In pursuance of an award made by an Industrial Tribunal fixing the pay of the employees at Rs. 2/2/ per day, the management of the appellant had entered into an agreement with its workmen, that the effect would be given to the wage structure prescribed by the said award.
In spite of the award and the agreement, the appellant paid its employees only As.
/10/ per day and that led to the present claim made by the respondents under section 15 of the Payment of Wages Act.
They asked for an order from the payment of wages authority directing the appellant to pay the said prescribed wages.
Against the respondent 's claim it was urged by the appellant that section 15 of the Act was inapplicable, because the rates of wages fixed by the award did not fall within the definition of wages prescribed by section 2(vi) of the Act.
The authority rejected the appellant 's contention.
The appellant then challenged the correctness of the conclusion of the authority before the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition and affirmed the finding of the authority.
It held that section 15 was applicable to the case, because the wages prescribed by the award did amount to wages as defined by section 2(vi) of the Act.
On appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended that before it is held that the wages prescribed by the award fall under section 2(vi), it must be shown that they constitute part of the terms of the contract of employment, either express of implied.
Held: The argument is not well founded.
When an award is made and it prescribes a new wage structure, in law the old contractual wage structure becomes inoperative and its place is taken by the wage structure prescribed by the award.
In a sense, the latter wage structure must be deemed to be the contract between the parties, because that, in substance, is the effect of industrial adjudication.
The true legal position is that when industrial disputes are decided by industrial adjudication and awards are made, the said awards supplant contractual terms in respect of matters covered by them and are substituted by them.
That being so, it is difficult to hold that the wages prescribed by the award cannot be treated as wages under section 2(vi) of the Act before it was amended.
The amendment has merely clarified what was included in the unamended definition itself.
South Indian Bank Ltd. vs A. R. Chacko, A.I.R, 1964 S.C. 1522, referred to.
Jogindra Nath Chatterjee and Sons, V. Chandreswar Singh, A.I.R., , inapplicable.
Modern Mills Ltd. vs V. R. Mangalvedhikar, A.I.R., 1950 Bom.
342 and V. B. Godse, Manager, Prabha Mills Ltd. vs R. M. Naick , approved L/P(D)lSCI 14(a) 420
