The respondent had under its control several docks.
The trustees Of the respondent introduced a two shift system of work and that resulted in the crew working in some docks getting 4 hours of overtime in some docks 3 hours of overtime and in others 2 hours of overtime only.
In the last category the 12 hours shift wag divided in to 8 hours of work, 2 hours of rest and 2 hours of overtime.
The 2 hours period of rest was variable depending on the tides or the exigencies of the work, though the crew were informed each day what the, period of rest would be on the following day.
The appellants, who belonged to this category, complained that the breakup of the 12 hours shift into 8 hours of duty, 2 hours of rest and 2 hours of overtime offended the , and that the system of variable recess did not satisfy the requirements of rest which is the basis for fixing statutorily the hours of work in relation to wages.
The Industrial Tribunal held that the appellants were not able to establish that the existing system of work needed any modification.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: There was no breach of the provision of the and the case of the appellants could not be compared with that of the crew working at the other docks, because, there wag no parallel in the work of the three different sets of crew.
[643 H] If an employer takes actual work for 8 hours per day on 6 days in a week he complies with the relevant provisions of the Act and the Rules, namely sections 13 and 14 of the Act and rr.
24 and 25 of the Minimum Wages (Central) Rules 1950, and need not pay overtime.
He may go up to 9 hours on any day without paying any overtime provided he does not exceed 48 hours in the week.
He can specify the intervals of rest and spread the 8 or 9 hours, as the case may be, together with intervals of rest over 12 hours in a twelve hour shift.
These periods of rest must not be periods during which the workman is on duty and inaction is due to want of work for him, but they must be predetermined periods of inaction during which the workman is neither called upon nor expected to display physical activity or sustained attention.[641 B D] In the present cage the total number of hours of work in a week was 48 (8 hours per day for 6 days).
Therefore overtime was payable beyond the period of 8 hours, for that hour or part of an hour during which the workman was either made to work or the interval of rest was not specified.
The respondent can say that it will not take more that two hours extra work on any day and specify the remaining two hours as the intervals for rest; and the Trustees would not be guilty of infraction of the Act by keeping the recess variable so long as they specify 633 in advance the recess on any particular day.
The Trustees could not be compelled to break up the hours of work by interposing intervals for rest.
[641 G H; 643 B C, D E]
