The lands in dispute had been granted in inam to a temple.
By about 1929 the then manager of the temple disposed of all those properties under various sale deeds, resigned his position and left the village.
He was therefore removed from the management of the temple and other persons had taken up the position as de facto managers from 1929.
As a result of successive alienations of the properties, the appellants became entitled to them.
In 1951, the respondents were appointed trustees of The temple and under the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, they applied, to the Magistrate, for possession of the properties and the Magistrate ordered delivery of possession.
Before the order could be executed the appellants filed the suit in 1954, for a declaration of their title to the properties and for an injunction restraining the respondents from interfering with their possession.
The trial Court and the lower appellate Court decreed the suit.
In second appeal, the High Court held that the suit was governed by article 134 B of the Limitation Act,, 1908, which was introduced into the Act on 1st January 1929; and that the appellants ' claim in regard to the properties covered by the sale deeds of 1917 and 1926.
should be rejected, because, the alienees had not acquired title by adverse possession by 1st January, 1929, and is the alienor was still alive, the plea of adverse possession could not be sustained under that article.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that article 134 B would not apply to the present case but that article 144 would apply, because, the transfers were effected by the alienor on the 'representations that the properties belonged to him as his separate property; and that even if the article applied, the decision of the High Court was erroneous, because the transferor had been removed from management more than 12 years before the suit was filed.
HELD : Though article 134 B applied to the facts of the case, since the appellants had acquired title to the properties by prescription, the decree passed by the High Court, in so far as it was against the appellants, should be set aside.
Column 1 of the article provides for suits brought,, inter alia, by the Tanager of a Hindu religion; or charitable endowment to recover possession of immovable property comprised in the endowment, which has been transferred by a previous manager for valuable consideration.
The period Prescribed for such suits is 12 years, and the time from which the period begins to run is the death, resignation or removal of the transferor.
The findings recorded by the High Court in the present case show that all the ingredients prescribed by the first column of the Article namely 121 (i)that the property belonged to the endowment, (ii) that it was transferred by a previous manager; and (iii) that the transfer was for valuable Consideration, were satisfied.
The character of the representations made by the previous manager in regard to his relation with the property which is the subject matter of transfer, is irrelevant for the purpose of the Article.
But if a suit had been brought by the respondents on the date when they were appointed trustees, it would have been barred under the Article, because more than 12 years had elapsed since the date of the removal of the previous manager who had transferred the properties; and therefore, the trial Court and the lower appellate Court were right in decreeing the, appellants ' suit in its entirety.
[129 C D, H; 132 H] Mahant Sudarsan Das vs Mahant Ram Kirpal Das & Ors.
L. R. 77 I.A. 42, applied.
