M, an accused person in certain proceedings pending before the Nyaya Panchayat filed a petition under article 227 in the High Court and obtained a stay of the proceedings on December 20, 1963 .
Thereafter when the Panchayat met to proceed with the matter, he made an application supported by a document purporting to be an affidavit stating that the High Court had admitted his writ petition and had stayed further proceedings before the Panchayat; and that therefore nothing further should be done in the matter.
However, the, Panchayat did not allow his application and proceeded (to hold M and others guilty and imposing fines on them.
M, thereafter filed an application under sections 4 and 5 of the , alleging contempt of the High Court by the Panchayat.
An affidavit filed before the High Court by the Sarpanch stated that the document filed by M, by way of an affidavit in support of his application had not been verified by any proper authority and for this and other reasons the Panchayat did not believe that the High Court had stayed the proceedings.
The High Court held the members of the Panchayat guilty of contempt and observed that if they wanted to ascertain the matter, they should have at best stayed the proceedings for a short while and asked the applicant to produce a certified copy of the stay order; in not doing so, the Panchas had obviously not acted bona fide and their action amounted to, wilful disobedience of the High Court 's order.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The appeal must be allowed and the judgment and order of the High Court set aside.
The only material before the Panchayat was the application dated December 25.
1963, which was not supported by 'any affidavit sworn to before a person authorised to administer oaths.
Further, the application did not contain the date of the order; even a copy of the telegram stated to have been sent by M 's advocate in the High Court was not attached to the application.
On this material the bona fides of the Panchas could not be doubted if they refused to accept the mere statement of the party that the High Court had stayed the proceedings before them.
In such matters those who assert that a person had knowledge of the order must prove this fact beyond all reasonable doubt.
If there is any doubt.
the benefit, ought to be given to the person charged with contempt of court.[120 F H; 121 A B] It is true that in certain cases proceedings can be adjourned to enable the parties to file better proof, but a judicial officer is not bound (to do so and, if the bona fide does not in his discretion adjourn proceedings, it cannot be said that he has committed contempt of court.
[121 C D]
