An industrial dispute regarding fixation of wages and bonus, between the respondent paper mills and its workmen, the appellants, was referred to the Industrial Tribunal in October, 1962, and the reference included a dispute about bonus payable for the years 1962 63 and 1963 64.
The Tribunal held: (1 ) that there were in the region no ' other concerns in the same line of business which could be compared with the respondent but that there were three collieries, a steel plant, a cement factory and an aluminum company in the region which were comparable with the resportdent, that as the minimum wage in those industries which was about Rs. 95 was above that of the respondent, a revision of the minimum wage in the respondent mills was justified.
that such minimum wage should be fixed for the price index prevailing at the time of the award taking 100 as the basic index for the year 1939, and that on that basis, the basic wage and dearness allowance should be Pa. 73, and that Pa. 11 was payable as production bonus; (2) that the dearness allowance element need not be linked to the price index, but that wage should be fixed at the prevailing price index leaving it to the workmen to ask for increase in minimum wage on any further rise in price index; (3 ) that the revised wages were payable with effect from 13th December, 1962; (4) that the three elements of basic wage, dearness allowance, and production bonus which make up the total minimum wage packet of Rs. 84 (Rs. 73 + Pa. 11) should be in the proportion of 3: 3: 1, and that profit bonus was payable at three months ' basic wage.
The proportion of 3:3: 1 was fixed by the Tribunal, because, under an agreement of 1959 the management and workmen accepted that proportion by mutual consent.
On the basis of that agreement, the Tribunal also held that; (5) casual workers should not be equated to permanent workers for purpose of minimum wages, and that casual and radii workers should not be allowed bonus on the same basis as the permanent workers; (6) The appellants also claimed before the Tribunal 6 months ' basic wage instead of 3 months ' basic wage, which was being paid by the respondent, on the assumption that certain before staff were being paid as bonus 3 months ' consolidated wage consisting of basic wage and dearness allowance; but the Tribunal rejected the claim.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD: (1) This Court laid down in French Motor Car Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, [1963] Supp.
that where there is no concern in the same industry in the region comparable with the concern in which wages have to be fixed, greater emphasis should be laid on the region part of the industry cum region principle.
To give full effect to this rule the Tribunal should have proceeded to fix the minimum wage in the respondent mills on the basis of the average minimum wage prevailing 667 in the other industries in that region.
The respondent was not providing any amenities which should be taken into account in fixing the minimum wage, different from the amenities provided by those concerns in the region which were being compared.
Therefore, the Tribunal should have fixed the minimum wage packet at Rs. 95 per mensem which was the average wage prevailing in all those concerns and should not have fixed the wages on an entirely different basis.
[671 F H; 672 G H] (2) The Industrial, Tribunal has the discretion, in appropriate cases, of making a direction linking the dearness allowance element of a wage to the price index, or to fix the wage at the prevailing price index leaving the labour to raise a fresh demand and, if necessary, a fresh industrial dispute for further rise in wages, in case there is marked variation in price index and the wage fixed becomes outdated; and therefore.
the Tribunal was not wrong in choosing the latter alternative.
[674 F G; 675 B] Hydra (Engineers), vs The Workmen, ; , referred (3) This direction ' was objected to by respondents, on the ground that the respondent may have to pay arrears for 5 or 6 years which would be a heavy burden.
But the previous agreement of 1959 was binding only upto 12th December, 1962.
So, the Tribunal was right in directing that the revised wages should take effect from 13th December, 1962, in view of the considerable rise in the price index and the fact that the labour had not raised a fresh dispute for a further revision of wages since the date of the award.
[675 G H] (4) No error was committed by the Tribunal in the break up of the wages into the 3 elements of basic wage, dearness allowance and production bonus in the proportion of 3: 3: 1.
The contention of the workmen that the proportion should be 3:1: 1: so as to increase the basic wage element and consequently the profit bonus.
was rightly rejected by the Tribunal, because.
the proportion of 3:3:1 was accepted by mutual consent.
[674 B C] (5) The distinction between casual workers and permanent workers for purpose of minimum wage, and casual and badli workers on the hand and permanent workers on the other for purpose of bonus, was recognised by the parties themselves in the agreement of 1959, and therefore, the Tribunal was right in keeping up the distinction in its award.
[675 D E; 678 B C] (6) The allegation that some clerical staff was receiving what amounted to 6 months ' basic wage as bonus was incorrect.
There was some clerical staff which did not get any dearness allowance and the bonus in their case was worked out on the basis of their wages which was only the basic wage.
The appellants were wrong in assuming that the wage of such clerical staff was a consolidated wage consisting of the 2 elements of basic wage and dearness allowance.
Therefore, the appellants could not claim 3 months ' consolidated wages as bonus which would amount to 6 months ' basic wage.
[677 G H; 678 A B] It could not be urged by the appellants that calculation of available.
surplus for purposes of bonus should have been on the basis of the Full Bench formula approved by this Court in Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen, , for justifying 6 months ' basic wages as bonus, because, that was not the basis of the claim before the Tribunal.
Further, the Tribunal was expected to decide the dispute only as referred to it, and at the time of the reference the accounts for the years 1962 63 and 1963 64 could not have been available, and therefore, 668 there could not possibly be a claim for higher bonus on the basis of the application of the Full Bench Formula.
[676 D F; 677 C D]
