The Parliament enacted the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 in pursuance of cl.
(3) of article 16 of the Constitution of India making special provision for requirement as to residence in public employment.
Section 3 of the Act gave the power to make rules in respect of certain classes of employment in certain areas, and accord ingly the Andhra Pradesh Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Rules were made prescribing the requirement , as to residence prior to appointment to certain posts, within the Telengana area of the State.
The petitioners who were non domicile persons appointed to the posts reserved for the domiciles of Telengana under the rules, were by an order relieved from their posts and employed in the other 'region of the State.
The petitioners, filed a petition under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the Act, the Rules and the order as ultra vires the Constitution.
Quashing the order, this Court, HELD : Section 3 of the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 in so far as it related to, Telengana and Rule 3 of other Rules under it were ultra vires the Constitution.
[122 A] Clause (3) of article 16 of the Constitution enables Parliament to make a law in a special case prescribing any requirement as to residence within a State or Union Territory prior to appointment, in the State or Union Territory.
The provision speaks of a whole State as the venue for residential qualification and it is impossible to think that the Constituent Assembly was thinking of residence in Districts, Talukas, cities, towns or villages.
The fact that the clause is an exception and came as an amendment must dictate that a narrow construction upon the exception should be placed as indeed the debates in the Constituent Assembly also seem to, indicate.
The words 'any law ' and 'any requirement ' cannot be given wide and liberal construction.
These words are controlled by the words .
residence within the State or Union Territory ' which words mean what they say neither more or less.
[121 D G] 116
