Two carts loaded with cloth returning alongwith others from a weekly village market were looted by 20 or more persons.
The houses of 20 persons including the 14 appellants were searched and the looted cloth was recovered from their Possession.
They were tried and held guilty Linder section 395 of the Indian Penal Code.
The High Court dismissed their appeals.
In appeal by special leave to this Court their only contention was that in the absence of other evidence connecting them with the dacoity, the presumption to be drawn from the possession of stolen clothes ought to have been one under section 411 of he Indian Penal Code or at the most under section 412 of the Indian Penal Code and not of complicity in the crime of dacoity.
It was urged that since section 114 of the Evidence Act did not lay down definitely the presumption to be drawn in a given set of circumstances it was necessary always to start with the lesser presumption and draw the higher presumption only when there was some other evidence to.
show the complicity of the persons in the crime itself.
HELD : If there is other evidence to connect an accused with the crime itself, however small, the finding of the stolen property with him is a piece of evidence which connects him further with the crime.
There is then no question of presumption.
The evidence strengthens the other evidence already against him.
It is only when the accused cannot be conis stronger than if there is a large gap of time.
Disposal of the fruits of crime that the presumption may be drawn.
In what circumstances the one presumption or the other may be drawn will differ from case to case [722 D] When the discovery of the fruits of crime is made immediately after the commission of the crime the presumption of complicity in the crime nected with the crime except by reason of possession of the fruits of crime requires the finding of a person ready to receive them and the 'shortness of time, the nature of the property which is disposed of, that is to say, its quality and character determine whether the person who had the goods in his possession received them from another or was himself the thief or dacoit, [722 F] In the present case the offence was committed at night by as many as 'IO persons or more.
Shortly after the offence the houses of 20 persons were searched and large quantities of the stolen goods were found in their houses.
It was impossible that these 20 persons were merely 'receivers of stolen property from some other 20 persons who were the decoits.
It was legitimate therefore to raise the presumption in this case that the persons with whom the goods were found were the dacoits themselves.
[723 A B]
