The appellant filed the suit on the basis that as the Mahant of a Dera he was entitled to possession and management of the properties of its branch Dera.
The defendant contended that it was an independent Dera and that he was in possession of the properties as its lawfully appointed Mahant.
The trial court decreed the suit but in appeal the decree was reversed.
While the second appeal, preferred by the appellant, was pending in the High Court, the defendant died.
As the application to implead the elected successor of the defendant was filed beyond the period prescribed for an application under O. 23, rr. 3 and 4, the High Court held that the appeal had abated and that there was no ground for setting aside the abatement.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that even if the Chela, who had been elected as the Mahant on the death of the defendant, was not impleaded within the period prescribed, there would be no abatement, because he represented the Dera.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) When a suit is brought by or against a person in a representative capacity and there is a devolution of the interest of the representative, the rule that has to be applied is O. 22, r. 10 and not O. 22, rr. 3 or 4, whether the devolution takes place as a consequence of death or for any other reason.
The word 'interest ' in the rule means interest in the property, i.e., the subject matter of the suit, and the interest is the interest of the person who was the party to the suit.
This rule is based on the principle that the trial of a suit cannot be brought to an end merely because the interest of a party in the subject matter of the suit has devolved upon another during the pendency of the suit.
The suit may be continued against the person acquiring the interest with the leave of the Court.
[489F G] In the present case, when the defendant died, the interest which was the subject matter of the suit devolved upon his successor elected as the Mahant of the Dera, and therefore, the appeal could be continued under O. 22 r. 10, C.P.C. [489B C] (2) Though it was uncertain on the death of the defendant as to who would become the Mahant by election, it would not make any difference for the application of O. 22, r. 10.
The devolution of the interest in the subject matter of the suit took place when the new Mahant was elected.
The suit was for possession and management of the Dera and the properties appertaining to it by the appellant purporting to be the de jure Mahant against the defendant as a de facto Mahant.
The subject matter of the suit was the interest of the defendant in the Dera and its properties and it devolved upon the new Mahant by virtue of his election subsequent to the death of the defendant.
As it was in a representative capacity that he defendant was sued and that it was in the same representative capacity that the appeal was sought to be continued against the new Mahant, O. 23, r. 10 will apply.
[490B E] Rajnam Pillai vs Natraja Desikar A.I.R. 1924 Madras 615, Thirumalai vs Arunachella, A.I.R. 1926 Madras 540 and Roshan Lal vs Kapur Chand, A.I.R. 1960 Punjab, 382, approved.
