The appellant along with "J" & '.T" was charged for offences u/s 120B/109/ 302 I.P.C. as well as 302/34 I.P.C. The trial which proceeded in the absence of absconding "T", resulted in the conviction and both the accused were sentenced to death sentence.
On a reference and appeals by the accused the High Court acquitted "J" rejecting four out of five eye witnesses and disbelieving even the only other eye witness who lodged the First Information Report.
The High Court however maintained the conviction and confirmed the death sentence on the appellant relying on the testimony of the very same single witness.
on appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (i) Ordinarily in an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution the Court would hesitate to go into the facts to reappreciate the evidence.
It is, however.
not possible to adopt that course, where the testimony of the sole witness has been rejected with reference to the second accused was on the same boat with the appellant.
When the accused is going to lose his life in such a serious charge u/s 302 I.P.C. it is only necessary that the Court should be circumspect and closely scrutinise the evidence to come to an unhesitating conclusion that the sole single witness is absolutely reliable.
[710G, H, 711H, 712A] (ii) In the instant case, the High Court was not correct in appreciating the ocular testimony of a sole witness, because (a) the very fact that the eye witness could be persuaded to substitute PWs.
1, 2. and 3 for his deceased brother as chasing the assailants, contrary to the version of the F.I.R. degrades him from the status of an absolutely reliable witness, not having a qualm of conscience, but an obliging and untrustworthy witness.
[710H] (b) 'The version in the F.I.R. stands contradicted by the testimony in court on a very material point and does not corroborate.
[712 B] (c ) Placing such reliance.
therefore.
as is requisite on the testimony of the uncorroborated solitary witness for convicting the accused facing a murder charge is not possible in the case. [712 B]
