The principles of law for determination of the question whether an endowment is public or private are: (1) In a private trust, the beneficiaries are specific individuals who are ascertained or capable of being ascertained; in a private trust, they are the general public or a class thereof which is incapable of being ascertained.
[526C] (2) The intention of the founder as to whether specified individuals or the general public or any specified portion thereof could have the right of worship.
[526E] (3) When property is dedicated for the worship of a family idol, it is a private and not a public endowment.
Where the beneficiaries are not specified individuals, the endowment can only be regarded as public.
[526 F] Devki Nandan vs Murlidhar. ; and State of Bihar & Ors.
vs Smt.
Charusila Dasi, [1959] Suppl.
S.C.R. 601/613, referred to.
(4) Proof of user by the public without interference would be cogent evidence that the dedication is in favour of the public.
[527A] Narayan Bhagwantrao Gosavi Balajiwala vs Gopal Vinayak Gosavi and others; , , referred to.
(5) It is unusual for rulers to make grants to a family idol.
[527B] (6) Participation of the members of the public in the darshan in the temple and in the daily acts of worship or in the celebrations on festival occasions may be a very important factor to consider in determining the character of the temple.
[527E] Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj vs The State of Rajasthan and others, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 561.
referred to.
(7) The origin of the temple, the manner in which its affairs are managed, the nature and extent of the gifts received by it, rights exercised by the devotees in regard to worship, the consciousness of the manager and the consciousness of the devotees as to the public character of the temple establish whether a temple is a public or a private temple.
[527F] Goswami Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji vs Rannchhoddas Kalidas and ors.
; , referred to.
(8) It is not always possible to have all the features of a public trust in a given case: even some of the tests may be sufficient to conclude about the character of the trust.
[528E] Dismissing the appeal ^ HELD: In the instant case from the documentary and oral evidence the following features are present: (i) The deity installed in the temple was intended by the founder to be continually worshipped by an indeterminate multitude of the Hindu public.
(ii) In order to facilitate worship by the public, the founder also intended that regular bhajan, kirtan and worship shall be maintained and annual ceremonies and processions for pilgrimage shall be conducted by the saints in succession nominated by the reigning saint.
519 (iii) There has been no evidence of any hindrance or restriction in the matter of continuous worship by the public extending over a long period.
(iv) More than a century ago the temple, in its own name, was the recipient of land by Royal grant and the same has been managed by the saints in succession as manager, not as personal or private property.
(v) Gifts of land by members of the public from the Taluka and outside it in favour of the temple or of the Sansthan were made for the purpose of worship.
(vi) Collection of subscriptions were made from house to house by taking Maharaj and also for 'Gulal ' ceremony.
(vii) Holding out of the Sansthan to all intents and purposes as a public temple.
(viii) Treating of the Sansthan by those who are connected with the management as intended for user by the public without restrictions.
(ix) Absence of any evidence in the long history of the Sansthan to warrant that it had any appearance of, or that it was ever treated as, a private property.
[530E H; 531A B] The above features lead to the inescapable conclusion that Shri Vithal Rukhamai Sansthan is a public trust within the meaning of section 2(13) of the Bombay Public Trust Act.
