The workmen 's demand for grant of sick leave and its accumulation upto a period was rejected by the employers on the ground that the provided more than adequate sickness benefits, and that any additional benefits would place a financial burden on the industry and would adversely affect other industries in the region.
The Tribunal, to which the dispute was referred, partly granted the workmen 's demand.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that section 61 of the debarred a person enti tled to any of the benefits under that Act from receiving similar benefit under the provisions of any other Act and as such the workmen were not entitled to the benefit of sick leave.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: (1) The , does not deal with the question of sick leave.
The scheme of the benefits admissible under the Act does not cover the work men 's demand for sick leave to the extent allowed by the Tribunal.
Section 61 is not applicable because the benefits granted by the Tribunal are not similar to those admissible under the Act.
[84 C] The Hindustan Times Ltd., New Delhi vs Their Workmen [1964] 1 SCR 234 and Technological Institute of Textiles vs Its Workmen and others applied.
(2) Sickness benefit under the Act cannot be said to be adequate, for, it works out to about half the average wage of a workman which benefit is not admissible for the first two days of sickness except under the conditions provided in the Act.
A workman is prevented from earning the normal daily wages during the period of his illness and there is no justification for the argument that the rate of benefit at about half his wage, under the Act, should be considered sufficient so as to deny him the benefit of sick leave on full emoluments for a period of 7 days when he is certi fied by a competent medical officer to be ill for that or a longer period.
Sickness is a serious misfortune to a work man for it not only prevents him from earning his normal wages, but is a drain on his meagre financial resources by way of additional expenditure on food, nursing and visits to the medical centre etc.
[84 E F] (3) The Tribunal could not be said to have erred in restoring the benefit which the workmen were receiving under an earlier award.
The benefit of sick leave to the employ ees in the region was lost when the Act was made applicable to the region from December 14, 1969.
This was obviously under a mistaken impression.
The Act does not deal with all aspects of sickness benefit and does not provide for the grant of leave on full emoluments during the period of a workman 's physical incapacity to earn his normal wages because of his sickness.
[85 B C] (4) There is no force in the argument that the Tribunal had granted additional privilege leave for 7 days under the garb of sick leave because by its very nature sick leave would be admissible only in the case of actual sickness certified by a registered medical practitioner.
[86 B] (5) There is no evidence to show that the benefit had not been allowed by other companies in the region.
The Tribunal had examined the financial 81 capacity of the companies and had given adequate reasons for holding that they were in good financial position and could bear the additional burden.
[85 H] (6) It has not been shown that the awards are illegal or unjust, or would adversely affect the economy or the indus trial peace, or lead to imbalance in the conditions of service in other industrial establishments.
[86 C]
