The plaintiffs in their suit claimed that the properties in dispute belonged to the Math Sauna temple and that one of the plaintiffs Mahant Sadashiva Yati on the death of his predecessor was elected as Mahant of the temple and that therefore as Sarbarakar he was entitled to all the properties recorded in the name of the deity or his predecessor.
The defendant claimed that by virtue of a will executed by Mahant Shivshankar Yati, the predecessor Mahant, the properties in dispute which were his personal properties devolved on him.
The Civil Judge decreed the plaintiffs ' suit with a finding that Mahant Sadashiv Yati was not the Sarbarakar.
Upholding the respondent 's claim, the High Court in appeal, held that the properties did not belong either to the Math or the deity but were the personal and separate properties of Mahant Shivshankar Yati.
In appeal to this Court the appellants impugned the correctness of the High Court 's view.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The properties in dispute did not form part of the properties of Math Sauna or of the deity but were the personal properties of the respondent.
[664 D E] It is well accepted that certain sects of Sanyasis (such as Dashnami Sanyasis in this case) could acquire personal property of their own and that the pronamis given to a Mahant are generally his personal property.
The mere fact that a Mahant is an ascetic does not raise any presumption that the property in his possession is not his personal property.
There is no presumption either way.
In each case the burden is upon the plaintiff to establish that the properties in respect of which he is asking for possession are properties to which he is entitled.
[662 F G] 660 In the instant case the three earlier Mahants before they took to sanyasa had been grahasthas.
They were entitled to possess, enjoy and acquire personal property.
Mahant Shivpher Yati, one of the predecessor Mahants, whose reputation as a man of learning and personal attainments was high, received personal bhents from many of his affluent chelas.
In addition, on the death of his predecessor Mahant Shivbaran Yati.
Mahant Shivpher Yati inherited his personal property, all of which devolved on Shivshankar Yati.
A succession certificate in respect of these properties was granted in the name of Shivshankar Yati.
The revenue records also showed him as the owner of the properties and not the Math or the deity.
None of the transfers of small parcels of these properties made by Mahant Shivshankar Yati from time to time was challenged by the plaintiffs at any time.
[663 A l] Whether a property was acquired by the application of the nucleus could only be determined after taking into consideration all the facts and circumstances of a case and on a balancing of the entire evidence.
The burden of proof rests on the party making the claim.
[663 F G] In the present case there is no material on record to how whether the total income from the properties belonging to the Math and the deity, left any appreciable surplus after meeting the expenditure on bhog and other ceremonies.
The High Court rightly held that the fund from which the properties were acquired constituted the personal property of Mahant Shivpher Yati on whose death Shivshankar Yati employed it for the purchase of the properties and by virtue of his will the properties devolved on the respondent.
[663 H]
