The Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 by section 127 (1) (i) empowered a municipal council to impose, in the whole or any part of the municipality, "a tax payable by the owners of houses, buildings or lands situated within the limits of Municipality with reference to annual letting value of the house, building or land called property tax".
The corresponding provision in the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 was section 132(1)(a), and it provided that "the Corporation shall impose a tax payable by the owners of buildings or lands situated within the city with reference to the gross annual letting value of the building or land called the property tax".
The procedure for imposition of taxes was spelt out in section 129 of the Municipalities Act and section 133 of the Municipal Corporation Act.
Section 127A was inserted in the Municipalities Act for imposition of property tax and provided by sub clause (1) that as and from the financial year 1976 77 there shall be charged, levied and paid for each financial year a tax on the lands or buildings or both situated in a municipality at specified rates.
Sub clause (2) exempted properties owned by or vesting in the Union Government, State Government or the Council from the levy.
Similar 2 provisions were inserted in sections 135 and 136 of the Municipal Corporation Act.
Respondent No. 1 was constituted the Special Area Development Authority under section 65 of the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam (23 of 1973).
Clauses (c) and (d) of section 69 of the Act conferred upon the Development Authority powers for the purpose of municipal administration and for the purpose of taxation.
These clauses were inserted by Ordinance 26 of 1975 which came into force on February 27, 1976.
The Ordinance was replaced by the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh (Sanshodhan) Adhiniyam 1976 (6 of 1976).
On June 24, 1976 respondent 1 entered into an agreement with the appellant company under which the company agreed to contribute a sum of rupees 3 lakhs annually to the "seed capital" of the Authority in consideration of the Authority agreeing not to exercise its power of taxation or of levying any other charges on the assets and activities of the company.
The agreement was to remain in force for a period of ten years beginning from the calendar year 1976 and the annual payments due from 1977 were to be made in January every year.
The appellant company paid the contribution for the year 1976.
In the same year the company was called upon by the Sales Tax authorities to pay "the tax on the entry of goods" which was introduced by the Madhya Pradesh Sthaniya Kshetra Me Mal Ke Pravesh Par Kar Adhyadesh 1976 in substitution of octroi tax.
While the company was pursuing that matter with the State Government, contending that it was not liable to pay the entry tax by reason of the agreement, on January 4, 1977 respondent 1 made a further demand of Rs. 3 lakhs on the company for contribution for the year 1977.
That amount not having been paid as provided in the agreement, respondent 1 terminated the agreement by its letter dated February 4, 1977.
By a notice issued under section 65 of the Madhya Pradesh Nagar Tatha Gram Nivesh Adhiniyam 'Act of 1973 ' on February 21, 1977 and by another notice issued under section 164(3) of the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act 1961 on April 15, 1977, the Chief Executive Officer of respondent 1 called upon the company to pay a sum of about Rs. 13 lakhs by way of property tax for the year 1976 77.
On July 16, 1977 the company was called upon to pay a further sum of about Rs. 13 lakhs as property tax for the year 1977 78.
The company disputed its liability to pay on the ground that no tax was leviable on its property since the company was owned wholly by the Government of India and that respondent 1 was estopped from levying the property tax by reason of the agreement of 1976.
Having failed to pursuade respondent 1 to accept its point of view, and also having failed in the High Court the appellant company came to this Court in appeal.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended: (1) that respondent 1 can exercise only such powers to levy property tax as the Municipal Corporation or the Municipal Council had under the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 or the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961 as these Acts stood on February 27, 1976, when clause (d) was inserted in section 69 of the Act of 1973.
Section 127A and section 135 which create and levy the charge of property 3 tax having been inserted in the Municipalities Act and the Municipal Corporation Act respectively with effect from April 1, 1976 i.e. subsequent to the insertion of clause (d) in section 69 of the Act of 1973, Respondent 1 was incompetent to exercise the powers of the Municipality or the Municipal Corporation under section 127A of the Municipal Corporation Act or section 136 of the Municipal Corporation Act; (2) that respondent 1 cannot impose the property tax without following the procedure prescribed by section 129 of the Municipalities Act and section 133 of the Municipal Corporation Act; (3) that Article 285(1) of the Constitution envisages that the property of the Union shall save in so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any authority within a State.
Section 127A(2) of the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act and section 136 of the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act also provide that the property tax shall not be leviable, on "buildings and lands owned by or vesting in the Union Government".
The appellant companies being wholly owned by the Government of India, the lands and buildings owned by the companies cannot be subjected to property tax; (4) that the lands having been taken on lease for a period of 30 years by the appellant companies, it is the State Government and not the appellant companies who can be called upon to pay the tax; and (5) that Parliament enacted the Coal Mines Nationalisation Act, 1973 for acquisition of coal mines and utilisation of coal resources to subserve the common good.
The lands and buildings on which respondent 1 had imposed the property tax are used for the purposes of and are covered by coal mines.
The taxing power of the State legislature comes in conflict with the power and function of the Union to regulate and develop the mines as envisaged by the Nationalisation Act, and is an impediment since it substantially increased the cost of the developmental activities.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: (i) Section 69(d) of the Act of 1973 must be read to mean that respondent 1 shall have all the powers of taxation which a Municipal Corporation or a Municipal Council has at the time when respondent 1 seeks to exercise those powers.
[14 A] (ii) The Act of 1973 does not provide for any independent power of taxation or any machinery of its own for exercising the power of taxation.
It rests content by referring to the provisions contained in the two Municipal Acts.
The three Acts are supplemental, from which it must follow that amendments made to the earlier Acts after the enactment of section 69(d) shall have to be read into that section.
Without recourse to such a construction the power of taxation conferred by that section will become ineffectual.
[14 B C] (iii) A reading of the reference to the two earlier Municipal Acts as a reference to those Acts as they stand at the time when the power of taxation is sought to be exercised by respondent 1 will not cause repugnancy between the two earlier Acts on one hand and the Act of 1973 on the other, nor will it cause any confusion in the practical application of the earlier Acts, because the Act of 1973 does not contain any independent provision or machinery for exercising the power of taxation.
[14 D] 4 (iv) If an earlier legislation is incorporated into a later legislation, the provisions of earlier law which are incorporated into the later law become a part and parcel of the later law.
Therefore, amendments made in the earlier law after the date of incorporation cannot by their own force, be read into the later law.
That is because the legislature, cannot be assumed to intend to bind itself to all future amendments or modifications which may be made in the earlier law.
[12 D E] (v) Where a statute is incorporated by reference into a second statute, the repeal of the first statute by a third does not affect the second.
Likewise, where certain provisions from an existing Act have been incorporated into a subsequent Act, no addition to the former Act, which is not expressly made applicable to the subsequent Act, can be deemed to be incorporated in it.
[12G 13A] (vi) The broad principle that where a subsequent Act incorporates provisions of a previous Act then the borrowed provisions become an integral and independent part of the subsequent Act and are totally unaffected by any repeal or amendment in the previous Act, is subject to four exceptions, one of which is that the principle will not apply to cases "where the subsequent Act and the previous Act are supplemental to each other".
[13 D] Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance Society, Limited, 58 Indian Appeals, 259, Clarke vs Bradlaugh, 69; Collector of Customs, Madras vs Nathella Samathu Chetty & Anr., ; and State of Madhya Pradesh vs M.V. Narasimhan, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, subsequent amendments made to the Municipal Corporation Act and the Municipalities Act will also apply to the power of taxation provided for in section 69(d) of the Act of 1973.
The Act of 1973 did not by section 69(d), incorporate in its true signification any particular provision of the two earlier Acts.
It provided that, for the purpose of taxation, the Special Area Development Authority shall have the powers which a Municipal Corporation or a Municipal Council has under the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 or the Madhya Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1961.
The case, therefore, is not one of incorporation but of mere reference to the powers conferred by the earlier Acts.
[13 E F] 2(i) Section 127A of the Municipalities Act and section 135 of the Municipal Corporation Act create by their own force, the liability to be brought to property tax and the right to levy that tax.
Nothing further is required to be done by the Municipality or the Municipal Corporation in order to impose the property tax.
The procedure preliminary to the imposition of other taxes which is prescribed by sections 129 and 133 of the two Acts, can have no application to the imposition of the property tax.
[14 F 15 A] (ii) The property tax is imposed by respondent 1 under section 127A of the Municipalities Act and section 135 of the Municipal Corporation Act.
It is not imposed under section 127 of the former Act or section 132 of the latter Act.
It is, therefore, not necessary to follow the procedure prescribed by sections 129 and 133 of the respective Acts.
[15 B C] 5 3.
Even though the entire share capital of the appellant companies has been subscribed by the Government of India, it cannot be predicated that the companies themselves are owned by the Government of India.
The companies, which are incorporated under the Companies Act, have a corporate personality of their own, distinct from that of the Government of India.
The lands and buildings, are vested in and owned by the companies; the Government of India only owns the share capital.
[16 A B] Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India, ; , 555, Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs The State of Bihar, , Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation vs The Income tax Officer & Anr. ; & Tamlin vs Hansaford referred to. 4.
The Explanation to section 147 of the Municipalities Act says that the property tax has to be paid by the owner of the land or building and that a tenant of land or building or both, who holds the same under a lease for an agreed period, shall be deemed to be the owner thereof.
Section 141(1) of the Municipal Corporation Act provides that the property tax shall be paid primarily by the owner.
By sub section (2) of section 141, the property tax levied on the owner can also be recovered from the occupier of the land or the building.[18D E] 5(i) The power conferred by the State Legislature on Special Area Development Authorities to impose the property tax on lands and buildings is not in conflict with the power conferred by the Coal Mines Nationalisation Act on the Union Government to regulate and develop coal mines so as to ensure rational and scientific utilisation of coal resources.
[21 G] (ii) The paramount purpose behind the declaration contained in section 2 of the is not in any manner defeated by the legitimate exercise of taxing power under section 69(d) of the Act of 1973.
[21 H 22A] H.R.S. Murthy vs Collector of Chitoor and Another, ; , State of Haryana & Anr.
vs Chanan Mal ; and The Ishwari Khetan Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. ; referred to.
Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar & Ors.
[1970] 2 S.C.R. 100, distinguished.
