In pursuance of r. 7A(1)(b) of the Central Health Service Rules, 1963 as amended by the Central Health Service (Amendment) Rules.
1966 and all other powers enabling in that behalf, the President of India issued a notification dated.
June 8,1967 making the substantive appointment of the appellant Dr. Asim Kumar Bose as Radiologist, Irwin Hospital, New Delhi.
By virtue of his post as Radiologist cum Associate Professor of Radiology, the appellant was teaching the under graduate and post graduate students as an Associate Professor of Radiology of the Maulana Azad Medical College for the M.D., M.S., D.M.R.T.
And M B.B.S. courses of studies of the Delhi University.
In 1973 the Central Government promoted Dr. K.P. Mittal, Lecturer in Radiology in the Maulana Azad Medical College as Associate Professor of Radiotherapy ignoring the claim of the appellant who thereupon made a representation.
The Government of India, Ministry of Health & family Planning Department of Health by its letter dated February 23, 1974 rejected the representation holding that the appellant could not be considered for appointment to the post of Associate Professor of Radiotherapy in the Maulana Azad Medical College inasmuch as he did not possess at least five years ' teaching experience as Reader/Assistant Professor in the concerned speciality as required under r. 8(2A) and paragraph 3 of Annexure I to the Second Schedule of the 1966 Rules.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court challenging the impugned order, but the High Court rejected the writ petition holding that the requirement rules required that the requisite teaching experience must be the experience gained while working in a medical college or in a teaching institution i.e. as a Teacher in a teaching department.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) There was a failure on the part of the Government of India in the Ministry of Health to draw a distinction between teaching and non 17 teaching hospitals under the Central Health Service.
The Irwin Hospital and the G.B. Pant Hospital are the two associate hospitals of the Maulana Azad Medical College and the teaching in the medical college is undertaken by Professors and Associate Professors as well as by the Specialists attached to the two hospitals affiliated to the College.
Thus the teaching experience gained by the appellant while holding the post of Radiologist cum Associate Professor of Radiology (ex officio) had to be taken into consideration to determine his eligibility for appointment as Professor or Associate Professor of the concerned speciality.
[35 G H, 36 A C, 43 F G] (2) On a construction of r. 8(2) and paragraph 2(b) of Annexure 1 to the Second Schedule of the 1966 Rules, it was held that the appellant possessed the qualifications and experience requisite for appointment to the post of Professor of Radiotherapy in the Maulana Azad Medical College which is a post belonging to Specialist Grade I equivalent to Supertime Grade II carrying a pay scale of Rs. 1800 2250, which had fallen vacant during the pendency of the appeal.
The Union Public Service Commission must therefore re advertise the post of Professor and call the appellant for an interview for being considered for appointment to the post.
[38 C D, F H] (3) The action of the Central Government in the Ministry of Health ignoring the claim of the appellant for appointment to the post of Associate Professor of Radiotherapy in the Maulana Azad Medical College in 1973 was based on a misconstruction of r. B(2A) and paragraph 3 of Annexure I to the Second Schedule.
The word "as" in these provisions must, in the context in which it appears, be interpreted to mean "in the capacity of".
These provisions must be interpreted in a broad and liberal sense as it would otherwise work great injustice of persons in Specialists Grade II like the appellant who, while holding a non clinical post in a teaching hospital like the Irwin Hospital, has actually been teaching the students of the Maulana Azad Medical College to which it is affiliated.
The Ministry of Health cannot be heard to say that the appellant had not acquired the status of an Associate Professor of Radiology with effect from October 9, 1964, particularly when the Central Government have been utilizing his services as such for teaching the post graduate and under graduate students of the Maulana Azad Medical College for the M.D., M.S., D.M.R.T. and M.B.B.S. courses of studies for the last 17 years.
The arrangement has continued for all these years with the approval of the Delhi University which has conferred the designation of Associate Professor of Radiology on the appellant presumably with the tacit sanction of the Medical Council of India.
[37 F G, 38 A B, 42 D F] (4) The recruitment rules nowhere provide that the teaching experience gained by a Specialist in a teaching hospital in the capacity of an Associate Professor (ex officio) shall not count towards the requisite teaching experience for purposes of sub rs.
(2) and (2A) of r. 8 and paragraph 2 (b) and 3 of Annexure I to the Second Schedule of the 1966 Rules.
There is no provision made in the Rules that the teaching experience must be gained on a regular appointment.
There is hardly any difference so far as teaching experience is concerned whether it is acquired on regular appointment or as a Specialist in a teaching hospital with the ex officio designation.
As the statutory rules do not 18 provide that the teaching experience gained in an ex officio capacity shall not count towards the requisite teaching experience, the teaching experience gained by the appellant while holding the post of Radiologist cum Associate Professor of Radiology (ex officio) in the Irwin Hospital can not be ignored in determining his eligibility for appointment as Professor or Associate Professor of the concerned speciality.
[35 C E]
