Section 33 of the Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zilla Parishads Act, 1961 provided that subject to rules made by the Government, a Panchayat Samiti may employ such servants as it may consider necessary for the efficient performance of the duties imposed upon it by the Act, rules or bye laws made thereunder or by any other law for the time being in force.
The Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zilla Parishads (Haryana Amendment Act, 1973 which came into force from June, 13, 1973, introduced extensive amendments.
Section 33 of the Act was deleted by Section 13 of the Amending Act, Sub section (4) of Section 14 the Amending Act, provided that persons employed by a Panchayat Samiti before April 4, 1973 and who were in service at the commencement of the Amending Act, "shall continue to serve on the same terms and conditions on which they were employed by the Panchayat Samiti" until they are absorbed in the Government Service or retire in such manner as may be prescribed.
Section 35(1) of the Act empowers the State Government to place at the disposal of a Panchayat Samiti such of its servants as are required for the implementation of the schemes annexed therewith, and for such other duties and functions as may be assigned to them by the Panchayat Samitis from time to time.
The appellant was appointed as a clerk on June 1, 1963 by the Panchayat Samiti, Loharu.
He was confirmed in that post ill course of time.
On January 21, 1974, he was promoted as a Head Clerk on an ad hoc basis.
On March, 14 1975 a resolution was passed by the Samiti regularising the post of Head Clerk.
On April 1, 1975, the appellant was appointed as a Head Clerk.
Acting in pursuance of the provision of Section 14(1) of the.
the Amending Act, The Government of Haryana notified the absorption of the appellant as a clerk, though he was working as a Head Clerk since January 21, 1974.
Being aggrieved the appellant filed a Writ Petition and prayed for a direction to absorb him as a Head Clerk.
The Writ Petition having been dismissed by the High Court, the appellant has filed this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1.
The Panchayat Samiti had no right to appoint the appellant to the post of Head Clerk on the date on which it purported to do so.
As a result of the deletion of Section 33 of the Act by the Amending Act of 1973, the 735 Panchayat Samiti lost its power to make appointment to the Panchayat.
It could not therefore have appointed the appellant as a Head Clerk, as it purported to do so, in January, 1974 on an adhoc basis or in April 1965 on a regular basis.
[737D] 1.2.
Though the right to be considered for promotion is a term and condition of service, in the instant case, the appointment of the appellant to the post of a Head Clerk being without the authority of law, the Government was not bound to absorb him in the post of a Head Clerk.
He was appointed lawfully to the post of a clerk and that is the post in which the Government has absorbed him.
[737C; E]
