It is well settled that common intention in section 34 of tile Indian Penal Code presupposes prior concert.
It requires a prearranged plan because before a man can be vicariously convicted for the criminal act of another, the act must have boon done in furtherance of the common intention of them all.
Accordingly there must have been a prior meeting of minds.
Several persons can simultaneously attack a man and each can have the same intention, namely the intention to kill, and each can individually inflict a separate fatal blow and yet none would have the common intention required by the section because there was no prior meeting of minds to form a pre arranged plan.
In a case like that, each would be individually liable for whatever injury he caused but none could be vicariously convicted for the act of any of the others; and if the prosecution cannot prove that his separate blow was a fatal one he cannot be convicted of the murder however clearly an intention to kill could be proved in his case.
Care must be taken not to confuse same or similar intention with common intention; the partition which divides their bounds is often very thin, nevertheless the distinction is real and substantial, and if overlooked will result in miscarriage of justice.
The plan need not be elaborate, nor is a long interval of time required.
It could arise and be formed suddenly, But there must 139 1084 be pre arrangement and premeditated concert.
It is not enough, to have the same intention independently of each other.
The inference of common intention should never be reached unless it is a necessary inference deducible from the circumstances of the case.
It is a question of fact in every case and however similar the circumstances, facts in one case cannot be used as a precedent to determine the conclusion on the facts in another.
All that is necessary is either to have direct proof of prior concert, or proof of circumstances which necessarily lead to that inference, or, in other words, the incriminating facts must be incompatible with the innocence of the accused and incapable of ex planation on any other reasonable hypothesis.
When appellate judges, who agree on the question of guilt differ on that of sentence, it is usual not to impose the death penalty unless there are compelling reasons.
Barendra Kumar Ghosh vs King Emperor ([1924] L.R. 52 I.A. 40), Mahbub Shalt vs King Emperor ([1945] L.P. 72 I.A. 148) and Mamand vs Emperor (A.I.R. , referred to.
