Sub section (7) of section 63 of the empowers the State Transport Authority, for the purpose of promoting tourism, to grant permits valid for the whole or any part of India, in respect of such number of tourist vehicles as the Central Government may in respect of that State specify in this behalf.
A proviso to that sub section, introduced by section 24 of the Amending Act of 1978 laid down that preference shall be given to applications for permits from (i) the India Tourism Development Corporation; (iii) a State Tourism Development Corporation; (iii) a State Tourist Department, and (iv) operators of tourist cars, or travel agents, approved in this behalf by the Central Government.
There were as many as 495 applications before the Karnataka State Transport Authority for the grant of 14 All India Tourist Vehicle permits.
By its proceedings dated April 30, 1984, the Authority granted 11 permits to the Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation, one to the Indian Tourism Development Corporation and two to the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation.
1009 On appeals being preferred, the Karnataka State Transport Appellate Tribunal, by its order dated February 28, 1985 set aside the grant of two permits in favour of the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation, three out of eleven permits to the Karnataka State Tourism Development Corporation, and instead granted three permits to private operators and increased the number of permits granted to the Indian Tourism Development Corporation from one to three, on the premises that in view of the rule of preference enunciated by the proviso to section 63(7) the applications from the non preferred category had to be excluded as the number of applications from the applicants who were required to be given preference exceeded the number of permits to be granted.
Though some of the appellants before the Tribunal had better expertise, experience and resources they did not succeed.
The High Court rejected the writ petitions on the ground that the rule of preference contained in the proviso to section 63(7) contemplated exclusion of the 'non preferred ' class, if sufficient number of applicants from the preferred classes were available.
In these appeals by special leave, it was contended for the appellants that on a correct interpretation of the proviso to section 63(7) the preference became operative only if other things were equal.
It was also urged that the fourth sub clause of the proviso offended article 14 of the Constitution, and had to be struck down.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The rule contained in the proviso to section 63(7) of the is a rule of preference and not a rule of exclusion, for it does not say that the permit shall be granted to the categories of operators specified therein.
The claims of eligible applicants must be considered on merits, applying the rule of preference whenever the claims are approximately equal.
The application of an applicant is not to be altogether excluded from consideration on the sole ground that another applicant is entitled to preference.
Though the proviso does not expressly refer to other things being equal, the principle is very much implicit in it.
[1015B E] 1.2 What has been said by this Court in Sher Singh vs Union of India; , , about preference in relation to section 47(1 H) applies mutatis mutandis to the preference contemplated by the proviso to section 63(7) in the instant case.
[1017C] 1010 2.1 Clause (iv) of the proviso to section 63(7) is arbitrary, unreasonable and unconstitutional.
There is no indication in it as to the manner in which the approval of the Central Government is to be sought and granted and the considerations which are expected to weigh with the Central Government.
It compels a tribunal, created by a statute for the purpose of considering rival claims and granting permits on merits, to give preference to persons securing the approval of the Executive Government.
To the extent the clause goes, it pre empts the decision of the designated tribunal by executive discretion.
[1017E G] 2.2 The clause provides for a preference not to operators of tourist vehicles but to operators of tourist cars and travel agents, though the permits to be granted are for tourist vehicles.
It is difficult to understand why preference should be given to operators of tourist cars in the matter of granting permits for tourist vehicles which may well be omnibuses required to travel long distances.
[1018B C] 2.3 The experience of running a tourist taxi cannot be said to be a better qualification than running a tourist bus when the question is of granting permits for tourist vehicles.
[1018C D] 3.
Having regard to the definitions of 'tourist vehicle ' and 'motor car ' contained in section 2(29 A) and section 2(16) respectively of the Act, the expression 'tourist cars ' cannot be said to mean 'tourist vehicles '.
While a tourist vehicle may include a motor car, a motor car, by definition, excludes an omnibus.
[1018D E] In the instant case, the State Transport Appellate Tribunal and the High Court have failed to consider the merits of the claims of the Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation and the private operators who did not get a certificate of approval from the Central Government, because of the rule of preference contained in proviso to section 63(7).
Their orders are, therefore, set aside.
The State Transport Appellate Tribunal is directed to re hear the appeals and dispose them of in accordance with law.
[1017C E]
