The respondent passed an order of detention in respect of the appellant under section 3(2) of the , on the ground that the appellant 's activities were prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
Several criminal cases were pending against the appellant when the aforesaid order was passed.
The appellant had already surrendered in respect of a criminal charge against him before the order was served.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the detention order, but it was dismissed without any speaking order.
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the appellant filed the present criminal appeal by special leave as also a writ petition challenging the aforesaid order of detention on the ground that the order of preventive detention could only be justified against a person in detention if the detaining authority was satisfied that his release from detention was imminent and the order of detention was necessary for putting him back in jail.
The service of order of detention on the appellant/ petitioner while he was in jail was futile and useless since such an order had no application under section 3(2) of the Act.
Allowing the writ petition and the appeal in part, ^ HELD: 1.
The continued detention of the detenu under the Act is not justified.
The order of detention therefore is set aside.
However, this will not affect detenu 's detention under the criminal cases.
If however, the detenu is released on bail in the criminal cases already pending against him, the matter of service of the detention order under the Act may be reconsidered by the appropriate authority in accordance with law.
[912 E F] 906 2.
In our constitutional framework, the power of directing preventive detention given to the appropriate authorities must be exercised in exceptional cases as contemplated by the various provisions of the different statutes dealing with preventive detention and should be used with great deal of circumspection.
There must be awareness of the facts necessitating preventive custody of a person for social defence.
If a man is in custody and there is no imminent possibility of his being released, the power of preventive detention should not be exercised.
[911 F G] In the instant case, when the actual order of detention was served upon the detenu the detenu was in jail.
There is no indication that this factor or the question that the said detenu might be released or that there was such a possibility of his release was taken into consideration by the detaining authority properly and seriously before the service of the order.
If there were cogent materials for thinking that the detenu might be released, then these should have been made apparent.
In the affidavits on behalf of the detaining authority though there are indications that transfer of detenu from one prison to another was considered but the need to serve the detention order while he was in custody was not properly considered by the detaining authority in the light of relevant factors.
If that is the position then however disreputable the antecedents of a person might have been, without consideration of all the aforesaid relevant factors, the detenu could not have been put into preventive custody.
Therefore, though the order of preventive detention when it was passed was not invalid, and on relevant considerations the service of the order was not on proper consideration.
The order of detention is, therefore set aside.
[911 G H; 912 A D] Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr., ; and Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate Etc.
and others, , relied upon.
