Fundamental Rule 56(j) confers power on the appropriate authority to compulsorily retire a Government servant, if it is in the public interest to do so, by giving 3 months ' notice or 3 months ' pay and allowances in lieu of such notice; while sub cl.
(i) thereof states that a public servant in class I or class II service or post who had entered service before attaining the age of 35 years can be retired after he has attained the age of 50 years, sub cl.
(ii) thereof states that any other public servant can be retired after he has attained the age of 55 years.
In Union of India vs K.R. Tahiliani & Anr., this Court had held that F.R. 56(j) is meant to cover only those who are in a post on a regular basis, i.e., in a substantive capacity, and not on an officiating basis only.
Basing his case on this decision, the petitioner, who had been compulsorily retired while working in a class II post In an officiating capacity, challenged the order of his compulsory retirement.
Overruling the decision in Union of India vs K.R. Tahi liani & Anr., but, allowing the petition on the ground that the Delhi High Court, relying upon that decision, had grant ed relief to persons similarly placed as the petitioner, and, directing payment of his salary and allowances upto the date of his normal superannuation, HELD: Sub clause (1) of r. 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules applies to Government servants in Class I or Class II service or post on substantive, temporary or officiating basis.
[638E F] There is no reference to officiating service in sub cl.
The relevant words used in sub cl.
(i) are "if he is in CIasa I or CIasa II service or post.
" A person can be in Class I or CIasa II service or post even when he holds a post of either ciasa substantively or temporarily or on officiating basis.
Instances are abundant where officers are promoted to CIasa I or Class II service or post of such class on officiating basis and 633 such officiation lasts for a number of years.
Officiating promotion certainly does not confer a right to the post and at any time the Government servant may be sent back to his substantive post.
There is, however, no reason why sub cl.
(i) should be confined to service or post held on substan tive basis.
It is not disputed that a person who is in Class I or Class II service or post is in such service or post as covered by sub cl.
The possibility of such incumbent being sent back to the substantive post is not at all rele vant in the matter of exercising powers of compulsory re tirement.
If the officiation is not brought to an end by reverting the Government servant to his substantive post before the power of compulsory retirement is exercised, the Government servant concerned must be taken to be in Class I or Class II service or post at the relevant time and would come within the ambit of sub cl.
There is no warrant for the conclusion that officiating Government servants in Class I or Class II service or post are outside the purview of sub cl.
The possibility of a reversion to the sub stantive post is not germane to the exercise of power con tained in F.R. 56.
[637F H; 638A C] The purpose of F.R. 56(j) is to confer power on the appropriate authority to compulsorily retire a Government servant in the public interest and the classification of Government servants into two categories covered by sub cls.
(i) and (ii) has a purpose behind it.
If the condition indicated in sub cl.
(i) is satisfied, namely, the Govern ment servant is in Class I or Class II service or post and he had entered into service before attaining the age of 35 years, and has attained the age of fifty, the further condi tion that he must substantively belong to the two classes of service or post cannot be introduced into the scheme.
The purpose of the sub clauses is to classify Government serv ants into two categories and sub cl.
(i) takes within its sweep those Government servants who at the relevant time are in Class I or Class II service or post, whether substantive ly, temporarily or on officiating basis.
[638C E] Union of India vs K.R. Tahiliani & Ant., , over rulled.
