HELD: The Court was concerned with the narrow question whether the six law reports aforementioned being published by the 1st respondent were newspapers within the meaning of the Act and whether the employees engaged in their production or distribution were entitled to the benefit of the orders made by the Central Government on the basis of the Palekar Award.
[781F] In order to be a newspaper, a work must be (i) a printed work, (ii) a periodical, and (iii) should contain public news or comments on public news.
Any other class of printed periodical work as may, from time to time, be notified in this behalf by the Central Government in the official Gazette, may also be a newspaper.
There was no dispute in this case that the law reports are printed works and that they are periodicals.
The only question which remained to be considered was whether they contained public news or comments on public news, Newspapers and 776 books are no doubt shown as separate items in Entry 39 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, but the distinction between them sometimes becomes very thin or totally vanishes.
[781G H;782A B] The law reports being published by the 1st respondent are reports of recent decisions of the Supreme Court of India and the High Courts in India, which are supplied to it by its agents appointed at New Delhi and other places where the High Courts are situated.
These decisions are of public importance.
The law declared by the Supreme Court is binding on all the Courts in India, as provided by Article 141 of the Constitution.
The decisions of the Supreme Court a court of record constitute a source of law as they are judicial precedents of the highest court of the land.
They are binding on all the courts throughout India.
The decisions of every High Court being judicial precedents are binding on all the Courts situated in the territory under the jurisdiction of the High Court.
The decisions of the Supreme Court and High Courts are almost as important as statutes, rules and regulations passed by the competent legislatures and other bodies.
The decisions of the superior courts, while they settle the disputes between the parties to the proceedings, are sources of law in so far as all others are concerned.
As soon as a decision is rendered, the members of the public would be interested in knowing it; lawyers and others connected with the courts and judicial proceedings are interested in knowing the contents and effects of the decisions.
The 1st respondent and other publishers of law reports, in the interests of their own business, vie with each other to publish the judgments of the Supreme Court or the High Courts as early as possible in their law reports, published periodically weekly, fortnightly or monthly.
They believe the faster the decisions are published in their reports, the larger will be the number of subscribers.
The contents of these law reports constitute news in so far as the subscribers and readers of these reports are concerned.
By reading these law reports, they come to know of the latest legal position prevailing in the country on any question decided in the decisions reported in the said reports.
Hence, it was difficult to agree with the submission of the 1st respondent that the law reports did not carry any news and that the public was not interested in them.
Any decision published in the law reports of the 1st respondent contains information about the recent events which have taken place in the Supreme Court or the High Courts which are public bodies and these are matters in which public is interested.
The Court found it also difficult to agree with the submission of the 1st respondent that since the law reports are going to be preserved by the lawyers as reference books after getting them rebound subsequently, they should be treated as books.
The decisions contained in these law reports may 777 cease to be items of news after some time, but when they are received by the subscribers, they do possess the character of works containing news.
[782G H; 783A H] Strong reliance was placed by the 1st respondent on the decision of the High Court of Orissa in P.S.V. Iyer vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Orissa, AIR 1960 Orissa 221, but the Court found it difficult to agree with that decision since the High Court had omitted to take into consideration that information about recent decisions of the Courts of record could be news in which the public was interested.
The fact that a law book could be used as a reference book at a later stage was not sufficient to hold that the law report did not contain public news when it was received by the subscriber.
[784A, G H] It is sufficient that the expression 'newspaper ' as defined in the Act includes not merely 'public news ' but also 'comments on public news '.
Every law report contains the editorial note and also comments on some of the recent decisions.
The law Reports also contain newly enacted Acts, Rules and Regulations, book reviews and advertisements relating to law books, handwriting and finger print experts, etc., speeches made at conferences in which the legal fraternity is interested, etc.
Though the publication of these items by itself may not occupy a substantial part of a law report to make it a newspaper, the publication of the recent judgments itself is sufficient to make a law report a newspaper which may after some time cease to be a newspaper and become a book of reference.
[786G H; 787A B] The Act is a beneficient legislation which is enacted for improving the conditions of service of the employees of the newspaper establishments, and even if it is possible to have two opinions on the construction of the provisions of the Act, the one which advances the object of the Act and is in favour of the employees for whose benefit the Act is passed has to be accepted.
[787B C] The Law Reports published by the 1st respondent are newspapers and the employees employed by the 1st respondent in their production or publication should be extended the benefit of the orders passed by the Central Government on the basis of the recommendations made by the Palekar Award.[787C D] The judgment of the High Court was set aside and the writ petition filed by the 1st respondent before the High Court was dismissed.
[787D] 778 P.S.V. Iyer vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Orissa, AIR 1960 Orissa 221; T.V. Ramanath & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1975] Labour and Industrial Cases 488; L.D. Jain vs General Manager, Government of India Press and Others, ILR 1967 Punjab and Haryana 193; Ex Parte Stillwell, and Commissioner of Sales Tax vs M/s. Express Printing Press, AIR 1983 Bombay 191, referred to.
