Prior to 1955, the Bench Secretaries in the Allahabad High Court were on a higher pay scale than that of the Section Officers.
In 1965, the State Government appointed a Pay Rationalisation Committee to consider the duties and responsibilities of different categories of posts and recommend changes.
The Committee recommended for the Bench Secretaries a pay scale lower than that of the Section Officers.
The Bench Secretaries made a representation to the Government that they be put at par with the Section Officers if not on a higher scale.
The Government appointed Pay Commission (l971 72).
The Pay Commission did not accept the claim of the Bench Secretaries.
The Bench Secretaries again moved the Government reiterating their demand, whereupon an "Anomalies Committee" was constituted.
The Committee rejected the claim of the Bench Secretaries for placing them at par with the Section Officers, but suggested that ten posts of Bench Secretaries be upgraded.
The Government accepted the recommendation and issued orders upgrading ten posts of Bench Secretaries to be called Bench Secretaries grade I, giving the nomenclature of Bench Secretaries grade Il to the rest of Secretaries.
The Bench Secretaries grade II moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, challenging the bifurcation of their cadre into grade I & grade 11.
The High Court quashed the notification which created Bench Secretaries grade 1.
The State of l, '.P., aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, appealed to this Court.
PG NO 288 PG NO 289 Two questions arose for consideration (i) whether the Bench Secretaries were entitled to pay scales admissible to Section officers, and (11) whether the creation of two grades with different pay scales in the cadre of Bench Secretaries doing the same or similar work was violative of the "equal pay for equal work".
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD:(I) It requires of duties and responsibilities of the respective posts.
Functions of two posts may appear to be the same or similar, but there may be a difference in the performance.
Quantity of work may be the same but quality may be different.
The equation of posts of equation of pay must be determined by expert bodies, like pay commissions.
If there is any determination by a Commission or Committee, the Court should normally accept it and not tinker with it unless it is shown to be made with extraneous consideration.
[298G H;299A B] The Bench Secretaries were paid more emoluments than the section Officers, but it was not known on what basis and how they were treated superior to Section Officers.
The Successive Pay Commission and the Pay Rationalisation Committee found no support to their superior claim.
The Court could not go against that opinion.
The Bench Secretaries could as of right the pay scale admissible to the Section Officers.
[299C D] (2) The second question formulated affected the civil services in general.
All the Bench Secretaries concerned were indisputably having the same duties.
They had been bifurcated into two grades with different pay scales grade I with higher pay scale and grade II which was said to offend the constitutional principle of "equal pay for equal work".
[299E G] Article 39(d) of the Constitution, which proclaims "equal pay for equal work" and other like provisions in the Directive Principles, are rooted in Social Justice, intended to bring about a socio economic trans formation in society.
In matters of employment, it must be ensured that there is no exploitation of the poor and ignorant.
It is the duty of the State to see that the under privileged or weaker section get their dues.
Against this background the principle of "equal pay for equal work" has to be construed.
This principle has no mechanical application in every ca8e of similar work.
It has to be read into Article 14 of the Constitution, which permits reasonable classification founded on different basis.
[303C E] PG NO 290 The classification can be based on some qualities or characteristics of persons grouped together and not in others left out.
Those qualities or characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the object to be achieved.
In service matters, merit or experience could be the proper basis for classification to promote efficiency.
It cannot be denied that the quality of work performed by persons of longer experience is Superior to the work of new comers.
Higher pay scale to avoid stagnation or resultant frustration for lack of promotional evenues is common in career service.
Entitlement to higher pay scales depends upon seniority cum merit or merit cum seniority.
The differentiation so made in the same cadre will not amount to discrimination.
Classification based on experience is a reasonable classification having a rational nexus with the object thereof.
To hold otherwise, would be detrimental to the interest of the Service itself.
[303F H; 304A B] The Bench Secretaries might do the same work, but their quality of work might differ.
The Rule framed by the Chief Justice of the High Court make a proper classification for the purpose of entitlement to higher pay scale.
The High Court overlooked the criterion provided under the Rules.
Merit governs the grant of higher pay scale.
Classification made under the Rules could not be said to be violative of the right to have equal pay for equal work.
[305A C] Randhir Singh vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ;Ram Chandra vs Union of lndia; , ; P. Savita vs Union of India, [1985] Suppl.
(1) SCR 101; Dhirendra Chamoli & Anr.
vs State of U.P., ; Surinder Singh vs Engineer in Chief, CPWD, ; R.D. Gupta & Ors.
vs Lt. Governor of Delhi, ; ; Bhagwan Das & Ors.
vs State of Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634; National Museum Non Gazetted Employees Association & Anr.
vs Union of India, (WP No. 1230 of 1987 disposed of by the Supreme Court on 10.2.1988); Jaipal & Ors.
vs State of Haryana, (WP No. 455 and connected petitions of 1987 disposed of by the Supreme Court on 2.6.1988); Y.K. Mehta vs Union of India, (W P No. 1239 of 1979 and connected petitions disposed of bay supreme Court on 26.8.1988); Keshavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] 4 SCC 225 at para 712; All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognised) and Others vs Union of India & Ors., [1988] (2) Judgments Today SC p. 519, referred to.
