The respondent, in the appeal, was in charge of prepa r ing the pay bills of the employees of the Beas Sutlej Li nk Project.
He, along with other two employees, was charg ed with the fraudulent act of withdrawal of Rs.238.90 by pr e paring a bogus pay bill and identity card in the name of a fictitious person.
An enquiry was conducted against all t he three employees under the Punjab Government Servants Condu ct Rules, 1966 and the Inquiry Officer found all the thr ee guilty of the charge framed against each of them.
The comp e tent authority accepted the findings of the Inquiry Offic er and after giving an opportunity of being heard imposed t he penalty of dismissal on the respondent.
Minor penalty of with holding two or three future increments was imposed on each of the other two employees.
The respondent challeng ed the finding of the Inquiry Officer as well as the order of dismissal by filing a writ petition in the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
Subsequently the writ stood transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal under the 20 provisions of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985.
T he Tribunal agreed with the findings recorded by the Inqui ry Officer to the effect that the respondent was guilty of t he charge but modified the punishment by reducing the punis h ment of dismissal imposed to that of stopping his fi ve increments on the ground that the respondent was measur ed with a different yardstick than the other two employee section Against the aforesaid order of the Tribunal appeals we re filed before this Court; (a) by the Union of India conten d ing that the tribunal has no powers to interfere with t he punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority on t he ground that it is disproportionate to the proved misdeme a nour, and (b) by the respondent seeking a complete exoner a tion from the charge.
While allowing the appeal of the Union and dismissi ng the Special Leave Petition of the respondent the Court s et aside the order of the Tribunal, and, HELD: 1.
Under the provisions of the Administrati ve Tribunal Act, 1985 the powers of the High Courts und er Article 226, in so far as they are exercisable in relati on to service matters stand conferred on the Tribunal esta b lished under the Act.
The powers of other ordinary civ il Courts in relation to service matters to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognisan ce either expressly or impliedly barred also stand conferred on the Tribunal.
The Act thus excludes the jurisdiction, pow er and authority of all Courts except the Supreme Court a nd confers the same on the Tribunal in relation to recruitme nt and service matters.
The Tribunal is just a substitute to the civil Court and High Court.
The Tribunal thus cou ld exercise only such powers which the civil Court or the Hi gh Court could have exercised by way of judicial review.
It is neither less nor more.
[27D E; 28B C1 S.P. Sampat Kumar vs Union of India & Ors., ; referred to; 2.
The jurisdiction of the Tribunal to interfere wi th the disciplinary matters or punishment cannot be equat ed with an appellate jurisdiction.
The Tribunal cannot inte r fere with the findings of the Inquiry Officer or compete nt authority where they are not arbitrary or utterly pervers e.
The power to impose penalty on a delinquent officer is conferred on the competent authority either by an Act of legislature or rules made under the proviso to Article 3 09 of the Constitution.
If there has been an enquiry consiste nt with the rules and in accordance with principles of natur al justice what punishment would meet the 21 ends of justice is a matter exclusively within the jurisdi c tion of the competent authority.
If the penalty can lawful ly be imposed and is imposed on the proved misconduct, t he Tribunal has no power to substitute its own discretion f or that of the authority.
The adequacy of penalty unless it is malafide is certainly not a matter for the Tribunal to concern with.
The Tribunal also cannot interfere with t he penalty if the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer or t he competent authority is based on evidence even if some of it is found to be irrelevant or extraneous to the matte r. [33D F] State of Orissa vs Bidyabhushan, [1963] (Suppl.) 1 S.C.R. 648; Dhirajlal Girdharilal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, A.I.R. 1955 S.C. 271; State of Maharashtra vs B.K. Takkamore & Ors.
, ; ; Zora Singh vs J.M. Tandon, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1537; Railway Board vs Nira n jan Singh; , ; State of U.P. vs O. P. Gupta, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 679 and Union of India vs Sarda rr Bahadur, , applied.
Bhagat Ram vs State of Himachal Pradesh, [1983] 2 S.C. C. 442, distinguished.
There is one exception to this proposition.
There m ay be cases where the penalty is imposed under clause (a) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitutio n.
Where the person, without enquiry is dismissed, removed or reduced in rank solely on the basis of conviction by a criminal court, the Tribunal may examine the adequacy of t he penalty imposed in the light of the conviction and senten ce inflicted on the person.
If the penalty impugned is appa r ently unreasonable or uncalled for, having regard to t he nature of the criminal charge, the Tribunal may step in to render substantial justice.
The Tribunal may remit t he matter to the competent authority for reconsideration or by itself substitute one of the penalities provided und er clause (a).
[35E F] Union of India vs Tulsiram PateI, 8, applied.
Since the respondent had made his choice of forum a nd was even otherwise dealt with under the Government Serva nt (Conduct) Rules which are applicable to him it cannot be held that he falls into the category of a workman empoweri ng the Central Administrative Tribunal to exercise the powe rs of an Industrial Court for giving appropriate relief.
[35 F G] 22
