The petitioners in the writ petitions were appointed as Supervisors Grade 'A ' in various ordnance factories betwe en 1962 and 1966, in pursuance of circular dated 6th Novembe r, 1962 issued by the Director General of Ordnance Factorie section The circular further provided for promotion from Supervis or 'A ' to Chargeman I1, on completion of two years ' satisfact o ry service.
75 Supervisors Grade 'A ' had moved a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court in 1972.
Their grievance was th at even though quite a large number of Supervisors Grade ' A ' had been promoted to the post of Chargeman Grade II on completion of two years ' satisfactory work, in pursuance of the circular dated 6th November, 1962, they had been di s criminated against and had not been so promoted immediate ly on the expiry of two years ' service.
The writ petition was contested on the ground that t he promotion from Supervisor Grade 'A ' to Chargeman II we re governed by the Indian Ordnance Factories (Recruitment a nd Conditions of Service of Grade III Personnel) Rules, 19 56 and such promotions could be made only in accordance wi th the procedure prescribed by Rule 8 of these Rules.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition on the ground of unexplained laches.
The Division Bench did n ot find any substance in the submission made on behalf of t he petitioners and dis 93 missed their special appeal.
According to the Divisi on Bench, it was difficult to read in the circular that aft er two years of satisfactory service there would be automat ic promotion from Supervisor Grade 'A ' to Chargeman II as su ch a view would militate against Rule 12 of the Rules, whi ch provided that no appointment shall be made otherwise than as specified in the Rules.
It was further held by the Divisi on Bench that even assuming that some Supervisors Grade 'A ' h ad been automatically promoted on completion of two year s ' service, without the recommendation after screening by t he Promotion Committee, as provided in Rule 8, no right wou ld accrue in favour of the appellants inasmuch as such prom o tions would be in the teeth of Rule 12.
Against the judgment of the Division Bench, Civil Appe al No. 441 of 1981 (Virendra Kumar and Others vs Union of Ind ia and Others, was preferred and this Court by its order dated 2.2.1981 directed that the cases of the 75 appellants in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1981 be considered f or promotion as Chargeman Grade II and they be so promot ed unless found to be unfit.
Another group of 125 Supervisors Grade 'A ' got t he benefit of the Circular dated 6.11.1962 in pursuance of an order passed by the Madhya Pradesh High Court on 4th Apr il 1983 on the basis of the judgment of this Court in Civ il Appeal No. 441 of 1981.
Special Leave Petitions against t he judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court were dismissed by this Court.
The petitioners in the present writ petitions pray th at the same relief may be granted to them as had been grant ed in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1981.
In the Civil Miscellaneous petitions now filed in Civ il Appeal No. 441 of 1981, the petitioners, apart from t he prayer for initiating proceedings for contempt against t he respondents for disobedience of the order of this Cou rt dated 2.2.1981, have prayed for orders directing the r e spondents to implement in true letter and spirit the sa id order and to promote the petitioners to the next high er posts after giving them the benefit of the directions of that order.
Their grievance is that their promotion tant a mounts to implementation of the order of this Court dat ed 2.2.1981 only on paper inasmuch as they have not been gran t ed the difference of back wages and promotion to high er posts on the basis of their back date promotion as Chargem an II.
Before this Court it has been urged on behalf of the r e spondents 94 that (i) promotions of employees including Supervisor ' A ' were governed by the Rules and in view of Rule 12 no a p pointment could be made otherwise than as specified therei n; (ii) appointments by promotion were to be made according to Rule 8 on the basis of selection list prepared in the mann er provided there in and there was no scope for automat ic promotion merely after expiry of 2 years of continuo us service on the basis of the circular dated 6th Novembe r, 1962; (iii) the circular which was in the nature of an executive instruction prescribed 2 years ' service as Supe r visor 'A ' to make them only eligible for promotion; and (i v) after the issue of the subsequent order dated 28th Decembe r, 1965 and circular dated 20th January, 1966 no Supervis or could claim to have become eligible for promotion merely on completion of 2 years ' satisfactory service and his prom o tion thereafter could be effected only in accordance wi th the normal Rules.
Dismissing the writ petitions and disposing of t he miscellaneous petitions, it was, HELD: (1) An executive instruction could make a prov i sion only with regard to a matter which was not covered by the Rules and such executive instruction could not overri de any provision of the Rule.
[103E] B.N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore, ; 2; Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan, 1; Ramchandra Shenkar Deoghar vs The State of Maharashtr a; , ; Union of India vs Somasundaram Viswanat h, [1988] 3 SC.
Judgments Today 724, referred to.
(2) Notwithstanding the issue of instructions dated 6 th November, 1962 the procedure for making promotion as la id down in Rule 8 of the Rules had to be followed, and the sa id procedure could not be abrogated by the executive instru c tions dated 6th November 1962.
[103F] (3) The only effect of the circular dated 6th Novemb er 1962 was that Supervisors 'A ' on completion of 2 year s ' satisfactory service could be promoted by following t he procedure contemplated by Rule 8.
This circular had inde ed the effect of accelerating the chance of promotion.
T he right to promotion on the other hand was to be governed by the Rules.
This right of promotion as provided by the Rul es was neither affected nor could be affected by the circula r. [103F G] 95 (4) After the coming into force of the order dated 28 th December, 1965 and the circular dated 20th January, 19 66 promotions could not be made just on completion of 2 year s ' satisfactory service under the earlier circular dated 6 th November, 1962, the same having been superseded by the lat er circular.
[106H; 107A B] (5) Circular dated 20th January, 1966 could not be treated to be one affecting adversely any condition of service of Supervisors 'A '.
Its only effect was that t he chance of promotion which had been accelerated by the circ u lar dated 6th November, 1962 was deferred and made depende nt on selection according to the Rules.
Though a right to be considered for promotion was a condition of service, me re chances of promotion were not.
[106G H] Ramchandra Shankar Deodhar vs The State of Maharashtr a, (supra) and Mohammad Shujat Ali & Ors.
vs Union of India Ors.
; , , referred to.
(6) Supervisors 'A ' who had been promoted before t he coming into force of the order dated 28th December, 1965 a nd the circular dated 20th January, 1966 stood in a cla ss separate from those whose promotions were to be made ther e after.
The fact that some Supervisors 'A ' had been promot ed before the coming into force of the order dated 20th Jan u ary, 1966 could not, therefore, constitute the basis for an argument that those Supervisors 'A ' whose cases came up f or consideration thereafter and who were promoted in due cour se in accordance with the Rules, were discriminated agains t. [107B C] (7) There were sufficient indications that when Civ il Appeal No. 441 of 1981 was heard by this Court either t he subsequent order dated 28th December, 1965 as well as t he circular dated 20th January, 1966 and the legal consequenc es flowing therefrom were not brought to the notice of t he learned Judges by the learned counsel for the respondent s, or the same was not properly emphasized.
[105E F] (8) The findings of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in i ts judgment dated 4th April stood approved by this Court wh en the Court dismissed the special leave petition against th at judgment.
The appellants in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 19 81 therefore deserved to be granted the same benefit as regar ds back wages and further promotion as were given by the Madh ya Pradesh High Court to such of the petitioners before th at Court who were Supervisors 'A ' and were granted promotion as Chargeman I1 by its judgment dated 4th April, 1983.
[108 H;
