Two separate properties bearing Door Nos. 2 and 3 ad measuring 41 grounds and 2005 sq. ft., which originally formed part of an extent of land, situate at Mount Road, Madras belonged to several co owners, who leased out the same to the Respondent, by two separate lease deeds (exhibit P 1 and P 2) item 1 and 2 in the Schedule A to the plaint.
The property contained in Door No. 2 which comprised an area of 4 grounds and 151 sq ft with certain buildings was given on rent for Rs. 150 p.m., whereas the property contained in Door No. 3 which also had some buildings thereon was let out for Rs.200 p.m.
The owners sold the properties to the United India Life Assurance Co. and the New Guardian of India Life Insurance Co. Ltd. in July 1953.
In 1956, the Life Insurance Corpora tion of India, the appellant stepped into the shoes of the said companies The appellant moved two applications before the Rent Controller for fixation of a 'fair rent ' for each of the premises; In respect of the property in Door No. 2, the rent claimed was Rs.2,399/03 while in respect of the other, the rent claimed was Rs.3266/50p.
The tenants claimed that, under both the lease deeds, what had been leased out to them was only a vacant land and since the superstructure had been built by them, they were entitled to relief under the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act.
It was further contended that the Rent Controller had no jurisdiction to fix a fair rent.
The Rent Controller accepted the contention of the tenant so far as item No. 1 (property at Door No. 2) was concerned but with regard to the second property (Door No. 3), he fixed the fair rent at Rs. 1451 p.m.
There were then two appeals to the Court of Small Causes.
The Small Causes Court came to the conclusion that the buildings on the land leased vide P 1 had also been conveyed to the appellant and that the LIC was entitled to seek fixation of fair rent in respect of this premises also.
However the order of the Rent Controller in regard to the 546 other property in Door No. 3 was upheld.
However, in certain earlier proceedings for fixation of fair rent etc., it had been held by the Rent Controller that item No. (Door No. 2) belonged to the LIC, but his order of eviction had been set aside by the appellate court on some other ground.
The Court of Small Causes did not treat that decision as res judicata.
The tenants being aggrieved by the order of the Court of Small Causes filed revision petitions but they were dis missed on 20.11.1968.
The appellant thereupon filed Civil Suit against the tenants respondents for recovery of arrears of rent together with interests etc.
on the basis of the fair rent fixed.
The respondents tenants also filed a civil suit claiming protec tion under the Madras City Tenants ' Protection Act but this suit and further appeals therefrom were dismissed.
In the suit for recovery of rent filed by the appellant, the ten ants contended that since the subject matter of the lease under exhibit P 1 was only a vacant site, the Rent Controller had no jurisdiction to fix the fair rent in respect thereof and that, therefore, the claim in the suit for arrears of rent, based on the Rent Controller 's order in respect of the premises covered by exhibit P 1 had to fail.
The trial Judge in the High Court came to the conclusion that exhibit P 1 did not, in law, create a valid lease between the co owners and the tenants.
He further held that the superstructure constructed on the land had been conveyed to the vendee under the sale deed dated 30.7.1953 and thus vested in LIC.
On this reason ing the High Court held that the Rent Controller had juris diction to fix the fair rent in respect of the premises.
The tenants filed an appeal.
The appellate Bench confirmed the decree in respect of Item 2 but as regards Item No. 1, the Appellate Bench vacated the decree passed by the trial Court.
It held that there was a valid lease between the owners and the tenants under Exts.
P 1 and P 2.
The appel lant Bench held that the Rent Controller had no jurisdiction to entertain the application for fixation of fair rent in respect of the property which was only a vacant piece of land.
Thus, the Court held that the LIC could not maintain the suit for recovery of rent based on the order made by the statutory tribunal under the Rent Control Act.
The tenants ' appeal was accordingly partly allowed.
LIC came up in appeal to this Court against the said order, after obtaining special leave.
Two questions arose for determination by this Court viz., (1) Was the LIC the vendee only of a vacant land with no title to the buildings standing on the site in Item 1, and (2) it open for the tenants to contend that the order of the Court of Small Causes in the earlier rent 547 control proceedings deciding to the contrary, and fixing the fair rent of item 1 could be completely ignored as an order passed totally without jurisdiction though it had become final between the parties? Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: There are clear indications in the Act and rules that the Rent Controller does not have the jurisdiction to decide questions of title.
In a proceeding under the Act, whether it be for fixation of fair rent or eviction, the tenant may raise several objections.
He may, inter alia, take the point that the opposite party is not the landlord.
[561C D] All that the Rent Controller has to do is to satisfy himself that the person seeking eviction or fixation of fair rent is a 'landlord ' who has, prima facie, the right to receive the rent of the property in question.
That the Rent Controller 's jurisdiction on this issue is limited is clear from the proviso to Section 10(1) of the Act.
[561 F G] The extensive jurisdiction conferred on civil courts under Section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure should not be curtailed without a specific statutory warrant or except on some clear principle.
There is nothing in the Tamil Nadu Rent Control Act which, in any way, takes away, or narrows down, the civil court 's jurisdiction as, for example, there is in the Delhi Rent Control Act (Section 50).
[569G H] Section 4 of the Rent Control Act provides only a ma chinery for fixation of fair rent in respect of certain premises.
It is the quantum of fair rent that arises for determination by the Rent Controller.
There is no doubt that, since an application for this purpose cannot lie except at the instance of a landlord or a tenant, the Rent Controller has to deal with this incidentally but this is not one of the direct issues before the Rent Controller.
If and only if, this relationship exists between the parties, the Rent Controller steps in for a limited purpose to determine what the fair rent is and then fades out of the picture.
Where a fair rent is fixed by a Controller, the Rent Control Act does not provide for a machinery for recov ery of the amount.
The amount has to be recovered by the landlord only by recourse to a civil court.
This gives an indication that the determination of the relationship that gives rise to the application is also not conclusive.
This is indeed made clear by the provisions relating to eviction.
[570B E] If the civil court in the instant case, had come to the conclusion that there is a relationship of a landlord and a tenant, and that the LIC 548 was entitled to recover the rent from the tenants, it will have to pass a decree in favour of the LIC on the basis of the fair rent fixed by the Rent Controller.
It will not be open to the civil court to re determine the rent payable by the tenant to the landlord because that is a matter squarely and exclusively within the jurisdiction of the Rent Control ler and, therefore, impliedly excluded from the purview of the civil court.
But his decision is not final on the issue that opens up his jurisdiction and cannot preclude an owner from contending, in a civil court, that he should not be asked to pay rent for his own property to some one else.
[570F H] There is no reason to hold that contract between a person with himself and others is invalid.
[571A] Krishnamurthy vs Parthasarathy, AIR 1949 Mad. 780; Manibhai Hathibhai vs Arbuthnot, AIR 1947 Bom.
413; Rai Brij Raj vs Shaw, ; at 147, 150; Official Trustee vs Sachindranath; , & 99 pp.
Antulay vs Nayak, ; at 649, 677 and 700; Trideshwar Dayal vs Maheshwar Dayal; , at 1437; Shiv Chander Kapoor vs Amar Bose, ; paras 22 and 23: Palaniappa Chettiar and Ors.
vs Vairavan Chettiar, [19631 76 L.W. 21; Palaniappa Chettiar vs Babu Sahib alias Sheik Mytheen Sahib and Ors., [1964] 77 LW 551; Salay Mohamed Sail etc.
vs Jaffer Mohamed Sait 's Memorial Dispensary Charity and Ors., [1969] 1 Andhra Weekly Reporter (S.C. 16); Bhagwan Dayal vs Reoti Devi, ; ; Desika Charyulu vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Ant., AIR 1964 SC 807; Dhulabhai vs State, ; ; Mathura Prasad Bajoo Jaiswal and Ors.
vs Dossibai N.B. Jee jeebhoy, [1070] 3 SCR 830; Jeeth Kaur and Ors.
vs Smt.
P. Rondalamma and Ant., AIR 1983 A.P. 219 and State of Tamil Nadu vs Ramalinga Samigal Madam and Ors.
