The mode of proving a will does not ordinarily differ from that of proving any other document except as to the special requirement of attestation prescribed in the case of a will by section 63 of the Indian Succession Act.
Proof in either case cannot be mathematically precise and certain and so the test should be one of satisfaction of a prudent mind in such matters.
The onus must be on the propounder and in absence of suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the will, proof of testamentary capacity and signature of the testator as required by law may be sufficient to discharge the onus.
Where, however, there are suspicious circumstances, the onus would be on the propounder to explain them to the satis faction of the Court before the will can be accepted as genuine.
If the caveator alleges undue influence, fraud or coercion the onus will be on him to prove the same.
Where there are no such pleas but the circumstances give rise to such doubts, it is for the propounder to satisfy the conscience of the Court.
What are suspicious circumstances must be judged in the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
If the propounder takes a prominent part in the execution of the will which confers substantial benefits on him, that itself is a suspicious circumstance attending the execution of the will and in appreciating the evidence in such a case, the court should proceed with an open but nevertheless vigilant and cautious mind.
Harmes vs Hinkson, , Fulton vs Andrew, , Barry vs Butlin, [1838] 2 MOO.
P.C. 480, Vallasamy Servai vs Sivaraman Servai, (1929) L.R. 57 I.A. 96 and Sarat Kumar Bibi vs Sakhi Chand, (1928) L. R. 56 1.
A. 62, referred to.
Case law discussed.
In the instant case the appellant, as the sole executor to a will, brought the suit out of which the appeal arises, for a declaration that the testatrix was the owner of certain properties and was as such entitled to dispose of them by the will and asked for consequential reliefs purporting to give effect to the bequests made by her.
It appeared from the evidence that the appellant took a prominent, if not a decisive, part in the execution of the 427 will, which contained substantial bequests in favour of his sons.
But there was no evidence to show that the draft was ever approved by the testatrix or that the will was fully read out to her and she knew its contents.
The trial court decreed the suit but the High Court dismissed the same.
Held, that the High Court was right in setting aside the finding of the trial court that the will had been duly and validly executed.
Held further, that the trial court was in error in holding that the proof of signature in the instant case could raise a presumption as to the testator 's knowledge of the contents of the will.
Surendra Nath Chatterji vs Jahnavi Charan Mukherji, Cal. 390, explained and approved.
