Petitioners ' lands were acquired by the respondents under sections 17 and 19 of the Bangalore Development Act, 1976.
Section 36 of the said Act made applicable the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, where acquisition is otherwise than by agreement.
The notification making the declaration under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act in respect of the lands in question was made on 20.9.1977.
On 20.9.1984s.
11 A was introduced and brought into force by the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 prescribing that where the declaration under section 4 of the Land Acquisition ACt was published before the commencement of the Land Acquistion (Amendment) Act, 1984, the award was to be made within two years from such commencement.
The awards should have thus been made within two years from 20.9.1984.
On 11.9.1985 the petitioners obtained an interim order from this Court directing status quo with regard to the possession of the lands in question in a special leave petition which was dismissed on 29.4.87.
on December 16 17,1987 two writ petitions were filed by the petioners in the High Court Challenging the acquisition, contending that as the awards were not made within two years of the notification making the declaration under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, the entire acquisition proceedings had lapsed.
The High Court granted interim stay in respect of the acquisition of the lands.
The petitions were later dismissed.
Appeals therefrom were also dismissed by a Division Bench.
The petitioners preferred these special leave petitions and obtained interim stay of dispossession.
Dismissing the special leave petitions, this Court, 564 HELD: 1.
The relief under Article 136 of the Constitution is discretionary and a petitioner who approaches this Court for such relief must come with frank and full disclosure of facts.
If he fails to do so and suppresses material facts, his application is liable to be dismissed.[566B C] 2.Whatever the ultimate effect of the stay orders, in view of the provisions of section 11 A of the Land Acquisition ACt, the Fact of the stay orders was highly material in the determination of these special leave petitions.
There was no reference in the special leave petitions to any of the stay orders and the Court could know about these orders only when the respondents appeared in response to the notice and filed their counter affidavit.
The said interim orders had a direct bearing on the question raised and the non disclosure of the same certainly amounts to suppression of material facts.
On this ground alone, the special leave petitions were liable to be rejected.
[565G H; 566A B]
