Sub section (1) of sec.
19 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, LVI I of 1947, provided that "it shall not be lawful for the tenant or any person acting or purporting to act on behalf of the tenant to claim or receive any sum or any consideration as a condition for the relinquishment of his tenancy of any premises"; and sub sec.
(2) provided that any tenant or person who in contravention of the provisions of sub sec.
(1) receives any sum or consideration shall on conviction be punished with imprisonment and also with fine.
A. who was a tenant of a flat, handed over vacant posses sion the flat to B on receiving "pugree", under a document which recited that A shall have no claim whatever over the flat and that B shall pay the rent directly to the landlord.
A was convicted of an offence under sec.
19 (2).
Held, that there was no "relinquishment" of his tenancy by A, within the meaning of sec.
19 (1) and the conviction could not be sustained.
There is a clear distinction between an assignment of a tenancy on the one hand and a relinquishment or surrender on the other.
In the case of an assignment, the assignor con tinues to be liable to the landlord for the performance of his obligations under the tenancy and this liability is contractual, while the assignee becomes liable by reason of privity of estate.
The consent of the landlord to an as signment is not necessary, in the absence of a contract or local usage to the contrary.
But in the case of relinquish ment it cannot be a unilateral transaction; it can only be in favour of the lessor by mutual agreement between them.
Relinquishment of possession must be to the lessor or one who holds his interest; and surrender or relinquishment terminates the lessee 's rights and lets in the lessor.
As sec.
19 of Bombay Act LVII of 1947 creates an offence and imposes a penalty of fine and imprisonment, the words of the section must be strictly construed in favour of the subject.
The Court is not concerned so much with what might possibly have been intended as with what has been actually said in and by the language employed in the statute.
Judgment of the Bombay High Court reversed.
