The appellant, who was working as a Loco Foreman, was found to have accepted a sum of Rs. 375 from a Railway Contractor.
The appellant 's explanation was that he had borrowed the amount as he was in need of money for meeting the expenses of the clothing of his children who were studying in school, The Special judge accepted the evidence of the contractor and held that the money had been taken as a bribe, that the defence story was improbable and untrue, that the presumption under section 4 Of the Prevention of Corruption Act had to be raised and that the presumption had not been rebutted by the appellant and accordingly convicted him under section 161 Indian Penal Code and section 5 Of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
On appeal the High Court held that on the facts of the case the statutory presumption under section 4 had to be raised, that the explanation offered by the appellant was improbable and palpably unreasonable and that the presumption had not been rebutted, and upheld the conviction.
The appellant contended (i) that section 4 was ultra vires as it contravened article 14 of the Constitution, (ii) that the presumption under section 4 could not be raised merely on proof of acceptance of money but it had further to be proved that the money was accepted as a bribe, (iii) and that even if the presumption arose it was rebutted when the appellant offered a reasonably probable explanation.
Held, that section 4 of the Prevention of Corruption Act did not violate article 14 Of the Constitution.
The classification of public servants who were brought within the mischief of section 4 was based on intelligible differentia which had a rational relation to the object of the Act, viz,, eradicating bribery and corruption amongst public servants.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri justice section R. Tendolkar; , , followed.
A. section Krishna vs The State of Madras, ; , referred to.
The presumption under section 4 arose when it was shown that the accused had received the stated amount and that the said amount was not legal remuneration.
The word " gratification ' 593 in section 4(1) was to be given its literal dictionary meaning of satisfaction of appetite or desire ; it could not be construed to mean money paid by way of a bribe.
The High Court was justified in raising the presumption against the appellant as it was admitted that he had received the money from the contractor and the amount received was other than legal remuneration.
State vs Pundlik Bhikaji Ahire, and Promod Chander Shekhar vs Rex, I.L.R. 1950 All. 382, approved.
The State vs Abhey singh, A.I.R. 1957 Raj.
138 and State vs Pandurang Laxman Parab, , disapproved.
Even if it be assumed that the presumption arising under section 4(1) could be rebutted by the accused giving an explanation which was a reasonably probable one the High Court was right in holding that the explanation given by the appellant was wholly unsatisfactory and unreasonable.
Otto George Gfeller vs The King, A.I.R. 1943 P.C. 211 and Rex vs Cary Briant, (1943) I K.B. 607, referred to.
