The appellants were detained under r. 30(l) of the Defence of India Rules made by the Central Government under section 3 of the Defence of India Ordinance, 1962.
They applied to the Punjab and Bombay High Courts under section 491(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and their case was that sections 3(2)(15)(i) and 40 of the Defence of India Act, 1962, and r. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, which were continued under the Act, were unconstitutional and invalid inasmuch as they contravened their fundamental rights under articles 14, 21, 22(4), (5) and (7) of the Constitution and that, therefore, they should be set at liberty.
The High Courts held that the Presidential Order which had been issued on November 3, 1962, under article 359(1) of the Constitution, after a declaration of emergency under article 352, consequent on the Chinese invasion of India, barred their right to move the said petitions and dismissed them.
These appeals raised two common questions in this Court, (1) what was the true scope and effect of the Presidential Order issued under article 359(1), and (2) did the bar created by the Order operate in respect of the applications under section 491(1)(b) of the Code.
The Presidential Order was as follows: "G.S.R. 1464 In exercise of the powers conferred by cl.
(1) of article 359 of the Constitution, the President hereby declares that the right of any person to move any court for the enforcement of the right conferred by article 21 and article 22 of the Constitution shall remain suspended for the period during which the Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause (1) of article 352 thereof on the 26th October 1962 is in force, if such person has been deprived of any such rights under the Defence of India Ordinance, 1962 (4 of 1962) or any rule or order made thereunder.
" By a later amendment of the Order article 14 was incorporated into it.
798 Held:(per Gajendragadkar, Sarkar, Wanchoo, Hidayatullah, Das Gupta and Shah, JJ.) that the proceedings taken by the appellants in the High Courts under section 491(1)(b) of the Code were hit by the Presidential Order and must be held to be incompetent.
Article 359 of the Constitution was not capable of two interpretations and it was, therefore not necessary to decide the controversy raised by the parties as to whether that Article should be interpreted in favour of the President 's power granted by it or the fundamental rights of the citizens.
The King (At the Prosecution of Arthur Zadig) vs Halliday, ; , Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson, ; , Keshav Talpade vs The King Emperor, [1943] F.C.R. 49, Nakkuda Ali vs M. F. De section Jayaratne, and King Emperor vs Vimalabal Deshpande, L.R. 73 1. A. 144, considered.
The words 'any court ' in article 359(1), construed in their plain grammatical meaning, must mean any court of competent jurisdiction including ' the Supreme Court and the High Courts before which the rights specified in the Presidential Order can be enforced.
It was not correct to say that the use of the words was necessary so as to include such other courts as might be empowered in terms of article 32(3).
Nor was it correct to say that the words could not include a High Court as its power to issue a writ under article 226(1) was discretionary.
In judging whether a particular proceeding fell within the purview of the Presidential Order the determining factor was not its form nor the words in which the relief was couched but the substance of it.
If in granting the relief the court had to consider whether any of the fundamental rights mentioned in the Presidential Order, had been contravened, the proceeding was within the Order, whether it was under article 32(l) or 226(1) of the Constitution.
The right to move the court for writ of habeas corpus under section 491(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure was now a statutory right and could no longer be claimed under the common law.
Girindra Nath Banerjee vs Birendra Nath Pal I.L.R. 54 Cal.
727, District Magistrate, Trivandrum vs K. C. Mammen Map pillai, I.L.R. , Matthen vs District Magistrate, Trivandrum L.R. 66 I.A. 222 and King Emperor vs Sibnath Banerji, L.R. 72 I.A. 241, referred to.
Since the promulgation of the Constitution the two methods by which a citizen could enforce his right of personal freedom were (i) by a writ under article 226(1) or article 32(l), or (ii) under section 491(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Whichever method he adopted if the right he sought to enforce was a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution the matter must, come within article 359(1) of the Constitution.
That the court could exercise its power under section 491(1)(b) suo motu could make no 799 difference and articles 372, 225 or 375 could provide no valid ground of attack.
The suspension of the right to move any court, as under the Presidential Order, must necessarily suspend the Court 's jurisdiction accordingly.
The right to challenge a detention order under section 491(1)(b) of the Code had been enlarged by the fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution and when a detenu relied upon such rights in his petition under that section he was in substance seeking to enforce his fundamental rights.
The prohibition contained in article 359(1) and the Presidential Order must, therefore, apply.
The expression "right to move any court" in article 359(1) and the Presidential Order takes in all legal actions, filed or to be filed, in which the specified rights are sought to be enforced and covers all relevant categories of jurisdictions of competent courts under which the said actions would other wise have been normally entertained and tried.
Sree Mohan Chowdhury vs Chief Commissioner Union Territory of Tripura, ; , referred to.
Even though the impugned Act may be invalid by reason of contravention of articles 14, 21 and 22, as contended by the appellants, that invalidity could not be challenged during the period prescribed by the Presidential Order and it could not be said that the President could not because of such invalidity issue the order.
Where, however, the challenge to the validity of the detention order was based on any right other than those mentioned in the Presidential Order, the detenu 's right to move any court could not be suspended by the Presidential Order because the right was outside article 359(1).
Where again the detention was challenged on the ground that it contravened the mandatory provisions of the relevant act or that it was malafide and was proved to be so and in all cases falling under the other categories of section 491(1) of the Code excepting those under section 491(1)(b), the bar of the Presidential Order could have no application.
So also the plea that the operative provision of the law under which the order of detention was made suffered from the vice of excessive delegation, was an independent plea not relatable to the fundamental rights mentioned in the Presidential Order and its validity had to be examined.
The plea that section 3(2)(15)(i) and section 40 of the impugned Act suffered from excessive delegation must fail.
The legislative policy was broad stated in the preamble and the relevant provisions of sections 3(1) and 3(2) gave detailed and specific guidance to the rule making authority and it was not correct to say that the Act had by the impugned sections delegated essentially legislative function to that authority.
Rule 30(1)(b) which was consistent with the operative provisions of the Act could not also be challenged on that ground.
800 In " The etc.
; , Harishankar Bagla vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , Bhatanagars and Co. Ltd., vs The Union of India, ; , relied on.
The impugned Act could not also he struck down as a piece of colourable legislation because the , was already on the Statute book.
The Parliament had power under Entry 9, List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and if in view of the grave threat to the security of India it passed the Act, it could not be said to have acted malafide.
If the Parliament thought that the executive would not be able to detain citizens reasonably suspected of prejudicial activities by a recourse to the , which provided for the required constitutional safeguards and the impugned Act which it enacted did not, it could not be suggested that it was acting malafide.
Even if the impugned Act contravened articles 14 and 22 and the detentions thereunder were invalid, article 359(1) and the Presidential Order, which were precisely meant to meet such a situation, barred investigation on the merits during the period prescribed by the Order.
The proceeding under section 491(1)(b) of the Code is one pro ceeding and the sole relief that can be claimed under it is release from the detention.
If that could not be claimed because of the Presidential Order it was unreasonable to say that a mere declaration that the impugned Act and the detention thereunder were invalid could be made.
Such a declaration is clearly outside the purview of section 491(1)(b) of the Code as also of articles 226(1) and 32(l) of the Constitution.
The period for which the emergency should continue and the restrictions that should be imposed during its continuance are matters that must inevitably be left to the executive.
In a democratic state the effective safeguard against any abuse of power in peace as also in emergency is the existence of enlightened, vigilant and vocal public opinion.
Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson, [19421 A.C. 206, referred to.
The inviolability of individual freedom and the majesty of law that sustains it are equally governed by the Constitution which has made this Court the custodian of the fundamental rights on the one hand and, on the other, provided for the declaration of the emergency.
Consequently, in dealing with the right of a citizen to challenge the validity of his detention, effect must be given to article 359(1) and the Presidential Order issued under it.
The right specified in that Article must be held to include such right whether constitutional or constitutionally guaranteed and the words "any court" must include the Supreme Court and the High Court.
The Punjab and the Bombay High Courts were, therefore right in their decision that the applications under section 491(1)(b) of 801 the Code were incompetent in so far as they sought to challenge the validity of the detentions on the ground that the Act and the Rules under which the orders were made contravened articles 14, 21 and 22(4)(5) and (7) of the Constitution.
Per Subba Rao, J. It was clear that section 3(2)(15)(i) of the Defence of India Act, 1962, and r. 30(1)(b) made under the Act contravened the relevant provisions of article 22 of the Constitution and were, therefore, void.
Deep Chand vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 840, Mahendra Lal vs State of U.P., A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1019, A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; , referred to.
Under the Constitution, every person has a right to move the Supreme Court, the High Courts or any other court or courts constituted by the Parliament under article 32(3) for the enforcement of fundamental rights in the manner prescribed.
But while the right to move the Supreme Court is a guaranteed right, the right to move the others is not so.
Article 359, properly construed, meant that the bar imposed by the Presidential Order applied not only to the guaranteed right to move the Supreme Court but also the rights to move the other courts under article 32 and article 226 of the Constitution.
There is no new rule of construction peculiar to war measures.
It is always the same, whether in peace or in war.
The fundamental rule is that the courts have to find out the expressed intention of the Legislature from the words of the enactment itself.
Words must be given their natural and ordinary meaning unless there is ambiguity in the language in which case the court has to adopt that meaning which furthers the intention of the Legislature.
A constitutional provision such as article 359, however, cannot be given a strained construction to meet a passing phase such as the present emergency.
Rex vs Halliday, L.R. [19171 A.C. 260, Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson; , , Nakkuda A1i vs jayaratna, , Gibbon vs Ogden, (1824) 6 L. Ed. 23, discussed.
Section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is wide in its terms and gives a discretionary power to the High Courts.
Unlike articles 32 and 226, the exercise of the power is not channelled through procedural writs or orders and their technicalities cannot circumscribe the court 's discretion.
Girindra Nath Banerjee vs Birendra Nath Pal, (1927) I.L.R. , District Magistrate, Trivandrum vs Mammen Mappillai, I.L.R. , Matten vs District Magistrate, Trivandrum, L.R. (1939) 66 I.A. 222, referred to.
Section 491 is continued by article 372 and article
225 preserves 802 the jurisdiction of the High Court.
The power it confers on the High Court is not inconsistent either with article 32 or article 226 or any other Article of the Constitution and the section cannot, therefore, be said to have been impliedly superseded even to the extent article 226 empowers the High Court to give relief in cases of illegal detention.
Though remedial in form the section postulates the existence of the substantive right that no person can be deprived of his liberty except in the manner prescribed by law.
It assumes the existence of the rule of law and empowers High Court to act suo motu.
The rights, substantive and procedural conferred by it arc different from those under articles 32 or 226 of the Constitution.
It places the onus on the custodian to prove that the detention is legal and although in scrutinising the legality of the detention the court may have to consider whether the law offends any fundamental rights, that cannot make the proceeding one for the enforcement of fundamental rights or the decision anything but one on the unconstitutionality of a law because of infringement of fundamental rights generally.
The mode of approach to the High Court under section 491 of the Code or the nature of the relief given thereunder cannot be equated with those under the Constitution.
The absolute discretionary jurisdiction under it cannot be put on a par with the jurisdiction under article 226 which is hedged in by constitutional limitations.
Alam Khan vs The Crown, Lahore 274, Ramji Lal vs The Crown, I.L.R. (1949) 11 E.P. 28, King Emperor vs Vimlabai Deshpande, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 144, referred to.
While section 491 gives no right to enforce fundamental rights, operating as it does as a check on arbitrary action, article 359 is concerned not with statutory powers but deals with the constitutional right and the constitutional enforcement of it.
It was not, therefore, correct to say that article 359 would be frustrated if section 491 was allowed to stand for Parliament might amend that section any time it liked.
The expression "right to move any court for enforcement of such of the rights conferred by Part 111" in article 359 must refer only to the right to move under article 32 or article 226 for the said specific relief and could not be applied to the exercise of the statutory power of the High Courts under section 491 of the Code and, consequently, the expression "all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the rights" must refer to the proceedings initiated in exercise of that right.
The detenus could not, therefore, enforce their fundamental rights under articles 21, 32 and 14 while the Presidential Order lasted, but that did not affect the High Court 's power under section 491 of the Code.
The President 's Order cannot bar the detenus from proving even under articles 32(l) and 226 that the detentions were not made 803 under the Defence of India Ordinance or the Act as they were outside the Ordinance or the Act or in excess of the power conferred by them or that the detentions were made malafide or in fraudulent exercise of power.
