By a notification dated November 2, 1864, a piece of land forming part of the Panchannagram Estate which was permanently settled under Regulation 1 of 1793, was acquired by the Government of Bengal at the instance of the justices of the Peace for the Town of Calcutta, which was a corporation established under the provisions of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1863, and the justices were required to pay the compensation payable to the proprietor of the Estate.
After the acquisition, the proprietor of the Estate was granted abatement of land revenue assessed on the Estate to the extent of Rs. 386 7 1, being the proportionate land revenue on the land acquired.
On October 27, i865, the Government called upon the justices to pay a sum of Rs. 7,728 13 8, which represented the amount capitalised at 20 years ' purchase of land revenue attributed to the area acquired.
On December 5, i870, the Secretary of State executed in favour of the justices of the Peace a conveyance of the land acquired, which stated, inter alia, that it was "ever free and clear and for ever discharged from all Government land revenue whatever or any payment or charge in the nature thereof to the end and intent that the said land may be used for a public purpose, namely, for the conservancy of the town." On January 23, 1880, a lease of the land was granted by the Justices to the predecessors in title of the appellant, under which the lessee had the right to carry on cultivation with the aid of sewage.
Before the income tax authorities the appellant claimed that the agricultural income derived by him from the land was not liable to income tax, but the claim was rejected on the ground that on the payment of a lump sum in 1865 the liability to pay land revenue was redeemed and no land revenue was demanded thereafter; consequently, the income derived from the land was not agricultural income within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and was not, therefore, exempt from tax.
The appellant 's contention was that the redemption only saved the justices from liability for payment but did not affect the assessability of the land to revenue under Regulation 1 of 1793.
599 Held, that by the down payment of a lump sum in 1865 the entire land revenue to be recovered from the land was redeemed and the land became free from land revenue assessment in perpetuity, as completely as if there was no assessment.
Thereafter, the land could not be said to be assessed to land revenue within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and, consequently, the income derived therefrom could not be considered to be agricultural income under that section.
The Collector of Bombay vs Nusserwanji Rattanji Mistri and others; , , distinguished.
