Various contracts for sale of goods had been made between the parties in Bombay each of which contained an arbitration clause.
Disputes having arisen in March, 1952, in respect of these contracts, they were referred to arbitration and a composite award was made on October 7, 1952, against the respondent.
One of these disputes had arisen out of a forward contract in groundnuts.
The respondent applied to have the award set aside on the ground that the forward contract in groundnuts was illegal as such a contract was prohibited by the Oilseeds (Forward Contract Prohibition) Order, 1943, issued under the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, passed by the Central Legislature.
The appellant contended that the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946, was repugnant to the Bombay Forward Contracts Control Act, 1947, passed by the Provincial Legislature of Bombay which had received the assent of the Governor General of India and therefore under section 107(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935, which applied, the Bombay Act prevailed in Bombay in preference to the Central Act and under the Bombay Act Forward Contract in groundnut was valid.
The High Court accepted the contention of the respondent and set aside the award.
Section 8 of the Bombay Act provided: "Every forward con tract for the sale or purchase of, or relating to, any goods specified in the notification under sub section (3) of section 1 which is entered into, made or to be performed in any notified area shall be illegal if it is not entered into, made or to be performed" and thereafter, set out the manner in which and the persons between whom such contracts could be made and also made punishable a person making a contract declared illegal.
Section 3 of the Central Act provided, "The Central Govern ment may by notified order provide for prohibiting trade and commerce" in any essential commodity.
Under this section the Oilseeds (Forward Contract Prohibition) Order was passed prohibiting forward contracts in groundnuts, which was one of the essential commodities specified in the Central Act.
Held, The Bombay Act did not make any contract legal.
Its only effect was to render certain forward contracts illegal if not 781 made in compliance with its terms while the Central Act made the contracts to which it applied, illegal.
There was, therefore, no repugnancy between the Bombay Act and the Central Act and both of them applied to Bombay.
Article 372 of the Constitution continued both these Acts, and so there is no provision in the Constitution under which any one of them may be said to apply to the exclusion of the other.
A composite award in respect of more than one dispute which is not severable, must be set aside as a whole if any of the disputes had been illegally referred.
