The appellant entered into contract with Government for the supply of goods, and in the assessment year 1942 43 Rs. 10,80,653 and in the assessment year 1943 44, Rs. 7,45,336 were assessed as its income by the Income tax Officer.
The supplies to Government were made for.
Jaipur by the appellant, and payment was by cheques which were received at Jaipur.
The contention of the appellant was that this income was received at Jaipur outside the then taxable territories.
This contention was not accepted by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, Delhi.
The appellant then applied for a reference to the High Court under section 66(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, and by its order dated December 10, 1952, the Tribunal referred the following question for the decision of the High Court.
" Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case the profits and gains in respect of the sales made to the Government 211 of India were received by the assessee in the taxable terri tories ?" The High Court remanded the case to the Tribunal for a supplemental statement of case calling for a finding on the question " whether the cheques were sent to the assessee firm by post or by hand and what directions, if any, had the assessee firm given to the department in the matter ".
The appellant questioned the order of the High Court relying on the decision in New Jehangir Vakil Mill 's case; , Held, that the enquiry in such cases must be to see whether the question decided by the Tribunal admits of the consideration of the new point as an integral or an incidental part thereof.
The supplemental statement which the Tribunal is directed to submit must arise from the facts admitted and/or found by the Tribunal and should not open the door to fresh evidence.
Held, further, that the question as framed in this case was wide enough to include an enquiry into whether there was any request, express or implied, that the amount of the bills be paid by cheques so as to bring the matter within the dicta of this Court in the Ogale Glass Works case, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 185 or Jagdish Mills case; , In the absence of anything expressly said in the Order of the High Court to the contrary, it cannot be held that the direction given would lead inevitably to the admitting of fresh evidence as that has been prohibited by the New Jehangir Vakil Mills case.
The New Jehangir Vakil Mills Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, ; , distinguished.
Jagdish Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; , Keshav Mills Co. Ltd., vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Sir Sobha Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Kirloskar Bros. Ltd.v.
Commissioner of Income tax, [1952] 21 I.T.R. 82, Commissioner of Income tax vs Ogale Glass Works Ltd. , Commissioner of Income tax vs Kirloskar Bros. Ltd., and Mrs. Kusumben D. Mahadevia, Bombay vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, ; , referred to.
