One of the persons who entered into a partnership was a minor and in the instrument of partnership he was described as a full partner with equal rights and obligations with the other adult partners.
The deed of partnership which was signed by the minor was produced before th e Registrar of Firms f or registration and he granted a certificate showing the minor as a full partner and not as one entitled merely to the benefits of the partnership.
The Income tax Officer, however, refused to register the firm under section 26A of the Indian Income tax Act and his decision was upheld by the Income tax Authorities and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
The High Court differed from the Tribunal and held that the firm should be registered.
On appeal by the Commissioner of Income tax, Held, that the Rules framed under section 26A quite clearly show that a minor who is admitted to the benefits of partnership need not sign the application for registration.
The law requires all partners to sign the application, and if the definition were to be carried to the extreme, even a minor who is admitted to the benefits of partnership would be competent to sign such an application.
The definition is designed to confer equal benefits upon the minor by treating him as a partner; but it does not render a minor a competent and full partner.
For that purpose, the law of Partnership must be considered, apart from the definition in the Income tax Act.
Section 30 of the Indian Partnershi Act clearly lays down that a minor. cannot become a partner, I tough with the consent of the adult. .partners, he may be admitted to the benefits of partnership.
. .Any document which goes beyond this section cannot be regarded as valid for the purpose of registration.
Registration can only be granted of a document between persons who are parties to it and on the covenants set out in it.
If the Income tax Authorities register the:partnership as between the adults only contrary to the terms of the document, in substance a new contract is made out.
It is tot open to the Incometax Authorities to register a document which is different from the one actually executed and asked to be registered.
Hoosen Kassam Dada vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal, [1937]5 I.T.R. 182, Hardutt Ray Gajadhar Ram vs Commissioner of 104 822 Income tax, , Banka Mal Lajja Ram and Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , approved.
Jakka Devayya and Sons vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1952) , disapproved.
