The High Court of.
Jammu and Kashmir, relying on the decisions of this Court in Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao; , and K. section Rashid and Son vs The Income Tax Investigation Commission etc.
; , , dismissed an application for a writ made by the appellant against the Union of India and Anr.
under article 32(2A), the relevant provisions of which are in the matter of enforcement of fundamental rights the same as in article 226 of the Constitution, on the preliminary objection that the said application was not maintainable against the Union of India as it was outside the territorial jurisdiction of that Court.
The appellant 's case was that he was holding the substantive rank of Lieut.
Col. in Jammu and Kashmir and had the right to continue in service until he attained the age of 53 on November 20, 1961, but was prematurely retired by a letter issued by the Government of India on July 31, 1954, without any allegation or charge and in contravention of article 16(1) of the Constitution.
Held, that there can be no doubt as to the correctness of the decisions relied on by the High Court and the appeal must fail.
829 The jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, properly construed, depends not on the residence or location of the person affected by the order but of the person or authority passing the order and the place where the order has effect cannot enter into the determination of such jurisdiction.
Since functioning of a Government really means giving effect to its order, such functioning cannot determine the meaning of the words "any person or authority within these territories" occurring in the article.
A natural person, therefore, is within those territories if he resides there permanently or temporarily, an authority other than the Government is within those territories if its office is located there and a Government if its seat from which, in fact, it functions is there.
It is not correct to say that the word "authority" in article 226 cannot include a Government.
That word has to be read along with the clause "including in appropriate cases any Government" immediately following it, which, properly construed, means, that the word may include any Government in an appropriate case.
That clause is not connected with the issuance of a writ or order and is not intended to confer discretion on the High Courts in the matter of issuing a writ or direction on any Government, and only means in such cases where the authority against whom the High Court has jurisdiction to issue the writ, happens to be a Government or its subordinates, the High Court may issue a writ against the Government.
Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao, and K. section Rashid and Son vs The Income tax Investigation Commission etc.
; , , approved.
Maqbulunnissa vs Union of India, I.L.R. (1953) 2 All. 289, overruled.
The Lloyds Bank Limited vs The Lloyds Bank Indian Staff Association (Calcutta Branches), I.L.R. , referred to.
Proceedings under article 226 are not suits covered by article 300 of the Constitution.
Such proceedings provide for extra ordinary remedies by a special procedure and there is no scope for introducing the concept of cause of action in it in the face of the express limitation imposed by it, that the person or authority concerned must be within the territories over which the High Court exercises jurisdiction.
Ryots of Garabandho vs Zamindar of Parlakimedi, (1943) L.R. 70 I.A. 129, held inapplicable.
The resulting inconvenience of such an interpretation of article 226 to persons residing far &way from New Delhi, where the Government of India is in fact located, and aggrieved by some order passed by it, may.
be a reason for suitably amending the Article but cannot affect its plain language.
This Court should not, except when it is demonstrated beyond all reasonable doubt that the previous ruling, given after 105 830 due deliberation and full hearing, was erroneous, go back upon it, particularly on a constitutional issue.
Per Subba Rao, J.
The object that the framers of our Con stitution had before them in declaring the fundamental rights in Part III of the Constitution and empowering the High Courts by article 226 of the Constitution to enforce them would be largely defeated if a person in a remote part of the country had to come to New Delhi to seek the protection of the Punjab High Court whenever the Union Government infringed his fundamental right.
The power of the High Courts under article 226 of the Consti tution is of the widest amplitude and it can issue not merely writs but also directions and orders.
The words "any Government" in the Article includes the Union Government which has no constitutional situs in a particular place and exercises its powers throughout India and must, therefore, be deemed in law to have functional existence throughout India and thus within the territories of every State.
Consequently, when the Union Government infringes the legal right and interest of a person residing within the territorial jurisdiction of 'a High Court, the High Court has the power under the Article to issue a writ to that Government.
If its orders are disobeyed by that Government or any of its officers, even though physically outside its territories, it can proceed in contempt against them under the Contempt.
of Courts Act, 1952.
Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao, ; , held inapplicable.
K. section Rashid and Son vs Income Tax Investigation Commission, ; and Ryots of Garabandho vs Zamindar of Parlakimedi, L.R. 70 I.A. 129, considered.
Maqbul Unnissa vs Union of India, I.L.R. (1953) 2 All. 289, approved.
Surajmal vs State of M.P., A.I.R. 958 M.P. 103 and Radhe shyam Makhanlal vs Union.of India, A.I.R. 1960 Bom.
353, held inapplicable.
In the instant case, therefore, the High Court had the power to issue the writ to the Union Government under article 32(2A) of the Constitution.
Per Das Gupta, J.
It is neither correct nor appropriate to speak of location of any Government and there is no satisfactory test for ascertaining the location of the Government of India.
Since the Government functions throughout the territory of India, the conclusion must be that it is within the territories under the jurisdiction of every High Court.
The words "any Government" in article 226 clearly indicate that the High Court was intended to give relief against that Government as well.
Even though the Government, of India is within the territories of every High Court, it will not have to face applications 831 for relief against the same order in all the High Courts in India.
The words "in appropriate cases" in that Article, properly construed, indicate that there can be only one High Court thereunder that can exercise jurisdiction under the Article for every act or omission in respect of which relief is claimed.
It is possible in every case to ascertain the place where the act or omission took place and that High Court alone, which exercises jurisdiction over that place, can have jurisdiction to grant relief under the Article.
It is not correct to say that under article 226 the cause of action determines the jurisdiction.
Neither that Article nor article 32(2A) of the Constitution is based on that principle.
Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao, ; , approved.
