The respondent was a registered firm carrying on business as commission agents, and for the purpose of income tax it was treated as the agent of a non resident principal doing business outside India.
Under section 42(1) of the Indian Income tax Act the respondent was deemed to be the assessee and had to pay Rs. 3,78,49r as income tax on behalf of the non resident principal.
After allowing for the amounts lying with the respondentfirm the account of the non resident principal showed a debit balance of RS.
3,20,162.
The respondent treated this amount as a bad debt and claimed it as a deductible loss.
The Incometax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner disallowed the respondent 's claim but the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal held it to be an allowable deduction being a bad debt incurred as a result of the respondent 's business activities with the nonresident principal.
The High Court treating the amount as a deductible business loss incurred by the respondent affirmed the decision of the Income tax Tribunal.
On appeal by the Commissioner of Income tax, Held, that the respondent was not entitled to the reduction claimed by it.
The liability to pay imposed upon it under section 42(2) of the Income tax Act did not arise directly from the carrying on of the business nor was it incidental to the business.
The loss was not a commercial loss incurred in the respondentfirm 's own business but it arose out of the business of another person and that was not a permissible deduction within section io(1) or section 10(2)(Xi) of the Act.
Gresham Life Assurance Society vs Styles, L.), referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Sir section M. Chitnavis, (1932) L. R 59 I. A. 290, followed.
Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] S.C.R. 690 and Curtis vs I. and G. Oldfield, Ltd., (1925) 9 T. C. 319, discussed.
Lord 's Dairy Farm Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bom bay, , Calcutta Co., Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, and C.I.R. vs Hagart and Burn Murdoch; ; , not applicable '.
120 950
