One Maganlal Parbhudas who was a Director of the assessee company held 6,344 shares out of a total of 10,000 shares of the company and he made a gift of 1000 shares to each of his five sons.
During the accounting period the company had eight Directors including the said Maganlal Parbhudas and two of his sons and they held 4695 shares as between themselves.
Out of the balance of the shares 4754 shares were held by the relatives of some of the Directors.
Three sons of Maganlal Parbhudas were Directors of the Managing Company.
The Income tax Officer applied section 23A of the Income tax Act as it stood prior to its amendment by the Finance Act, 1955 to the company holding that this was not a company in which the public were substantially interested.
The order of the Income Tax Officer was confirmed on appeal both by the Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal.
The High Court remitted the case to the Tribunal for a statement whether the Directors were exercising de facto control over any of the other shareholders.
The Tribunal thereupon gave the finding that the Directors, particularly the three sons of Maganlal Parbhudas who formed the Directors of the Managing Company were under the de facto control of their father.
The High Court agreed with the finding of the tribunal and held that on the facts and circumstances of the case the shares held by the three sons of Maganlal Parbhudas could not be considered to be shares held by the members of the public within the meaning of the Explanation to the third proviso to section 23A of the Income Tax Act.
On appeal by the assessee company, Held, that in the Explanation the word "public" is used in contradistinction to one or more persons who act in unison and among whom the voting power constitutes a block.
If such a block exists and possesses more than seventy five per cent of the voting power, then the company cannot be said to be one in which the public are substantially interested.
Sardar Baldev Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi and Ajmer, ; , considered.
The test is first to find out whether there is an individual or a group which controls the voting power as a block.
If there is such a block the shares held by it cannot be said to be held 979 "unconditionally" or "beneficially" by the public.
Only those shares which are "unconditionally" and "beneficially" held by the public uncontrolled by the controlling group can be treated as shares held by the public under the Explanation.
The group may be composed of Directors or their nominees or relations in different combinations, but none can be said to belong to that c group, be he a Director or a relative unless he does not hold the shares unconditionally and beneficially for himself.
It is only such a person who can fall properly outside the word "public".
The view that Directors merely by reason of their being Directors stand outside the "public" is erroneous.
Commissioner of Income tax vs H. Bjordal, , followed.
Mere relationship is of no consequence unless it is proved that the voting power of one relative is controlled by another relative.
Tatem Steam Navigation Co. vs Commissioner of Inland Reve nue, , followed.
