The appellant employed workmen in his bidi factory who had to work at the factory and were not at liberty to work at their houses; their attendance were noted in the factory and they had to work within the factory hours, though they were not bound to work for the entire period and could come and go away when they liked; but if they came after midday they were not supplied with tobacco and thus not allowed to work even though the factory closed at 7 p.m.; further they could be removed from service if absent for 8 days.
Payment was made on piece rates according to the amount of work done, and the bidis which did not come upto the proper standard could be rejected.
The respondent workmen applied for leave for 15 days and did not go to work, for which period the appellants did not pay their wages; in consequence the concerned workmen applied to the Payment of Wages Authority for payment of wages to them.
The appellant 's contention that the respondent workmen were not his workmen within the meaning of the , was rejected and the claim for payment of wages was allowed.
The question therefore was whether the appellants were workmen within the meaning of the .
Held, that the nature of extent of control varies in different industries and cannot by its very nature be precisely defined.
When the operation was of a simple nature and could not be supervised all the time and the control was at the end of day by the method of rejecting the work done which did not come up to proper standard, then, it was the right to supervise and not so much the mode in which it was exercised which would determine whether a person was a workman or an independent contractor.
The mere fact that a worker was a piece rate worker would not necessarily take him out of the category of a worker within the meaning of section 2(1) Of the .
In the instant case the respondent workmen could not be said to be independent contractors and were workmen within the meaning of section 2(1) of the .
Held, further, that the leave provided for under section 79 of the arose as a matter of right when a worker had put 21 162 in a minimum number of working days and he was entitled to it.
The fact that the workman remained absent for a longer period had no bearing on his right to leave.
State vs Shankar Balaji Waje, A.I.R. 1960 Bom.
296, approved.
Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State of Saurashtra, ; and Shri Chintaman Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , referred to.
