Two officers of the appellant were assaulted by the workmen.
In this connection the appellant served notices on eight workmen calling upon them to explain their conduct and to show cause why they should not be dismissed.
In their explanations the workmen denied the charges.
Thereupon a proper enquiry was held according to the Standing Orders, as a result of which the charges were found proved against the workmen and the appellant dismissed the workmen and asked them to take their final dues together with one month 's pay in lieu of notice.
As a dispute in respect of bonus was pending before the Industrial Tribunal, the appellant made applications to it under section 6E(2) of the U. P. , for approval of the dismissal of the workmen.
The Tribunal refused to accord its approval and directed the appellant to reinstate the workmen from the date of suspension and to pay full wages for the period of unemployment.
The appellant contended that the Tribunal acted beyond its jurisdiction and assumed powers of an appellate Court over the decision of the appellant.
Held, that the Tribunal had assumed jurisdiction not vested in it by assuming powers of an appellate Court and its refusal to accord approval was patently erroneous in law.
The requirement of obtaining approval under section 6E(2)(b) of the U. P. Act (or section 33(2) Of the Central Act) in cases of dismissal or discharge for misconduct not connected with a pending dispute as distinguished from the requirement of obtaining previous permission under section 6E(1) of '.the
U. P. Act (or section 33(1) of the Central Act) in cases of misconduct connected with a pending dispute indicated that the ban imposed by section 6E(2) was not as rigid or rigorous as that imposed by section 6E(1).
The jurisdiction to give or withhold permission was Prima facie wider than the jurisdiction to give or withhold approval.
Where the employer had held a proper domestic enquiry and had dismissed the workmen as a result of such enquiry, all that the Tribunal could do was to enquire: (i) whether the Standing Orders justified the dismissal, (ii) whether the enquiry had been held as provided by the Standing Orders, (iii) whether wages for one month had been paid and (iv) whether an application for approval had been made as prescribed.
In the present case all these conditions were 205 satisfied but the Tribunal lost sight of its limitations and assumed powers of an appellate Court entitled to go into question of fact.
The Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs Its Workmen, [1960] S.C.R. 806, referred to.
Quaere: Whether the application for approval under section 6E(2)(b) of the U. P. Act or under section 33(2)(b) of the Central Act could be made after the order of dismissal had been passed or whether it had to be made before passing such an order.
Note: Section 6E of the U.,P. is identical in terms with section 33 of the Central .
