Under an agreement dated July 11, 1945, the appellants were appointed managing agents of the Coimbatore Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd., for 20 years, and certain remuneration was provided for them including 10% commission on the net profits of the company due and payable yearly immediately after the accounts of the company were closed and commissions on purchases and capital expenditure of the company.
Prior to October 1, 1944, the appellants were the managing agents of the Coimbatore Mills Agency Ltd., who were the managing agents of the Coimbatore Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. The year of account of the appellants ended on March 31, of the company on June 30, and of the Agency Company on September 30.
For the assessment year 1945 46 the appellants submitted a return of their income which included the stipulated remuneration and commissions.
This return was accepted by the Income tax Officer, and Excess Profits Tax liability for the chargeable accounting period ending March 31, 1945, was also worked out on that basis.
A return of income was submitted by the appellants for the assessment year 1946 47 which included commission for the period 1 4 45 to 30 6 45 on purchases of cotton and stores and on capital expenditure.
The Tax Officer directed that the commission on purchases and capital expenditure be taken into account 272 for the year April 1, 1945, to March 31, 1946, and that the receipts be computed accordingly.
The assessment for 1945 46 was then reopened under section 34 of the Income tax Act under section 15 of the Excess Profits Tax Act and as a result of apportionment made by the application of r. 9 of Sch.
1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act, the liability of the appellants for Income tax and Excess Profits 'fax was revised and fresh assessments were made.
The orders of assessment were confirmed by the appellate authorities.
Held, that as in the instant case the chargeable accounting period for the assessment of Excess Profits Tax and the year of account of the company did not tally, by the assessment of income made on the assumption that they did tally, there had resulted under assessment and it was open to the Tax Officer to take action under section 15 of the Excess Profits Tax Act.
The Excess Profits Tax Officer acted properly in apportioning under r. 9 of Sch. 1 the commission received by the appellants.
Rule 9 of Sch. 1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act is enacted in general terms and it is applicable to all contracts which are intended to be operative for fixed periods.
If, for the performance of the entire contract, remuneration is payable at certain rates the profits earned out of that remuneration must be apportioned in the manner prescribed by 19 if the performance of the contact extends beyond the accounting period.
E. D. Sassoon & Co., Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City; , , distinguished.
