One Rangachari, a partner of a partnership firm, assigned by means of a deed of settlement a fourth share of the profits of the firm each to his wife, a married adult daughter and a minor daughter for 8 years with the right to receive the said share of profits absolutely and exclusively from the firm.
The question which arose before the High Court on a reference under section 66(1) of the Income tax Act was " Whether the inclusion in the assessee 's total income of the profits settled by him on his wife and two daughters is justified in law ?" The assessee Rangachari relying on the rule laid down by the Privy Council in Bijoy Singh Dudhuria 's case claimed that the amounts payable to his wife and two daughters never became his income, being diverted by an overriding title and that those amounts could not be included in his total income for the purposes of assessment being excluded by reason of the third proviso to section 16(1)(c) of the Income tax Act.
The High Court held that the third proviso was not attracted and that the income had accrued to the assessee in the first instance, and had then been applied for payments under the deeds.
On appeal with a certificate of the High Court: Held, that the answer given by the High Court was correct.
381 An examination of the deeds of settlement showed that the disponer had stated that from the profits " payable to him " certain amounts in specified shares were to be paid to his wife and two daughters.
No doubt, the assessee in those deeds created a right in favour of the disponees to get the amounts direct from the firm, of which he was a partner.
The tenor of the document In, showed that the profits were first to accrue to him and were then applied for payments to the disponees.
Under the law of partnership, it is the partner and the partner alone who is entitled to the profits.
A stranger, even if he were an assignee, has not and cannot have a direct claim to the profits.
By the deeds in question, the assessee merely allowed a payment to his wife and daughters to constitute a valid discharge in favour of the firm, but what was paid was, in law, a portion of his profits or, in other words, his income.
The rule in Bijoy Singh 's case was not applicable to this case, and in view of the decision of this court in Sitaldas Tirathdas 's case it cannot be said that the profits were diverted by an overriding title before they accrued to the assessee.
Provat Kumar Mitter vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal ; Tulsidas Kilachand vs The Commissioner of Income tax ; The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Sitaldas Tirathdas ; , applied.
Bijoy Singh Dudhuria vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal , held inapplicable.
