On June 14, 1958, the President of India promulgated an Ordinance to amend the .
By section 8 of the Ordinance, the Statutes of the University were amended, and in place of Statute NO. 30, another statute was substituted, which set up a " Screening Committee " to examine the cases of all persons holding teaching, administrative or other posts in the University at the commencement of the Ordinance, in respect of whom there was reason to believe that their continuance in office would be detrimental to the interests of the University, and to forward its recommendations to the Executive Council to take such action as it may deem fit.
The Ordinance was repealed by the Banaras Hindu University (Amendment) Act, 1958, which re enacted Statute No. 30.
Under the re enacted Statute before any action could be taken by the Executive Council as referred to above, the matter had first to be referred to the Solicitor General of the Government of India, who, if he was of the opinion that there was prima facie case for inquiry, shall refer the case of the person concerned to a committee, known as the Reviewing Committee.
On receipt of the recommendations of the Reviewing Committee, the Executive Council was to take such action thereon as it thought fit, after giving the person concerned a reasonable opportunity for being heard.
Apart from Statute No. 30, added by Parliament, the Executive Council could terminate the engagement of an employee by taking action under the terms of the agreement, where such agreement existed, or under Ordinance No. 6, framed under the Act, without assigning a cause, on four months ' notice or four months ' salary in lieu of notice.
The cases of the appellants who held posts under the Univer sity were considered in accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute No. 30 by the Solicitor General who then sent up their cases to the Reviewing Committee.
The appellants appeared before the Committee and made their representations.
The Committee sent its findings in respect of the appellants except one to the Executive Council who then called upon four of them to show cause why their services should not be terminated, in view of the 387 findings of the Committee that the continuance in office of those appellants was detrimental to the interests of the University.
No notices, however, were sent to appellants 2, 4, 5 and 6.
Appellants 1, 3, 7 and 8 having filed petitions in the High Court of Allahabad under article 226 of the Constitution of India for relief against the proposed action and proceedings having been stayed, the Executive Council passed a resolution, No. 89, on May 15, 1960, that the consideration of their cases was postponed till after the writ petitions were disposed of by the High Court.
On the same day, however, the Executive Council passed resolutions, Nos. 90, 94 to 96 and 99 to 102, terminating the services of all the appellants giving them four or six months ' salary in lieu of notice.
The appellants challenged the validity of the resolutions on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that the Executive Council could not take recourse to the provisions of Ordinance No. 6 having started action under Statute NO. 30, (2) that Ordinance No. 6 was subordinate to Statute NO. 30 and could not prevail where Statute NO. 30 applied, (3) that action against respondents 1, 3, 7 and 8 was stayed by the High Court and resolution No. 89 and that any action thereafter under the agreement or Ordinance No. 6 was incompetent, and (4) that, in any case, the action of the Executive Council was mala fide and a fraud upon the Univer sity Act and Statute NO. 30.
The case for the University authorities was that the Executive Council could take action under the terms of the agreements, where such agreements existed or under Ordinance No. 6 or Statute NO. 30 at its option, and that where alternative remedies were provided by law, all or any of the remedies could be invoked: Held, that the impugned resolutions were ultra vires and should be quashed.
The power of terminating services without notice could not be invoked in the present case, where allegations of conduct detrimental to the interests of the University had already been made and scrutinised by the Solicitor General and the Reviewing Committee and the matter was pending before the Executive Council.
The powers granted by the Ordinances were expressly subject to the Statutes, and the Ordinances could not prevail over the Statutes.
State of Keyala vs C. M. Francis and Co. [1961] 3 S.C.R. 181, distinguished.
The words " shall take such action thereon as it may think fit " in Statute No. 30, gave liberty of action on the recommendations of the Reviewing Committee but lay a duty to form an opinion.
The words did not give a discretion to take action outside the Statute.
The action taken by the University authorities could only be questioned if it was ultra vires and proof of alien or irrelevant motive was only an example of the ultra vires character of the action.
The court was not concerned so much with the motives, 388 nor even with the justice of the action taken by a public body, like the University, as with its legality.
Short vs Poole Corporation , relied on.
