The District Magistrate, apprehending a breach of peace as a result of demonstrations and counter demonstrations held by two rival labour unions promulgated an order under section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which was to remain in force for a period of fifteen days, prohibiting, inter alia, the assembly of five or more persons in certain specified areas.
The petitioner took it as an invasion on the fundamental rights of the citizens under article 19(1)(a) and (b) of the Constitution and held a meeting outside the specified areas and exhorted the workers to take out processions in the notified areas in defiance of the said order.
He was thereupon prosecuted under sections 143 and 188 read with section 117 of the Indian Penal Code.
He moved the High Court under section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and having failed to get relief there, moved this Court under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the constitutional validity of section 144 of the Code on the ground that it conferred wide and unguided powers on the District Magistrate and thus contravened article 19(i)(a) and (b) of the Constitution.
Held, that the attack on the constitutional validity of section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure must fail, 424 Read as a whole, the section clearly showed that it was intended to secure the public weal by preventing disorders, obstructions and annoyances.
The powers conferred by it were exercisable by responsible Magistrates who were to act judicially and the restraints permitted by it were of a temporary nature and could be imposed only in an emergency.
The restrictions which the section authorises are not beyond the limits prescribed by cls.
(2) and (3) of article 19 of the Constitution.
The prevention of such activities as are contemplated by the section is undoubtedly in public interest and therefore no less in the interest of public order.
Clauses (2) to (6) of article 19 of the Constitution do not require a special enactment for the enforcement of the restrictions mentioned in them.
The impugned section must be construed as a whole and although the first part of cl.
(1) does not expressly mention that the order of the Magistrate must be preceded by an enquiry, the second part clearly indicates that the Magistrate has to satisfy himself either by his own enquiry or from a report made to him as to what the facts are.
The section does not, therefore, confer an arbitrary power on the Magistrate in the matter of making the order.
The wide power under the section can be exercised only in an emergency and for the purpose of preventing obstruction, annoyance or injury etc.
as specified therein and those are the factors that must necessarily condition the exercise of the power and, therefore, it was not correct to say that the power is unlimited or untrammelled.
Since the judgment has to be of a Magistrate, it can be assumed that the power will be exercised legitimately and honestly.
The section cannot be struck down simply on the ground that the Magistrate might possibly abuse his power.
Although the section makes the Magistrate the initial Judge of an emergency that cannot make the restrictions placed by it unreasonable.
Since maintenance of law and order rests with the Executive, it is only appropriate that the initial decision must be with the Magistrate.
But such decision is not entirely based on his subjective satisfaction.
Sub sections (2), (4) and (5) clearly indicate that the Magistrate must act judicially.
Moreover, the propriety of his order can be challenged in revision.
It was not, therefore, correct to say that the remedy of a person aggrieved by an order under the section was illusory.
P. T. Chandra, Editor, Tribune vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1942 Lah. 17r, referred to.
The American doctrine that previous restraints on the exer cise of fundamental rights are permissible only if there is a clear and present danger, can have no application in India, since the rights guaranteed by article 19(1) of the Constitution are not absolute but subject to restrictions under cls.
(2) to (6) of that 425 Article.
Anticipatory action permitted by section 144 is not, therefore, hit by cls.
(2) and (3) of article 19.
Scheneck vs U. section ; , considered.
State of Madras vs V. G. Row ; , relied on.
