On November 16, 1949, the respondent was convicted under sections 38o and II4 of the Indian Penal Code.
On October 5, 1957, the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Bombay, acting under section 57(1) of the Bombay Police Act passed an order externing him from the limits of Greater Bombay.
Later he was prosecuted and convicted under section 142 of the Bombay Police Act by the Presidency Magistrate for returning to the area from which he was externed.
On an application for revision the High Court acquitted the respondent upholding his contention that section 57 of the Bombay Police Act was not retrospective and was not applicable unless the conviction on which the externment was based took place after the Act came into force.
On appeal by the appellant with the special leave of this Court it was 27 Held, that though statutes must ordinarily be interpreted prospectively unless the language makes them retrospective, either expressly or by necessary implication, and penal statutes creating new offences are always prospective, penal statutes creating disabilities though ordinarily interpreted prospectively are sometimes interpreted retrospectively when the intention is not to punish but to protect the public from undesirable persons whose past conduct is made the basis of future action.
Midland Ry.
Co. vs Pye, IO C.B. (N.S.) 179, Rex vs Birth whistle, (1889) 58 L.J. (N.S.) M.C. 158, Queen vs Vine, [1875] IO Q.B. 195, Ex Parte Pratt, , Bourke vs Nutt, [1898] I Q.B. 725, Ganesan vs A.K. Joscelyne, A.I.R. 1957 Cal.
33, Taher Saifuddin vs Tyebbhai Moosaji, A.I.R. 1953 Bom.
183, The Queen vs Inhabitants of St. Mary Whitechapel, ; : ; and Rex vs Austin, , considered and applied.
Section 57 of the Bombay Police Act did not create a new offence but was designed to protect the public from the activities of undesirable persons convicted of particular offences and enabled the authorities to take note of their activities in order to put them outside the areas of their activities for preventing any repetition of such activities in the future.
The verb " has been " as used in section 57 meant " shall have been Legislation which takes note of a convicted offender 's antecedents for restraining him from his acts cannot be said to be applied retrospectively as long as the action taken against him is after the Act comes into force.
The Act in question was thus not applied retrospectively but prospectively.
An externment order must be bona fide and must relate to a conviction which is sufficiently proximate in time.
