M, a Hindu, died leaving his mother, widow, sisters and sisters ' son and daughters.
There were disputes between the mother and the widow which were settled at the instance of certain arbitrators.
Under this settlement a portion of one of the houses was given to a sister of M, another portion to R son of another sister and his sister and a third portion to the daughter of the third sister.
Certain properties , which had been agreed to be sold under the settlement were sold to the appellant by the mother and the widow.
After the death of the mother and the widow R filed a suit as the next reversioner of M for recovery of the properties sold on the ground that the alienation was without necessity and was not binding on him.
The appellant contended (i) that R was precluded from disputing the settlement between the mother and the widow as he had received a benefit under it and had ratified it by his conduct and (ii) that the transfer was for legal necessity.
Held, that the transfer was not binding on R and he was entitled to avoid it.
The settlement between the mother and the widow was also not binding on R.
If a person having full knowledge of his rights as a possible reversioner enters into a transaction which settles his claim as well as the claim of the opponents at the relevant time, he cannot be permitted to go back on that arrangement when reversion actually falls open.
But the mere fact that the reversioner has received some benefit under the transaction or has not challenged its validity when it took place cannot bar his rights as a reversioner.
It will always be a question of fact as to whether the conduct of the reversioner on which the plea of ratification is based does in law amount to ratification properly so called.
In the present case the settlement was not in the nature of a family arrangement; at that time R was a minor and was not a party to any of the said transactions.
There was no conduct of R which could amount to ratification of the settlement or of the alienation.
At the time when he accepted the gift he could not know about his rights as a possible reversioner.
Further, there was no legal necessity for the transfer.
Sahu Madho Das vs Pandit Mukand Ram ; , Dhiyan Singh vs Jugal Kishore, [1952] S.C.R. 478, Kanhai Lal vs Brij Lal (1918) L.R. 45 I.A. 118.
Rangasami Gounden vs Nachiappa Gounden (1918) L.R. 46 I.A. 72 and Ramgouda Annagouda vs Bhausakeb (1927) L.R. 54 I.A. 396, referred to 625
