In Mohd. Hanif Quareshi vs The State of Bihar the Supreme Court held that a total ban on the slaughter of bulls, bullocks and she buffaloes after they had ceased to be useful was not in the interests of the general public and was invalid.
Thereafter, the Bihar Legislature passed the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals (Amendment) Act, 1958, the Uttar Pradesh Legislature passed the U. P. Prevention of Cow Slaughter (Amendment) Act, 1958 and the Madhya Pradesh Legislature passed a new Act, the M. P. Agricultural Cattle Preservation Act, 1959.
Section 3 of the Bihar Act prohibited the slaughter of a bull, bullock or she buffalo except when it was over 25 years of age and had become useless.
Rule 3 of the Bihar Preservation and Improvement of Animals Rules, 1960 prescribed that the certificate for slaughtering an animal could be granted only with the concurrence of the Veterinary Officer and the Chairman or Chief Officer of a District Board, Municipality etc., and if the two differed, then according to the decision of the Sub Divisional Animal Husbandary Officer.
Section 3 of the U. P. Act permitted the slaughter of a bull or bullock only if it was over 20 years of age and was permanently unfit.
It further provided that the animal could not be slaughtered within 20 days of the grant of 'a certificate that it was fit to be slaughtered and gave a right of appeal to any person aggrieved by the order granting the certificate.
Section 4(1)(b) of the Madhya Pradesh Act provided that no bull, bullock or buffallo could be slaughtered except upon a certificate issued by the competent authority and section 4(2)(a) provided that no certificate could be issued unless the animal was over 20 years of age and was unfit for work or breeding.
Section 4(3) gave a right of appeal to any person aggrieved by the order of the competent authority.
Section 5 provided that no animal 611 shall be slaughtered within 10 days of the date of the issue of the certificate and where an appeal was preferred against the grant of the certificate, till the time such appeal was disposed of.
The petitioners, who carried on the profession and trade of butchers, contended that the various provisions of the three Acts set out above infringed their fundamental rights by practically putting a total ban on the slaughter of bulls, bullocks and she buffaloes even after the animal had ceased to be useful and thus virtually put an end to their profession and trade.
Held, (i) that the ban on the slaughter of bulls, bullocks and she buffaloes below the age of 20 or 25 years was not a reasonable restriction in the interests of the general public and was void.
A bull, bullock or buffalo did not remain useful after 15 years, and whatever little use it may have then was greatly offset by the economic disadvantages of feeding and maintaining unserviceable cattle.
The additional condition that the animal must, apart from being above 20 or 25 years of age, also be unfit was a further unreasonable restriction.
Section 3 of the Bihar Act, section 3 of the U. P. Act and section 4(2)(a) of the M. P. Act were invalid.
(ii) Rule 3 of the Bihar Rules was bad as it imposed dis proportionate restrictions on the rights of the petitioners.
The procedure involved such expenditure of money and time as made the obtaining of the certificate not worthwhile.
(iii) The provisions in the Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh Acts providing that the animal shall not be slaughtered within 20 and10 days respectively of the issue of the certificate and that any person aggrieved by the order of the competent authority, may appeal against it, were likely to hold up the slaughter of the animal for a long time and practically put a total ban on slaughter of bulls, bullocks and buffaloes even after they had ceased to be useful.
These provisions imposed unreasonable restrictions on the fundamental rights of the petitioners and were void.
Mohd. Hanif Quareshi vs The State of Bihar, [1959] S.C.R. 629, State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; and The State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga, , referred to.
