Lands in four villages forming part of the Cis Sutlej jagir were compulsorily acquired under the East Punjab Acquisition and Requisition of"Immovable Property (Temporary Powers) Act, 1948.
At the time of the acquisition A was the holder of the jagir.
Possession over one of the villages had been given to 677 A 's wife G in lieu of maintenance under a consent decree.
The matter of payment of compensation was referred to an arbitrator.
A claimed that he was entitled to the entire compensation amount as he was the present holder of the jagir.
A 's son S claimed that the lands, acquired were inalienable, that A merely had a life interest therein and that the compensation money should be deposited out of which A should get only the interest for his life.
G claimed that she was entitled to the entire compensation in respect of the lands over which she was in possession.
All the claimants claimed interest on the compensation amount from the date of taking of possession to the date of payment of compensation.
The arbitrator held: (i) the acquired lands were inalienable and A merely had a life interest thereiq, (ii) S was entitled to a share in the compensation awarded, (iii) the amount of compensation for the first three villages should not be deposited but should be divided between A and S in the proportion of 3/4th to 1/4th, (iv) the compensation for the fourth village should be deposited and the interest thereof be paid to G and after the death of G the amount be divided between A and S half and half, and (v) the claimants were not entitled to any interest on the amount of compensation.
On appeal the High Court confirmed the awards in toto.
The claimants appealed to the Supreme Court by special leave.
Held, that the acquired lands formed part of a Cis Sutlej Jagir which was inalienable, that A was merely a limited owner thereof and was not entitled to the entire amount of compensation and that the reversioners were also entitled to a share therein.
The compensation amount could not be permanently deposited leaving the parties the right to enjoy only its income.
Even if the equitable principle of section 32, Land Acquisition Act, 1894, was applied it would not justify the permanent investment of the compensation amount.
Section 32(1)(b) was intended to be applied provisionally for short periods, where other lands had to be purchased out of the compensation money but were not immediately available and the money had to be invested as an interim measure till such lands were available.
It was fair to divide the compensation money in respect of the first three villages half and half between A and section In deciding the question of apportionment on equitable grounds it was relevant and material to take into account the facts that no part of the amount paid to A would reach the reversioners, that S himself had a son and that the reversionary interest had to be safeguarded.
Shri Somashekhar Swami vs Bapusaheb Narayanrao Patil A.I.R. , K. C., Banerjee, Official Receive?, In re: A.I.R. 1928 Cal.
402, Mt. Gangi vs Santu A.I.R. 1929 Lah. 736 and Special Deputy Collector, Ramnad vs Rajah of Ramnad A.I.R. 1935 Mad. 215, referred to.
Held, further, that the claimants were entitled to interest at 4% per annum on the compensation amount from the date when possession was taken by the State to the (late on which it deposited 678 or paid the amount of compensation to the claimants ' The provision in section 5(e) of the 1048 Act which made section 23(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, applicable did not exclude the application of SS. 28 and 34 of the latter Act which dealt with the payment of interest.
On general principles, the act of taking possession of immovable property generally implied an agreement to pay interest on the value of the property ; the right to receive interest took the place of the right to retain possession.
The application of this rule was not excluded by section 5 of the 1948 Act.
Even under the Interest Act, 1839, the power to award interest on equitable grounds was expressly saved by the proviso to section 1.
Swift & Co. vs Board of Trade , Birch vs joy ; and Inglewood Pulp and Paper Co. Ltd. vs New Brunswick Electric Power Commission , applied.
Surjan Singh vs The East Punjab Government A.I.R. 1957 Punj.
265, approved.
Seth Thawardas Pherumal vs The Union of India and Nachiappa Chettiar vs Subramaniain Chettiar ; , referred to.
