Under a scheme a Board of Trustees was appointed for administration of the Durga and a Masjid for the maintenance of which the Nawab of Carnatic had granted two villages in Inam.
The income of the institution after disbursing the expenses had since long been shared by the descendants in four families in equal shares.
The scheme also provided that the surplus income was to be distributed amongst the members of the said four families.
One of the descendants died leaving him surviving his wife and two daughters who were obstructed in the performance of the "Urs" by the appellant 's father.
The said Muslim female members filed a suit for declaration that they were entitled to enjoy the properties and to manage the Durga, perform the "Urs" festival and receive all incomes, endowments and perquisites thereof once in every eight years according to their turn.
The right to a share in the income was denied by the appellant contending that by custom in the family, females were excluded from inheritance and that the claim was barred by the law of limitation and that, in any event, the suit for mere declaration was not maintainable.
Held, that a suit for declaration of rights with a consequential relief for injunction was not a suit for declaration simpliciter; it was a suit for declaration with further relief and was not barred under article 120 Of the Indian Limitation Act merely because the contesting defendant did not recognise the right.
The period of six years prescribed by article 120 is to be computed from the date when the right to sue accrued and there could be no right to sue until there was an accrual of the right asserted in the suit and its infringement or at least a clear and unequi vocal threat to infringe that right.
If under the law a person was entitled to any legitimate right, the mere denial of the right will not set the period of limitation running against the person entitled to such right.
68 Held, further, that on the enactment of the Shariat Act 26 Of 1937, as amended by the ' Madras Act r8 Of 1949, the Muslim Personal Law applies in all cases relating to the matters specified notwithstanding any customer usage to the contrary even at the stage of appeals, if other conditions prescribed under the Act are fulfilled.
Kunj Behari Prasadji Purshottam Prasadji vs Keshavld Hiralal.
567, discussed.
Syed Roshan Ali vs Mt. Rehmat Bibi and Others, A.I.R. 1943 Lah.
219, disapproved.
