The 1st appellant in the first batch of appeals had filed a writ petition in this Court challenging the notices calling upon him to pay the tax of 9 pies per ton on coal including coal despatched outside the State of Madhya Pradesh on two grounds, namely, that the levy of the tax by the Independent Mining Board was invalid at the date of its initial imposition and, 173 therefore, the respondent Sabha which was the successor of the Mining Board could not continue the levy and also that on a proper construction of section 51 of the Act, the levy could not be made.
Another point namely, the increase in the rate of tax from the original 3 pies to the 9 pies per ton at which the tax was demanded was illegal was sought to be canvassed but was not allowed to be argued by the Court as it had not been raised in the petition.
The writ petition was rejected.
The appellant challenged the levy of the tax for the further periods byway of a writ petition before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh on grounds distinct and separate from those which had been rejected by this Court.
The High Court dis missed the writ petition on the ground that it was barred by res judicata by reason of the earlier judgment by this Court.
In the case of the other appellants the High Court held that the matter was also concluded on the authority of the decision of this Court.
The appellants in the first batch of appeals came by special leave and also filed writ petitions challenging the validity of the levy.
Held, that while the general principle of res judicata applies to writ petitions under article 32 and article 226 of the Constitution, in its application to article 32 of the Constitution, the doctrine only regulates the manner in which the fundamental rights could be successfully asserted and does not in any way impair or affect the content of the fundamental rights.
Pandit M.S.M. Sharma vs Dr. Shree Krishna Sinha, [1961] 1 section 0.
R. 96, Raj Lakshmi Dasi vs Banamali Sen, [1953] section C. R. 154 and Daryao vs State of U.P., ; , referred to.
Constructive res judicata was a creature of statute and its application could not be extended to other proceedings particularly those questioning tax liability for different years.
Held, further, that the law declared by the Supreme Court which is binding under article 141 of the Constitution of India is that which has been expressly declared and any implied declaration though binding was subject to revision by this Court when the point was subsequently directly and expressly raised before this Court.
Held, further, that the procedure of assessment of tax authorised by the relevant statutory provisions and the Rules could not be said to be a capricious administrative or executive affair so as to violate article 19(1) (f) of the Constitution.
174 Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair vs State of Kerala, ; , distinguished.
As the Rule which prescribed the maximum rate had itself been deleted it could not be said that there had been a levy in excess of the maximum prescribed.
As neither the Act nor the Rules prescribed a ceiling on the levy, the expression "first impositions occurring in section 51(2) would include every increase of the levy after its initial imposition and the increased levy would require the previous sanction of the Local Government and such sanction not being there, the levy at the rate of 9 pies per ton was illegal.
Considering the nature of the tax and the periods for which it was assessed and in the absence of any provision, the assessment once made by r. 10 was final and there could be no re assessment.
