The respondent executed an instrument and presented it to the Collector for his opinion under section 31 Stamp Act as to the duty chargeable.
The Collector,, after a reference to the Board of Revenue, determined the duty payable.
He then impounded the instrument and ordered that the ditty be deposited within 98 fifteen days.
Later, a notice was served upon the respondent to deposit the amount of stamp duty and penalty within one month and threatening that in default proceedings would be taken to recover them as arrears of land revenue.
The respondent challenged the legality of the impounding of the instrument and demand of stamp duty and penalty.
Held, that after determination of the stamp duty the Collector became functus officio and could not impound the instrument or demand duty and penalty.
Under section 31 the Col lector has merely to determine the proper amount of duty.
If the person executing the instrument wants to effectuate the instrument or to use it for purposes of evidence he has to make up the duty and under section 32 the Collector makes the necessary endorsement.
Section 33 empowers every person in charge of a public office before whom an instrument chargeable with duty is produced or comes in the performance of his functions to impound the instrument if it is not duly stamped.
When an instrument is presented to the Collector under section 31 for determination of duty it cannot be said that it "is produced or comes in the performance of his functions" as contemplated by section 33.
These words refer firstly to production before judicial or other officers performing judicial functions as evidence of any fact to be proved, and secondly refer to other officers who have to perform any function in regard to those instruments when they come before them, e.g., registration.
In Re Cooke and Kelly, Cal. 1171, held obiter.
Collector, Ahmednagar vs Rambhau Tukaram Nirhali, A.I.R. , Paiku vs Gaya, I.L.R. and Chunduri Panakala Rao vs Penugonda Kumaraswami, A.1,R. , referred to.
