One Bbanu Bala had joined the appellant 's service as a workman in 1929 and resigned in 1957.
During this period of his service he had remained absent from duty without permis sion or leave for nearly 8 months between February, 1945, to 718 October, 1945.
Under an Award made between the company and its workmen a scheme was framed wherein the concerned clause was that "on voluntary retirement or resignation of an employee after 15 years continuous service gratuity at the same rate as above.
" Dispute arose with regard to the question of granting gratuity to Bhanu Bala who claimed the benefit of the said clause and the company denied the claim on the ground that the said employee had not been in continuous service for the requisite period because there was a break in his service and that affected the continuity of his employment which made his claim incompetent.
The question was as to the interpretation of the term "continuous service" contained in the Award of 1951.
Held, that in different context the same word can often have different meanings and the expression "continuous service" would always be a question of fact to be decided on the circumstances of each case whether or not a particular employee can claim continuity of service for the requisite period.
Where the expression "continuous service" was statutorily defined then the definition would prevail; and where an award itself gave a definition of the expression that would bind the parties in dealing with claims arising from the award but where the award did not explain the expression "continuous service" and statutory definitions contained in other Acts were of no material assistance it would be necessary to examine the question on principle and decide what the expression should mean in any given award.
"Continuous service", in the context of the scheme of gratuity, postulates the continuation of relationship of master and servant between the employer and employees which could come to an end either by act of parties, i.e., by resignation or termination of service, or by the operation of law; but the continuity of service would not come to an end merely because an employee was absent without obtaining leave; though.
there would be cases where long unauthorised absence may reasonably give rise to an inference that such service was intended to be abandoned by the employee.
For the purpose of gratuity mere participation in an illegal strike could not be said to cause breach in the continuity of service though it may he a good cause for its termination, provided the relevant provisions in the Standing Orders in that behalf were complied with.
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. vs Workers of the Bucking ham and Carnatic Co. Ltd.; , , distinguished.
Budge Budge Municipality vs P. R. Mukherjee, [1953] 1 L.L.J. 195, referred to. 719
