The appellant and the respondent entered into a written partnership with respect to the managing agency business of two mills, the terms of which were, inter alia, that the management shall be carried on in rotation once in four years, the appellant to manage for the first four years and thereafter the respondent to manage for the next four years and in the same way thereafter.
999 It further provided that the partners and their heirs and those getting their rights shall carry on the management in rotation.
Soon after disputes arose between the partners and the appellant gave notice to the respondent terminating the partnership treating it as a partnership at will, and the directors of the mills in their turn terminated the managing agency on the ground that the quarrels between the partners were detrimental to the good management of the mills.
Thereafter the respondent brought a suit against the appellant and the mills for dissolution of the partnership firm and damages alleging that dissolution of the partnership by the appellant by notice was fraudulent and connived at by the mills.
The trial court held that the partnership was at will and the termination of the managing agency was, legal and disallowed damages.
On appeal by the respondent the High Court held that the partnership was not a partnership at will and could not be dissolved by notice by the appellant.
The termination of the managing agency was also held to be illegal.
appeal by the appellant with a certificate of the High Court: Held, that considering the provision that the management would be carried on in rotation between the partners in four yearly periods and that the heirs of the partners would also carry on the business in rotation the intention was obviously to have a partnership of some duration, though the duration was not expressly fixed in the agreement.
The duration of a, partnership may be expressly provided for in the contract but even when there is no express provision, courts have held that the partner.
ship will not be at will if the duration can be implied.
Grawshay vs Manle, Swans 495; ; , followed.
The contract in this case disclosed a partnership the deter mination of which was implied, namely, the termination of the managing agency and, therefore, under section 7 of the Partnership Act it was not a partnership at will and was not legally terminable by the notice given by the appellant.
In view of the strained atmosphere between the partners there was sufficient reason for the mill to terminate the managing agency and the resolution of the board of directors terminating the managing agency agreement confirmed by the general meeting of the shareholders, did terminate the managing agency.
There was neither any fraud nor collusion by the mills with the appellant.
Morarji Gokuldas and Co. vs Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. and Others, and Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Sansom, , referred to.
The partnership in the present case must be deemed to have determined on the date of the passing of the resolution by the board of directors terminating the managing agency.
Sections 10 and 13(f) of the Partnership Act have no application to the facts of the case.
