The High Court quashed the charges framed against the respondents.
The charge sheet stated that accused 1 to 9 had committed offenses under section 12oB of the Indian Penal Code and section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, and that accused No. had committed offenses under SS.
5(1)(c) and 5, (i)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and SS. 463, 464 Of the Indian Penal Code and accused 2 to 8 abetted all the offenses and each of the accused in addition had committed offenses under section 420 Of the Indian Penal Code.
The High Court directed the Special judge to frame fresh charges inter alia on the ground that charge No. 1 was an omnibus charge containing as many as 203 offenses and that it was direct violation of SS. 234, 235 and 239 Of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Further that the Special judge had no jurisdiction to try the offenses under section 120B read with SS.
466, 467 and 420 Of the Indian Penal Code because he was appointed a Special judge under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, only for trying offenses under Prevention of Corruption Act.
The question was whether all the accused, persons could be jointly tried in respect of all these offenses.
Held, that when several persons had committed offenses, in the course of the same transaction, they could jointly be tried in respect of all those offenses under section 239 Of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the limitation placed by section 234 Of the Code could not come into operation, but the charges should be suitably split up so that the accused persons would not be prejudiced in answering the charges and defending themselves.
Held, further, there is no analogy between section 120B and section Log of the Indian Penal Code.
There may be an element of abetment in a conspiracy which is an offence by itself but conspiracy is something more than abetment for which a person could separately be charged.
Offenses created under SS.
109 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code are quite distinct and there is no warrant for limiting the prosecution to only one element of conspiracy, that is, abetment when the allegation is that what a person did was something over and above that.
If the alleged offenses flow out of the conspiracy the appropriate form of charge would be a specific charge in respect of each of those offenses along with the charge of conspiracy.
Held, further, that the introduction of a large number of charges spread over a long period was a question of propriety and it should be left to the judge or the Magistrate trying the case to adopt the course which he thought to be appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Held, also, that while a special judge appointed under section 6 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act has jurisdiction to try cases under section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act he can under section 7(3) Of the Criminal Law Amendment Act try other offenses under the Criminal Procedure Code for which the accused can be charged at the same trial.
196 In re Venkataramaiah, A.I.R. 1938 Mad. 130, disapproved.
section Swaminatham vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 340, R. vs Dawson, [1960] 1 All E.R. 558 and Durgadas Tulsiram Sood vs State, I.L.R. , referred to.
