The appellant had two money claims against the Maharaja of Mayurbhanj State.
From January 1, 1949, the State merged with the Province of Orissa.
Clause 9 of the Administration of Mayurbhanj State Order, 1949, promulgated by the Government of Orissa, provided for the issuing of a notification for calling upon all persons having pecuniary claims against the Maharaja to notify the same to an officer authorised in that behalf.
After issue of the notification the appellant preferred his two claims before the Claims Officer.
The Claims Officer made a report substantially accepting the claims.
This report was submitted to the Member (third), Board of Revenue.
Without giving the appel lant any hearing the claims were rejected on the ground that they were barred by limitation.
The appellant applied for a review and submitted the documents on which he relied but again without giving the appellant a hearing the Board of Revenue declined to review the matter.
The appellant contended 206 that there was a breach of the principles of natural justice in the Board of Revenue deciding the matter without giving the appellant a proper hearing.
The respondent contended that the rejection of the claims was an act of State, that the new Sovereign State could not be compelled by the courts to accept the liability of the old Ruler, that though the new Sovereign State might make such enquiry as it chose it was not compelled to give a hearing to the appellant.
The appellant replied that the act of State was over when the claims were invited and accepted by the Claims Officer.
Held, that the rejection of the claims was an act of State and could not be challenged.
Unless the new Sovereign, either expressly or impliedly, admitted the claims, the municipal courts had no jurisdiction in the matter.
The act of State did not come to an end when Government allowed the claims to be preferred or the Claims Officer made his report.
The enquiry was for the benefit of the State and not for conferring rights on the claimants.
Till there was an acceptance of the claims by the Government or some officer who could be said to bind the Government, the act of State was still open.
Dalmia,Dadri Cement Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1959] S.C.R 729 State of Saurashtra vs Mmemon Haji Ismail Haji, ; and Vaje Singh ji joravar Singh vs Secretary of State for India, (1924) L.R. 51 I.A. 357, relied on.
