The respondents were entitled to a rebate of sales tax on goods purchased by them and used in their manufacturing process.
They had adopted the system which was permissible under law, 233 of paying sales tax provisionally assessed by the Sales Tax Officer on the basis of turnover of the previous year, the liability being adjusted at the end of the year of account in the light the actual turnover of that year, as a result of which, in some years the respondents were assessed to pay tax in excess of the amount provisionally assessed, in others they obtained refund of the excess tax paid under the provisional assessment.
The Income Tax Officer recognised the system and permitted deduction of sales tax actually paid under the provisional assessment.
The Excess Profits Tax Officer had in assessing liability to excess profits tax for previous periods adopted the same method of computation, but for the chargeable accounting period, he did not allow the deduction of the full amount of tax provisionally debited to the sales tax, because in his view it was not reasonable and necessary expenditure and thus not a permissible deduction.
The question was whether the sales tax payments were unreasonable and unnecessary having due regard to the requirements of the business and consequently not deductible under r. 12 Sch. 1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act.
Held, that it is for the Excess Profits Tax Officer to decide whether the deductions claimed are reasonable and necessary having regard to the requirements of the business.
But the reasonableness and necessity of the expenditure sought to be deducted under r. 12 Sch. 1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act in assessing excess profits tax liability must be adjudged in the light of commercial expediency, and not on any legalistic consideration.
Payments made in satisfaction of liability which arises by virtue of assessment made by the Sales Tax Officer cannot be called unreasonable.
Payment of sales tax as assessed being obligatory and necessary for the purpose of carrying on the business, it must be deemed to satisfy the requirements of r. 12 of Sch.
1 of the Excess Profits Tax Act.
In re M. P. Kumaraswami Raja, (1955) 6 Sales Tax Cases 113, referred to.
