Usufructuary mortgage bond was executed in favour of the father of the appellant who was put in possession of the mortgaged property.
One of the terms of the usufructuary mortgage was that in case of failure of payment of rent by the mortgagor, the mortgagee was to pay off the arrears of rent to the landlord, which obligation the mortgagee did not honour as a result of which the property was brought to sale and ultimately purchased by the mortgagee.
The mortgagor filed a suit against the mortgagee, the appel lant 's father, for redemption of the mortgage and !or possession.
, The defence inter alia was that the mortgagee had purchased equity of redemption in execution of the rent decree and that the mortgagor had no longer any right to sue him for redemption and their remedy, if any, was to sue for setting aside the sale on the ground of fraud or otherwise.
Held, that section go of the Trusts Act read with the illustration (c) lays down the principle that no one can be allowed to benefit for his own wrongful act.
Held, further, that the legal position with regard to mort gagor and mortgagee was that: (1) the governing principle is that "once mortgagee 291 always a mortgagee" till the mortgage is terminated by the act of the parties themselves, by merger or by order of the Court; (2)where a mortgagee purchases the equity of redemption in execution of his mortgage decree with the leave of court or in execution of a mortgage or money decree obtained by a third party, the equity of redemption may be extinguished; and, in that event, the mortgagor cannot sue for redemption without getting the sale set aside; and (3)where a mortgagee purchases the mortgaged property by reason of a default committed by him the mortgage is not extinguished and the relationship of Mortgagor and mortgagee continues to subsist even thereafter, for his purchase of the equity of redemption is only in trust for the mortgagor.
In the instant case the right to redeem the mortgage was not extinguished and in the eyes of law, the purchase in the rent sale was deemed to have been made in trust for the mortgagor and the suit for redemption was maintainable.
Sidhakamal Nayan vs Bira Naik, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 336, relied on.
Malkarjun Bin Shidramappa Pasare vs Narhari Bin Shivappa, (1900) L.R. 27 I.A. 216, distinguished.
