The appellant who was a clerk under the East Indian Railways was compulsorily retired from service on attaining the age of 55 years.
His prayer for further retention in service having been rejected he filed a suit alleging that he was entitled to be retained in service up to the age of 60 years under Rule 2046 (2)(a) of the Railway Establishment Code, which runs as follows: "Clause (a) A ministerial servant who is not governed by sub cl.
(b) may be required to retire at the age of 55 years but should ordinarily be retained in service if he continues to be efficient up to the age of 60 years.
He must not be retained after that age except in very special circumstances which must be recorded in writing and with the sanction of the competent authority.
" His suit was decreed by the Trial Court but the High Court reversed it holding that the plaintiff appellant had no right to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years.
On appeal with the certificate of the High Court.
Held, that the correct interpretation of Rule 2046(2)(a) is that a railway ministerial servant falling within this clause may be compulsorily retired on attaining the age of 55 but when the servant is between the age of 55 and 6o years the appropriate authority has the option to continue him in service, subject to the condition that the servant continues to be efficient but the authority is not bound to retain him even if he continues to be efficient.
This rule does not give the servant a right to be retained in service beyond the age of 55 years even if he continues to be efficient.
jai Ram vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 584, explained.
Basant Kumar Pat vs The Chief Electrical Engineer, A.I.R. , Kishan Dayal vs General Manager, Northern Railway, A.I.R. 1954 Punj.
245 and Raghunath Narain Mathur vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1953 All. 352, approved.
375 The formation by the Railway Board of two classes of ministerial servants, namely, one of, those who retired after September 8, 1948, and the other of those who had already retired before that date was a reasonable classification and (lid not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
