F, the appellant, and A his brother, were partners in a business of hides and skins.
On August 10, 1949, A executed a deed of sale in respect of some immoveable properties in Orissa and Madras in favour of F. A deed of dissolution of the partnership was also executed on August 12, 1949, wherein it was inter alia stated that the partners bad agreed that the said partnership shall stand dissolved as from November 2, 1948.
On receipt of information that A had migrated to Pakistan after transferring his properties to his brother F, the Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property, issued a notice to F under section 7(1) of the Ordinance 27 of 1949 in respect of immoveable properties in Orissa including the properties covered by the sale deed and the business in hides and skins and certain immoveable properties standing in the name of the firm.
In reply F contended that he had become the sole proprietor of the business with all assets and liabilities, with effect from November 2, 1948, when the partnership was dissolved 457 and that while some of the immoveable properties as mentioned in the notice had been conveyed to him by a deed of sale by A, the rest being assets of the firm, had vested in him after the dissolution of partnership.
The Assistant Custodian held that though the transfer of the properties mentioned in the sale deed was for adequate and valuable consideration it was not at all bona fide; as regards other properties and the hides and skins business itself, A had no interest as the partnership had been dissolved on November 2, 1948.
Against this decision F appealed to the Custodian, who held that these properties were rightly declared as evacuee properties and that as regards the transfer of other properties, the same amount of mala fides was present and as such these should also be included in the list of evacuee properties.
The appeal to Custodian General was rejected and the appellant moved the Supreme Court by special leave.
Four contentions were urged by the appellant: Firstly, that the Custodian General should have held that the Custodian acted without jurisdiction in interfering with the order passed by the Assistant Custodian that the hides business and the properties mentioned in Sch.
A III of the notice were not evacuee properties and should be released.
Secondly, that as against the Assistant Custodian 's order in respect of the hides business and the immoveable properties in Sch.
A III the Custodian Department had not preferred any appeal, so that the Custodian could not interfere with it, in exercise of his appellate jurisdiction.
The Custodian 's order in respect of these properties could not have been passed, in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction conferred on him by section 27 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act as no notice of such intention to examine the records in revision had been issued to F. Thirdly, once the partnership business was dissolved, there could be no question of declaring the dissolved partnership as an evacuee property, in view of section 43 of the Indian Partnership Act.
Fourthly, the transaction evidenced by the two deeds, viz., the sale deed and the dissolution were merely in furtherance of the winding up of the affairs of the dissolved partnership and therefore in determining the validity or otherwise of the transactions, F could not resist the claim of the other partner to wind up.
Held, that where the Custodian had made an order against that portion of the order of the Assistant Custodian which was not before him in appeal it must be taken to have been passed in the exercise of the Custodian 's revisional jurisdiction and the mere fact that this was riot expressly stated in the order could 58 458 be no ground for holding that he was not exercising his revisional jurisdiction.
It was quite another matter whether in the exercise of the revisional jurisdiction, he proceeded in accordance with law.
The Custodian in exercising his revisional jurisdiction must give the party concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard before any order prejudicial to him is made in revision.
If this reasonable opportunity of being heard cannot be given without the service of notice, a notice must be served for otherwise the omission to serve the notice would be fatal, even though section 26 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act did not specifically provide for service of notice by the Custodian.
But in cases where the party affected is before the Custodian and has knowledge of the proceedings before him and is heard, the failure to issue a formal notice is immaterial or does not vitiate the order passed.
Once the fact of dissolution is accepted, the declaration as regards the business must necessarily be construed as a declaration that the property that remained in the evacuee on the dissolution of the firm was evacuee property.
Held, further, that where a deed of transfer by an 'evacuee ' was without good faith, section 40 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act would come into operation, making the transfer of no effect and in the case of a firm its property on dissolution would become an evacuee property from the date of the execution of the deed of dissolution of the partnership and vest in the Custodian with all the rights under the provisions of the Partnership Act and the Custodian was not bound by the statements made in the deed of dissolution as regards the settlement of account.
In the present case the Custodian did not act without juris diction or exercise his jurisdiction irregularly.
