The petitioner who was carrying on the business of the manufacture of celluloid and plastic bangles etc.
was granted two licences dated January 18, 1960, and February 2, 1060, for the purpose of importing cellulose nitrate sheets for two licensing periods, April/September, 1950, and October/March, 1960, On getting information that the petitioner had no machinery or equipment at the premises nor possessed any municipal licence or factory licence, the Imports and Exports authorities issued a notice dated May 27. 1960, to the petitioner to the effect that the Government of India proposed to cancel the licences granted to him, in exercise of the powers conferred by cl. 9 of the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, unless sufficient cause against this was furnished within ten days of the date of issue of the notice.
The petitioner replied that as the notice did not disclose on which of the grounds specified in cl. 9 the proposed action was sought to be taken, it was not possible to show cause against it and that in any case he had not done anything justifying the cancellation of the licences under the said rule.
On July 2, 1060, the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports wrote to the petitioner giving the information received as aforesaid and said: "In view of this it is clear that you had obtained the Essentiality Certificate from the Director of Industries fraudulently and by misrepresentation of facts and thereafter obtained the licences in question. .
You are called upon under cl. 10 of the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, to show cause, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of this letter, as to why further issue of licences to you should not be suspended, under cl. 8 of the said Imports (Control) Order, 1955, for contravening the Imports Trade Control Regulations. .
On August 4, 1960, the petitioner received two orders dated August 3, 1961, by which the two licences in favour of the petitioner were cancelled.
The petitioner challenged the validity of the aforesaid orders on the grounds, inter alia, that no real opportunity at all to show cause against the proposed cancellation was given to him in total disregard of the provisions of cl.
:co of the Imports (Control) 541 Order, 1955 which required that "No action shall be taken under cls.
7, 8 or 9 unless the licensee. has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard", and that the cancellation of the licences arbitrarily deprived the petitioner of his fundamental right to carry on his business under article 19 of the Depi Constitution of India.
The correspondence between the petitioner, and the Import authorities showed that after the receipt of the letter dated July 2, 1960, the petitioner had no real opportunity of being heard with regard to the ground alleged in the letter, before the cancellation orders were made on August 3, 1960.
Held, that on the facts of the case, there was a. clear violation of the requirements of cl. 10 of the Imports (Control) Order 1955, which "embodied the principles of natural justice, and that the orders dated August 3, 1960, canceling the licences granted to the petitioner, were bad and must be quashed.
