By section 39 of the Calcutta Police Act, 1866, "The Commissioner of Police, may, at his discretion from time to time, grant licenses to the keepers of such houses or places of public resort and entertainment as aforesaid for which no licence as is specified in the Bengal Excise Act, 1909 is required upon such conditions, (1) (1934) L.R. 61 I.A. 398.
136 to be inserted in every such license, as he, with the sanction of the said State Government from time to time shall order, for securing the good behaviour of the keepers of the said houses or places of public resort or entertainment, and the prevention of drunkenness and disorder among the persons frequenting or using the same; and the said licenses may be granted by the said Commissioner, for any time not exceeding one year".
The petitioner, whose application for a license in respect of an eating house was refused by the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, under the section, challenged its constitutional validity on the ground that it conferred arbitrary and unguided powers on the Commissioner to grant or refuse a license without hearing the applicant and was, therefore, an unreasonable restriction on his fundamental right to carry on his trade guaranteed by article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Held, (per Kapur, Gajendragadkar and Wanchoo, JJ.), that in order to decide whether a provision in a pre Constitution statute, like the one in question, satisfies.
the test of constitutionality laid down by article 19(i)(g) read with article 19(6) of the Constitution, the impugned section has to be read as a whole in a fair and reasonable manner and it should not be declared void simply because the considerations relevant to those Articles are not immediately apparent from its language.
It is not correct to say that the discretion conferred on the Commissioner by the first part of the section is absolute and that the question of imposing the two conditions mentioned by the second part can arise only after the grant of the license.
The two parts, read together, can lead only to the conclusion that the discretion vested in the Commissioner is guided by the two conditions mentioned in the section, namely, the securing of good behaviour and the prevention of drunkenness and disorder and a third by necessary impli cation, that the applicant must have actual and effective control and possession of the place where he keeps the eating house.
Section 39 of the Calcutta Police Act, 1866, therefore, con fers no arbitrary or uncanalised discretion on the Commissioner, unguided by any criteria, and does not constitute an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right to carry on trade under article 19(i)(g) of the Constitution.
Rustom jamshed Irani vs Harley Kennedy, Bom.
386, inapplicable.
Although there can be no doubt that procedural provisions of a statute also enter into the verdict as to its reasonableness, it cannot be laid down as a general proposition that if a licensing statute omits to provide for a hearing or for the giving of reasons for refusal, such omission must necessarily constitute an unreasonable restriction on a fundamental right.
The Commissioner in passing an order under the section acts administratively and although he must act reasonably, there is no duty cast on him 137 to act judicially.
Regard being had to the setting in which the impugned section appears in the Act and the circumstances of ,.this case, it could not be said that section 39 of the Act was such a restriction.
State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; , Nagendra Nath Bora vs The Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; , Nakkuda Ali vs M. F. De section jayaratne, and Express Newspapers (P.) Ltd. vs The Union of India, , relied on.
If an applicant thinks that he has fulfilled the three con ditions and the Commissioner has unreasonably rejected his application, he has his remedy under article 226 of the Constitution.
Per Subba Rao, J. It is well settled that restrictions on fundamental rights must not be arbitrary or excessive or beyond what is required in the interest of the general public.
Such restrictions have to be tested both from the substantive and the procedural aspects.
An uncontrolled or uncanalised power constitutes an unreasonable restriction.
Even though the statute may clearly express the legislative policy that cannot be enough unless it provides a suitable machinery for implementation of that policy in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Restrictions are justifiable and in deciding whether a restriction is reasonable or not, the Court cannot attach much importance to the fact that the impugned statute vests discretion in the State Government or a high officer.
Nor can the distinction between an administrative authority and a judicial one have much relevance except that the Court may be more inclined to uphold the discretion if vested in an impartial judicial authority rather than in an administrative one.
State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; , Thakur Raghubir Singh vs Court of Wards, Ajmer, ; and M/s. Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , relied on.
Babulal Chandra vs Chief justice and judges, High Court of Patna, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 524, Harishankar Bagla vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh, , Union of India vs Bhana Mal Gulzarimal Ltd.; , and Mineral Development Ltd., State of Bihar, considered.
Thus viewed, the plain words of the impugned section cannot be said to lay down any policy reasonably capable of controlling the discretion vested in the Commissioner.
The word 'may ' coupled with the words 'at his discretion ' in the first part of the section clearly emphasises the intention of the Legislature to confer absolute power on the Commissioner.
The second part deals with the nature of the conditions to be inserted in the license.
But the scope of the discretion to issue 18 138 the license and the power to impose conditions in a license are two different matters.
Even if the two conditions mentioned in the second part could be read into the first, the discretion conferred by the section would still be arbitrary since the section neither requires that the Commissioner should give reasonable opportunity to the applicant to prove that he satisfies both the tests prescribed by it nor that he should give reasons for refusing the license and no appeal is provided for.
Consequently , from the substantive as much as the proce dural aspect, section 39 of the Act infringes the fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed by article 19(i)(g) of the Constitution.
