The appellant firm had its factory in the State of Madras, where it manufactured, assembled and sold motor vehicles, spare parts and accessories.
For the assessment year 1952 53, the sales tax authority computed the appellant 's taxable turnover of sales for that year excluding a sum which represented the value of vehicles etc., sold outside the State of Madras, but on revision, the taxable turnover was increased by including a sum which related to certain transactions with dealers outside the State of Madras on the ground that the sales covered thereby were made within the State of Madras and were therefore liable to tax under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939.
The appellant claimed that these sales were in the course of inter State trade and commerce and not liable to sales tax by reason of the provi sions of article 286(2) Of the Constitution of India.
The matter was taken up to the Supreme Court and in the meantime, the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956, had been passed by Parliament.
The question was whether the transactions in question, even if they were considered as having taken place in the course of inter State trade, came within the protection of the Validation Act of 1956 and, therefore, the assessment in the present case was valid.
The appellant contended (1) that the Validation Act was applicable only when the law of the State imposed, in express terms, a tax on the sale or purchase of any goods in the course of inter State trade or commerce, and (2) that the new section 22 inserted in the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, by Madras Act 1 of 1957, which operated retrospectively from January 26, 1950, talked of sales in which the goods were delivered for consumption in the State of Madras, and, therefore, the Validation Act did not operate on sales of an inter State character other than such sales.
Held: (1) that the effect of the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956, was to liberate the State laws from the fetter placed on them by article 286(2) of the Constitution of India and enable such laws to operate on their own terms.
Consequently, the transactions in question were liable to tax under the provisions 608 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, and it was not necessary to provide in that Act in express terms that it was taxing sales in the course of the inter State trade.
M. P. V. Sundararamier & Co. vs The State of Andhra Pradesh and Another, , relied on.
(2) that the transactions in question came within the definition of sale in section 2(h) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, and the power to tax conferred on the State by the charging section, section 3, was not affected by section 22 in view of sub section
(2) therein.
