The respondent was born in India in 1924 and had lived there all along till about the end of 1954.
He had been paying rent for his shop in India for ten years upto about 1958 and his family was and had always been in India.
At the end of 1954 or the beginning of 1955 lie went to Pakistan from where he returned on January 20, 1955, on a passport granted by the Pakistan Government which had a visa endorsed on it by the Indian authorities permitting him to stay in India up to April, 1955.
The respondent applied to the Central Government for extension of the time allowed by the visa but the records did not Show What order, if any, had been made on it.
As the respondent had stayed beyond the time specified in the visa, he was on September 3, 1957, served with an order made by the Government of Andhra Pradesh under section 3(2)(C) Of the , i946 requiring him to leave India.
The order described him as a Pakisthan National.
on his failure to comply with this order 93 738 he was prosecuted under section 14 of the .
His defence was that he was an Indian national.
The trying magistrate rejected this defence and convicted him holding (a) that the fact that the respondent obtained a Pakistan passport proved that he had disowned Indian nationality and ceased to be an Indian national and (b) that by refusing to extend the time fixed by the visa the Central Government had decided that the respondent was a foreigner and under section 8 of the , such a decision was final.
An appeal by the respondent was dismissed by the Sessions judge on the ground that the respondent 's application for extension of the time fixed by the visa proved that he had renounced his Indian nationality and had acquired the citizenship of Pakistan.
The High Court of Andhra Pradesh set aside the conviction in revision.
On appeal by the State of Andhra Pradesh, Held, that neither the Magistrate nor the Sessions Judge was competent to come to a finding of his own that the respon dent, an Indian national, had disowned his nationality and acquired Pakistan nationality for under section 9(2) of the , that decision could only be made by the prescribed authority which under the Rules framed under the Act was the Central Government.
The fact that the Central Government had refused to extend the visa did not show that it had decided under the section that the respondent had renounced his Indian nationality and acquired Pakistan citizenship.
In any event, in order that the Central Government might come to a decision under section 9(2) of the an enquiry as laid down in r. 30 Of the Rules framed under the Act had to be made and no such inquiry had been made.
On the facts established, the respondent became an Indian citizen under article 5(a) of the Constitution when it came into force.
He thereby discharged the onus laid on him by section 9 of the to prove that he was an Indian citizen when that was in dispute.
The passport obtained by the respondent from the Pakistan Government would, therefore, only be evidence that the respondent had renounced Indian nationality and acquired Pakistan citizenship.
Such evidence was however of no use in a court for no court could in view of section 9(2) of the decide whether an Indian citizen had renounced his citizenship and acquired the citizenship of a foreign country.
Section 8 of the had no application to the case as it only applied where a foreigner is recognised as a national by the law of more than one foreign country or where it is uncertain what nationality is to be ascribed to a foreigner and in the present case that was not the question but the question was whether the respondent was an Indian or a foreigner.
The respondent 's short visit to Pakistan had not amounted to a migration to that country.
Query, whether article 7 of the Constitution contemplates migration from India to Pakistan after January 26, 1950.
