The appellants who were registered as dealers under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947, used to collect sales tax from the purchasers on all sales effected by them including sales to dealers in other states.
They were assessed to and paid tax on their turnover which included sales outside the State of Orissa, but after the decision of this Court in State of Bombay vs The 'United Motors (India) Ltd.; , , they applied under section 14 of the Act for refund of tax paid on the ground that sales outside the State were not taxable under cl.
(1)(a) of article 286 of the Constitution read with the Explanation.
Refund was refused by the Sales Tax Authorities and the Board of Revenue.
In petitions moved by the appellants for writs of certiorari and Mandamus against the orders of the Board of ,Revenue the High Court ordered refund of tax paid for certain periods and refused it in regard to other periods.
The Orissa Sales Tax Act was, however, amended in 1958 with retrospective effect incorporating section 14 A which provided that refund could be claimed only by the person from whom the dealer had realised the amount by way of sales tax or otherwise.
550 Held, that under section 14 A of the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1958, refund of tax which the dealer was not liable to pay could 'be claimed by the person from whom the dealer had actually realised it whether as sales tax or otherwise, and not by the dealer.
The legislature was competent to legislate for granting )IS refund of sales tax improperly collected; there, is no reason to exclude the power to declare that refund shall be claimable only by the person from whom the dealer has realised the amount as sales tax or otherwise.
Under section 9B, cl. 3 of the Act, if the amount realised by the assessee exceeded the amount payable as tax such amount must be deposited in the Government treasury, and the assessee having no beneficial interest in such amount the enactment that the amount shall be claimable only by the persons who paid the amounts to the dealers as sales tax is a reasonable restriction imposed on the right of the assessee to obtain refund in the interest of the general public, and does not infringe the provisions of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
If the assessees discharge their statutory obligation to deposit the amount collected by them as sale tax in the Government treasury they cannot be exposed to any claim for refund by the persons from whom the tax is collected, even though such persons were in the first instance not liable to pay the tax.
