By section 66 (1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 "the assessee or the Commissioner may, by application in the prescribed form . require the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question of law arising out of such order and the Appellate Tribunal shall . draw up a statement of the case and refer it to 789 the High Court.
" The respondents, who received compensation from the Government as owners of a requisitioned steamship lost in enemy action, were assessed to tax under the fourth proviso to section 1O(2)(Vii) of the Indian Income tax Act, which was inserted into the Act by the Income tax (Amendment) Act, 1946 (VIII Of 1946) that came into force on May 4, 1946.
Before the Tax Authorities the respondents sought to resist the liability on the ground that the income was received not in the year of account but in the previous year but failed.
No question as to the applicability of the said proviso was either raised before the Tribunal or dealt with by it.
The question that was referred to the High Court was as follows: "Whether the sum of Rs. 9,26,532 was properly included in the assessee company 's total income computed for the assess ment year 1946 47." In the High Court the respondents contended that the said proviso had no application.
The appellant took a preliminary objection to this contention being raised on the ground that it was not raised and argued before the Tribunal but the High Court overruled the objection and held that the compensation amount was not liable to charge as the proviso in question was not in force on the material date.
Against this decision the Commissioner of Income tax appealed.
The point for determination in the appeal was whether the High Court in answering a reference under section 66 could decide a question not raised or argued before the Tribunal.
Held (per Das, Kapur, Hidayatullah and Venkatarama Aiyar, jj.), that the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act is purely advisory and therefore different from its ordinary jurisdiction as a Civil Court.
It is of the essence of such a jurisdiction that the High Court can decide only such questions as are referred to it and that implies that the questions must necessarily be those that the Tribunal had occasion to consider.
The words "any question of law arising out of such order" in section 66(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, do not in the context mean any question of law arising out of the findings in the order of the Tribunal but only such questions as were raised before, or decided by the Tribunal.
The Indian Income tax Act, I 922, is not in Pari materia with the British Statute and in view of the difference between section 66(i) and the corresponding provisions of the British Statute no useful purpose can be served by referring to English decisions for interpreting section 66 of the Indian Act.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace & Co., (1932) L.R. 59 I.A. 2o6, referred to.
Attorney General vs Avelino Armavo & Co., , considered.
790 The power the High Court has under s: 66(2) Of the Act to direct a reference can make no difference since such power is subject to the same limitations as that of the Tribunal under section 66(i) of the Act.
Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Mtt.
section Ar.
Arunachalam Chettiar, (1953] S.C.R. 463, New jehangir Vakil Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 249, Kusumben D. Mahadevia vs Commissioner of Income tax, and Zoraster & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; , referred to.
Madanlal Dharnidharka vs Commissioner of Income tax, , disapproved.
Case law reviewed.
The jurisdiction of the High Court in deciding a reference under section 66(5) is co extensive with the right of the litigant to ask for a reference and the power of the court to make one.
Therefore the High Court has jurisdiction in a reference to decide questions of law arising out of the order of the Tribunal, that is question of law raised and decided by the Tribunal, or question of law raised before the Tribunal but not decided by it or question of law decided by Tribunal, though not raised before it, but not questions not raised or decided by the Tribunal even though it may arise from its findings.
A question of law may have more than one aspect and section 66(1) of the Act does not contemplate that each aspect of a question is by itself a distinct question.
It only requires that the question of law which is referred to the Court must have been in issue before the Tribunal.
It does not further require that the reference should be limited to those aspects of the question which had been argued before the Tribunal.
The Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay South vs M/s. Ogale Glass Works Ltd. [1955] I S.C.R. 185 and Zoraster & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax; , , approved.
In the instant case, the question referred to the High Court was wide enough to cover the contention raised by the respondent and the High Court was right in holding that the fourth proviso to section 10(2)(Vii) Of the Act, not being retrospective in operation, bad no application.
Per Shah, J. Section 66 of the does not contemplate that the question which tire Tribunal may refer, or which the High Court may call upon the Tribunal to refer, must be one that is raised and argued before the Tribunal at the hearing under section 33(4) Of the Act.
The section does riot specifically impose such a restriction nor is it implied.
To import into the expression "any question of law arising out of such order" any limitation that the question must either have been argued before the Tribunal or dealt with by it, would be not only to impose fetters upon the jurisdiction of the High 791 Court which were plainly not intended by the statute and in certain cases might involve gross injustice to the parties.
Madanlal Dharnidharka vs Commissioner Of Income tax, , approved.
Under section 66(5) Of the Act, the court has to record its opinion on the questions arising out of the order of the Tribunal and not on the arguments advanced before it.
In the instant case the High Court, on the question arising out of the order of the Tribunal and referred to it, had jurisdiction to decide that the proviso which made the amount taxable was not in operation at the material date.
