The appellant, who held the rank of a Mamllatdar in the first grade and was officiating as District Deputy Collector, was alleged to have wrongly charged travelling allowance for 59 miles instead of 51 and was, as the result of a departmental enquiry, reverted to his substantive rank for three years and 887 directed to refund the excess be had charged.
He made a re presentation to the Government which was of no avail although the Accountant General was of the opinion that the appellant had not overcharged and committed no fraud.
Ultimately the appellant was promoted to the selection grade but the order of reversion remained effective and affected his position in the selection grade.
After retirement he brought a suit for a declaration that the order of reversion was void and for recovery of Rs. 12, 516 and odd as arrears of salary, allowances, etc., with interest and future interest.
The trial court held that there was no compliance with the provisions of section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, granted the declaration but refused the arrears claimed.
The plaintiff filed an appeal and the State a cross objection and the High Court dismissed the appeal and allowed the cross objection, holding that the order of reversion was not a punishment within the meaning of section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935.
Held, that the matter was covered by the observations of this Court in Purshottam Lal Dhingra 's case and of the two tests of punishment laid (town by this Court, namely, (1) whether the servant had a right to the rank or (2) whether he had been visited by evil consequences of the kind specified therein, the second certainly applied.
The appellant might or might not have the right to hold the higher post, but there could be no doubt that the was visited with evil consequences as a result of the order of reversion.
Mere deprivation of higher emoluments, however, in conse quence of an order of reversion could not by itself satisfy that test which must include such other conseqnences as forfeiture of substantive pay and loss of seniority ' In the instant case, by the order of reversion for three years to his substantive post, the appellant lost seniority and promotion and the belated action of the Government could not wholly undo the mischief.
Since the requirement of section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, which corresponds to article 311(2) of the Constitution, had not been found to have been fully complied with, the order of reversion must be held to be void.
Purshottam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, , applied.
The claim of arrears of salary was governed by article 102 of the Indian Limitation Act, and the appellant, therefore, was entitled to no more than what fell due during the 3 years previous to his retirement.
The Punjab Province vs Pandit Tarachand, [1947) F.C.R. 89, followed.
