The John Mills comprising of three textile mills and one flour mill were jointly owned by several persons.
The financier of the Mills filed a suit for recovery of the amount due to him.
During the pendency of the suit a receiver was appointed to take possession of the flour mills but he was not empowered to run the mills directly without further directions of the court.
A preliminary decree was passed in the suit directing among other things that the receiver was to continue until discharged.
Thereafter, an arrangement was made for running the mills and the court directed that the appellant, who was one of the co owners of the mills, be given a lease of the flour mill for three years by the receiver.
In the lease deed the appellant undertook to deliver back possession to the receiver upon the expiry 869 of the three years.
Shortly thereafter, a final decree was passed in the suit but it was silent in regard to the receiver appointed earlier.
On the expiry of the three year term of the lease the court directed the receiver to take back possession of the flour mill from the appellant.
The appellant contended (i) that after, the passing of the final decree the receiver ceased to 'be a receiver in respect of the rights of the co owners and could not dispossess the appellant, and (ii) that the appellant could only be dispossessed by a suit filed by the receiver and not by a summary procedure.
Held, that the receiver continued by the preliminary decree was entitled to function till he was discharged.
The legal position with regard to the continuance of receivers is that: (i) if a receiver is appointed in a suit until judgment, the appointment is brought to an end by the judgment in the suit; (ii) if a receiver is appointed in a suit without his tenure being expressly defined, he will continue till he is discharged; (iii) even after the final disposal of the suit, though as between the parties to the suit his functions are usually terminated, the receiver con tinues to be answerable to the court till he is finally discharged, and (iv) the court has ample power to continue the receiver even after the final decree if the exigencies of the case so require.
The final decree in the present case did not finally dispose of the suit and did not bring the appointment of the receiver to an end.
Held, further that the court was entitled to direct the appellant to give back possession of the flour mill to the receiver.
The court was merely making suitable arrangement for the running of the mill in the course of its administration of the estate through the receiver.
The mill had been leased out to the appellant with an express condition that he should redeliver the property to the receiver on the expiry of the lease and the court was competent under 0.
4o r. 1(1)(d) Code of Civil Procedure to confer a power on the receiver to recover the property from the appellant.
It was not necessary for the receiver to file a suit for the recovery of the property.
