In exercise of the power conferred by section 3A(2) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, which enabled the State Government, by notification, to fix the rate of the tax to be levied on the sales of goods specified in the section not exceeding nine pies per rupee, the Government issued at notification dated June 8, 1948 imposing a tax of six pies in the rupee on sales of jute.
On March 31, 1956, the Governor of Uttar Pradesh issued an Ordinance, inter alia, amending section 3A(2) of the Act, the effect of which was to enact one ceiling rate of one anna per rupee on the sale proceeds for all goods leaving it to the State to fix within the ceiling such rates of tax for such goods as it might determine.
On the same date the Government issued a notification by which sales on jute were liable to pay sales tax at the rate of one anna per rupee on the sale proceeds.
The Ordinance was replaced by U.P. Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1956, under which the amended section shall "be deemed to have effect on and from April 1, 1956".
One of the dealers who had been assessed to sales tax in accordance with the notification filed an application under article 226 of the Constitution of India, calling in question its validity, and the High Court of Allahabad held that there was no power in the State to issue the notification under section 3A(2) on March 31, 1956, as that section was itself to come into force only on April 1, 1956.
With a view to remove the defect pointed out in said decision, the State Legislature passed the U.P. Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 957, but this in turn having been declared by the Allahabad High Court not being effective in saving the notification, the legislature ultimately enacted the U.P. Sales Tax (Validation) Act, 1958.
Section 3 of this Act provided that notwithstanding any judgment of any court the notification dated March 31, 1956, shall be deemed to have been issued in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, as if the said section was in force on the date on 2 which the notification was issued in the form in which it was in force immediately before the commencement of this Act.
The petitioner who was carrying on business in the manufacture and sale of jute goods filed an application under article 32 of the Constitution and contended that the Validation Act of 1958, had not brought about any change in the situation on the grounds (1) that the words "in the form in which it was in force immediately before the commencement of this Act" in section 3 must be read as qualifying the word "notification" and not the word "section" and in that view the notification in question was subject to the same infirmity which attached to it when it was published on March 31, 1956, and (2) that the State Legislature was not competent to enact a law imposing sales tax retrospectively and therefore the Validation Act was ultra vires.
Held: (1) that on its proper construction, the words "in the form in which it was in force immediately before the commencement of this Act" in section 3 of the U.P. Sales Tax (Validation) Act, 1958, qualify the word "section" and not the word "notification", and that on that view the impugned notification was within the saving clause of the Validation Act.
H. L. M. Biri Works vs Sales Tax Officer, A.I.R. 1959 All. 208, approved.
(2) that the power of a legislature to enact a law with re ference to a topic entrusted to it is unqualified and that in the exercise of such a power it will be competent for the legislature to enact a law which is either prospective or retrospective.
Accordingly, the Validation Act is not ultra vires the powers of the legislature under entry 54 in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, for the reason that it operates retrospectively.
The fact that the seller is not in a position to pass the sales tax on to the consumer does not affect the competence of the legislature to enact a law imposing a sales tax retrospectively as that is a matter of policy.
The Province of Madras vs Boddu Paidanna and Sons, [1942] F.C.R. go, explained.
The Tata Iron & Steel Co., Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, ; , Buchirajalingam vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 756 and M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs The State of Andhya Pradesh, ; , followed.
The Union of India vs Madan Gopal Kabra, ; , relied on.
