The appellants one of whom was the owner and the other the manager of a colliery were convicted for contravening the provisions of the Mines Creche Rules, 1946, under which the owner of every mine employing women was required to construct creches for the use of the women employees and also to appoint a "Creche in charge" for the supervision of the creches.
Their contentions mainly were (1) that the Mines Creche Rules, 1946 stood repealed as the Mines Act, 1923 itself under which those rules were framed were repealed by the Mines Act of 1952 and (2) that the said rules having been framed under section 30(bb) of the Mines Act, 1923, could not be deemed to be rules made under the corresponding section 58(d) of the 1952 Act the requirements of which were different from those of section 30(bb) of the 1923 Act.
On behalf of the manager a further contention was raised that he was not liable for the Contravention of r. 7(1) under which he 37 had no duty to perform and no question of his omission to appoint a creche in charge arose.
Held, per Sinha, C. J., section K. Das, Das Gupta and Ayyangar, JJ., that the regulations framed tinder section 30 of the Mines Act, 1923, survived the repeal of that Act.
Criminal Appeals Nos.
go to 106 of 1959, followed.
The Mines Creche Rules, 1946, framed under section 30(bb) of the Mines Act of 1923 covered a part of the ground that was covered by the provisions of section 58(d) of the Mines Act of 1952, and to the extent the provisions of the two enactments overlap each other these rules would continue to be in force by virtue of section 24 of the and operate as rules under the 1952 Act.
Contravention of r. 7 of the Mines Creche Rules, 1946, was in law contravention of a rule under section 58(d) of the 1952 Act within the meaning of section 73 of the Act.
Under section 18(1) of the , the manager, the agent and the owner are responsible for observance of the Mines Creche Rules which form part of the conditions of employment of female labour engaged in "mining operations" and under subS. (2) of section 18 each of them shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention of any rule by "any person whosoever", unless he proves that he took all reasonable means to prevent such contravention.
The manager in the present case not having proved that he took all reasonable means to prevent the contravention of r. 7 by the owner even though the rule in terms laid no duty on him, must be deemed to be guilty of the contravention.
State Government, M. P. vs Deodatta Diddi, A.I.R. (1956) Nag. 71, held inapplicable.
G. D. Bhattar vs State, A.I.R. (1957) Cal.
483, the view making the manager liable to be approved.
Per Mudholkar, J.
In the mining industry a "mining operation", as contemplated under section 18 of the , is understood to mean an operation undertaken for the purpose of mining minerals and cannot be extended to mean "management of mines" such as employment of labour and providing amenities to employees etc.
The manager of a mine cannot be made vicariously liable for the omission of the owner to carry out his own duty under r. 7(1) of the Mines Creche Rules.
Sub section
(2) of section 18 would also absolve the manager from vicarious liability if he could show "that he had taken all reasonable means by publishing and to the best of his power enforcing those provisions to prevent such contravention".
But there is nothing in the Act or the rules which empowers the manager to enforce the performance by the owner of his duty under sub r.
(1) of r. 7 of the Mines Creche Rules and the manager was therefore not liable for the breach of that rule.
