On December 19, 1953, the appellant, a company registered in West Germany, entered into a contract with a company in India to set up a complete coke oven battery ready for production as well as by products plants at Sindri in the State of Bihar, agreeing to erect and construct buildings, plants and machinery and deliver and supply accessories and articles from Germany and also locally from India, and render services fully described in the First Schedule, for an all inclusive price of Rs. 2,31,50,000.
The contract provided that in case the contractor failed to complete the works within the period specified therein the Indian company might take possession of the works and the materials which would become its property and complete the works and deduct from the agreed price the expenses incurred in such completion.
Under cl.
15(ii) of the contract all materials brought by the contractor upon the site shall immediately become the company 's property, but such of them as during the progress of the works.
were rejected by the company ceased to be Company 's property, and after the coke oven and byproducts plants had been constructed the contractor was entitled to remove the surplus materials.
The clause further provided that the company shall not be liable for any loss if the materials were destroyed by fire or otherwise.
Under the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947, in a contract for, execution of works, the materials used 11 82 therein are treated as sold by the contractors and their value is taken as the sale price liable to be taxed.
The execution of the works was completed in 1955 as provided in the agreement and on March 20, 1956, the sales tax authorities issued a notice to the appellant to the effect that it was liable to pay tax for the three years 1952 to 1955, under the provisions of the Act.
The appellant represented that it had only supplied materials in execution of works contract, that there was no sale of any goods or materials by it and that the proceedings for taxing this supply of materials as if they had been sold were illegal.
The sales tax authorities having proceeded to take further steps to levy the tax in spite of its representations, the appellant filed a petition before the High Court of Patna under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the proceedings.
The High Court took the view that under cl.
15(ii) of the contract in question the property in the materials was to pass to the Indian company as soon as they were brought on the site, and that, in effect, amounted to a sale of those materials by the appellant to the company.
The Court, however, dismissed the petition on the ground that the facts had not yet been fully investigated and that it would be open to the sales tax authorities to investigate the facts and upon the proper construction of the contract come to the finding whether and if so to what extent, the appellant was liable to pay sales tax.
Held (Shah, J., dissenting): (1) that on its proper construction the agreement dated December 19, 1953, was a contract entire and indivisible for the construction of specified works for a lump sum and not a contract of sale of materials as such and that the sales tax authorities had no right to impose a tax on the materials supplied in execution of that contract on the footing that such supply was a sale.
The State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd., ; and Peare Lal Hari Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; , followed.
(2) that where proceedings are taken before a tribunal under a provision of law, which is ultra vires, it is open to a party aggrieved thereby to move the court under article 226 for issuing appropriate writs for quashing them on the ground that they are incompetent, without his being obliged to wait until those proceedings run their full course.
The State of Bombay vs The United Motors (India) Ltd., ; , Himmatlal Harilal Mehta vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; and The Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs State of Bihar, , relied on.
In the present case, the sales tax authorities sought to maintain the liability of the appellant to pay tax in respect of materials supplied by it only under the contract dated December 19, 953, and on the basis of the legality of the provisions 83 of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947.
Consequently, the proceedings taken by them must be held to be illegal and must be quashed.
Per Shah, J. Under the agreement dated December 19, 1953, there was a contract for the construction of a coke oven battery and by products plant, and also to deliver and supply accessories and articles.
Even if this delivery and supply was incidental to the works contract, it could not be assumed without investigation that it was not a part of a transaction of sale liable to tax.
The investigation of facts on the question of liability to pay tax has to be made by the taxing authorities in whom that jurisdiction is vested.
Before these facts are ascertained, by merely looking at the terms of the written contract and without any investigation as to the true nature of the transaction, the High Court could not decide whether the contract performed was a pure works or construction contract or was a composite contract.
The High Court was, therefore, right in declining to issue the writ prayed for.
