One C had obtained a lease of a cinema house which was to expire in May 1942.
In the meantime litigation ensued between the owners of the cinema house, and the High Court appointed receivers to administer the property.
In 1940 one I offered to take a lease of the cinema house for 21 years.
The High Court offered C the option of taking the lease for 21 years but C was willing to take it only for 7 years upto May 1947.
Thereupon the High Court ordered that a lease be given to C upto May 1947, and thereafter the lease be given to 1 upto May 1961.
In accordance with this order the receivers executed two leases, one in favour of C and a reversionary lease in favour of I. Before the lease in favour of C expired the Madras (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1946, came into force which protected tenants in 22 170 possession from eviction even after the expiry of their leases.
This Act was replaced by the Madras Buildings (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1949, which contained similar provisions.
Section 13 of the 1949 Act empowered the State Government to "exempt any building or class of buildings from all or any of the provisions of this Act.
" On the application of I the Government passed an order on June 4, 1952, under section 13 exempting the cinema house from all the provisions of the Act.
Subsequently, the reasons for making the order were given by the Government to be: (i) C had deliberately, though he had been offered a lease for 21 years by the High Court, taken a lease for 7 years and he was seeking to take advantage of the Act after the expiry of his lease, (ii) C was an absentee lessee and had several other business and (iii) C had already been in possession for 5 years more than he was legitimately entitled to be.
C filed a writ petition before the High Court for quashing the order on the grounds that section 13 of the Act vested in the Government an unguided and uncontrolled discretion and violated article 14 of the Constitution and that the order deprived C of the equal protection of the beneficial provisions of the Act.
The High Court held that section 13 was not unconstitutional but that the order of the Government was ultra vires.
I appealed to the Supreme Court.
At the hearing C sought to challenge the validity of section 13 also.
Held, that section 13 of the Act did not violate article 14 and was not unconstitutional.
Enough guidance was afforded by the preamble and the operative provisions of the Act for the exercise of the discretionary power vested in the Government.
The power tinder section 13 was to be exercised in cases where the protection given by the Act caused great hardship to the landlord or was the subject of abuse by the tenant.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Sri justice Tendolkar, [1959] S.C.R. 279 and Sarday Inder Singh vs State of Rajasthan, ; , followed.
Held, (per Sinha, C.J., Ayyangar and Mudholkar, jj.), that the order passed by the Government under section 13 was ultra vires and void.
An order made under section 13 was subject to judicial review on the grounds that (a) it was discriminatory, (b) it was made on grounds which were not germane or relevant to the policy and purpose of the Act, and (c) it was made on grounds which were mala fide.
In the present case the grounds given for granting the exemption were not those countenanced by the policy or purpose of the Act.
The mere fact that C had taken the lease for 7 years and continued in possession after its expiry was no ground for eviction as the policy of the Act was to protect such possession.
The fact that C had other business was immaterial; the Government failed to consider the question whether if C was evicted he could secure alternative accommodation where he could carry on the business which he was carrying on in the cinema house.
171 Per section K. Das and A. K. Sarkar, JJ.
The order passed by the Government under section 13 was a competent and legal order.
All that the court had to see was whether the power had been used for any extraneous purpose, i.e., not for achieving the object for which the power was granted.
The purpose of the Act was to prevent unreasonable eviction and to control rent.
Where, as in the present case, there was no risk of the landlord being able to realise illegal rent or premium the eviction would not be unreasonable.
Further, if exemption was refused in the present case it would prevent the High Court from administering the property in its charge.
The order was not unfair to C for he had been offered a lease for 21 years which he declined.
