B was married to the appellant in October, 1951, but their relations got strained by 1953.
She was ill treated and her health deteriorated due to maltreatment and under nourish ment.
In 1956 she was deliberately starved and not allowed to leave the house in which they were living and only sometimes a morsel or so used to be thrown to her as alms are given to beggars.
On June 5,1956, she managed to escape from the house and went to the Civil Hospital at Ludhiana.
Her brother came down to Ludhiana on learning of the facts and made a complaint to the police.
The doctor who attended on B sent a note to the police saying that she was seriously ill and might collapse any moment.
The appellant was prosecuted for the offence of attempting to murder B under section 307 Of the Indian Penal Code.
The trial Court acquitted him but, on appeal, the High Court came to a finding, on the evidence, that the object of the appellant was to confine B and deprive her of regular food in pursuance of a scheme of regular starvation in order to accelerate her end, and convicted him under section 307 Of the Indian Penal Code.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended, inter alia, that whereas under section 511 Of the Code for an Act to amount to the offence of attempting to commit an offence it need not be the last act and can be the first act towards the commission of the offence, under section 307 it is the last act which, if effective to cause death, would constitute the offence of an attempt to commit murder, and that even if B had been deprived of food for a certain period, the act of so depriving her did not come under section 307 as that act could not, by itself have caused her death, it being necessary for the period of starvation to continue for a longer period to cause death.
Held, that a person commits an offence under section 307 Of the Indian Penal Code when he has an intention to commit murder and in pursuance of that intention does an act towards its commission irrespective of the fact whether that act is the penultimate act or not.
Abhayanand Mishra vs The State of Bihar, [1962] 2 S.C.R. 241, followed.
Rex vs White, , relied on.
Queen vs Nidha, All. 38 and Emperor vs Vasudeo Balwant Gogte, BOM.
434, considered, 255 Jeetmal vs State, A.I.R. 1950 Madhya Bharat 21, disapproved.
The word 'act ' in section 307 did not mean only a particular act of a person, but denoted, according to section 33 Of the Code, as well, a series of acts.
In the present case the course of conduct adopted by the appellant in regularly starving his wife B, comprised a series of acts which though they fell short of completing the series sufficient to kill her, came within the purview Of section 307 Of the Indian Penal Code.
The High Court was, therefore, right in convicting the appellant under that section.
