The appellant applied to the Patna University for permission to appear at the 1954 M. A. Examination in English as a private candidate representing that he was a graduate having obtained his B. A. Degree in 1951 and that he had been teaching in a certain school.
Believing his statements the University authorities gave him the necessary permission, and on his remitting the requisite fees and sending copies of his photograph, as required, a proper admission card for him was dispatched to the Headmaster of the School.
As a result of certain information received by the University, an investigation was made and it was found that the appellant was neither a graduate nor a teacher as represented by him and that in fact he had been de barred from taking any University examination for a certain number of years on account of his having committed corrupt practice at a University examination.
He was prosecuted and convicted under section 420 read with section 511 of the Indian Penal Code, of the offence of attempting to cheat the University by false representations by inducing it to issue the admission card, which if the fraud had not been detected would 31 242 have been ultimately delivered to him.
The appellant contended that on the facts found the conviction was unsustainable on the grounds (1) that the admission card had no pecuniary value and was therefore not property under section 415, and (2) that, in any case, the steps taken by him did not go beyond the stage of preparation for the commission of the offence of cheating and did not therefore make out the offence of attempting to cheat.
Held, that under section 511 of the Indian Penal Code a person commits the offence of attempting to commit a particular offence, when he intends to commit that particular offence and, having made preparations and with the intention to commit that offence, does an act towards its commission; such an act need not be the penultimate act towards the commission of that offence but must be an act during the course of committing such offence.
It is not necessary for the offence under section 511 that the transaction commenced must end in the crime or offence, if not interrupted.
The observations to the contrary in The Queen vs Ramsarun Chowbey, (1872) 4 N. W. P. 46, In the matter of the Petition of Raisat Ali, Cal. 352 and In re Amrita Bazar Patrika Press Ltd., Cal.
190, not approved.
In the matter of the Petition of R. MacCrea, (1893) I.L.R. 15 All. 173, approved.
In re T. Munirathnan Reddi, A.I.R. 1955 And.
118, explained.
Held, further that an admission card issued by the Univer sity for appearing at the Examination held by it, though it has no pecuniary value, has immense value to the candidate and is property within the meaning Of section 415 Of the Indian Penal Code.
Queen Empress vs Appasami, Mad. 151 and Queen Empress vs Soski Bhusan, All. 210, relied On.
In the present case, the preparation was complete when the appellant had prepared the application for the purpose of submission to the University, and the moment he despatched it, he entered the realm of attempting to commit the offence of cheating.
Accordingly, the appellant was rightly convicted of the offence under section 420 read with section 511 of the Indian Penal Code.
