An investigation of the affairs of a Co operative Bank registered under the , on the disappearance of the manager of the bank in 1953, showed that a very large amount of money had been defalcated.
On February 26, 1955, the Registrar of Co operative.
Societies gave notice to the members of the managing committee of the bank asking them to show cause why the committee should not be suspended, under r. 30(3) Of the Rules framed under the Act.
In reply the members denied allegations of mismanagement etc., but the Registrar, however, appointed an administrator of the bank after removing the managing committee.
In the meantime, some of the shareholders of the bank made an application before the Registrar under r. 18 of the Co operative Societies Rules, in the nature of a misfeasance proceeding against the members of the managing committee, praying for an award directing them to pay the amount found defalcated, on the ground that it had been occasioned by a glaring breach of the law and the rules 434 and the bye laws of the bank and betrayal of confidence by the members of the committee.
The Registrar originally appointed an arbitrator for this purpose, but, on the inability of the arbitrator to act due to his illness, the Registrar informed the parties that he would decide the dispute himself.
The legality of the procedure adopted by the Registrar was challenged in a petition filed before the judicial Commissioner, on the ground that he was in the position of a party and had expressed his opinion unequivocally against the members of the committee in the notice he gave on February 26, 1955, and therefore his con stituting himself as a tribunal to decide the dispute under r. 18 was against the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as a party constituted himself the judge.
The judicial Commissioner took the view that although the Registrar had no pecuniary or properties interest in the dispute yet in view of the circumstances of the case there was a strong likelihood of bias and therefore his acting as the tribunal would be against the principles of natural justice.
Held, that the notice dated February 26, 1955, was concerned with the collective responsibility of the members of the managing committee in the.discharge of their duties, while the application made under r. 18 of the Co operative Societies Rules was in the nature of misfeasance proceedings in which their individual responsibility as members to make good the loss caused by the embezzlement fell to be considered, and consequently there could be no inference of bias against the Registrar simply because he gave notice to show cause against the removal of the managing committee, as the two matters were quite different.
Held, further, that the fact that Registrar had general supervision over all co operative societies could not be said to amount to a bias in him so as to disentitle him to act as a judge or arbitrator under r. 18.
