The appellant 's father, a Talukdar of the Estate of Khajur gaon, executed a simple mortgage of his proprietary interest in the estate consisting of sixty seven villages to the Allahabad Bank Ltd. While execution proceedings were pending, the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, came into force from July 1952.
As a result, the Zamindari rights of the appellant judgment debtor were abolished and it was no longer possible to sell these rights in the 67 villages.
The respondent Bank made an application before the executing court that as the Zamindari rights could not be sold, only such rights of the judgment debtor as remained in him after coming into force of the Act might be sold along with certain other rights.
Objections were taken and finally the matter came up by appeal to the High Court and it, inter alia, upheld the view of the executing court that the execution could proceed against the Bhumidari rights created in favour of the appellant under section 18 of the Act.
The question was whether the Bhumidari rights created under section 18 of the Act could also be sold in execution of the decree in view of the fact that the proprietary rights bad vested in the State.
Held, that the intention of the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act was to vest the proprietary rights in the Sir and Khudkast land and grove land in the Estate by virtue of section 6(a)(i) and resettle it on the intermediary not as compensation but by virtue of his cultivatory possession of lands comprised therein and on a new tenure and confer upon the intermediary a new and special right of Bhumidari, which he Dever had before, by section 18 of the Act.
The proprietary rights in Sir, Khudkast land and grove land which were mortgaged were extinguished, and the Bhumidari right which was altogether a new right could not be con sidered to be included under the mortgage.
442 The mortgagee could only enforce his rights against the mortgagor in the manner as provided by section 6(h) of the Act read with section 73 of the Transfer of Property Act and follow the compensation money; and so far as the Sir, Khudkast land and grove land were concerned, he could not enforce his rights under the mortgage by the sale of the Bhumidari rights created in favour of the mortgagor against them as a substituted security.
In the instant case the Bhumidari rights created in favour of the appellant could not be sold in execution of the decree held against him by the respondent under the mortgage Of 1914.
