This appeal was directed against an order of the Madras High Court issuing a writ of mandamus at the instance of the respondent restraining the appellants from giving effect to two circulars issued by the Railway Board reserving selection posts in Class III of the Railway service in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with retrospective operation.
It was urged on behalf of the respondent that the Constitution made a clear distinction between backward classes on the one hand and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes on the other, and that article 16(4) applied only to reservation of posts at the stage of appointment and not to posts for promotions after appointment and, therefore, the circulars which fell 587 outside the scope of article i6(4) and contravened article i6(1).
This was denied by the appellant who pleaded the contrary.
The first circular, inter alia, prescribed a quota of reservation for( selection posts and gave retrospective effect to it and the second ' gave guidance and directions as to how the first should be implemented.
A subsequent clarification issued by the Board stated that no reversion of staff already promoted to selection posts was contemplated.
The High Court held that the expression "backward classes" in article 16(4) included members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, but that the word ,appointments ' did not denote promotion and the word 'posts ' meant posts outside the civil services and thus the impugned circulars were not covered by article i6(4) and were ultra vires.
Held, (per Gajendragadkar, Sarkar, and Das Gupta, JJ.), that the impugned circulars were well within the ambit of article 16(4) Of the Constitution and the appeal must succeed.
Articles 16(i) and 16(2) of the Constitution are intended to give effect to article 14 and article 15(1) Of the Constitution and these Articles form parts of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
Article 16(i) should, therefore, be construed in a broad and general, and not pedantic and technical way.
So construed, "matters relating to employment" cannot mean merely matters prior to the act of appointment nor can 'appointment to any office ' mean merely the initial appointment but must include all matters relating to employment, whether prior or subsequent to the employment, that are either incidental to such employment or form part of its terms and conditions and also include promotion to a selection post.
Although Art.16(4), which in substance is an exception to articles 16(1) and 16(2) and should, therefore, be strictly construed, the court cannot in construing it overlook the extreme solicitude shown by the Constitution for the advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.
The scope of article 16(4), though not as extensive as that of article 16(1) and (2), and some of the matters relating to employment such as salary, increment, gratuity, pension and the age of superannuation, must fall outside its non obstante clause, there can be no doubt that it must include appointments and posts in the services.
To put a narrower construction on the word 'posts ' would be to defeat the object and the underlying policy ' Article 16(4), therefore, authorises the state to provide for the reservation of appointments as well as selection posts.
It is not correct to say that the legislative history of the word 'posts ' shows that it has invariably been used to mean posts outside the services, Neither the relevant provisions of the Constitution nor those of the Constitution Act of 1935 justify such a conclusion.
It is the context in which that word is used that must determine its meaning.
588 But in exercising its powers under the Article it should be the duty of the State to harmonise the claims of the backward classes and those of the other employees consistently with the maintenance of an efficient administration as contemplated by article 335 of the Constitution.
Per Wanchoo, J. Article 16(4) which is in the nature of an exception or proviso to article 16(1) cannot be allowed to nullify equality of opportunity guaranteed to all citizens by that Article.
Article 16(4) implies, as borne out by article 335, that the reservation of appointments or posts for backward classes cannot cover all or even a majority of appointments and posts and the words "not adequately represented", which provide the key to the interpretation of article 16(4), do not convey any idea of quality but mean sufficiency of numerical representation in a particular service, taken not by its grades, but as a whole.
Appointments must, therefore, mean initial appointments, and reservation of appointments, the reservation of a percentage of initial appointments.
Posts refer to the total number of posts in the service and reservation of posts means reservation of a certain percentage of posts out of total posts in the service.
Per Ayyangar, J. Article 16(4), concerned as it is with the right to State employment, has to be read and construed in the light of other provisions relating to services contained in Part XIV of the Constitution and, particularly, article 335.
So construed, the word "post" in that Article must mean posts not in the services but posts outside the services.
Assuming that was not so, and the word 'posts ' meant posts in the services, the inadequacy of representation sought to be redressed by article 16(4) means quantitative deficiency of representation in a particular service as a whole and not in its grades taken separately, nor in respect of each single post in the service.
Read in the light of article 335, article 16(4) can only refer to appointments to the services at the initial stage and not at different stages after the appointment has taken place.
Article 16(4) contemplates prospective reservation of appointments and posts and does not authorise retrospective reservation.
