The Supply and Prices of Goods Act, 1950, made provisions for the control of prices, supply and distribution of certain goods essential to the national economy.
Section 4(1)(c) empowers the Central Government to fix the maximum quantity of such goods which may be sold to any person in one transaction.
Sect ion 4(2)(a) provides that the maximum quantities may be fixed for the same goods differently in different localities or for different classes of dealers or producers.
Section 5(1)(c) provides that no dealer or producer shall sell or agree to sell or offer for sale goods exceeding the maximum fixed under section 4.
The Central Government issued a notification prohibiting dealers and producers from selling any non ferrous metal exceeding one ton except upon a declaration by the purchaser that the quantity did not exceed his requirements for three months.
The appellant entered into an agreement to sell to the respondent 300 tons of zinc.
The respondent did not take the entire quantity and the appellant filed a suit for damages for breach of contract.
The respondent resisted the suit on the ground that the agreement was void as it offended section 5(1)(c) of the Act.
The appellant contended that the notification was invalid as only an immutable arithmetical maximum could have been fixed for each non fer rous metal but the notification did not do so and also as it did not fix the maximum by reference to difference classes of dealers and producers according to section 4(2)(a).
It was further contended that the notification applied only to a sale and not to an agreement to sell and as such the agreement did not off end section 52(1)(c).
Held, that the notification was perfectly valid and that agreement was void as it offended section 5(1)(c) of the Act.
Section 4(1)(c) did not require the fixing of an immutable arithmetical maximum as a large number of goods were intended to be covered by the Act which would be required by different classes of persons under a variety of circumstances.
Section 4(2)(a) was merely an enabling provision and did not oblige the Government to fix the maximum differently for different classes of dealers and producers; section 4(z)(a) was not a proviso to section 4(1)(c).
Once the maximum was fixed, then by the combined operation of section 4(1)(c) and section 5(1)(c) an agreement to sell or an offer to sell such goods in excess of the maximum was immediately hit, 627
