The respondent passed an order under section 99A of the Code of Criminal Procedure forfeiting two books written by the appellant as in its opinion they contained matter the publication of which was punishable under section 153A and 295A of the Indian Penal Code.
The order did not state the grounds on which the respondent had formed this opinion as was required by section 99A.
The appellant applied to the High Court under section 99B of the Code to set aside the order.
Section 99D of the Code provided that the High Court shall set aside the order of forfeiture if it was not satisfied that the book contained seditious or other matter of such a nature as was referred to in sub section
(1) of section 99A.
The High Court was of the view that it could not set aside the order under section 99D for the reason that the order did not set out the grounds on which the Government had formed its opinion and that its duty was only to see whether the books in fact came within the mischief of the offence charged.
Upon examining the books for itself the High Court came to the conclusion that their contents were obnoxious and highly objectionable and dismissed the application.
Held (Per Gajendragadkar, Sarkar, Wanchoo and Ayyangar, jj.
Das Gupta, J. contra) that on the failure of the respondent to set out the grounds of its opinion as required by section 99A of the Code the High Court should have set aside the order under section 99D.
It is the duty of the High Court under that section to set aside the order of forfeiture if it is not satisfied that the grounds on which the Government formed its opinion could justify that opinion.
Where no grounds of its opinion are given at all the High Court must set aside the order for it cannot then be satisfied that the grounds given by the Government justified the order.
Arun Ranjan Ghose vs State of West Benaal, (1955) 59 C.W.N. 495, approved.
Premi Khem Rai vs Chief Secretary, A.I.R. (1951) Raj.
II3, N. Veerabrahmam vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. (1959) A. Pr.
572 and Baba Khalil Ahmed vs State of U. P., A.I.R. (1960) All. 715, disapproved.
488 Per Das Gupta, J. The High Court had no power to set aside the order on the ground of failure of the Government to set out the grounds of its opinion in the order.
The duty cast on the High Court is not to see whether the grounds stated by the Government for forming its opinion are correct but to see whether the opinion formed is correct; this can only be done by examining the books.
Section 99B has limited the grounds on which relief can be asked for to one and one only, viz., that the books do not contain any objectionable matter.
It was not permissible for courts to add to that ground.
Baijnath vs Emperor A.I.R. (1925) All. 195, Premi Khem Raj vs Chief Secretary, A.I.R. (1951) Raj. 113, N. Veerabrahmam vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I. R. 1959 A. Pr.
572 and Baba Khalil Ahmed vs State of U. P., A.I.R. (1960) All. 715, approved.
Arun Ranjan Ghose vs The State of West Bengal, , disapproved.
