Certain amounts collected by the appellants as sales tax were included in their turnover by the sales tax authorities.
They contested the constitutional validity of the Madras General Sales (Definition of Turnover and Validation of Assessments) Act, 1954, on the ground inter alia that the Sate Legislature went beyond its legislative competence under entry 54 of List If of the Constitution in enacting by the impugned Act that the amounts collected by the dealer by way of tax shall be deemed to have formed part of his turnover.
Held, that entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution is similar to entry 48 of List 11 of Sch.
Vil of the Government of India Act, 1935 sales under which have been held to be transactions passing title to the Goods from the seller to the buyer and that a mere executory agreement was not a sale within the meaning of that entry.
The same meaning must be given to entry 54.
571 State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerly & Co., Ltd., ; and Sales Tax Officer vs M/s. Budh Prakash jai Prakash; , , referred to.
Under sections 2(i) and 2(h) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, the expression "turnover" means the aggregate amount for which goods are sold either for cash or deferred payment or other Valuable consideration, and when a sale attracts purchase tax which is passed on to the consumer what the buyer has to pay includes the tax and the aggregate amount to be paid would fall under the definition of turnover.
When the seller passes on the tax and the buyer agrees to pay sales tax in addition to the price, the tax is really part of the entitle considerations.
Papreka Ltd. vs Board of Trade, , Love vs Norman Wright (Builders) Ltd., , followed.
Asoka Marketing Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, [1959] IO S.T.C. 110 and Tata Iron and Steel Co. vs The State of Bihar, ; , referred to.
Although section 8B of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939 and the Turnover and Assessment Rules separately mentioned the amounts collected as tax for the purpose of paying such amounts to the Government, no immutable distinction was drawn between the sale price and the tax nor was any such distinction maintained under section 2 of the impugned Act.
Assuming that such a distinction did exist the Legislature was competent to enact under entry 54 in List II of the Constitution that the tax shall be deemed to have formed part of the turnover and obliterate the distinction for the limited period during which the impugned Act operated.
The impugned Act was therefore valid.
The Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs M. Kyishna swami Mudaliar, [1954] 5 S.T.C. 88, held not applicable.
Sri Sundararajan & Co. vs The State of Madras, [1956] 7 S.T.C. 105, approved.
The Government of Andhya vs East India Commercial Co., Ltd., [1957] 8 S.T.C. 114 and Bengal Immunity Co., Ltd. vs State Of Bihar,[1955] 2 S.C.R. 603, referred to.
