The appellant was tried for an offence under section 302 Indian Penal Code for the murder of his wife.
The evidence consisted mainly of the uncorroborated dying declaration of the wife.
The Sessions judge accepted the evidence but convicted the appellant under section 304 Part 1 Indian Penal Code.
On appeal by the State the High Court convicted the appellant of an offence under section 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to death.
The appellant contended that he had a right of appeal to the Supreme Court under article 134 (1) (a) of the Constitution and that his conviction was bad.
Held, that the appellant had a right of appeal to the Supreme Court under article 134 (1) (a) of the Constitution.
The conviction of the appellant under section 304 Part 1 of the Indian Penal Code by the Sessions judge amounted to an acquittal of the offence under section 302 and the High Court had reversed this order of acquittal and sentenced the appellant to death.
The word "acquittal" in article 134 (1) (a) did not mean that the trial must have ended in a complete acquittal of the charge, but acquittal of the offence charged and conviction for a minor offence was included in the word "acquittal".
Kishan Singh vs The King Emperor, (1928) L. R. 55, I.A. 390 relied on.
Per Kapur, Subba Rao and Shah, JJ.
The appellant was rightly convicted and sentenced by the High Court.
it was legal to found a conviction on the uncorroborated dying declaration.
The dying declarations had been accepted both by the Sessions judge and by the High Court and there was nothing in the evidence on the record which detracted from the findings of those courts in regard to the correctness or the propriety of this dying declaration.
776 Khushal Rao vs The State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
Per Hidayatullah and Dayal, JJ.
In an appeal under article 134 (1) (a) of ' the Constitution the Supreme Court assessed afresh the evidence on record and did not follow the practice in appeals by special Leave under article 136 that concurrent findings of the Courts below could be interfered with.
only when special circumstances existed.
In the circumstances of the present case it was not safe to rely on the dying declaration and the appellant was entitled to be acquitted.
