The appellant who was a jagirdar in the former Hyderabad State was assessed to income tax and super tax for the assessment years, 1337 Fasli and 1358 Fasli, corresponding to the years, 1948 49 and 1949 50, under the provisions of the Hyderabad Income tax Act, 1357 Fasli, which was passed by the Hyderabad Legislative Assembly and came into force on Azur 1, 1357 Fasli.
The appellant challenged the validity of the assessment on the grounds(1) that under the Hyderabad Legislative Assembly Ain the Assembly was prohibited from introducing bills which dealt with laws affecting the relations between the holders of jagirs on the one hand and the Nizam on the other, that the provisions of the Act in so far as they seemed to levy a tax on jagirs amounted to an encroachment upon the relations between the jagirdars and the Nizam, and that the bill introduced in contravention of the Ain was, void ab initio, even though it had been assented to by the Nizam, (2)that the Act could not affect, in any case, the income for the account year 1356 Fasli, corresponding to the assessment year 1357 Fasli, because the Act came into ' force only from Aur 1,1357 Fasli, and (3) that the Income tax Officer erred in disallowing the claim for deduction of the amount spent on account of maintenance of elephants, stables, drummers,, bodyguards, etc., in connection with management of the jagir Estate, and in treating the amount as personal expenditure.
Held, (1) that the Hyderabad Income tax Act, 1357 Fasli, did not affect the relations between the holders of Jagirs and the Nizam, and that even if it could be said to affect indirectly these relations, the Act having been passed with the assent of the Nizam, was valid, and the question whether it could be introduced in the Legislative Assembly did not arise as it must be regarded as a law emanating from the Nizam, the supreme legislator in the State, whose laws promulgated in any manner binding upon the subject,.
849 Ameer un Nissa Begam vs Mahboob Begum, A. I. R. 1955 section C. 352, Director of Endowments, Government of Hyderabad vs Akram Ali, A. 1. R. and Madhaorao vs State of Madhya Bharat, ; , applied.
(2)that the income for the 1356 Fasli was rightly assessed tinder the provisions of the Act for the assessment year 1357 Fasli.
Union of India vs Madan Gopal Kabra, ; and Rajputana Mining Agencies Ltd. vs The Union of India, ; , followed.
(3)that the maintenance of elephants, stables, drummers, and bodyguards by the jagirdar was not entirely for his personal or private ends but must be considered part and parcel of the administration of the estate, and the expenditure for such maintenance must be regarded as one incurred in connection with land and its administration within the meaning of section 14(5)(a) of the Act.
It was accordingly deductible for purposes of income tax.
