The respondents, a joint Hindu family and evacuees from Pakistan, were allotted certain lands by the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
A draft scheme for consolidation of holdings was framed and published by the Consolidation Officer in pursuance of a notification by the State Government under section 14 of the East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948.
The scheme under the directions of the State Government and contrary to the Act substituted lands of a lesser value for those already allotted to the respondents.
Objections filed by the respondents were rejected by the Consolidation Officer and the scheme was confirmed by the Settlement Commissioner.
Before the confirmation, the Central Govern ment by a notification under section 12 of the , acquired all evacuee properties and after the said confirmation issued a sand conferring proprietary rights of the said lands on the respondents.
The respondents bad moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution before the issue of the sanad but the matter was finally disposed of by the High Court thereafter by setting aside the said scheme and directing the Consolidation Officer to dispose of the matter according to law.
Held, that the notification issued by the Central Government under section 12 of the , did not put an end to the rights the respondents had in the lands originally allotted to them by the Custodian and they had the right to move the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
Sections 10 and 12 of the said Act read with r. 14(6) of the Rules framed under the , made it amply clear that the respondents held a quasi permanent tenure in the said lands and as such had a valuable right therein.
Such right continued while they remained in possession and the lands remained vested in the Central Government and with the grant of the sanad the limited right they had in the lands became a full fledged right of property.
Amar Singh vs Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab, [1957] S.C.R. 801, referred to.
The East Punjab Holdings (Consolidation and Prevention of Fragmentation) Act, 1948, did not empower the Consolidation Officer to take away an allottee 's lands without giving him other lands of equal value or paying compensation nor did the Act empower the State Government either to do so in any way or to direct the Consolidation Officer as to how he should exercise his powers thereunder.
Since, in the instant case, the respondents ' lands had admittedly been substituted by lands of less value and no compensation had been paid to them, the High Court was right in setting aside the order confirming the scheme. 713
