The appellants applied to the Rent Controller for fixation of fair and standard rent of certain shops and other premises alleging that the rent charged by the landlords was exorbitant.
The questions arising for determination were (1) whether the Delhi and Ajmer Marwara Rent Control Act, 1947 in so far as it provided for the fixation of standard rent in respect of premises the construction of which was completed after March 24, 1947 by the Rent Controller violated the fundamental right guaranteed under article 14 of the Constitution; and (2) whether the procedure to be followed by the Rent Controller 'violated the principles of natural justice.
Held, that section 7A and the relevant provision , of Sch.
IV of the Act laying down the procedure for fixing standard rent by the Rent Controller are not unconstitutional and do not violate article 14 of the Constitution.
The classification between premises the construction of which was completed before March 24, 1947 when the Act came into force and those which were completed thereafter, is reasonable, and the criteria for the fixation of standard rent for both old and new buildings under the Act were not substantially different.
The procedure laid down under those provisions does not violate the principles of natural justice.
The power given to the Rent Controller is not arbitraly and he has to exercise it on a judicial consideration of all the circumstances of the case.
948 G.D. Soni vs section N. Bhalla, A.I.R. 1959 Punj.
381 approved.
New Prakash Transport, Co. Ltd. vs New Suwarna Transport Co. Ltd., , Union of India vs T.R. Verma (1958) S.C.R. 499 followed.
In the instant case ample opportunity was given to the landlord for producing all relevant evidence in the case which he did not avail himself of.
It was not necessary under para 2, Sch.
TV, to have two enquiries one for ascertaining whether there were good reasons for believing that the rent charged was exorbitant and another for fixing the standard rent.
The proceedings before the Rent Controller were not vitiated merely because standard rent of certain vacant shops was also.
, fixed in the process of fixing the standard rent for the entire building in which those shops were situated; that would not affect the legality of the fixation of the rent for the shops which had been let out to tenants.
