In execution of a decree obtained on a mortgage a vil lage owned by the mortgagor which was included in the mort gage was sold by the court on the 6th July 1935 and it was purhased by the mortgagee.
An application by the mortgagor under 0 .XXI,.r. 90, C.P.C., for setting aside the sale for irregulrities was dismissed, the sale was confirmed and full satisifiction of the decree was recorded, on the 6th March 1943.
A few days afterwards the mortgagor and his adopted son made an application under section 19 of the Madras Agricul turists ' Relief Act, 1938, praying for relief under the Act, and, as this application also was dismissed they preferred two appeals, one from the order dismissing this application and the other against the order of 6th March 1943 refusing to set aside the sale.
The High Court of Madras held that, as the mortgagor 's village had been sold he did not come within the purview of el.
(i)) of the proviso to 6. 3 of the Madras Agriculturists ' Relief Act and so he was entitled to claim relief under the Act and the debt stood discharged under the provision of the Act, but the Bale was not liable to be set aside; and in accordance with this judgment the decree holder was directed to pay the amount for which the property had been sold with interest thereon: ' Held per FAZL ALl and MUKHERJEA JJ. (i)that the conclu sions arrived at by the High Court were self contradictory because if the sale was effective on the date it was held or confirmed, the decree was also satisfied on that date and the judgementdebtors were no longer entitled to invoke the provisions of the Act; (ii) that the High Court was not justified in law in deciding the appeal on the footing that the judgment debtors ceased to be owners of the village from the date of sale and on that account were not hit by cl.
(D) of the proviso to section 3 of the Act inasmuch as when an appeal is preferred from an order rejecting an application under O.XXI, r. 90, C.P.C., to set aside an execution sale, the sale does not become absolute until the matter is finally decided by the appellate court.
807 Per CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR J.
After the execution sale in 1935 the only interest which the judgment debtors had in the village was to have the sale set aside under the relevant provisions of the Civil Procedure Code and this interest, not being an interest contemplated by section 3 (ii) (a) & (b) and section 19 (1) of the Act, they were not "agriculturists" and were not entitled to any relief under the Act.
Held also, per FAlL ALl and MUKHERJEA JJ.
A person does not cease to be a land holder of an estate within the mean ing of cl.
(D) to the proviso to section 3 of the Act merely because the estate is placed in the hands of a receiver.
Bhawani Kunwar vs Mathura Prasad Singh (I.L.R. 40 Cal.
89) and Chandramani Shaha vs Anarjan Bibi (I.L.R. 61 Cal. 945) referred Judgment of the Madras High Court reversed.
