By the order of the then Government the right of S, an ancestor of the respondent, to the entire parganas "Syudpore Bhettree" was resumed.
S challenged in a civil court the authority of the Government to resume his interest in the jagir.
During the pendency of the dispute, settlement proceedings were commenced and in 1832 the Settlement Officer reported that to 166 mahals of the "Syudpore Bhettree" pargana, the village zamindars had established their proprietary rights and only on 12 mahals the proprietary right of S had been established.
The dispute pending in the Civil Court was compromised, and the terms were finalised in 1838 with H, son of S (who had died in the meantime).
The terms, inter alia, were that for 214 166 mahals settled with the Zamindars, H, and his heirs in perpetuity, be paid annually a pension of 1/4th of the collections after deducting the Tehsildari charges and for 12 mahals settled with H allowance be made in the form of remission of 1/4th of the revenue assessed.
The Government under the settlement intended to give a clear fourth of the net revenue of the parganas as pension.
The allowance and/ or pension was paid through Treasury Office year after year from 1838 to H and his descendants.
In 1951 the U.P. Legislature enacted the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act 1 of 1951, and under s.6(b) of the Act the revenue authorities stopped payment of the allowance to the respondent.
The respondent claimed that by virtue of the notification issued under s.4 of the Act his right to receive pension did not cease because the pension was neither land nor immovable property nor an estate within the meaning of the Act and being merely compensation payable to him in lieu of the rights of his ancestors over the estates comprised within the pargana "Syudpore Bhettree", it was not liable to vest in the State.
Held, that the right to receive the allowance of Rs.30,612 8 0 for 166 mahals from the Government under the, arrangement was not in respect of land or its revenue; it was granted as consideration for settlement of a claim litigated in a civil court relating to that land, and could not in the absence of an express provision to that effect be called "an area included under one entry in any of the registers" described in various clauses, (a) to (d) of s.32 of the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901.
The intention of the Legislature was to extinguish estates and all derivative rights in estates and to extinguish the interest of intermediaries between the State and the tiller of the soil.
The grant of confirmation of title which is in respect of a right or privilege to land in an estate or its revenue; it must determine under cl.(b) of s.6 of the Act; but a right to receive an allowance granted in consideration of extinction of a right to land or land revenue does not by the force of cl.
(b) determine.
The allowance has not the quality of land or land revenue; its quantum only was measured by equating it with a fourth share in the net revenue of a part of land which was the subject matter of the suit in which arrangement for payment of the allowance was made.
A person receiving an allowance from the State in consideration "of extinction of a right to land or land revenue is not a proprietor who is an assignee of land revenue," and in particular if his name is not entered in the revenue record under cls.(a) to (d) of s.32 of the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901, the provisions relating to computation of gross and net assets will not apply to him.
The Act does not intend to extinguish the right to receive allowance granted in 21 considerations of extinction of right to land or land revenue by the operation of s.6(b) of the Act 1 of 1951.
Held, further, that the respondent was a proprietor of the 12 mahals, of the "Syudpore Bhettree" Parganas.
The said 12 mahals were an "estate" within the meaning of s.3(8) of the Act and by section 4 the right of the respondent in that estate stood vested in and transferred to the State.
The right of the respondent in the 12 mahals having ceased, the right of remission could not be converted into a positive right to receive the amount thereof.
