The question for determination in the appeal was whether the wakf in question should be assessed to tax under s.41 (1) of the Indian Income tax Act.
1922, through the manager as individual or as an association of persons at the maximum rate under the first proviso to that section on the ground that the individual shares of the beneficiaries were indeterminate and unknown.
The wakf deed directed the mutawalli to do acts necessary for charitable purposes and to meet the maintenance expenses of the wakif 's children, grand children, the female children born in the future and the male children born to the said female children and after payment of taxes and meeting of expenses for repairs,and maintenance of properties, to utilise the balance of the income for daily necessary expenses of the house and for food for purchasing dresses and other necessities for the and female members of the tarwad.
for conducting specified ceremonies, for feeding the poor and for.
meeting such.
other then necessary expenses and thereafter to utilise the balance, if any, in acquiring properties yielding good income.
138 Held that under the terms of the wakf deed the individual shares of the beneficiaries were indeterminate within the meaning of the first proviso to s.41 (1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, and as such the assessee was liable to pay income tax thereunder at the maximum rate.
It was not correct in view of ss.3 and 4 of the , to say that under the wakf deed the property vested in the Almighty and the Mutawalli did not therefore, receive the income on behalf of any person within the meaning of s.41 (1) of the Indian Income Tax Act and as such the proviso could not come into operation.
Under the Mahomedan law wakf property vests in the Almighty only in an ideal sense and the Mutawalli, acting in his name, utilises the income for the advantage of the beneficiaries.
The words "on behalf of any person" in s.41 of ' the Act, therefore, could only mean on behalf of the beneficiaries and not on behalf of the Almighty.
Jewun Doss Sahoo vs Shah Kubeer ood deen, (1 841) 2 M.I. A. 390, referred to.
Held, further, that there was no scope for importing the Mahomedan Law of wakf in s.41 of the Act since that section in express terms treated the Mutawalli as a trustee though he is not one in the technical sense under the Mohamedan Law.
