The appellant and another were prosecuted ' for offences under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The trial commenced before the special judge who heard the evidence but before he could deliver judgment was transferred and was succeeded by another special judge.
The latter did not recall the witnesses and did not hear the evidence over again, but proceeded with the trial without any objection from either side from the stage at which his predecessor had left.
He convicted both the accused.
On appeal, the Punjab High Court held that section 350 Criminal procedure Code applied to the trial before a special judge in view of section 8(1) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, and the succeeding special judge was entitled to proceed on the evidence recorded by his predecessor.
The controversy is whether section 330 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is applicable to a special judge under sub s.(1) ,of section 8 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, though it is not applicable under sub section
(3) of the Act.
Therefore the question is what is meant by the words "The procedure prescribed by the court. for the trial of warrant cases by magistrate" in sub s.(1) of section 8 of the Act, and whether section 350 of the Code prescribe one of the rules of such procedure.
The Act was since amended and therein it is expressly provided that s.350 of the Code applies to the proceedings before a special judge.
The amendment does not govern the present proceeding as the impugned part of the proceedings was concluded before the amendment.
Held, that the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, did not intend that section 350 of the Criminal Procedure Code would be available as a rule of procedure prescribed for the trials of warrant cases, to a special judge as the special Judge was not a magistrate for the purpose of the Act not did the Act require before the amendment that he was to be deemed to be such.
329 The Act in using the words "procedure prescribed by the Code. for the trial of warrant cases by magistrate" meant only the sections 251 to 259 of the Criminal Procedure Code as expressly referred in the code as containing the procedure St specified for the trials of warrant cases by magistrate and did not contemplate section 350 of the Code as a procedure so prescribed.
Held, further, that where in a case there is want of competency and not a mere irregularity, section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure has no application.
It cannot be called in aid to make what was incompetent, competent.
Held, also, that it is the right of an accused person that his case should be decided by a judge who has heard the whole of it and that very clear words would be necessary to take away such an important and well established right.
In the present case the succeeding special judge had no authority under the law to proceed with the trial of the case from the stage at which hi , predecessor in office left it, and the conviction of the appellant cannot be supported as he had not heard the evidence in the case himself.
The proceeding before the succeeding special judge were clearly incompetent.
There has been no proper trial of the case and there should be one.
In re Vaidyanatha Iyer, (1954) 1 M. I,.
cable.
Pulukuri Kotayya vs King Emperor, (1947) L. R. 74 I A. 65 and Kimbray vs Dapper, , referred to In re Fernandez.
(1958) 11 M. L. J. 294, approved,.
