Section 34 A of the Banking Companies Act, 1949, introduced in 1960, provides that no banking company shall be compelled to produce or give inspection of its books of account or other document or furnish or disclose any statement or in formation which the company claims to be of a confidential nature and the production etc., of which would involve dis closure of information relating to any reserves not shown as such in its published balance sheet or any 'particulars not shown therein in respect of provisions made for bad and doubtful debts and other usual or necessary provisions.
Sub section (2) of section 34 A provides that any authority, before whom the question as to whether any amount out of such reserves or provisions should be taken into account, may refer the question to the Reserve Bank and the Reserve Bank shall furnish to the authority a certificate stating that the authority shall or shall not take into account the amount specified therein.
Sub section (3) makes section 34 A applicable to only such banking companies whose operations extend beyond one State.
The Appellant contended 270 that section 34 A contravened the fundamental right guaranteed to trade unions by Art 19(1)(c) of the Constitution as it prevented them from effectively exercising the concomitant right of collective bargaining in respect of wages, bonus etc.
before industrial Tribunals by shutting out important and relevant evidence and that the section violated article 14 of the Constitution as it was not made applicable to all the banking companies.
Held, that section 34 A of the.
Banking Companies Act, 1949, was constitutionally valid and did not and either article 19(1)(c) or article 14 of the Constitution.
The right guaranteed by article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution does not carry with it a concomitant right that unions formed for protecting the interests of labour shall achieve their object such that any interference to such achievement by any law would be unconstitutional unless it could be justified,under article 19(4) as being in the ' interests of Public order or morality.
The right under article 19(1)(c) extends only to the formation of an association or union and insofar as the activities of the association or union are concerned or as regards the steps which the union might take to achieve, its object, they are subject to such laws as, may be framed and such laws cannot be, tested under article 19(4).
Section 34 A was, enacted to effect a i.e conciliation between the conflicting interest of labour to obtain proper relief in industrial arbitration and tire need to preserved and maintain the delicate fabric of the credit structure of the country by strengthening the as well as the apparent credit worthiness of banks operating in the country.
It preserved industrial adjudication in respect of disputes between the banks and their employees by entrusting the duty of determining the surplus reserve which could be taken into account as a part of the assets for determining their capacity to pay to the Reserve Bank.
Ramesh Thappar vs State of Madras ; Express Newspapers (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, , Be.
The Kerala Education Bill, (1959) S.C.R. 995, National Association for the advancement of coloured people vs Alabama, 2 Law.
Second 1488, Bates vs Little Rock, 4 Law Ed.
Second 480,.
National Labour Relations Board vs Jones & Lauqhlin Steel Corporation, ; and Amalgamated Utility Workers vs Consolidated Edison Company of New York, ; , referred to.
Though there were certain banks which were not entitled to the protection of section 34 A that was no ground for holding that the section offended article 14.
The complaint was not made by the banks who were not given the protection.
Admittedly, 95% of the banking business in the country was in the hands of 271 banks to whom section 34 A applied and.
they employed 80,000 out of the 90,000 bank employees.
The injury to the credit, structure will only be by the disclosure of the reserve etc. ' of the banks of this class and there is sufficient rational connection and basis for the classification to justify the differentiation.
The exclusion of the Reserve Bank from the operation of section 34 A (2) also does not amount to discrimination; in the very nature of things and on the scheme of the provision the reserve Bank could not but be excluded.
