The appellant was the President of a Municipal Committee.
A written notice of the intention to move a motion of no confidence in the President signed by nine members of the Board was delivered to the District Magistrate under section 87 A sub section
(2)of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916.
The District Magistrate duly convened a meeting of the Board, but before the date of the meeting the appellant moved a writ petition in the High Court and questioned the validity of the notice.
The writ petition was dismissed in limine inter alia as being premature.
The Meeting of the Board.
was held on the due date and all the members present, voted for the motion of no confidence and the Munsif of the area who had presided declared the motion to have been carried.
The appellant by his second writ petition before" the High Court desired that the 719 proceeding of the meeting be quashed and the resolution ex pressing no confidence in the appellant be not given effect to, by the State and the District Magistrate, for the reason that two of the members of the Board who had signed the notice and subsequently taken part in the proceedings of the meeting and voted, had 'incurred disqualification under section 13 D (g) of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, inasmuch as they were in arrears in the payment of municipal tax and other dues to which section 166 of the Act applied.
Held, that an order, dismissing a writ petition in limine not on merits but for the reason that it was premature.
could not operate as res judicata in subsequent proceedings.
does not automatically come under suspension, or lose his rights to take part in the proceeding of the Board, or perform the duties of a member or cease to be a member of the Board merely on his incurring any of the disqualification mentioned in section 13 D of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916.
A member of the Municipal Board, merely, by incurring the disqualification under cl.
(g) of section 13 D of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, was not incompetent to exercise his rights as a member of the Board.
Election Commission, India vs Saka Venkata Subba Rao, ; , referred to.
