The conveyance in suit was the result of a collusive plan between respondent 1 and respondent 2 to defraud the latter 's creditors.
The agreement was that respondent 1 was to act as the benamidar for respondent 2 and his sons, the appellants.
The fraud succeeded and the creditors of respondent 2 were in fact defrauded.
Thereafter respondent 1 brought the present suit for declaration of title and recovery of possession against respondent 2 and the appellants on the basis or the conveyance.
The latter resisted the suit on the ground that the conveyance was fraudulent, unsupported by consideration and passed no title.
The High Court in second appeal held that the appellants and respondent 2 were estopped from pleading fraud in the suit and decreed the same.
The question was whether the view taken by the High Court was correct and the ostensible owner was entitled to a decree.
Held, that there could be no question of estoppel in a case where both the parties were guilty of fraud.
740 Where in a case, such as the present, one of the confederates in fraud seeks a, decree on a conveyance that resulted from such faud and the other takes plea 'of fraud in defence, the matter has to be decided on considerations of public policy.
Since one of the parties must succeed in any event, the proper approach for the Court to adopt would be the one that was less injurious to public interest, namely, to allow the plea of fraud to be raised in defence and, if upheld, allow the properties to remain where they were, than to decree a suit based on a fraudulent claim.
It could make no difference in such a case if the suit was based on a deed of conveyance and not a contract.
Vodiana Kamayya vs Oudisa Kamayya, (1917) 32 M.J.J. 484, Kepula Kotayyar Naidu vs Chitrapur Mahalakshmama, Mad. 646 and Mutho K.B.A.R.P.L. Arunachalam Chettiar vs Rangaswamy Chettiar, Mad. 289, disapproved.
Berg vs Sadler and Moore, , T. P. Petherperumal Chetty vs B. Muniandi Servai, (1908) L.R. 35 I.A. 98 and Holman vs Johnson, (1775) 1 Cowper, 34 1, referred to.
Deo, Dem.
Roberts against Roberts, Widow, (1819) 106 E. R. 401, considered.
Case law reviewed.
Section 84 of the is not exhaustive in its provisions and since the present case falls outside of that section, it has to be decided on considerations of general policy.
