The petitioners were working as Dalals at New Customs 109 House, Bombay, under licences issued under section 202 of the Sea Customs Act, 1 878.
In 1955 by an amending Act, section 202 was substituted by another section and, by sub s.(1) of section 202 it was enacted : "no person shall act as an agent for the transaction of any business relating to the entrance or clearance of vessel or the import or export of goods or baggage in any custom house unless such person hold '$ a licence granted in this behalf in accordance with the rules made under sub section (2) ".
By sub section
(2) the Chief Customs authority was empowered to make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the section.
Section 4 provided that "when any person was . authorised by the owner of the goods to be his agent in respect of such goods for all or any of the purpose, of thisAct. such person shall for such purposes be deemed to be the owner of such goods".
The petitioners who, after the enactment of the news.202, had to apply for licences to be granted in accordance with 'the rules framed under sub s(2), challenged the validity of certain of the rules on the ground that they contravened articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India and also that they were in excess of the rule making power conferred by s.202 (2).
In particular, they questioned power validity or r. 12 under which inter alia the agent was required to enter into a bond in Form C by which he was made liable for short collection of customs duty under section 39 and also to furnish security which might be increased or decreased by the Customs collector.
Held : (1) that the rules in question though they were headed as framed under section 202 of the , cannot be impugned on the ground that some of them go beyond the special purposes of that section and seek to further some of the general purposes of other parts of the Act, since the Chief Customs authority is also empowered under section 9 of the Act to make.
rules consistent with the Act "generally to carry out the provisions of the Act." (2) that rr. 4 and 8 under which the Customs collector could limit the number of licences to be granted at the Customs House and applications could only be made if the Customscollector published a notice inviting applications, do not contravene article 19 of the Constitution, as they are only designed to advance public interest.
(3) that rr. 6(a) and 6(b) which require the applicant, to furnish to the Custom 's collector satisfactory evidence as to his respectability, reliability and financial status and that he would be in a position to muster sufficient clientel, 110 and business in the event of his being granted the licencee, are reasonable restrictions within the meaning of article 19(6) and are valid.
(4) that cl.
(p) of r. 9(2) whicn requires the licensee to have a working knowledge of the procedure in the matter of refund of claims, appeals and revision petitions under the , is valid, since it is necessary where an, agent handles goods of the principal.
(5) that r. 10 (1)(c) which gives the Customs collector a wide discretion to reject an application for the grant of a licence, if he considers the applicant to be not suitable, is an unreasonable restriction upon the right of the successful candidate to carry on his avocation, and is invalid.
If a candidate is found fit under the other rules and has successfully passed the examination, he should only be rejected under a rule which requires the Customs collector to state his reasons for the rejection, and the rules must provide for an appeal against the order.
(6) that r. 11, in so far as it prescribes a renewal fee of Rs. 50,is invalid inasmuch as it has thereby provided not for a fee but for a tax to raise revenue.
It would be open to the Government to frame a rule in which the renewal fee to be charged is reasonable in the circumstances.
(7) that rr.
15(g), 15(k), 17 and 19, are designed to have a control over agents, including firms which act as agents, who stand in a fiduciary capacity both in regard to their own clients and the Government, and are valid.
(8) that r, 22 which enables the Customs collector to cance a licence for non compliance by the agent with the other rules or for misconduct on the part of the agent, which in the opinion of the Customs collector, renders him unfit to transact business in the Custom House, is within the rule.
making power of the Customs authorities and is valid.
(9) that the words "the person chargeable with the duty or charge" in section 39(1) of the.
Act are wide enough.
in their ambit to take in, not only the, real owner but also a "deemed owner" within the meaning of s.4 of the Act.
(10) that on its true construction of s.39(1) it is only the goods of the defaulting owner in respect of Which, the agent is also the deemed owner that would suffer the penalty of detention, but not the goods of a different owner, 111 even though the agent may be authorised to deal on his behalf.
(11) that r. 12 read with Form C, which makes an agent liable for short collection of customs duties under section 39, is valid and the rule is not invalid on the ground that it enables the Customs authorities to make a proper adjustment of the security to be obtained from each individual agent commensurate with the volume and type of business which he might transact.
Held, further (Subba Rao, J. dissenting,) that r. 6(c), which requires the applicant to produce an income tax clearance certificate, is connected with the enquiry into his respectability and financial status to find out if fie can be trusted with other persons ' money and goods, and is valid.
K. Raman and Co. vs State of Madras, A. I. R. 1953 Mad.
84, distinguished.
Per Subba Rao, J. Non production of an income tax clearance certificate is not germane to the issue of a licence under the Custom House Agents Licensing Rules, 1960, and the principle in K. Raman and Co. vs State of Madras, A. I.R. , is applicable.
Accordingly, r. 6(c) constitutes an unreasonable restriction on the right of an applicant to do business as Custom house agent, and is invalid.
