The Election Tribunal on the petition of the first res pondent set aside the election of the appellant holding that the appellant as a Ghatwal, was not a holder of office of profit, and t hat he was guilty of corrupt practices.
The Election Tribunal however did not entertain the first respondent 's prayer to declare him as duly elected.
The ' appellant and the first respondent, both went up in appeal to the High Court.
Appellants appeal being No ' 7 was against the order setting aside his election.
The first respondent 's appeal being No. 8 was against the order not declaring him to be duly elected.
Both the appeals were disposed of by the High Court by one judgment.
The appellant 's appeal No. 7 was dismissed holding that the appellant was not guilty of corrupt practices and that be, as a Ghatwal, held an office of profit.
The respondent 's appeal No. 8 was allowed declaring him as duly elected.
Two separate decrees were prepared in the two appeals.
The appellant filed this appeal by special leave from the order in Appeal No. 8 by the first respondent.
All the grounds of the appeal related to the finding of the High Court that the office of Ghatwal was an office of profit.
A preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the first respondent that this appeal was incompetent as barred by the principle of res judicata inasmuch as the appellant did not appeal against the order of the High Court in Appeal No. 7 whose dismissal by the High Court confirmed the order of the Election Tribunal setting aside the election of the appellant; and that it was not open to the appellant to question the correctness of the finding that he held an office of profit, which was the basis of the dismissal of appeal No. 7.
Held, that where two appeals arose out of one proceeding, but the subject matter of each, appeal was different, the 760 decision of the High Court in the appeals though stated in one judgment, really amounted to two decisions and not to one derision common to both the appeals.
The subject matter of Appeal No 7 filed by the appellant related to the question of his election being bad or good.
The subject matter on appeal No. 8 did not relate to the validity or otherwise of the election of the appellant.
It related to the further action to be taken in case the election of the appellant was bad, on the ground that ' a Ghatwal holds an office of profit.
The High Court came to two decisions, one in respect of the invalidity of the appellant 's election in appeal No. 7.
It came to another decision in appeal No. 8 with respect to the justification of the claim of the first respondent to be declared as a duly elected candidate.
That so long as the order in the appellant 's appeal No. 7 confirming the order setting aside his election on the ground that he was a holder of an off ice of profit stands, he cannot question that finding in the present appeal, preferred against the decree in the first respondent 's appeal No. 8.
Narhari vs Shankar ; , distinguished.
