The respondent was the tenant of a tract of land which formed part of a forest and continued to remain in possession thereof after the Zermindari interest of the proprietor became vested in the State Government under the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1952.
The Government notified its intention to constitute the forest a private protected forest and by a subsequent notification under section 30 of the Indian Forest Act prohibited the breaking up or cleaning the land of this and certain other "protected forests" for cultivation whereupon the employees 'of the Forest Department started interfering with the agricultural operations carried on by the respondent.
The respondent then sought the permission of the Collector to start reclamation and cultivation of this area and the Collector gave him permission to "go ahead with the work of reclamation and cultivation of this area.
" The forest officer disregarded the Collector 's order and made the respondent stop reclamation.
Ultimately the Government interfered insisting on the withdrawal of the Collector 's order.
The questions which arose for decision in this case was whether (1) the order passed by the Forest officer on the basis of rule of the Bihar Protected Forest Rules,which prohibited the cutting or removal of trees without the permission of the Forest Officer should prevail over the permission granted by the Collector under r. 8 and (2) whether the respondent 's right to the land had ceased under section 19 of the Bihar Private Forests Act.
Held, that rr. 1 to 4 apply to the cutting or removal of trees where inspite of such cutting the forest would remain a forest but those rules did not control the cutting of trees which would be necessary for clearing the land for cultivation or any other purpose which was controlled only by r. 8.
In the present cast the permission given by the Collector under r. 8 was in accordance with law and neither the Forest Officer nor the Government had any authority in law to interfere with that permission for the clearing or cultivation of the land.
The extinction of rights under section 19 of the Act could take place only after the publication of the final notification 728 under section 30 and not by a notification under the proviso thereof pending the completion of enquiries under the provisions of the Act.
