Under the powers conferred by section 8(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, the Central Government issued a notification on August 25, 1948, placing a ban on the importation of gold except with the permission of the Reserve Bank.
Section 23A of the Act, which was introduced by an amendment in 1952, provided that". the restrictions imposed by section 8(1). shall be deemed to have been imposed under section 19 of the , and all the provisions of the Act shall have effect accordingly. " Section 19 of the , enabled the Central Government, by notification, to prohibit or restrict the bringing goods of any specified description into 787 India and, by reason of other :provisions of that Act, goods imported in contravention of the notification issued under section 19 were liable to confiscation.
In 1955, the , was amended by the introduction of section 178A in that Act, which provided, inter alia that "where goods were seized, under that Act in the reasonable belief that they were smuggled goods, the burden of proving that they were not smuggled goods shall be on the person from whose possession the goods were seized.
" On June 26, 1956, N, an employee of the respondent, on alighting at the Central Station in Madras From Bombay was intercepted by a Police Head Constable and, on a search of his clothing, four blocks of gold weighing about a thousand tolas were found in his possession.
The officers of the customs department interrogated him and, finding that lie was unable to produce any record for the purchase of the gold, seized from him the blocks of gold.
N admitted that he brought the gold for the respondent and enquiries were made to verify the story narrated by him as to the source from which he obtained the gold.
Thereafter the Collector of Customs being prima facie of the view that the gold seized had been smuggled, issued notice to the respondent to show cause why the said gold should not be confiscated.
The respondent offered his explanation bat the Collector held that the respondent bad not discharged the onus of proving that the gold was not smuggled, an onus which had been cast on him by section 178A of the , and directed the confiscation of the gold under section 167(8) of that Act.
The respondent challenged the legality of the action taken by the Collector of Customs on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that section 178A of the Sea Customs Act, 1873, was consti tutionally invalid as it was an unreasonable restraint on the citizen 's rights to hold property or to do business guaranteed by article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution of India and was not saved by cls.
(5) and (6) respectively of article 19; (2) that section 178A of the Sea Customs Act which was enacted in 1955 could not be invoked in adjudicating a contravention of a notification under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act inasmuch as section 23A of the latter Act when enacted in 1952 in effect incorporated into that Act all the relevant provisions of the Sea Customs Act as they stood in ' 1952 with the result that any subsequent amendments to the Sea Customs Act could not affect section 23A; and (3) that the rule as to the burden of proof under section 178A was not attracted to the present case because the Customs Officer who effected the seizure did not, at the moment of seizure, entertain a reasonable belief that the goods seized were smuggled.
The Collector of Customs besides maintaining the legality of the order of confiscation, contended that the question raised in the case as to the constitutional 788 validity of section 178A of the Sea Customs Act was concluded by the decision in Babulal Amthalal Mehta vs The Collector of Customs, Calcutta Held: (1) that Babulal Amthalal Mehta vs The Collector of Customs, Calcutta, [1957] section C. R. II 10, was a decision as to the validity of section 178A of the Customs Act, 1878, with reference to article 14 of the Constitution of India only and that the question whether the said section was obnoxious to the rights guaranteed by article 19(1)(f) and (g) was not considered by that judgment.
(2) that the object of section 178A was the prevention and eradication of smuggling, inter alia of gold which was widely prevalent, and in view of the fact that without a Law in that form and with that amplitude smuggling might not be possible of being effectively checked, the restrictions imposed by that section being in the interests of the general public could not be held to be violative of the rights guaranteed by article 19 (1) (f) and (g), though it might operate somewhat harshly on a small section of the public.
Accordingly, section 178A does not contravene article 19(1)(f) and (g).
State of Madras vs V. G. Row, ; , Manohar Lal vs State of Punjab, ; and Ram Dhan Dass vs State of Punjab; , , relied on.
Pukhraj Champalal Jain vs D. R. Kohli, (1959) 61 Bom.
T. R. 1230, approved.
M.G. Abrol vs Amichand, (1 960) , disapproved.
Nathella Sampathu Chetty vs Collector of Customs, Madras, A. 1.
R. , reversed.
(3) that a seizure to which section 178A was applicable was merely a preliminary to the proceedings before a quasi judicial authority under section 182 and that it was only when the latter authority was, satisfied that the seizure was made "in the reasonable belief that the goods seized were goods that had been smuggled" that the rule of evidence laid down by section 178A came into operation.
(4) that the wording of section 23A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, showed that the reference in it to section 19 of the , was merely for rendering notifications under the named provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act to operate as notifications under the and that it could not have the effect of incorporating the relevant provisions of the latter Act in the Act of 1947, and that, consequently, when a notification issued under section 8(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act was deemed for ail purposes to be a notification issued under section 19 of the 789 , the contravention of the notification attracted to it each and every provision of the which was in force at the date of the notification.
The, Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance Society Ltd., (1931) L. R,.
A. 259, held inapplicable.
(5) that, in the instant case, the circumstances present at the moment when the gold was taken by the Customs Officer at the Central Station did tend to raise a reasonable suspicion that the gold seized had been obtained illicitly and that this was sufficient to constitute in the words of the statute "a reasonable belief that the goods (gold) were smuggled."
