In the present suit for possession the courts found that none of the parties had a legal title to the property in the dispute and in determining which of the parties had possessory title to the said property the trial court found that on the death of the daughter of the original owner the so called reversioners got a Kodaha (Kabuliyat) executed in their favour by two tenants of the last possessory of the property and themselves executed a cowle in their favour but the said tenants did not pay any rent to the so called reversioners.
The trial court held that,though there was a kadapa by which it might be said that the tenants who were there from before had attorned to the so called,reversioners it was a mere paper transaction as no rent was paid.
On appeal the first appellate court relying, on the Kadapa and, cowle, found that the so called reversioners got peaceful possession of the property but did not enter into the question whether any rent was paid to them by the tenants.
On, second appeal the High Court held that the real question was whether the tenants really attorned to the reversioners and as the, first appellate court did not consider whether there: was.real attornment by, payment, Of rent sent back the case to the said court for a fresh finding,on that question whereupon that court returned a finding in favour of the respondent on the question of possession.
The contention of the appellant on appeal by special leave was that the High Court had no jurisdiction in second appeal to reverse a finding of fact arrived at by the first appellate Court and as the high Court indirectly reversed that finding of fact by calling for a further finding on the question of possession the judgment, of the High Court should be set aside.
Held (per K. N. Wanchoo, K.C Das Gupta and K.J.C. Shah, JJ.) that if the so called reversioners had title in the sense that they were the next reversioners, then attornment by the Kadapa would have been sufficient but where a person in whose favour attornment had been made had no title, a mere paper attornment would not be sufficient unless there was a real attornment in the sense that the person who attorned also paid rent voluntarily or under a decree to the 911 person in whose favour the attornment was, made.
The first appellate court had merely considered the paper attornment and had not considered the evidence as to the payment of 'rent which was there and had been considered by the trial court.
The High Court was therefore, justified in calling for.
a finding on a question which was not considered by the lower appellate court.
Per Raghubar Dayal, J. Once a tenant agreed, to accept the person claiming title from the previous landlord, that amounted to attornment in favour of the new landlord and was no more dependent on the future conduct of the tenant by way of payment of rent or otherwise., Krishna Prasad Lal Singha Deo vs Baraboni Coal Concern, (1937) L. R. 64 I. A. 31 I , referred to.
There was no good reason why the possession of tenants who had attorned to a person having no, title be not considered to be, his possession in determining whether he had preferential possessory title to that of another who too had no title.
The mere, fact that certain evidence had not been closely scrutinised in other words, not scrutinised in a manner in which the second appellate court desired it to be scrutinised, could not be a ground for interference with a finding of fact in second appeal.
In the present case the Kadapal the terms of which were different from those of the old one was not a deed of attornment merely substituting the new landlord in place of the old but was a document accepting fresh.
tenancy but as the new lessors had no title to the property the ' lease executed by the created no right.
