The respondents, who were the Khadims of the tomb of Hazrat Khwaja Moin ud din Chishti of Ajmer challenged the constitutional validity of the Durgah Khwaja Saheb Act, 1955 (XXXVI of 1955) and certain specified sections by a petition filed under article 226 of the Constitution in the Rajasthan High Court.
The High Court substantially found in their favour and made a declaration that the impugned provisions of the Act were ultra vires and restrained the appellants from enforcing them.
The respondents claimed to represent the Chishti Soofies who, according to them, constituted a religious denomination or a section thereof to whom the Durgah belonged and their case was that the impugned Act had interfered with their fundamental right to manage its affairs.
Their further case was that the Nazars (off erings) of the pilgrims constituted their customary and main source of income and were their property, recognised by judicial decisions including that of the Privy Council in Syed Altaf Hussain vs Dewan Syed Ali Rasul Ali Khan, A.I.R. , that the impugned Act and its material provisions violated their fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 14, 19(1) (f) and (g), 25, 26, 30(1) and (2) and 32 of the Constitution.
It was contended that sections 4 and 5 of the Act, which provided for the setting up and composition of the Durgah Committee consisting of Hanafi Muslims none of whom might belong to the Chishtia order, infringed the rights of the.
denomination guaranteed by Art, 26(b), (c) and (d) that cl.
(v) of section 2(d) of the Act, by which all such Nazars as were received on behalf of the Durgah by the Nazim or any person authorised by him were to be included in the Durgah Endowment, infringed their fundamental right to property, that sections 11(f) and (h) which empowered the committee to determine the privileges of the Khadims and the functions and powers of the Sajjadanashin and section 13(1) which authorised the committee to make provisional interim arrangement in case the office of Sajjadanashin fell vacant, infringed 384 their fundamental rights under article 25(1), that section 14 by creating a statutory right in the Nazim or his agent.
to solicit and receive offerings on behalf of the Durgah and prohibiting the Khadims and the Sajjadanashin from doing so, violated their right to property and section 118 which provided for the enforcement of the orders of the committee as orders and decrees of a civil court violated articles 14 and 32 of the Constitution.
The past history of the Endowment for centuries showed that its management was always vested in Mutawallis appointed by the State, some of whom were Hindus, and that the pilgrims who visited the Durgah and made offering were not confined to Moslems alone but belonged to all communities.
Held, that the contentions of the respondents must be nega tived.
Although this Court has laid down what is a religious deno mination and what are matters of religion, it must not be overlooked that the protection of article 26 of the Constitution can extend only to such religious practices as were essential and integral parts of the religion and to no others.
Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, ; and Sri Venkataramana Devaru vs The State of Mysore, ; , discussed.
Assuming that the Chishti order of Soofies constituted such a denomination or section of it whom the respondents represented, it was obvious that cls.
(c) and (d) of article 26 could not create any rights which the denomination or the section never had; they could merely safeguard and guarantee the continuance of such rights which the denomination or section had.
Where right to administer properties had never vested in the denomination or had been surrendered by it or had otherwise been effectively and irretrievably lost to it, article 26, could not be successfully invoked.
In the instant case, since Chishti Soofies never had any rights of management over the Durgah Endowment for centuries since it was created, the attack on SS. 4 and 5 of the Act must fail.
Asrar Ahmed vs Durgah Committee, Ajmer, A.I.R. 1947 P.C. 1, referred to.
It was not correct to say that SS. 2(d)(v) and 14 of the impugned Act infringed article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
Those sections, properly construed, meant that offerings earmarked generally for the Durgah belonged to the Durgah and could be received only by the Nazim or his 'agent.
These offerings, as found by judicial decisions, never belonged to the respondents and the impugned sections did not affect what was found to belong to them.
Syed Altaf Hussain vs Dewan Syed Ali Rasul Ali Khan, A.I.R. , referred to.
385 There could be no doubt as to the competency of the Legis lature to regulate matters relating to the property of the Durgh by providing that the said Offerings could be solicited by the Nazim or hi,, agent.
It was, liower, not correct to say that the omission of the word explicitly ' contained in the definition in the earlier Act from the present Act enlarged the scope of the definition in any way.
The powers conferred on the committee by section 11(f) and (h), which must be read in the light of the mandatory provisions of section 15 which made it obligatory on the committee to observe Muslim Law and the tenets of the Chishti saint and which had to be exercised within the limits laid down by section 16, could not be said to violate article 25(1) of the Constitution.
section 16 in providing for the setting up of a Board of Arbitration, embodied a healthy and unexceptionable principle, obviously in the interest of the institution as well as the parties, and could not be said to infringe Arts 14 or 32 of the Constitution.
Section 13(1) could not be read apart from the other provi sions of section 13.
That section really intended to lay down the procedure for determining disputes relating to succession to III Office of Sajjadanashin and it was therefore fertile to contend that section 13(1) offended against article 25(1).
since section 18 was confined to such final orders as were within the jurisdiction of the committee and passed against persons who did not object to them but failed to comply with them, it did not contravene articles 14 or 32 of the Constitution.
