One died intestate during his year of account Leaving g behind him his son A the respondent and eight daughters.
After notice under section 22 (2) of the Income Tax Act was issued, A was assessed under section 24 (2) of the Act and notice of demand was issued under section 29.
The respondent appealed to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, but during the pendency of the appeal a penalty was imposed upon him under section 46 (1) of the Act by the Income tax officer as the respondent had defaulted in payment of tax on the due date.
After the appeal was disposed of a notice of demand was again issued to the respondent to pay the tax.
On respondent 's default, a second penalty was imposed upon him.
Respondent challenged this order by writ.
The High Court quashed the order inter alia holding that section 46 (1) did not apply to a legal representative as he was assessed as an assessee under a fiction in section 24B (2) and that fiction came to an end when the assessment was made, for the fiction was created for the limited purpose of assessment, and since that subsection was not concerned with collection, the fiction could not be carried, beyond assessment resulting in the determination of tax.
The question was whether the fiction came to an end after the assessment, so that the Legal representative remained a mere debtor to the department or could he be ordered to pay penalty under section 46 (1) of the Act. ^ Held, that the fiction made the respondent an assessee for the purpose of assessing the total income of E.
That fiction did not come to an end after the assessment.
When a thing is deemed to be something else, it is to be treated as if it is that thing, though, in fact it is not E being dead before the notice, either general or special, to his, could not be treated as an assessee, and the process of the Act, was, by fiction, made available against the legal representative who was the assessee for purpose of assessment which meant the entire process of computation and law of the tax and the fiction had to be worked out to its logical conclusion.
The definition of 144 the word assessee being defined in the Act as a person by whom income tax is payable, the legal representative came within the definition and his assessment being made under section 23, he had also a right of appeal under section 30 since he did not cease to be an assessee after the determination of the tax at least for the purpose of sub section
(2) of section 24 B, and section 29 applied to the legal representative in his position as the assessee.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Teja Singh, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 394 and East End Dwellings Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council,[1952] A.C. 109, referred to.
