The appellant who executed works contracts was assessed to sales tax for quarters ending June 30, 1949, to March 31, 1954, and paid the tax.
On August 9, 1954, the appellant filed a writ petition before the High court for a declaration that the provisions of the orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947, permitting levy of sales tax on works contracts were ultra vires, for a declaration that the assessments were illegal and for a refund of the amount paid as tax the High court declared that the assessments were not in accordance with the law and directed refund of the tax paid, if recovery thereof was not barred under section 14 of the Act on the date of the filing of the writ petition.
Section 14 provided that no claim for a refund shall be allowed by the Collector unless it was made within 24 months from the date of the assessment order or within 12 months of that order passed on appeal, revision, review or reference.
The appellant contended that section 14 was ultra vires and that the bar of limitation in section 14 was not applicable to the writ petition before the High Court for refund of tax illegally recovered. ^ Held, that provisions of section 14 of the orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947, were not ultra vires the State Legislature.
The power to legislate in respect of refund of tax improperly or illegally collected, and imposition of restrictions on the exercise of the right to claim refund which was an ancillary or subsidiary matter was not beyond the competence of the legislature.
State of Orissa vs The orient Paper Mills Ltd., A. 1.
R. , relied on.
Held, further, that the bar of limitation in section 14 of the Act was applicable to the case.
The proceedings before the High Court were substantially to compel the Collector to carry out his statutory obligations under section 14, and it could only be allowed subject to the restrictions imposed by the statute.
it was not open to the appellant to rely upon the statutory right and to ignore the restrictions subject to which the right was made enforceable.
