The appellant was the owner of a factory manufacturing bidis and one P along with other labourers used to roll bidis in the factory with tobacco and leaves supplied to him by the factory.
The following were established facts: (1) There was no contract of service between the appellant and P.(2) He was not bound to and the factory for rolling biding for any fixed hours or period; he was free to go to the factory at any time during working hours and leave the factory at any time he liked.
(3) He could be absent from the work any day he liked and for ten days without even informing the appellant.
He had to take the permission of the appellant if he was to be absent for more than I O days.
(4) He was not bound to roll the bidies at the factory.
He could do so at home with the permission of the appellant for taking home the tobacco supplied to him.
(5) There was no actual supervision of the work done by him in the factory and at the close of the day rolled bidis were delivered to the appellant.
Bidis not up to the standard were rejected.
(6) He was paid at fixed rates on the quantity of bidis turned out and there was no stipulating for turning out any minimum quantity of bidis.
The Inspector of Factories found that he was not paid the wages for 4 days ' leave which he had earned after having worked for a certain period.
The appellant was fined Rs. 101 for contravening the provisions of section 79(11) of the .
The questions which arose for decision were whether P was a worker within the meaning of that expression under the Act and whether he was entitled to any leave wages under section 80 of the Act.
^ Held (per Kapur and Raghubar Dayal, JJ.), that the decision of this Court in Birdhi Chand 's Case was distinguishable on facts and could not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
The appellant exercised no control and supervision over P. He was not a worker as the three criteria and conditions laid down by this Court in Chintaman Rao 's 250 case for constituting him as such were not fulfilled in the present case.
Biardhi Chand Sharma vs The First Civil Judge, Nagpur ; , distinguished.
Chintaman Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , applied.
Whether the appellant contravened the provisions of sub .(1) of section 79 depended on the proper construction of sections 79 and 80 of the Act.
With the terms of the work as they were in the present case there could be no basis for calculating the daily average of the worker 's "total full time earnings" which means the earnings he earns in a day by working full time on that day, the full time to be in accordance with the period of time given in the notice displayed in the factory for a particular day and.
therefore the wages to be paid for the leave period could not be calculated nor the number of days for which leave with wages could be allowed be calculated in such a case.
The conviction of the appellant under section 92 read with section 79(1) of the Act was wrong.
Per Subba Rao, J., dissenting, The question raised in the appeal was directly covered by the judgment of this Court in Birdhi, Chand Sharma case.
It could not be said that the appellant had no right of supervision or control over the labourers ill the factory or did not supervise to the extent required having regard to the nature of the work done in the factory.
Under section 2(1) of the Act "worker" meant a person employed, directly through any agency whether for wages or not in any manufacturing process.
All the ingredients of the word "employed" as laid down by this court were present in this case and therefore the labourers were workers within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Act.
Birdhi Chand Sharma vs First Civil Judge, Nagpur.
; , Chaintaman Rao vs State of M.P.[1958] section C. R. 1340, Dharangadhara Chemical Works vs State of Saurashtra, ; , State of Kerala vs V. M. Patel, and palaiappa vs Court of Additional First Class Magistrate, Kulitalai I. L. R. , considered.
For the purpose of calculation of wages during the leave period under section 80, the full time earnings for a day could be taken to mean the amount earned by a worker for the daily hours of work fixed for a factory.
In the instant case the workers were entitled to work throughout the fixed working hours of the factors though they could leave the factory at any time during those hours and hey 251 were entitled to be paid their wages on the basis of the number of the bidis rolled by them.
The wages earned by them during the working hours of the factory would be no their full time earning for the day.
There could, therefore, be no difficulty in ascertaining the rate under section 80 of their wages during, the leave period, for under that section the workers would have to be paid at a rate equal to the daily average of their total full time earnings for the days they worked.
