By section 3 of the , the appropriate Government is authorised to fix minimum rates of wages for employees in the Scheduled employments and section 5 lays down the procedure for fixing and revising such minimum wages.
The State Government published a notification dated June 11, 1958, fixing minimum rates of wages in respect of employments in bidi making in the Vidarbha region.
Clauses 1 and 2 of the notification prescribed the minimum rates district wise and provided for higher rates for making bidis known as 'Hatnakhun ' in all the districts.
Clauses 3 to 7 dealt with disputes between the employers and the employees as to how bad bidis were to be discarded and in what proportion and as to the payment for such discarded bidis.
The appellant contended that cls.
3 to 7 of the notification were ultra vires: ^ Held, that cls.
3 to 7 of the Notification were outside the purview of the powers conferred upon the State Government 382 by section 5 of the Act and were ultra vires.
The provisions of the Act empowered the Government only to fix minimum wages; they did not authorise it to make rules for resolving the disputes regarding the rejection of bad bidis and regarding the payments to be made for the rejected bidis.
The Act empowered the Government to fix the remuneration payable to an employee if the other terms of the contract were observed; it did not authorise the Government to vary the other terms.
Under the contract the employer was entitled to decide which bidis to discard, and to retain such bidis and to pay only for such bidis as were accepted by him.
Clauses 3 to 7 of the notification purported to modify these terms in material particulars and this was not within the power conferred by the Act upon the Government.
Nor could these clauses be justified on the basis of implied powers.
The doctrine of implied powers could only be invoked when it was found that a duty was imposed or a power conferred on an authority buy a statute and it was further found that the duty could not be discharged or the powers could not be exercised at all unless some auxiliary or incidental power was assumed to exist.
Even if cls.
I and 2 would become ineffective without cls.
3 to 7 being there that would not be a proper basis for invoking the doctrine of implied powers.
The definition of 'wages ' in section 2(h) of the Act postulated the binding character of the other terms of the contract and brought within the purview of the Act only the term relating to wages.
By implication the very basic concept of wages could not be ignored.
By sections 20 and 21 the Act makes specific provision for the settlement of claims in regard to payment of minimum wages and as such no powers could be implied in the Government to set up a separate machinery to settle such disputes.
Further no power could be implied to make cls.
1 and 2 of the notification effective: such power could only be implied if it was necessary to make section 5 of the Act itself effective.
Michael Fenton and James Fraser vs Jhon Stephen Hompton, (1957 59) 117 R. R. 21, referred to.
