These appeals arose out of a representative suit filed on behalf of the creditors of defendants I to 6 who hat executed a trust deed on August 26, 1936, conveying their properties to three trustees with authority to dispose of the one and distribute the ale proceeds ratably amongst the creditors.
The trust deed required "the three trustees to act according to the decision arrived at either unanimously or by majority." The trustees accepted the trust and conveyed all the properties except the family house in administration of the trust.
Two of the sale deeds in favour of two of the creditors, defendants 13 and 14, a mortgagee creditor, in the suit were executed by only two or the trustees .
In a suit brought by the said defendants 1 to 6 for administration of trust the trial court passed a preliminary decree.
The High Court on appeal remanded the matter to the trial court for a finding as to the market value of the lands sold.
The trial court submitted its finding.
At this stage defendants 1 to 6 withdrew the suit which we dismissed.
The present suit under O. I, r. 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure we filed on October 29, 1947, before such withdrawal.
The claimed made therein, inter alia, were for a declaration that the properties in question were still impressed with the trust, for the removal the surviving trustee and appointment of an a administrator to realise the amount, recover position of the properties and re sell them.
The trial Judge passed a decree infavour of the plaintiffs .
The High Court in substance confirmed that decree but modified it by awarding simple interest 207 instead of compound Interest decreed in favour of defendant 14.
The two sale deeds, executed by only two of the trustees, were declared invalid and it was found that the third trustee did not give his consent to it.
The sale deed in favour of defendant 12 was declared invalid on the ground that he had intermeddled with the trust estate and had thus become a trustee de sou tort.
The courts below also rejected the pleas of limitation and res judicata raised on behalf of the defendants.
Some of the creditor detendants appealed.
After the appeals had been admitted by this Court the High Court amended the decretal order by substituting the words 'mesne profits ' by 'net profits ' under sections 151 and 152 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
^ Held, that the question whether article 120 or article 134 of Indian Limitation Act applied to a case had to be decided on the case made in the plaint, read as whole and properly construed.
Since the present suit was not one for a mere declaration but for possession of property, having been valued and framed as such, deliverable to the administrator, it was governed by article 134 and not by article 120 of the Act and was thus within time.
It was not correct to say that section 63 of the Indian Trust Act was exhaustive as to the remedies available to a beneficiary under a private trust or that claim for constructive possession, such as was made in the present suit, was prohibited under that section.
Rani Chhatra Kumari Devi vs Prince Mohan Bikram Shah, Pat. 851, distinguished.
Subbaiya Pandaram vs Mohammad Mustapha merachayar , (1923) L. R. 50 IE A. 295, A Subramania Iyer vs P. Nagarathna Naicker , (1910)20 Mad.
L. J. 151 and Masjid shahid Ganj vs Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee Amritsar (1940) L. R. 67 I. A. 251, referred to.
Nor could the suit be said to be barred by res judicata since it did not fall within the scope of section II of the Code of civil Procedure.
The suit being one under o. 1, r. 8 of the Code, it could not be said that defendants I to 6, plaintiff in the earlier suit, and the creditors, plaintiffs in the present suit, where the same party or parties claiming through each other.
Clause 23 of the trust deed, properly construed, conformed to the provision of section 48 of the Trusts Act that where there are more trustees than one, they must all join in the execution of the trust, and did not provide for an exception to that rule, even though it provided that decisions by the trustees need not a ways be unanimous but could be by majority as well.
Such sale deeds as had been executed by 208 two of the trustees only must therefore fail.
The alternative.
case of consent given by the third trustee to the transaction could be of no avail since it could not be substantiated by evidence Lala man Mohan Das vs Janaki Man Prasad, (1944) L. R. 72 I. A. 39, referred to.
The High Court had jurisdiction under sections 151 and 152 of the Code of Civil Procedure to correct the obvious error in the decretal order even though the appeals from the said decree had already been admitted by this Court.
Nor could the amendment be challenged on merits.
Although a successful plaintiff would not normally be entitled to mesne profits for more than three years in view of article 109 of the Limitation Act, the court had jurisdiction in the case of a trust to make appropriate direction in the decree, while awarding net profiles to the trust and interest to the mortgagee, in adjustment of the equities between them.
Salgur Prasad V Har Narain Das (1932) L.R. 59 I. A. 147, Bhagwat Dayal Singh vs Debi Dayal Sahu, (1908) L. R. 35 I. A. 48 and Jagannath Prasad Singh Chowdhury vs Surajmal Jalal , (1926) L. R. 54 I. A. 1, referred to.
Even slight intermeddling with the trust estate is sufficient to make a person trustee de son tort.
Since in the instant case, the acts of intermeddling by one of the defendant covered a fairly long period, the courts below were right in holding that the sale in his favour must be set aside as one in favour, of a trustee de son tort.
