The appellant, a research institution established for the purpose of improving the quality of tea, was managed by the India Tea Assciation.
The employees made claims, inter 558 alia, for (1) free housing accommodation or adequate allowance in lieu thereof, and (2) grant of bonus.
The tribunal, to which the matter was referred by the Government considered the financial position of the appellant and came to the conclusion that the demand for housing accommodation was not justified and that the ends of justice would be met if a flat rate of enhancement of Rs. 20/ was awarded.
As regards the demand for bonus the tribunal felt that it would be inexpedient to apply the formula which governed the decision of industrial claims for the payment of bonus, but made an award directing the appellant to pay puja bonus to its employees on the ground that what was described as puja bonus was being given to workmen who were similarly situated as also to the clarical staff working at the Indian Tea Association at Calcutta and that refusing the workmen 's claim for bonus against the appellant would amount to discrimination.
^ Held, that a demand for the provision of housing accommodation can be reasonably entertained where it appeared that the financial position of the employer can bear the burden involved, that under the present economic conditions prevailing in the industry the responsibility for providing housing accommodation cannot be placed solely on the shoulders of the employer, and that in due course the problem would have to be tackled by the industry in cooperation with the State, which would have to bear a part of that responsibility.
The Patna Electric Supply Co., Ltd. Patna vs The Patna Electric Supply Workers ' Union, [1959] Supp.
S.C. R. 761, relied on.
Held, further, that before a claim for the grant of puja bonus could be sustained it must be shown (1) that it was consistently paid by the employer to his employees from year to year at the same rate, and (2) that it had been paid even in years of loss and that it had no relation to the profit made by the employer during the relevant year.
A claim for puja bonus could also be made on the ground that the payment of such bonus was an implied term in the contract of employment.
The Graham Trading Co. (Indian) Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; and M/s. Ispahani Ltd., Calcatta vs Ispahani Employees ' Union, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 24, followed.
Industrial profit bonus which is governed by the application of the well known formula, cannot be awarded unless a specific year for which the claim is made is indicated and it is alleged that there is available surplus in the hands of the employer for that year.
