In February 1943 the appellant leased out an agricultural land for 5 years to the respondent.
Before the expiry of the lease, the Bombay Tenancy Act, 1939, was made applicable to the area where the land was situated, and under section 23(1)(b) the period of the lease was statutorily extended to 10 years.
During the subsistence of the tenancy thus statutorily extended, the Bombay Act 67 of 1948 came into force.
In March 1952 the appellant gave notice to the respondents intimating that the statutory period of tenancy expired on 31st March 1953, and called upon them to deliver possession immediately thereafter.
Before the notice could effectively be enforced the Bombay Act 33 of 1952 came into force, the effect of which was that the lease was automatically extended for 10 years from time to time, unless terminated by giving one year 's notice with the averment that the land was required bona fide by the landlord for personal cultivation and that income would be the main source of income to the landlord.
The appellant 's case was that the technical requirements of a valid notice prescribed by the Amending Act do not apply to his claim inasmuch as the relevant provisions of the amending Act are not retrospective in operation.
The question was whether the appellant was entitled to eject the respondents even without complying with the statutory requirement as to valid notice prescribed by the Amending Act 33 of 1952.
^ Held, that by virtue of the Amending Act 33 of 1952 the period of lease was automatically extended for a period of ten years from time to time, unless terminated by a valid 701 notice or a surrender was made by the tenant as specified by the statute, otherwise the tenancy would be extended from time to time at a stretch of every ten years.
In order to put an end to the tenancy, thus statutorily safe guarded, the landlord had to follow the course prescribed by the amending statute to give a valid notice as required by the said statute.
The right of a landlord to obtain possession does not accrue merely on the giving of the notice, it accrues in his favour on the date when the lease expires.
It is only after the period specified in the notice is over and the tenancy in fact had expired that the landlord gets a right to eject the tenant and take possession of land.
Held, further, that there is distinction between existing right and vested right.
Where a statute operates in future it cannot be said to be retrospective merely because within the sweep of its operation all existing rights are included.
The operation of section 5(1) of the Amending Act is not retrospective, it merely affects in future the existing rights under all leases whether executed before or after the date of the Act.
vs Gwynne, [191I] 2 Ch. 1, Durlabhai Fakirbhai vs Jhaverbhai Bhikabhai, (1955) 58 Bom.
L. R. 85, applied.
Jivabhai Purshottam vs Chhagan Karson, [1962]1 section C. R. 568, referred to.
