In the first three appeals the tenants were in default in paying rents for three years and due notices had been served by the landlords terminating the tenancies.
The landlords thus acquired statutory rights to eject the tenants and applied to the Mamlatdar, as required by section 29 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, for possession over the lands.
The Mamlatdar refused to make an order for possession on the ground that the tenants were entitled to relief against forfeiture on equitable principles.
In the fourth appeal also the tenants had defaulted in paying rents for three years.
In respect of the default in the first year the tenant had been granted relief against forfeiture under section 25(1) of the Act.
The tenant contended that the default in the first year had merged in the order under section 25(1) and could not be relied upon far holding that he had defaulted for three years.
^ Held, that the landlords were entitled to orders for possession in all the four cases.
Upon default in payment of rent for three years a statutory right accrued to the landlords under section 25(2) to terminate the tenancy and to obtain possession.
There was no provision in the Act for granting relief against forfeiture in such a case; the provision in section 29(3) that the Mamlatdar "shall pass such orders as he deems fit" did not give him such a power.
The Act merely empowered him to grant relief where the tenant was not in arrears for more than two years.
No relief against forfeiture could be granted to the 740 tenants on equitable grounds; relief on equitable grounds could only be granted in cases of contractual rights and not in cases of statutory rights.
Nor could relief be granted under section 114 Transfer of Property Act as that provision was inconsistent with the provisions of the Bombay Act and was therefore inapplicable.
R. V. Boteler, (1864) 33 L. I. M. C. 101, referred to.
Raghuvir, Vyasaraya Acharya vs Govind Mogre Bandekar, , disapproved.
Held, further, that in the fourth appeal the default in the first year could also be taken into consideration in computing of three years inspite of the tenant having been relieved against forfeiture for that year.
The order granting the relief did not wipe out the default, it only prevented the termination of the tenancy for that default alone.
