Under a scheme framed and notified under the Motor Vehicles Act a certain route was notified under section 68D of the Act and the Rajya Transport, Bihar was exclusively allowed to operate on that route.
The said notified route formed part of routes on which the appellants were operating, and in respect of which they had asked for renewal of their permits.
The Rajya Transport, Bihar filed objections against the renewal of the permits in some cases but in other case no objection was filed.
The question which arose for decision was whether the permits of the appellant could be renewed by the Regional Transport Authority.
The appellants contended that as the notified route formed part of a larger route operated by a private operator, the two routes must be regarded as different route, and the private operator could not be prevented from running his omnibuses on that portion of his route, which was a different route, although notified.
^ Held, that as decided by this Court in Abdul Gafoor 's case, the Regional Transport Authority had no option but to refuse the permit to the private operator, if the State Transport Undertaking had either applied for a permit or had already been granted one.
Abdul Gafoor vs State of Mysore, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 1956, followed.
If the Regional Transport Authority did not do its duty under the law the Appeal Board was entitled, when the record was before it, to revise the order of the Regional Transport Authority under its revisional powers as provided in section 64A of the Act, even if the appeal was incompetent.
Samarth Transport Co. vs Regional Transport Authority Nagpur, ; , followed.
729 In the present case the appellants were not entitled to run over those portions of their routes which were notified as part of the scheme.
Those portions could not be said to be different routes, but must be regarded as portions of the routes of the private operators, from which the private operators stood excluded under section 68F (2) (c) (iii) of the Act.
Kelani Valley Motor Transit Co. vs Colombo Ratnapura Omnibus Co., and Kondala Rao vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 82, considered.
