Section 6(1) of the East Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, provided that no tax shall be payable on the sale of goods specified in the Schedule to the Act and that no dealer shall charge sales tax on the sale of goods which were "declared tax free from time to time".
Sub section (2) of section 6 empowered the State Government by notification to add or to delete from the Schedule.
On September 27, 1954, the State Government issued a notification under section 6 (2) 914 adding item 51 relating to manufactured tobacco to the Schedule.
The appellant contended that sales tax was a yearly tax and hence the exemption, whenever given during the financial year, became operative as from the beginning thereof.
^ Held, (per Sinha, C. J., Hidayatullah, Shah and Mudholkar JJ., Kapur, J., dissenting) that the exemption operated for the entire financial year.
The tax was a yearly tax levied on the taxable turnover of a dealer every year though it was collected in some cases at the end of the year, in some cases quarterly and in other cases monthly.
If the exemption operated for the period for which the tax was payable according as it was annually, quarterly or monthly the tax would be different for different persons; those paying annually would get exemption for the whole year but those paying quarterly or monthly would get the benefit in the quarter or month of the notification and not for earlier quarters or months.
This could not have been intended.
The exemption whenever it came in, in the year for which the tax was payable, exempted sales throughout the year, unless the notification fixed the date for the commencement of the exemption.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, U. P. vs The Modi Sugar Mills Ltd., ; , referred to.
Per Kapur, J. The exemption became operative only from the date of the notification.
The tax was not a yearly tax.
The use of the words "tax free from time to time" in section 6 (1) showed that the exemption could be given at any time during the year and that it would operate from the date of the notification and not from the beginning of the financial year.
Otherwise, an exemption given or an imposition made near the end of the year will both operate from the beginning of the year.
This was never intended
