The Kerala Agrarian Relations Act was impugned on various grounds.
^ Held, (per Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo and Das Gupta, JJ.) that (1) the bill which was originally passed by a Legislative Assembly which as dissolved and was reconsidered and re passed by a new legislative assembly did not lapse and validly became the law when the President assented to it after it was passed by the second legislative assembly.
830 Purushothaman Nambudiri vs State of Kerala, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 753, followed.
(II) The Act which made certain deductions from the compensation payable to the landholders under Ch.
II and to others who held excess land under Ch.
III cannot be struck down as a piece of colourable legislation which is beyond the competence of the State Legislature, and it cannot be said that any device has been employed in the Act to take away the moneys of the landowners or the persons from whom excess land is taken away for the purpose of adding to the revenue of the State.
Section 80 of the Act provides for the Constitution of an agriculturist rehabilitation fund for the purpose of rendering help by way of loan, grant or otherwise to persons affected by the Act and eligible for the same under the rules but rr. 161 (a) (III) and 161 (b) (III) are so framed as to take within their scope even persons not affected by the Act.
Those rules are ultra vires of section 80 and must be struck down.
(III) The lands held by ryotwari pattadars in the area which came to the State of Kerala by virtue of the States Reorganisation Act from the State of Madras are not 'estates ' within the meaning of article 31A(2)(a) of the Constitution and therefore the Act is not protected under article 31A (1) from attack under articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
State of Bihar vs Rameshwar Pratap Narain Singh, ; , referred to.
(IV) The reasons which call for exemption of tea, coffee and rubber plantations from certain provisions of the Act equally apply to areca and pepper plantations and there is no intelligible differentia related to the object and purpose of the Act which would justify any distinction in the case of tea, coffee and rubber plantations as against areca and pepper plantations.
The provisions in the Act relating to plantations are violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The provisions relating to plantations cannot be severed from the Act and struck down only by themselves.
The whole Act must be struck down as violative of article 14 of the Constitution so far as it applied to ryotwari lands in those areas of the State which were transferred to it from the State of Madras.
(V) The manner in which ceiling has been fixed under section 58(1) is violative of the fundamental right enshrined in article 14 of the constitution and as that section is the basis of entire Ch.
III the whole chapter must fall with it 831 (IV) The manner in which progressive cuts have been imposed on the purchase price under section 52 and the market value under section 64 in order to determine the compensation payable to landowners or intermediaries in one case and to persons from whom excess land is taken in another, results in discrimination and cannot be justified on any intelligible differentia which has any relation to the objects and purposes of the Act.
The provision as to compensation is all pervasive and the entire Act must be struck down as violative of article 14 of the Constitution in its application to ryotwari lands which have come to the State of Kerala from the State of Madras.
Per Sarkar, J. Sections 52 and 64 of the Act which provide for payment of Compensation at progressively smaller rates for larger valuations of the interests acquired are not invalid as offending article 14 of the Constitution.
The provisions in the act making a discrimination in favour of tea, coffee, rubber and cardamom plantation and also in favour of cashew plantations cannot be upheld.
Sections 3(viii), 57 (1) (d) and 59 (2) are therefore invalid.
These are however severable from the other parts of the Act and the whole Act cannot be held to be bad merely because those provisions are bad.
Per Ayyangar, J. Properties held on ryotwari tenures and the interest of the ryot in such lands would not be "estate" for the purposes of article 31A(2) as it stood even after the Fourth Amendment of the Constitution.
Where an existing law in relation to land tenures in force in an area contains a definition of an 'estates ' and that definition excludes the interest of a ryotwari proprietor, the very words of article 31A(2) of the Constitution negatived the applicability of its provisions to that tenure.
Ram Ram Narain Medhi, vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
I S.C.R. 489 and Atma Ram vs State of Punjab, [1959] Supp.
I S.C.R. 748, referred to.
Section 2(39) which by definition excludes pepper and areca plantations from the category of the plantations named in it which are exempted from the operative provisions of the impugned Act, section 58 for the determination of the ceiling in respect of different individuals who are brought within the scope of the enactment and sections 52 and 64 for determining the compensation payable to the several classes of persons whose lands are acquired under the Act are all violative of the guarantee of equal protection of laws under article 14 of the Constitution.
