In an application under article 226 of the Constitution, to challenge the validity of the transfer of a life insurance company 's business to another company under section 36 of the : ^ Held, the transfer though it brought about an abandonment of the business of the company was not bad as resulting in an alteration of the memorandum of the company without recourse to section 12 of the Indian Companies Act, 1913.
The Company 's memorandum of association contained a power to sell its undertaking and an exercise of that power does not amount to alteration of the memorandum.
The transfer was not a winding up of the company without following the procedure laid down in the Companies Act and hence invalid.
It was effected under the provisions of the .
Bisgood vs Hendersons Transval Estate, , distinguished.
An agreement by the directors of a company to transfer its undertaking subject to confirmation by the company in general meeting did not offend section 86H of the Companies Act.
Section 55 and the connected sections of the Companies Act do not contemplate reduction of share capital brought about by loss of assets and loss of assets does not amount to reduction of share capital.
Section 44 of the does not prevent an insurance company from dealing with its assets though as a result thereof no asset was left out of which the agents of the company might be paid commission to which they are entitled under the . 131 Section 36 of the does not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
That section applies to all insurance companies which in general meeting agree to a transfer.
Even if it is assumed that under section 36 (1) of the only that scheme of transfer of which notice under section 35 (3) of the Act had been given could be sanctioned and not a modified version of it, there would be power to sanction a modified version where the scheme itself or the resolution of the company approving of it, gave power to the directors to accept modifications of that scheme on behalf of the company suggested by the controller of Insurance before final sanction by him.
Mihirendrakishore Datta vs Brahmanbaria Loan Co., Cal. 913, referred to.
