The appellants who were carrying on business in tobacco had in their licenced warehouse considerable quantity of tobacco on February 28, 1951.
On the same day a Bill was introduced in the House of the People containing the financial proposals of the Government of India for the fiscal year beginning April 1, 1951.
Clause 7 of the Bill made provision for the amendment of the , by way of alteration of duties, inter alia, on unmanufactured tobacco by imposing an excise duty of 8 annas per 1b.
Under the provisions of the , the duty could become leviable as from the date of the introduction of the Bill and it was so made.
In accordance therewith the appellants paid excise duty on tobacco in their possession at the rates mentioned in the Bill and obtained clearance certificates.
On April 28, 1951, the Bill was passed and became Finance Act, 1951, but as passed changes were effected as regards the duty proposed in the Bill.
Under section 7(1) of the Finance Act, the duty on unmanufactured tobacco was increased to 14 annas per lb.
Section 7 (2) thereof provided that "the amendments made in the , shall be deemed to have effect on and after March 1, 1951 and accordingly. . recoveries shall be made of all duties which have not been collected but which would have been collected if the amendment had so come into force.
" In pursuance of section 7(2) a demand was made upon the appellants on June 22, 1951, for payment of the excess of the 2 excise duty payable on tobacco cleared out of the warehouse from March 1, 1951, to April 28, 1951.
The appellants challenged the legality of the demand on the grounds, inter alia, that (1) excise duty was a tax on goods which must exist at the time when the tax was levied and it must have been intended and expected by the legislature that it would be passed on to the consumer, and as the retrospective operation of the duties deprived the tax of these qualities they did not fall within the term "duties of excise" in Entry 84, List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, and, therefore, section 7(2) of the Finance Act, 1951, in so far as it imposed an excise duty retrospective before the date of its enactment was beyond the legislative competence of Parliament and (2) the impugned levy contravened article 19(1)(f), because a retrospective levy of an excise duty deprived the tax payer of the right of passing it on and recovering it from his buyer, and that this constituted a restraint on the right to hold property, which was not saved by cl.(5) of article 19.
^ HELD: (1) Parliament acting within its own legislative field had the powers of a sovereign legislature and could make a law prospectively as well retrospectively and the duties leviable under the , as provided by section 7(2) of the Finance Act, 1951, notwithstanding their imposition with retrospective effect and even if it be that they were incapable of being passed on to a buyer from the taxpayer, were "duties of excise" within the meaning of Entry 84, List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
(2) The levy of the tax retrospectively under section 7(2) of the Finance Act, 1951, was valid and did not contravene article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Per Kapur, J. (1) Entry 84 in List I deals with taxes on goods manufactured or produced, while Entry 60 in List II deals with the carrying on of trade i.e., an activity in the nature of buying and selling, and the , in its pith and substance relates to duty on goods manufactured or produced and has no relationship with Entry 60.
(2) Reasonableness of tax laws is not justiciable and therefore they cannot fall within cl.(5) of article 19.
article 19(1)(f) and the cl.(5) are part of one scheme and the former is incapable of operating where the latter is inoperative.
If considerations of article 19(5) are foreign to taxing laws article 19(1)(f) can have no application to them.
Case law reviewed.
