On March 17, 1954, Promode Ranjan a brother of N. R. Sarkar filed a complaint under section 200 Code of Criminal Procedure against Pramathanath and section M. Basu alleging offences punishable under sections 467, 471 and 109 of the Indian Penal Code, before the Chief Presidency Magistrate in respect of a document appointing Pramathanath as the Managing Director of N. R. Sarkar & Co. and the minutes of the Board meeting resolving the same.
It was alleged therein that the signatures of N. R. Sarkar on those documents were forgeries.
After considering the evidence of the Handwriting Expert the Magistrate dismissed the complaint.
Promode Ranjan preferred a revision petition to the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the revision Petition.
By an application dated January 6, 1956, when the revision petition was pending, attention of the High Court was drawn to the fact that the minutes dated January 16, 1948, had been typed on a letter bearing at the top in print "Telephone City 6091" where as the City Exchange had not come into existence till December 1948.
The Supreme Court granted special leave against the dismissal of the revision petition by the High Court but the appeal was withdrawn.
On April 3, 1959, Saroj Ranjan, another brother of N.R. Sarkar, laid a complaint on the same facts and allegations 298 against the appellants, in addition alleging the further fact about the City Exchange in support of the allegation that the minutes were forged dishonestly and fraudulently and used as genuine.
Neither in this complaint nor before the High Court had it been stated as to when it came to be known that on the purported date of the minutes the City Exchange was not in existence.
The Presidency Magistrate issued process against the appellants.
The appellants went up in revision to the High Court.
The matter was first heard by a Division Bench and was later referred to a larger Bench of three Judges which dismissed the revision petition.
In these appeals on special leave it was contended by the appellants that the second complaint ought not to have been entertained, that the constitution of the special Bench was illegal and that as the complaint alleged criminal conspiracy sanction under section 196A of the Code of Criminal Procedure was required.
^ Held, that the enquiry contemplated by sections 200 to 204 Code of Criminal Procedure is for the purpose of enabling the Magistrate to find out if sufficient grounds exist for issuing process.
Vadilal Panchal vs Daltaraja Dulaji Chandigaonkar, , Gulab Khan vs Gulab Mohammad Khan A.I.R. 1927 Lah.
30 and Ram Gopal Ganpat Ruia vs State of Bombay, referred to.
Per section K. Das, J.
The law does not prohibit altogether the entertainment of a second complaint when a previous complaint on the same allegations has been dismissed under section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
But a second complaint containing more or less the same allegations can be entertained only in exceptional circumstances.
It is not possible nor desirable that the exceptional circumstances must be stated with particularity or precision.
Generally speaking, the exceptional circumstances may be classified under three categories: (1) manifest error in the earlier proceeding, (2) resulting miscarriage of justice, and (3) new facts which the complainant had no knowledge of or could not with reasonable diligence have brought forward in the previous proceedings.
Where the previous order of dismissal was passed on an incomplete record or on a misunderstanding of the nature of the complaint, a second complaint may be entertained.
Where a Magistrate misdirects himself as to the scope of an enquiry under s 202, Code of Criminal Procedure, and the mistake, made gives a wrong direction to the whole proceeding on the first complaint, the order of dismissal passed thereon would be due.
to a manifest error resulting in a miscarriage of justice.
In such a case, a second complaint is entertainable.
299 Per Kapur and Hidayatullah, JJ.
There is no legal bar to the entertainability of a second complaint.
It is only when the Magistrate had misdirected himself, with regard to the scope of the enquiry under section 203, Code of Criminal Procedure, or has passed an order misunderstanding the nature of the complaint or the order is manifestly unjust or absurd or the order is based on an incomplete record can it be said that there is such a manifest error or a manifest miscarriage of justice that a second complaint on the same allegations may be entertained.
The other exceptional circumstances in which a second complaint may be entertained is when it is supported by fresh and further evidence.
Case law referred to.
In the case of fresh evidence it must be such as could not have been with due diligence on the part of the complaint adduced on the earlier occasion.
Queen Empress vs Dole Gobinda Das I.L.R , Dwarkanath Mandal vs Daniradha banerjee, I.L.R. disapproved.
Allah Ditta vs Karam Bakshi, Ram, Narain Chowdhary vs Punachand Jain, AIR 1949 Pat. 255, Hansabai vs Ananda, A.I.R. 1949 Bom.
384 and Doraiswami vs Subramania, A I. R. , approved.
In the present case permitting the second complaint to proceed would be a gross abuse of process.
Held, further, concurring with S.K. Das, J., that the Special Bench was properly constituted.
Per section K. Das, J.
On the first complaint the Presidency Magistrate had misdirected himself regarding the scope of the enquiry under sections 203 and 204 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and it was a manifest error.
The facts about the City Exchange urged and fresh evidence were decisive of a prima facie case for issuing process and it was an exceptional circumstance justifying entertaining the second complaint and not to permit the trial of the case in such circumstances would be a denial of justice.
Kumariah vs C. Naicker, A.I.R. 1946 Mad, 167 and Ramanand vs Sheri, I.L.R. 1. 56 All 425, referred to.
Though Chapter II of the Rules of the High Court (Appellate Side) in terms applies to Civil cases, their substance could be applied to criminal cases by the Chief Justice in constituting a larger bench.
The substance of the allegations in the complaint amounted to an offence of abetment by conspiracy under 300 section 107 Indian Penal Code and not the offence of Criminal Conspiracy as defined by section 120A and therefore sanction under section 196A of the Code of Criminal Procedure was not necessary.
The distinction between the two offences lies in that the first requires an overt act in pursuance of the agreement whereas the second makes the agreement to do the unlawful act itself punishable.
Basirul Hag vs State of West Bengal and Mulachy vs The Queen, , referred to.
