The appellants had acquired the rights of protected tenants under section 3A(1) of the Bombay Tenancy Act, 1939, as amended by the Bombay Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1946, and their rights as protected tenants were recorded in the Record of Rights.
That Act was repealed by the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, which by section 31 recognised the rights of a protected tenant acquired under the Act of 1939 for its own purposes, by section 88(1)(c) provided, that nothing in the foregoing provisions of the Act should apply to any area within the limits of the Municipal borough of Poona City and Suburban as also some other boroughs and within a distance of two miles of the limits of such boroughs, and by section 89(2) that "nothing in this Act or any repeal effected thereby . (b) shall, save as expressly provided in this Act, affect or be deemed to affect (i) any right, title, interest, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred before the commencement of this Act, or . . . . . . . . . or . . . . . . . . . (ii) any legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, title, interest, obligation, or liability or anything done or suffered before the commencement of this Act, and any such proceeding shall be continued and disposed of, as if this Act was not passed The lands in dispute were situated within two miles of the limits of the Poona Municipal Borough, i.e. Poona City and Suburban, and the question was whether the rights of the appellants as protected tenants therein were.
I affected by the repeal.
Held, that the provisions of section 88 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, are entirely prospective and apply to such lands as are described in cls.
(a) to (d) of section 88(1) from 60 the date on which the Act came into operation i.e. December 28, 1948, and are not of a confiscatory nature so as to take away from the tenant the status of a protected tenant already accrued to him.
Section 89(2)(b) of the Act clearly intends to conserve such rights as were acquired or accrued before its commencement and that any legal proceeding in respect of such rights was to be disposed of in terms of the Act of 1939.
Abbot vs The Minister for Lands, , distin guished.
