The Income tax Officer, Madura, issued notice under section 18A (1) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922, for payment of advance tax.
R, the then manager of the Hindu Undivided family availed of the option to submit a revised estimate for the years 1946 47 and 1948 49.
The assessment of these two years were completed respectively in November, 1950 and February, 1951, as the total income assessed far exceeded the estimate submitted by R, the Income tax Officer ordered the respondent, the legal representative of R, to pay the interest under section 18A (6) of the Act.
On appeal, the Income tax Appellate Tribunal reduced the income and the Income tax Officer in giving effect to the said order reduced the interest and called upon the respondent to make payment.
The respondent asked the Income tax Officer not to levy interest under section 18A (6), submitting that the levy was illegal and unjustified, alternatively he requested that the interest be waived by virtue of the powers vested on the Income tax Officer under proviso 5 to section 18A (6) which was added by section 13 of Act 25 of 1953, with retrospective effect from April 1952.
The Income tax Officer and the Inspection Assistant Commissioner declined to accede to the request.
The respondent then moved the High Court at Madras for a writ under article 226 cancelling the levy of interest on the ground among others that refusal by the Revenue authorities to cancel the levy was arbitrary and not based on any judicial exercise of the discretion vested by the Act.
The High Court upheld the plea, ordered the Income tax Officer to decide whether the respondent had made out a case for the exercise of the discretion.
The only question in the appeal before the Supreme Court was whether benefit of the said 5th proviso to section 18A (6) may be granted in respect of assessments of income which were completed by the Income tax officer before April 1952.
614 ^ Held, that the jurisdiction under 5th proviso of section 18A (6) of the Income tax Act may be exercised by the income tax Officer in all cases which were pending on April 1, 1952 before him or any superior authority having under the Act power to modify the assessment of income.
