The application for eviction against the appellant was based inter alia on the ground that the premises in suit were dilapidated and the landlord wished to rebuild them after dismantling the structure.
The Rent Controller dismissed the application observing that there was hardly any proof that the building was in a dilapidated condition and that the landlord had no means to rebuild the premises.
The appellate authority confirmed the finding holding that the premises were in good condition and that the landlord was not, in good faith, wanting to replace the building.
An applications purporting to be under section 15(5) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, was made before the High Court.
The High Court following an earlier decision of the same Court allowed the revision petition holding that in determining the question of ejectment, what needs alone to be considered is whether the landlord genuinely wants to rebuild the permises and that the condition of the premises is 'a wholly irrelevant factor '.
^ Held, that the investigation by the Rent Controller cannot be confined only to the existence of an intention in the mind of the landlord to reconstruct.
This intention must be honestly held in relation to the surrounding circumstances, otherwise the very purpose of the Rent Restriction Act would be defeated, if the landlords were to come forward and to get tenants turned out, on the bare plea that they want to reconstruct the house without first establishing, that the plea is bona fide with regard to all circumstances, viz. that the houses need reconstruction or that they have the means to reconstruct them.
Held, further, that when the Tribunals have examined the facts after instructing themselves correctly about law, a Court of Revision should be slow to interfere with the decision, thus reached, unless it demonstrates by its own decision the impropriety of the order which it seeks to revise.
Under section 15(5) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, the powers of the High Court do not include 624 powers to perverse a concurrent finding without showing how those finding are erroneous and without giving any substantial reasons for its finding.
Held, also, that a case cannot be an authority on a point of fact and reach case has to be examined in the light of the circumstances existing.
Moti Ram vs Suraj Bhan, [1960] 2 section C. R. 896, referred to.
