In 1942, one M sent a proposal for the insurance of his life.
He was examined by Dr. D who submitted two reports, one with the proposal form and one confidential.
The confidential report showed that M was anaemic, had a dilated heart and his right lung showed indications of an old attack of pneumonia or pleurisy and that he was a total physical wreck.
Nothing came out of this proposal and it lapsed.
In 1943, M consulted and was treated by one Dr. L for anaemia oedema of the feet, diarrhoea and panting on exertion.
In 1944, M made a second proposal for insurance of his life.
Against the question in the proposal form whether he had consulted any medical man for any ailment within the last five years, he gave the answer, "Nor '.
He also did not disclose any of his ailments.
After medical examination by one Dr. K the proposal was accepted and a policy for Rs. 25,000/ was issued on March 13, 1945.
The policy lapsed for non payment of premium but was revived in July, 1946.
In November, 1946, M died.
His assignee, the appellant, made a demand for Rs. 26,000/ but the Company on October 10, 1947, repudiated it on the ground that the policy had been obtained by deliberate mis statement and fraudulent suppression of material facts.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a suit to recover the amount of the policy contending that section 45 Insurance Act, barred the company from calling in question the policy after two years on the ground that any statement made in the proposal was inaccurate or false. ^ Held, that the policy holder was guilty of fraudulent suppression of material facts relating to his health and the Company was entitled to avoid the contract.
Section 45 Insurance Act applied to the case as two years had lapsed since the policy was effected; in view of the language of s.45 the two years could not be counted from the date of the revival of the policy.
The second part of section 45 entitled the company to repudiate the contract even after the expiry 572 of two years if three conditions were fulfilled viz. (a) the statement was on a material matter or there was suppression of facts which it was material to disclose; (b) the suppression was fraudulently made by the policy holder, and (c) the policy holder must have known at the time of the making of the statement that it was false or that it suppressed facts which it was material to disclose.
When M was treated in 1943 by Dr. L he was suffering from serious ailments.
He must have known that it was material to disclose this but made a false statement that he had not been treated by any doctor for any serious ailment.
There was deliberate suppression fraudulently made by M. Even though the Company had got M examined by four doctors before issuing the policy, it was not estopped from questioning the policy.
It had no means of knowing that M had been treated by Dr. L for serious ailments.
Held, further, that the appellant was not entitled even to a refund of the money paid as premium as one of the terms of the policy was that all monies paid belonged to the company if the policy was vitiated by fraudulent suppression of material facts.
To such a contract neither section 65 nor section 64 of the Indian Contract had any application.
