The appellant and two others were convicted for murder under sections 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal Code.
The High Court accepted the testimony of the approver as being a reliable piece of evidence.
It relied upon the discovery of the dead body of the deceased at the instance of the appellant and of blood stained buttons also at his instance and attached importance to the scarf recovered from the pit where the dead body was alleged to have been first buried and which had hairs both of the appellant as well as the deceased.
The appellant contended that the evidence of the approver, even though it had been accepted as true, was not corroborated in material particulars connecting the appellant with the offence.
None of the recoveries are corroborative of the statement of the approver to the extent of connecting the appellant with the offence committed; on the other hand they are somewhat contradictory of the statement.
The evidence of the Chemical Examiner was not sufficient to prove that hairs on the scraf were of the appellant or of the deceased because the Chemical Examiner was no expert on this matter and his evidence was not admissible under section 45 of the Evidence Act and, at the most, according to the Chemical Examiner the hairs resembled those of the appellant.
^ Held, that where the evidence of the approver is held not to be very helpful to the prosecution other circumstances 727 besides the evidence of the approver has to be considered.
The mere fact that the dead body was pointed out by the appellant or was discovered as a result of a statement made by him would not necessarily lead to the conclusion of the offence of murder.
In the present case beside the evidence of the approver, the appellant 's pointing out of the dead body, his pointing out the silver buttons of the deceased which were stained with human blood and the presence of his hairs on a pania (scraf) on which there were the hairs of the deceased also, are important facts which are sufficient evidence to connect the appellant with the commission of the offence.
Held, further, that writers of medical jurisprudence have stated that from microscopic examination of the hairs it is possible to say whether they are of the same or of different colours or sizes and from the examination it may help in deciding where the hairs come from.
Vemireddy Satyanarayan Reddy vs State of Hyderabad, ; and Wasim Khan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1956] S.C.R. 191, relied on.
