In 1953 the assessee created a trust in respect of a sum of money and provided that the interest on that amount was to be accumulated and added to the corpus and that his minor daughter C was to receive the income from the corpus increased by the addition of interest when she attained the age of 18 years.
In the relevant account year, when C was still a minor, the income derived from the trust fund was Rs. 410 Earlier in 1941, the assessee 's father had created a trust in respect of certain shares and money directing the trustees to pay the net interest and income thereof to the assessee "for the maintenance of himself and his wife and for the maintenance, education and benefit of all his children till his death".
In the relevant account year a sum of Rs. 14,170 accrued as income in the hands of the assessee from the said trust funds, 903 The taxing authorities included both these incomes in the total income of the assessee. ^ Held, that neither of these two incomes could be included in the total income of the assessee.
Under section 16(3)(b) of the Indian Income tax Act, upon which the authorities relied, the assessee could only be taxed on the income from the trust funds for the benefit of his minor child if in the year of account the minor child either received the income or it accrued to her or she had a beneficial interest in the income in the relevant year of account.
In the present case though there was income in the hands of the trustees and they were liable to pay tax thereon, there was no benefit to the minor child in that year.
As such the sum of Rs. 410 did not form part of the total income of the assessee.
The trust deed of 1941 created two trusts, the one requiring the trustees to pay the income from the trust funds to the assessee and the second requiring the assessee to spend the income for the maintenance of himself and his wife and for the maintenance, education and benefit of his children.
It was not a case where the settler merely expressed a wish or desire or hope but he gave as direction which created a trust in respect of the income in the hands of the assessee in favour of himself, his wife and children.
The assessee did not create the second trust in respect of the beneficial interest which he held under the trust of 1941 and section 8 of the Indian Trusts Act which forbade the creating of such a trust was inapplicable.
The assessee was a trustee and not the sole beneficiary; and since the shares of the beneficiaries were Indeterminate it was open to the Department to levy and recover tax at the maximum rate from the assessee as trustee under the first proviso to s.41(1) but the Department was not entitled to include the sum of Rs. 14,170 in the total income of the assesse as though he was the sole beneficiary under the trust deed.
