Section 3 of the Pepsu Police (Incitement to disaffection) Act 1953, provided: "Whoever intentionally causes or attempts to cause, or does any act which he knows is likely to cause, disaffection towards any Government established by law in India amongst the members of a police 'force, or induces or attempts to induce, 'or does any act, which he knows is likely to induce, any member of a police force to withhold his services or to commit a breach of discipline shall be punishable with imprisonment.
" After the administration of the State of Pepsu was taken over by the President under article 356 of the Constitution of India, Parliament enacted a law by which the power of the legislature of the State of Pepsu was conferred on the President.
By virtue of this power the President enacted the Pepsu Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, 1953, the object of which was to provide a penalty, inter alia, for spreading disaffection among the police.
The appellants were charged with having induced or attempted to induce members of the police force to withhold their, services and thus to commit a breach of discipline by staying away without doing their duty, and thereby having committed an offence under section 3 of the Act.
They were convicted by the Magistrate and the conviction was confirmed by the High Court.
The appellants challenged the validity of the conviction on the ground that section 3 was violative of the freedom guaranteed by article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and was not saved by article 19(2).
Held, that section 3 of the Pepsu Police (Incitement to dis affection) Act, 1953, did not infringe article ' (19)(1)(a) of the Constitution and was intra vires.
The Police service is an arm of the State charged with the duty of ensuring and maintaining public order and since any breach of discipline on the part of its members might 26 result in a threat to public order, section 3 must be held to be valid as having been enacted "in the interests of public order" within the meaning of article 19(2).
Superintendent, Central Prison, Fatehgarh vs Ram Manohar Lohia, ; , relied on.
Held, further, that article 33 of the Constitution was not ;applicable because Parliament had delegated the powers of the legislature of the State to the President and any law enacted by him would not have the force of Parliamentary legislation contemplated by article 33.
