The appellants, one a Sub Divisional Officer and the other a Naib Tehsildar, were entrusted with the duty of allotting land to displaced persons.
The first respondent forcibly occupied the land allotted to B.
On May 9, 1958, the first appellant ordered that B and other allottees similarly situated would be given possession of lands allotted to them on May 20, 1958.
On May 16, 1958.
the first respondent and others threatened with dispossession filed petitions in the High Court under article 226 of the constitution and obtained interim stay of delivery of possession till May 19, 1958, when the petitions would come up before the Division Bench for admission.
On May 19, 1958, the Division Bench extended the operation of the stay order until May 23, 1958.
The notice of the first stay order reached the appellants on May 19, 1958, but no notice of the second order was officially communicated to them till May 21, 1958.
It was alleged that on May 20, 1938, the appellants, although informed of the second stay order by certain interested persons and the Advocate for one of the parties, formally dispossessed the respondent in disobedience of the Court 's order and handed over possession of the land to B. On the complaint of the respondent the High Court field that the .appellants were guilty of contempt of Court and, instead of committing them for contempt, administrated a warning as the appellants honestly believed that they were not bound to stay delivery of possession in absence of an official communication.
The appellants appealed by special leave.
Held, (per Das and Subba Rao, JJ.)that in a case of contempt for disobedience of a prohibitive order, as distinguished from an order of affirmative nature, it was not necessary to show that notice of the prohibitory order was served upon the party against whom it was granted.
It would be sufficient if it was proved that the party had notice of it aliunde.
N.Baksi vs O. K. (Thosh, A. T. R. (19.)7) Patn.
528, referred to.
128 There may be circumstances where officials entrusted with the carrying out of a legal order might have valid reasons to doubt The authenticity of the order conveyed to them by interested parties.
But in the present case there could hardly be any such reasons.
The appellants had really no justification for doubting the authenticity of an order communicated to them by an Advocate.
Held, further.
that in a matter relating to contempt of court, there cannot be both justification and apology.
shareef vs The Hon 'ble Judges of the High Court of Nagpur; , , referred to.
Although the appellants might have honestly believed that they were not bound to bold their band in absence of an official communication, that would be no defence to the charge of contempt of court, but only a relevant consideration in awarding the sentence.
Per Daval, J. Contempt proceedings are criminal or quasi criminal in nature and it is essential that before any action can be taken the accusation must be specified in character.
In the instant case, the respondent did not state that he was formally dispossessed.
This would 'be for some reason if actual posssssion had been delivered.
He could not be said to have come to court with clean hands.
Further, the finding of the High Court that the appellants delivered possession honestly believing that they were not bound not to do so in the absence or the official communication meant that there was no defiance of the High Court 's order.
There could be no willful disobedience since there was no belief in the existence of the order.
It may not be necessary that the party against whom a prohibitory order was made must be served with the order, but it should have notice of the order before it could be expected to obey.
Such notice must be from sources connected with the court passing the order.
The alleged knowledge of the party cannot be made, to depend on the veracity of the witnesses examined by the party praying for action.
In re Bryant L.R (1987 6) In Ex Parte Langly, Exparte Smith.
In re Bishop L. R. and The Seraglio.
L. R. , discussed.
