The assessee company carried on a business of manufacture and sale of textile goods.
The manufacture was made at its mills in Indore which was an Indian State before integra tion and had its own law as to income tax known as the Indore Industrial Tax Rules, 1927.
The sales of textile goods so manufactured were made at various places, some inside and some outside the taxable territories of the then British India.
For and upto assessment year 1949 50 the assessee company was treated as a non resident.
Indore became a part of the taxable territories within the meaning of the Indian 311 Income tax Act, 1922 in the two assessment years 1950 51 and 1951 52 and the asscssee company was held to be "resident and ordinarily resident" within the meaning of that Act.
Upto the assessment year 1949 50 that part of its profits which was received by the assessee company in British India was subjected to tax together with it.
,; other income which accrued in British India.
In making the calculation of business profits or loss received or arising in the taxable territories, a proportion was struck between the total turnover and its sales the proceeds whereof were received in the taxable territories.
The assessee company raised two questions in the course of the assessment proceedings, one of which with regard to the entire loss of Rs. 5,19,590/ of the year 1948 49 which it claimed to set off against the profits made in its business in the two assessment years.
The assessee company contended that the business was one and under section 24 it was entitled to set off the losses which it had sustained in 1948 49.
The High Court decided this question against the assessee company, but gave a certificate under section 66A of the Act.
Held, on appeal, that the High Court correctly answered the questions the provisions of section 24 of the Act read with the provisions in section 4(1) (a) and (c) and section 14(2)(c) make it clear that sub s(1) of s: 24 when it talks of profits or gains has reference to taxable profits or taxable gains ; it has no reference to income accruing or arising without the taxable territories which were not liable to be assessed in the case of non residents.
In determining the nature of the losses under consideration in these appeals the relevant year was 1948 49, the year in which the losses occurred, and the High Court rightly took the view that for the application of sub s (2) of section 24, the losses must be such losses as could have been set off under sub s.(1) of section 24.
