The disputes between the appellant, the management of the D.C.M. Chemical Works which was a constituent unit of the Delhi Cloth and General Mills Limited (the Company), and its workmen related, inter alia, to wage scales and gratuity.
The workmen claimed that the chemical works was an integral part of the Company and, therefore, the over all position of the Company should be taken into account in fixing the wage structure.
The Industrial Tribunal to which the matter was referred held that in the circumstances of the case the chemical works should be treated as an independent unit and that the wage structure etc. could not be fixed on the basis of the over.
all position of the Company.
The facts showed that the high the Company was a single limited concern owning and controlling various industrial units of different kinds under it.
There were certain features which went to show that the various undertakings carried on by the Company had been treated as independent concerns and could not lead to the conclusion that they were one integrated whole.
It was found that (i) each unit had separate books of account and separate profit and loss account, (ii) each unit had separate muster rolls for its employees, and transfers from one unit to the other usually took place with the consent of the employees concerned, (iii) each unit had its own separate wages and dearness allowance and bonus was also paid differently in each concern,(iv) where sales took place from one unit to another they were at market price and not at cost price, and (v) each unit had its own separate management.
The evidence showed that throughout the course of its existence since 1942 the chemical works had made profits only in two years and that for the rest of the time it had been making losses which had to be met by the Com pany out of the profits of other units.
Held, that on the facts found in the present case, there was no nexus of integration between different lines of business carried on by the Company and that the Tribunal was right in 517 its conclusion that the chemical works was ' an independent unit and that, therefore, in fixing the wage structure etc.
, one had to look to the position of the chemical works only and could not integrate it with other units.
The Associated Cement Companies Limited, Chaibassa Cement Works,Jhinkpani vs Their Workmen, (1960) 1 S.C.R. T, 703, Pratap Press etc.
vs Workmen, , Pakshi raja Studios V. Workmen, and Hony.
Secretary, South India Milloumers 'Association vs Secretary, District Coimbatore District Textile Workmen Union, (1962) (2) S.C.R. (Supp.) p. 926 relied on.
Fine Knitting Co. Ltd. vs Industrial Court, Bombay, (1962) (3) S.C.R. (Supp.) p. 196, applied.
Held, further, that in making a direction for the fixation of an increased fair wage on an incremental scale, the present financial condition of the concern and its stability are both necessary to be considered.
There is a difference between a minimum wage and fair wage which is above the bare minimum wage.
In the former case the tribunal could insist that the employer paid minimum wages even out of capital.
Messrs Crown Aluminium Works vs Their Workmen, (1958) S.C.R. 651, referred to.
Held, also, that it is well settled that both gratuity As well as provident fund schemes can be framed in the same concern if its financial position allows it, and that though the financial position of the chemical works had not been found to be good and stable enough to warrant an incremental wage structure, the direction given by the Tribunal for the framing of a gratuity scheme was not erroneous, as it was a long term provision and there was no reason to suppose that in the long run the appellant would not be in a flourishing condition.
