The appellant as reversioner sued for a declaration that the adoption of respondent 1 by respondent 2 to her deceased husband was invalid in law and respondent 1 acquired no right to the properties left by the husband of respondent 2.
The parties were governed by the Banaras School of Mitakshal a Hindu law and respondent 1 was the sister 's daughter 's son of respondent 2.
The question was whether a wife 's sister 's daughter 's son could 'be validly adopted to a person governed by the Banaras School of Mitakshara Hindu Law.
The High Court answered it in the affirmative and dismissed the suit.
Reliance wag placed on behalf of the appellant in this Court on Nanda Pandit 's Dattak Mimansa which specifically ,excluded a wife 's sister 's daughter 's son for the purpose of adoption on the ground of incongruous relationship (Viruddha Sambandha) as also on the text of Ashvalayana interdicting marriage with a sapinda, sagotra and viruddha sambandha girl such as a wife 's sister 's daughter on which the author of Dattak Mimansa had relied.
It was contended that when a positive statement in the text was followed by a negative one, the latter 628 containing the prohibition must be held to be mandatory and that in any case since the prohibition against marriage to a sapinda or sagotra girl was mandatory, the prohibition against marriage to a Viruddha Sambandha girl must also be equally go.
Held, that the contentions were without substance and must fail.
Adoption of a wife 's sister 's daughter 's son is legally valid under the Banaras School of Mitakshara Hindu law.
None of the reasons which rendered marriage to a sapinda or sagotra girl invalid were present in the case of a marriage to a Viruddha Sambandha girl and the rule against marrying a Viruddha Sambandha girl was not intended by its author to be mandatory.
The extension of the rule of Viruddha Sambandha to adoption made by Nanda Pandit was not meant by him to be mandatory.
Minakshi vs Ramanada, Mad. 49, distin guished.
Held, further, that the marriage of a Hindu with his wife 's sister 's daughter is not invalid in Hindu law.
Ragavendra Rau vs
Jayaram Rau, Mad. 283, referred to.
Case law reviewed.
