The appellant was appointed a qanungo in Pepsu and latter as Assistant Consolidation Officer.
Complaints having been received against him, an enquiry was held as a result of which he was dismissed by the Revenue Secretary.
Against this order he preferred an appeal to the State Government.
The Revenue Minister Pepsu wrote on the file 'chat dismissal would be too hard and instead he should be reverted as qanungo but no written order to that effect was served upon the appellant.
After merger of Pepsu with Punjab, the Revenue Minister Punjab sent up the file to the Chief Minister with the remarks "C.M. may kindly advise".
The Chief Minister passed the order confirming the dismissal.
and the order was duly communicated to the appellant.
The appellant challenged the order of the Chief Minister Punjab on the ground that the Chief Minister Punjab could not sit in review on the order of the Revenue Minister Pepsu and that the Chief Minister was not competent to deal with the matter as it pertained to the portfolio of the Revenue Minister.
Held, that the order of the Revenue Minister Pepsu could not amount to an order by the State Government unless it was expressed in the name of Rajpramukh as required by article 166(1) of the Constitution and was then communicated to the appellant.
Until the order was so communicated it was only of a provisional character and could be reconsidered over and ever again.
Before communication the order was binding neither on the appellant nor on the State Government.
State of Punjab vs Sodhi Sukdev Singh A.I.R. (1961) 2 S.C.R. 3 71 referred to.
714 Held, further, that the Chief Minister Punjab was competent to deal with the appeal and to pass the order which he did.
Under r. 25 of the Rules of Business of the Punjab Government the matter undoubtedly related to the portfolio of the Revenue Minister.
But since tinder r. 28(1)(ii) and (xix) which provide that cases involving questions of policy and cases of administrative importance and such other cases or classes of cases as the Chief Minister may consider necessary shall be referred to the Chief Minister, the case was properly referred to the Chief Minister.
Under r. 4 the order passed by the Chief Minister, even though it pertained to the portfolio of the Revenue Minister, would be deemed to be an order of the Council of Ministers.
It would be the Chief Ministers advice to the Governor, for which the Council of Ministers Would be collectively responsible and action taken thereon would be the action of the Government.
Departmental proceedings cannot be divided into two parts : (i) enquiry and (ii) taking of action ; there is one conti nuous proceeding though there are two stages.
Any action decided to be taken against a public servant found guilty misconduct is a judicial order and as such it cannot be varied at the will of the authority.
