In order to put the sugar industry on a stable footing, for which it was necessary to develop the cane area, the Ruler of the erstwhile Gwalior State by an order dated 27 7 1946 sanctioned the levy of cess of one anna per maund on all sugar cane purchased by the respondent company.
When the Government of Madhya Bharat, which was the successor state of the former Gwalior State, made a demand for payment of the cess, the respondent filed a petition before the High Court of Madhya ,Bharat challenging the legality of the levy on the grounds (1) that the order dated 27 7 1946 was only an executive order and not a law under article 265 of the Constitution of India and that, therefore, there was no authority for the imposition of the cess after January 26, 1950, and (2) that the levy was discriminatory and violated article 14 inasmuch as while the respondent was made liable to pay the cess the other sugar factories in the State were exempt.
It was found that at the time when cess was first levied there was no sugar factory in existence in the Gwalior State other than that of the respondent.
Held, that (i) the Ruler of an Indian State was an absolute monarch in which there was no constitutional limitation to act in any manner he liked, he being the supreme legislature, the supreme judiciary and the supreme head of the executive.
I Consequently, the order dated 27 7 1946 issued by the Ruler of Gwalior State amounted to a law enacted by him and became an existing law under article 372 of the Constitution of India.
The levy of cess was therefore by authority of law within the meaning of article 265; Madhaorao Phalke vs The State of Madhya Bharat, ; , followed.
(2) the levy of cess did not contravene article 14 because (a) the object was cane development in the particular area and a geographical classification based upon historical factors was a permissible mode of classification, and (b) a tax could not be struck down as discriminatory unless it was found that it was imposed with a deliberate intention of differentiating between 620 (ii) where the order is passed by the Sub divisional Animal Husbandry Officer, under sub rule (5), to the District Animal Husbandry Officer and (iii) where the order is passed by the authority prescribed under sub rule (1) to the Sub divisional Animal Husbandry Officer, if there is one; if not, to the District Animal Husbandry Officer; (b) The appeal shall not be decided against the appellant unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
" The argument on behalf of the petitioners is that they are "Kassais" by profession and they earn their living by slaughtering cattle only (not goats or sheep which are slaughtered by "Chiks"); that they have the fundamental right to carry on their profession and trade; and that section 3 of the Act read with r. 3 imposes unreasonable restrictions restrictions not in the interests of the general public on their fundamental right and therefore they are not saved by cl.
(6) of article 19 of the Constitution.
Some of these arguments were considered by this Court in Md. Hanif Quareshi vs The State of Bihar (1) and it was pointed out that the test of reasonableness should be applied to each individual statute impugned and no abstract standard, or general pattern, of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable to all cases.
It referred to the decision in State of Madras vs V. G. Row (2) and repeated what was said therein that "the nature of the right alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial verdict." 'Another consideration which has to be kept in mind is that "the legislature is the best judge of what is good for the community,.
by whose suffrage it comes into existence. . . . (See The State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga (3)).
But the ultimate responsibility for determining the validity of the law must rest with the (1) (2) ; (3) 621 Court and the Court must not shirk that solemn duty cast on it by the Constitution.
We must, therefore, approach the problem before us in the light of the principles laid down by this Court.
The most pertinent question is having regard to all the relevant circumstances, is the age of 25 years laid down in section 3 a reasonable restriction on the right of the petitioners in the interests of the general public ? We are unable to say that it is.
Apart from the affidavits made on behalf of the petitioners and the respondent State, a large volume of authoritative and expert opinion has been placed before us which shows beyond any doubt that a bull, bullock or she buffalo does not remain useful after 14 or 15 years and only a few of them live up to the age of 25.
In the Report of the Cattle Preservation and Development Committee, published by the Ministry of Agriculture, it is recommended by the Committee that the slaughter of animals over 14 years of age and unfit for work as also animals of any age permanently unable to work owing to injury or deformity, should be allowed.
In the Report on the Marketing of Meat in India (published by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture) there is a reference to a draft Bill circulated by the Ministry of Agriculture (page 112 of the Report) which contains a clause that animals over 14 years of age and unfit for work may be slaughtered on a certificate from a Veterinary Officer.
In the Report on the Marketing of Cattle in India, again published by the Ministry of Food and Agriculture, occurs the following passage as to the price of animals with reference to their age: "Young draught animals up to the age of 4 years being raw and untrained fetch comparatively low prices.
Between 4 and 8 years of age, the animals are in the prime of their youth and tender best service, and fetch maximum prices.
From the 8th year onwards old age sets in, and a graded decline is observed in their capacity to work and consequently prices depreciate considerably." .
In a Food and Agricultural Organisation study of cattle in India and Pakistan (Zebu Cattle of India and 79 622 Pakistan, page 94) it is stated that the active breeding life of a bull is estimated to be about 10 years.
In Black 's Veterinary Dictionary (edited by W. C. Miller and G. P. West, fifth edition) it is stated that pedigree ,bulls may reach 12 or 14 years of age before being discarded; and cattle seldom live longer than 15 or 16 years, and when they do, their age is usually of no immediate importance.
In another publication of the Ministry of Agriculture called 'Problems of Cattle Insurance ' under Indian conditions, it is stated that the life of cattle is comparatively much shorter, the maximum age being only about 15 years.
There is an interesting chart relating to the determination of age in cattle in a publication called 'Cattle Development in Uttar Pradesh ' by R. L. Kaura, Director of Animal Husbandry; that chart shows that at II years incisors appear smaller due to wearing out; at 12 years space appears between the teeth, and after 12 teeth wear out constantly and roots remain far apart from one another.
As against all this expert opinion the respondent State has relied on the chart embodying some useful data about domestic animals, prepared by Major A. C. Aggarwala, Director of Veterinary Services, Punjab, and R. R. Gulati, Superintendent, Veterinary Department, Jullandur, which shows the sterility age of a buffalo at 15 and average age at 25, and of a cow sterility at 15 and 16 years and average life 22 years.
