The property regarding which the contention is raised that the fundamental rights of the petitioners under articles 19(1) (f) and 31 ( 1) of the Constitution are alleged to 832 have been infringed is a plot of land within the Municipal limits of Hazaribagli with certain buildings and structures thereon,which originally belonged to the Raja of Ramgarh.
On January 16, 1948, the Raja leased this property to N for a term of 99 years and sometime thereafter settled his reversionary interest of the property for the benefit of a Trust.
The estate of Ramgarh was notified under section 3(1) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act for being taken over by the Government of Bihar and in consequence, the estate statu torily vested in the State of Bihar.
A notice was issued to N to show cause why the lease executed in his favour should not be set aside under s.4(h) of the act as the lease was executed well within the period specified under section 4(h).
N submitted objections standing that these properties were not covered by section 4(h).
During the pendency of the enquiry N surendered his leasehold to the trust.
The trust leased the property to one 1, who assigned his household interest in the property to the petitioner Company.
The present sought to quas the said proceedings under section 4(h) pending before the Collector wherein an enquiry was having held as to the manner in which the property in, question was being enjoyed by tile Raja of Ramgarh prior to the transfer, by lease for 99 years.
The question is whether any fundamental rights of the petitioner have been infringed by the enquiry being held.
Held, that before a party could complain of an infringement of his fundamental rights to hold property he must establish that be has title to that property and if that title itself is in dispute and is the subject of adjudication in proceedings legally constituted,the cannot obviously put forward any claim based on such title until as a result of that enquiry his title established.
It is only thereafter that the question whether his rights in or to that property have been improperly or illegally infringed could arise.
