In May, 1959, the appellant was sent to Ambala Jail as an undertrial prisoner.
On account of certain jail offences alleged to have been committed by him the Superintendent of Jail segregated him from other prisoners and kept him in a separate cell.
He was convicted in June, 1960.
Though he was 296 not alleged to be guilty of any jail offence or indiscipline after this date he was still confined in a separate cell without being allowed to communicate with other prisoners; he was only allowed to come out in the compound attached to the cell for one hour in the morning and for one hour in the evening.
In December, 1960, the Governor ordered that the appellant be treated as a B" class prisoner.
Even after this he was still kept in a separate cell with this difference that he locked up only at night and was allowed to move in the compound attached to the cell during the day.
But he was still not allowed to communicate with others.
The Prisons Act provided for the separation of prisoners and s.28 thereof permitted convicted criminal prisoners to be confined in cells either in association or individually.
Paragraph 571 of the Punjab Jail Manual provided that so far as possible all convicts shall be kept separate both by day and by night.
Paragraph 575 provided that a convict who could not be confined in a cell by day by reason that he was required for some jail service shall be confined in a cell by night.
The appellant contended that his confinement was under para 575, that para 575 offended article 14 of the Constitution and that the Superintendent of Jail acted mala fide and discriminated against him by keeping him in solitary confinement. ^ Held, that para 575 of the Punjab Jail Manual did not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
This paragraph was a part of an integrated scheme for the maintenance of discipline of prisoners by providing for their separation.
The classification was made on the basis of sex and the nature of the prisoners and depended on the availability of cells; is had a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
The power to separate was entrusted to the highest officer in the jail who was ordinarily expected to act reasonably, objectively and without bias.
Held, further (per Sinha, C. J., Subba Rao, Shah and Mudholkar, JJ.) that the confinement of the appellant in a separate cell in the manner it was being done was illegal.
The separation of the appellant so as to seclude him from communicating with or from the sight of other prisoners certainly amounted to cellular confinement if not to solitary confinement.
This could only be done as a measure of punishment, and even then the prisoner was entitled to have one hour 's exercise every day and to have his meals in association with one or more prisoners.
The appellant was discriminated from other prisoners and, under the colour of the rules for separation, was illegally confined in a manner of authorised by law.
Per Dayal,J. There was no discrimination or illegality in keeping the petitioner in a separate cell.
The mere fact 297 that a person was kept in a separate cell did not make his confinement solitary, cellular or separate.
Paragraph 571 of the Jail Manual provided that subject to cell accommodation and requirement of labour all convicts be kept separate both by day and by night.
Paragraph 575 provided an exception that where the convict could not be kept separate by day he could be kept separate by night.
The entire scheme of the Prisons Act and the rules was that ordinarily a prisoner was to be kept separate and that only in cases of limitation of providing separate cells were prisoners to be kept together.
There was no provision that a prisoner kept in a cell was to be specially.
allowed to associate or mix with other prisoners.
