Acting under section 38 (1) (f) of the C. P. Municipalities Act 1922, the Provincial Government, with the sanction of the Government of India, transferred certain Nazul Lands to the Municipal Committee to be used for the purposes of a garden.
The 1922 Act was repealed by the City of Jabalpur Corporat ion Act, 1948, which replaced the Municipal Committee by the Jabalpur Corporation.
Under section 81 of the Corporation Act the State Government issued a notification notifying that a portion of this land needed for making a road stood divested from the Corporation.
The Corporation filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the notification.
On a concession made by the counsel for the State that the transfer of the land had been made by the Central Government the High Court held that the notification could not be sustained under section 81 which was applicable only to transfers made by the State Government But the High Court sustained the notification under section 38 of the repealed 1922 Act, relying upon the saving in section 3 (1) of the Corporation Act.
Held, that the transfer of the land in fact had been made by the State (Provincial) Government and the notification was fully justified by the provisions of section 81 of the Corporation Act.
There was no basis on which the High Court could have based its assumption that the transfer was by the Central Government.
The allegations in the writ petition proceeded on the basis that the transfer was by the State Government.
On the pleadings the appellant ought not to have been permitted to put forward a case that the State Government was not the transferor of the property.
To confine a party to his pleadings particularly in respect of facts, is dictated not merely by the need for orderliness but for avoiding surprise to the other party.
Save in exceptional cases, parties should be held strictly to their pleadings, and if there is need to amend them, the Court should insist on formal amendments being affected.
136 in the present case, on the terms of the order transferring the land it was clear that the transfer was made by the Provincial Government.
