The respondent imported 2,000 drums of mineral oil and the appellant confiscated 50 drums and imposed a personal penalty.
The appeal of the respondent was dismissed by the Central Board of Revenue.
The respondent filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the Calcutta High Court.
A Full Bench of the High Court held that the High Court had no jurisdiction to issue a writ against the Central Board of Revenue in view of the decision in the case of Saka Venkata Subbha Rao.
However, as the Central Board of Revenue had merely dismissed the appeal against the 564 order of the appellant, the High Court further held that it had jurisdiction to pass an order against the appellant.
The appellant came to this Court after obtaining a certificate.
Held that the appellant had merged into that of the Central Board of Revenue and hence no order could be issued against the appellant.
It is only the order of the appellate authority which is operative after the appeal is disposed of.
It is immaterial whether the appellate order reverses the original order, modifies it or confirms it.
The appellate order of confirmation is as efficacious as an operative order as an appellate order of reversal or modification.
As the appellate authority in this case was beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court, it was not open to the High Court to issue a writ to the original authority which was within its jurisdiction.
Election Commission, India vs Saka Vankata Subba Rao, , A. Thangal Kunju Mudatiar vs M. Venkitachalam Poiti, ; , Commissioner of Income tax vs M/s. Amritlal Bhogilal & Co. [1959] section C. R. 713 and Madan Gopal Rungta vs Secretary to the Government of Orissa, (1962) (Supp.) 3 S.C.R. followed.
Barkatali vs Custodian General of Evacuee Property, A. 1.
R. , overruled.
Joginder Singh Waryam Singh vs Director, Rural Rehabilitation, Pepsu, Patiala, A. 1.
R. 1955 Pepsu 91, Burhanpur National Textile Workers Union vs Labour Appellate Tribunal of India at Bombay, A. I. R. , and Azmat Ullah vs Custodian, Evacuee Property, A.I.R. 1955 All 435, approved.
State of U. P. vs Mohammed Nooh, ; , distinguished.
