The three respondents were declared by the appellant to have passed the Intermediate examination.
Thereafter they prosecuted further studies and subsequently the fathers and guardians of the respondents were informed that the Examination Committee of the Board had cancelled the examination results of the respondents and that they were debarred from appearing at the next examination.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court of Allahabad contending that since the Examination Committee had never afforded any opportunity to them to rebut the allegations made against them the Examination Committee had violated the principles of natural justice.
They also contended that the Committee had violated the provisions of the U. P. Intermediate Education Act, 192 1.
The appellant while admitting that no opportunity had been afforded to the respondents to rebut the allegations against them, contended that the Examination Committee was only an administrative body acting merely administratively and it was not bound to give a hearing to a party who might be affected by its decision.
The Single judge who heard the writ petition held that the Committee was not bound to act judicially and there was no statutory obligation on the Committee to give an opportunity to be heard.
The respondents appealed to a Division Bench and one of the judges of Bench held that even though the Committee was not bound to act judicially or quasijudicially and it was acting administratively it ought to have given an opportunity to the respondents of being heard.
The other judge was of the opinion that since the committee was acting only administratively it was not bound to give a hearing.
The matter then went before a third judge who held that even though the Committee was acting merely administratively the respordents were entitled to a hearing.
The appellant thereupon appealed to this Court.
The appellant contended that the Committee was only a body a ing administratively and that the principles of natura 37 justice, including the maxim audi alteram partem apply only to judicial or quasi judicial bodies.
The respondents contended that the High Court was wrong in holding that the Committee was only an administrative body.
It was further submitted by them that the mere fact that there was nothing express in the Act or the Regulations framed thereunder which might make it obligatory for the Committee to call for an explanation and to hear the examinee whose case it was required to enquire into was not wholly determinative of the question whether a duty is cast on the Committee in cases like this to act judicially.
Held, that the inference whether the authority acting under a statute, where it is silent, has the duty to act judicially will depend on the express provisions of the statute read along with the nature of the rights affected, the manner of disposal provided, the objective criterion if any to be adopted, the effect of the decision on the persons affected and other indicia afforded by the statute.
The mere fact that the Act in question or the relevant Regulations do not make it obligatory on the Committee to call for anexplanation and to bear the examinee is not conclusive on the question whether the Committee acts as a quasi judicial body when exercising its powers under Ch.
VI, r. 1 (1), of the Regulations.
It is obvious that the Committee when it proceeds to decide matters covered by r. 1 (1) will have to depend upon materials placed before it and before it decides to award any penalty it has to come to an objective determination on certain facts and this is the only manner in which it can carry out the duties impos.
ed on it.
Even though there is no lis in the present case in the sense that there are not two contending parties before it the Committee should hear the examinees whose lives may be seriously affected by its decision even subjecting them in some cases to criminal prosecution on charges of impersonation, fraud and perjury.
Though therefore there is nothing express one way or other in the Act or the Regulation casting a duty on the Committee to act judicially, the manner of the disposal and the serious effects of the decision of the Committee lead to the conclusion that a duty to act judicially is cast on the Committee and the Committee when it acts under r. 1 (1) is acting quasi judicially and the principles of natural justice will apply to its proceedings.
Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani, ; , Yagendranath Bora vs Commissioner of Ilills Division & Appeals, Assam, ; Shri Radheshyam Khore vs State of Madhya Pradesh, , Gullapalli Nageswara Rao vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corpo ration, [1959] Stipp.
1 section C. R. 319 and Nathubhai vs Union (if lndia; , , followed.
