Section 12 of the , provides that the Central Government may constitute a Mining Board for any part of the territories to which the Act extended or for any group or class of mine .
In 1957 only one mining board i.e. the Bihar Mining Board was in existence and other mining boards were not constituted.
Section 57 empowers the Central Government to make Regulations.
Section 59(3), as it then stood, provided that before the draft of any regulation was published it should be referred to every Mining Board concerned and that it shall not be published until each such Mining Board had had a reasonable opportunity of reporting on it.
The Central Government referred the draft of the Coal Mines Regulations to the Bihar Mining Board which circulated the draft to all the members of the Board and the members communicated their opinions individually to the Central Government.
Thereafter, the Regulations were duly published and came into force.
The petitioner 's, who were being prosecuted in Bengal for violation of the Regulations, contended that the Regulations were invalid as : (i) it was incumbent upon the Central Government under 'section 12 of the Act to constitute all the Mining Boards and to refer the draft Regulations to all the Boards before they.
could be published under section 59.
and (ii) the communication of opinions by individual members 'of the Bihar Mining Board did not amount to consultation with the Board within the meaning of section 59(3).
Held (Per majority, Subba Rao, J., dissenting), that the 'Coal Mines Regulations, 1957, had been duly framed and published.
Section 59(3) merely provided that if a Mining Board was in existence at the relevant time it was obligatory on the Central Government to consult it before 905 the draft Regulation was published.
But section 12 was not mandatory and it was not obligatory on the Central Government to constitute any or all of the Mining Boards.
There was nothing in the Act or.
in the context which justified reading the word "may" in section 12 as "shall".
The Mining Board constituted under section 12 had to perform two functions, viz., to make a report in respect of regulations or rules referred to it and to decide cases which may be referred to it under section 81.
The working of the Act was not dependent on the constituting of Mining Boards.
This construction of section 12 did not render the provisions of section 59(3) nugatory.
Apart from consulting the Boards, all parties affected by the draft had an opportunity to make their suggestions or objections and these had to be considered before the draft was settled and the regulations were finally made.
Banwarilal Agarwalla vs state of Bihar, , explained.
Held, further, that the requirement of section 59(3) had been complied with in referring the draft Regulations to the Bihar Mining Board.
All that section 59(3) required was that a reasonable opportunity should be given to the Board to make its report.
How the Board chose to make its report, was not a matter which the Central Government could control.
Per Subba Rao, J. ,The Coal Mines Regulations were not validly made.
The Supreme Court had directly decided in Banwarilal vs State of Bihar that the Regulations were bad as there was no consultation with any Mining Board under section 59 (3) as the Boards were not in existence.
A fair construction of sections 12 and 59 (3) of the Act ' also showed that if the Central Government wanted to ' make regulations under section 57 it had to appoint Mining Boards and to refer the regulations to them before publication.
If the Central Government wanted to exercise the power under section 59 it had first to exercise the power under section 12.
The power to make regulations was coupled with a duty to consult the Mining Boards, and to discharge its duty it was incumbent upon the Central Government to appoint the Mining Boards.
Apart from this, the Regulations is so far as they purported to regulate mines in West Bengal had not been validly made as no Mining Board for the West Bengal area had been consulted before making the Regulations.
The Act did not empower the Central Government to make regulations in regard to mines in one part of the country by consulting a Board constituted for another part of the Country.
906 Banwarilal Agarwalla vs State of Bihar. , followed.
Alcock Ashdown & Co. vs The Chief Revenue Authority, Bombay, A. I. R. , referred to.
