Section 29 of the Indian Arms Act, 1878, provided that for prosecution for an offence under section 19(f) of the Act com mitted in the territories north of the jumna and Ganga no sanction was required but sanction was required for the pro. section if the offence was committed in other areas.
j was found in possession of an unlicensed firearm in Delhi, and though sanction under section 29 was necessary, he was tried and convicted without obtaining such sanction.
B was found in possession of an unlicensed firearm in Saharanpur and as no sanction under section 29 was necessary for his prosecution he was tried and convicted without obtaining any sanction.
The respondents contended that section 29 offended article 14 of the Constitution and was unconstitutional.
j contended that even if section 29 was invalid in its operation as regards territories to the. ,North of the jurnna and Ganga it was not invalid in its 865 application to the other territories as the parts of section 29 were separate and severable.
B contended that if the portion of section 29 which offended article 14 was struck down the remaining portion was complete in itself and required sanction for prosecution in all cases, and that if s.29 was void in toto s.19 could not stand and also become void and unenforceable.
Held, that section 29 Arms Act offended article 14 and was unconstitutional and as such no sanction was necessary for the prosecution of either j or B. The differentiation between the territories north of the jumna and Ganga and the other territories had no relevance now to the object of the legislation.
The differentiation had come into being an account of the fact that the largest opposition to the British Government in 1857 had come from the people to the north of the jumna and Ganga and they had been disarmed.
But now after more than a century conditions have changed and the distinction could not be sustained on any ground pertinent to the object ,of the law in question.
Mehar Chand vs State, A.I.R. (1959) All. 660, approved.
Held, further, that it was not permissible to strike out only the offending words from section 29 and to read the section as requiring sanction for prosecution for offences in areas north of the jamna and Ganga.
The section could.
not be construed as for bidding what it expressly authorised.
Nor could the section insofar as it required sanction for prosecution for offences committed in other territories be severed from the rest and held valid as that would necessarily again result in discrimination.
The entire section 29 must be struck down.
Bhai Singh vs State, A.I.R. (1960) All. 369.
approved.
Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Held, further, that section 29 was severable from the other, provisions of the Act and that its invalidity did not affect the validity of section 19.
Section 19 was a substantive provision providing punishment for violation of sections 14 and 15 and section 29 was merely procedural and in general the invalidity of a procedural provision could not be held to affect the validity of a substantive provision.
There was nothing in the Arm Act to take it out of the general rule.
Section 29 was intended for giving protection to the subjects against frivolous and vexatious prosecutions but sanction was not one of the elements of the under offence s, 19(f).
It could not be said that the legislature 866 would not have enacted the ' law without the; protection afforded by section 29.
Davis vs Wallace, (1921)257 U.S. 477; ; and Lemka
Parmers ' Grain Company; , ; 66 L. Ed. 458, referred to.
