On September 7, 1955, the appellant company entered into a contract with the respondents for the purchase of certain bales of jute cuttings to be delivered by the respondents in equal installments every month in October, November and December, 1955.
Under cl. 3 of the agreement the sellers were entitled to receive the price only on their delivering to the buyers the full set of shipping documents.
Clause 8 conferred on the sellers certain rights against the buyers such as the right to resell if the latter refused to accept the documents.
Clause 14 provided that all disputes arising out of or concerning the contract should be referred to the arbitration of the Bengal Chamber of Commerce.
As the respondents failed to deliver the goods as agreed the appellants applied to the Bengal Chamber of Commerce for arbitration.
The respondents appeared before the arbitrators and contested the claim, but an award was made in.
favour of the appellant.
Thereupon the respondents filed an application in the High Court of Calcutta under section 33 of the , 184 challenging the validity of the award on the ground that the contract dated September 7, 1955, was illegal as it was in contravention of the notification of the Central Government dated October 29, 1953, issued under section 17 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952, which declared that no person shall enter into any forward contract other than a nontransferrable specific delivery contract for the sale or purchase of raw jute in any form. . .
The appellant pleaded (1) that on the terms of the arbitration clause the question whether the contract dated September 7, 1955, was illegal was one for the arbitrator to decide and that it was not open to the respondents to raise the same in proceedings under section 33 of the ; (2 ) that the respondents were estopped from questioning the validity of the award by reason of their having submitted to the jurisdiction of the arbitrators ; and (3) that, in any case, the contract was a nontransferrable specific delivery contract within section 2 (f ) of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act and was not hit by the notification dated October 29, 1933.
Held, that : (1) the dispute as to the validity of the contract dated September 7, 1955, was not one which the arbitrators were competent to decide under cl. 14 and that in consequence the respondents were entitled to maintain the application under section 33 of the .
When an agreement is invalid every part of it including the clause as to arbitration contained therein must also be invalid.
Leyman vs Darwins Lid.
, , Union of India vs Kighorilal Gupta and Brothers, ; , Tolaram vs Birla Jute Manufacturing Company Lid., I. L. R. , relied on.
(2)the respondents were not estopped by their conduct from questioning the validity of the award.
Ex parte Wyld, (1861) 30 Law J. Rep. (N. section) Bank. 10, explained.
(3)on the true construction of the contract dated Sep tember 7, 1955, read with the terms of the import licence in favour of the appellant, the agreement between the parties was that the contract was not to be transferred.
In construing a contract it would be legitimate to take into account surrounding circumstances and, therefore, on the whether there was an agreement between the parties 185 that the contract was to be non transferable, the absence of a specific clause forbidding transfer was not conclusive.
Virjee Daya & Co. vs Ramakrishna Rice & Oil Mills, A. 1.
R. , approved.
British Waggon Co. vs Lea, , dist inguished.
Accordingly, the contract in question was not hit by the notification dated October 29, 1953.
