The Bombay City Civil Court Act of 1948, an Act passed by the Provincial Legislature of Bombay, provided by section 3 that the Provincial Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, establish for the Greater Bombay a court to be called the Bombay City Civil Court, and that this court shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law, have jurisdiction to receive, try ' and dispose of all suits and other proceedings of a civil nature nob exceeding Rs. 10,000 in value arising within Greater Bombay except certain kinds of suits which were specified in the section.
Section 4 of the Act provided that subject to the exceptions speci fied in 8. 3 the Provincial Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, invest the City Civil Court with jurisdiction to 52 receive, try and dispose of all suits and other proceedings of civil nature arising within the Greater Bombay and of such value not exceeding Rs. 25,000 as may be specified in the notification.
Section 12 barred the jurisdiction of the Bombay High Court to try suits and proceedings cognizable by the City Civil Court.
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 4 the Provincial Government invested the City Civil Court with jurisdiction to receive, try and dispose of all suits and proceedings of a civil nature not exceeding Rs. 25,000 in value.
The first respondent instituted a suit in the High Court of Bombay for recovery of Rs. 11,704 on the basis of a promissory note, contending that the Provincial Legislature had no power to make laws with respect to juris diction of courts in regard to suits on promissory notes which was a matter covered by item 53 of List I, and the Bombay City Civil Court Act of 1948 was therefore ultra vires.
It was further contended on his behalf that in any event section 4 of the Act was invalid as it involved a delega tion of legislative powers to the Provincial Government and that the suit was therefore cognisable by the High Court.
Held by the Full Court. (i) that the impugned Act was a law with respect to a matter enumerated in List II and was not ultra vires; (ii)that, as the legislature had exercised its judgment and determined that the City Civil Court should be invested with pecuniary jurisdiction up to Rs. 9,5,000 and all that was left to the discretion of the Provincial Government was the determination of the conditions under which the court should be invested with the enhanced juris diction, section 4 did not involve any delegation of legislative powers but was only an instance of conditional legislation and was not ultra vires or invalid on this ground; (iii) inasmuch as the impugned Act was in pith and substance a law with respect to a matter covered by List II, the fact that it incidentally affected suits relating to promissory notes (a subject falling within items 28 and 53 of List I) would not affect its validity and the suit was accordingly not cognisable by the High.
Court.
Per FAZL ALI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN and MUKHERJEA JJ.
The power of the Provincial Legislature to make laws with re spect to "administration of justice" and "constitution and organisation of all courts" under item 1 of List II is wide enough to include the power to make laws with regard to the jurisdiction of courts established by the Provincial Legis lature; the object of item 53 of List I, item 9, of List II and item 15 of List III is to confer special powers on the Central and the Provincial Legislatures to make laws relat ing to the jurisdiction of courts with respect the particu lar matters that are referred to in Lists I and II respec tively and the Concurrent List, and these provisions do not in any way curtail the power of Provincial Legislature under Item I of List II to make laws with regard to juris diction of courts and to confer jurisdiction on courts established by it to try all causes of a civil nature sub ject to the power of the Central and 53 Provincial Legislatures to make special provisions relating to particular subjects referred to in the Lists.
Per PATANJALI SASTRI and DAS JJ.
The words" adminis tration of justice" and "constitution and organisation of all courts" in item 1 of List II must be understood in a restricted sense excluding from their scope "jurisdiction and powers of courts" as the latter subject is specifically dealt with in item 2 List II.
Item 1 of List II does not therefore by itself authorise legislation with respect to jurisdiction and powers of courts, and the legisltive power under item 9.
in regard to "jurisdiction 'and powers of courts ", which can legitimately be exercised with respect to any of the matters in List II, can be exercised with respect to administration of justice as this is one of the matters enumerated in that List, with the result that the subject of general jurisdiction of courts is brought within the authorised area of provincial legislation; and as the Provincial Legislature is thus competant to make a law with respect to the general jurisdiction of the court, the apparent conflict with the central legislative power under item 53 of List I can be resolved by invoking the doctrine of pith and substance and incidental encroachment.
[The legislative practice which prevailed in India before 1935 was relied on in this case in support of the view that the Provincial Legislatures had power under the constitution of 1935 to invest courts constituted by them with general pecuniary jurisdiction].
Quaere: Whether it was not open to the Legislatures of India under the Government of India Act of 1935 to delegate their legislative powers to other agencies.
Queen vs Burah (59.
A 178).applied.
Jatindra Nath Gupta vs Province of Bihar distinguished.
Mulchand Kundanmmal Jagtiani vs Raman (51 Born.
L.R. 86 :, United Provinces vs Atiqa Begum Prafulla Kumar Mukherjea and Others vs Bank of Commerce, Khulna referred
