The appellants along with four others were charged with having committed offences under section 148 and sections 202 and 326, read with section 149, of the Indian Penal Code.
The incident which gave rise to the present criminal proceedings related to a cultivable field in respect of which a dispute arose as to its possession between the appellants and the faction of the complainants.
On September 14, 1960, a rioting took place in the field which resulted in the death of six persons and injuries to nine persons.
The appellant 's case was that they were in possessions of the field and were cultivating it at the time of the incident whereas the prosecution contended that the complainant 's party was in possession and that the appellants virtually invaded it and caused a massacre.
The High Court found that the crop in the field had been ploughed by the appellants and their companions and that when the operations were being carried on by them on the day of rioting, the villagers, who did not tolerate the strangers, came to the field armed with weapons to take forcible Possession of the field, that as soon as fire arms were used for the first time killing a person, the villagers started running away and that after all the villagers had run away, the appellants used their rifles against their respective victims when the latter were standing at a considerable distance from them.
The High Court took the view that as at the relevant time the property had been saved from the trespass, there was no justification for using any force against the running villagers and so, the appellants who were proved to have caused the deaths of the victims could not claim protection of the right of private defence and were guilty of the offence of murder under s 302.
Held, that the appellants were rightly convicted under s.302 of the Indian Penal Code on the findings given by the High Court.
490 In exercising the right of private defence, the force which a person defending himself or his property is entitled to use must not be unduly disproportionate to the injury which is to be averted or which is reasonably apprehended and should not exceed its legitimate purpose.
The use of the force must be stopped as soon as the threat has disappeared.
The exercise of the right of private defence must never be vindictive or malicious, In exercising its powers under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the Court must take care to put all the relevant circumstances appearing in the evidence to the accused, so that he might get an opportunity, to say what he wanted to do so in respect of the prosecution case against him, but it is not necessary that the Court should put to the accused detailed questions which may amount to his cross.
examination.
Held, that the failure to put the specific point of the distance from which the appellants used their rifles, under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, did not vitiate the trial or affect the conclusion of the High Court.
