The appellant employed as a temporary motor driver On the express condition that until such time as he was confirmed his services were liable to be terminated without notice or compensation and without assigning any reason.
Sometime afterwards, the appellant served a charge sheet upon K and after holding an enquiry dismissed him.
K made an application before the Labour Commissioner under section 16 C. P. for reinstatement alleging that the dismissal was illegal as it was not preceded by an enquiry.
The Labour Commissioner was doubtful whether any enquiry was held by the appellant but on the basis of evidence adduced before him he held the charges proved and accordingly dismissed the application.
On appeal, the Industrial Court held that the Labour Commissioner had no jurisdiction to hold the enquiry and made an order directing reinstatement of K with 651 back wages.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court for quashing the order of the Indus trial Court but the High Court dismissed the application.
The appellant contended (i) that in view of the terms of em ployment the appellant could dismiss K without holding an enquiry, (ii) that the Labour Commissioner had jurisdiction to ' hold the equiry and (iii) that the finding of the Labour Commissioner that no enquiry had been held by the appellant was perverse and the High Court should have intervened, Held, that the finding that no enquiry had been held by the appellant before dismissing K was perverse and the appellant was entitled to a writ quashing the order of the Industrial Court and restoring that of the Labour Commissioner.
The appellant had produced before the Labour Commissioner the evidence recorded at the enquiry which consisted of the statement of K himself signed by him and the statements of two conductors.
The explanation of K that he had been made to sign on a blank paper was unacceptable.
The finding of the Labour Commissioner amounted to a clear error of law, the industrial Court erred in thinking that it was bound by this finding and this error on its part was so apparent on the face of the record that it was proper and reasonable for the High Court to correct the error.
Semble, Inspite of the terms of employment the appellant could not dismiss k without holding an enquiry and that even if the appellant had failed to hold the enquiry it was open to the Labour Commissioner to hold one.
