In 1909 six persons created the Burhanpur Trust for governing, managing and administering the affairs of a school in Burhanpur.
Under the Trust deed 18 persons were appointed as the trustees and all movable and immovable properties connected with the school were vested in them.
Clause 5 of the Trust deed empowered the trustees "to appoint new trustees from time to time" and to frame rules and regulations for the benefit and efficient running of the school.
In 1917 the Hakimia Society was formed by the trustees for the purpose of running the school and 12 persons were named members of the governing council in which all the properties of the school were vested.
Since then ten members of the governing council have been administering the properties in respect of which a trust was created in 1909.
A suit under s.92 Code of Civil Procedure was filed for removal of the ten members of the governing council, inter alia, on the ground the Hakimia Society and the ten members of the governing council had not been validly appointed trustees of the trust properties.
Held, that the ten members of the governing council of the Hakimia Society were not validity appointed trustees of the Trust properties and were liable to be removed from the management thereof, The trustees of the Burhanpur Trust had no power to create another body of men as trustees in their own place.
Trustees who have once entered upon the trust cannot renounce their duties and liabilities except with the permission of the Court or with the consent of the beneficiaries or by the authority of the trust deed itself.
Nor can trustees delegate their offices or any of their functions except in some specified cases.
In the present case there was delegation of all the powers and functions of the trustees amounting to abdication in favour of a new body of men.
The trustees sought to divest themselves of the properties vested in them by the trust deed and to vest them in the 624 new body.
Such abdication could not be permitted.
There was nothing in.
the trust deed which allowed such an abdication and substitution of trustees.
, The provision in cl. 5 for appointment of new trustees only permitted the old trustees to add to their number.
Nor did the power to frame rules and regulations authorise the trustees to give up the management of the school themselves or to divest them.
selves of the properties entrusted to them by the trust deed and vest them in other persons.
