The respondent, who owned agricultural properties in the different districts of Uttar Pradesh, was assessed to agri cultural income tax by the Additional Collector of Banaras.
On challenge by way of a petition under article 226 of the Constitution, assessment was quashed by the Allahabad High Court on the ground that the assessing authority had no ,jurisdiction to assess.
Under section 6 of the U.P. Act No. XIV of 1956 the assessments by the Additional Collector were validated and a party to the proceedings under Agricultural Income tax Act was given the right to move the Court or authority within the prescribed period to review the proceedings where in the assessments had been set aside on the ground that the assessing authority had no jurisdiction to make the assessment.
By section 11 the authority or court so moved was bound to review the order.
The State of Uttar Pradesh applied to the High Court for review of its earlier order quashing the assessment.
The single judge of the High Court held that section II of the Act did not apply to writ pro ceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.
On appeal the Division Bench held that the order for the single judge did not amount to a 'judgment ' under Ch.
VIII r.5 cl.10 of the Letter Patent and the Rules of Allahabad High Court and that section 11 of the Act did not apply to proceedings.
by way of a writ before the High Court.
On appeal by special leave by the State it was contended that the Division Bench was wrong and by an additional statement of case it was sought to be urged that the application for review should be treated as one under order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 2 Held (per Sinha, C. J, Subba Rao, Ayyangar and Aiyar, jj.), that under cl.
IO of the Letters Patent of the Allahabad High Court and the Rules of the Court the expression 'judgment ' would even on the narrow view of the expression include the order in the present case whereby the statutory right given to the party was finally negatived and that the Division Bench was in error in holding that it was not a 'judgment '.
Held, further, that the proceeding under article 226 of the constitution were neither 'proceedings ' under the Act nor proceedings on the basis of the Act.
The proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution were independent and original proceeding and not a continuation of the assessment proceedings.
Venkataratnam vs Secretary of State for India, (1930) I.L.R.53 Mad.
979, Ryots of Garabandha vs The Zamindar of Parlakimedi I.L.R. , Ramayya vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1952 Mad.
300, Moulvi Hamid Hassan Nomani vs Banwarilal Coy.
(1947) II M.L.J. 32, Budge Budge Municipality vs Mangru (1952) 57 C.W.N.25 and Satyanarayanamurthi vs 1.T. Appellate Tribunal, A.I.R.1957 Andhra 123, referred to.
The Act had to be interpreted consistently with the Constitution and there was no power in the State Legislature to compel the High Court to act in a particular way in exercise of its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitu tion.
Section, II could only apply to cases 'Where any court or authority other than the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution, had decided the matter.
Held, further, that construing shall ' in section II of the Act as `may ' would defeat the very provisions of the Act.
Held, also, that the contention that the application under s.11 of the Act may be treated as one order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, was highly belated and further there were many possible objections to such a course and it cannot be acceded to.
