The second appellant was a manufacturer of cement and at the material time it had over a dozen factories in different parts of India none of which was in the State of Mysore.
The first appellant was its sales manager and had its head office in Bombay with a branch office at Bangalore in the State of Mysore ' Cement was a controlled article and every one wishing to buy cement.
had to get an authorisation from the appropriate Government authorities in a standard form which authorised the first appellant to sell cement in quantities mentioned therein and the cement had to be supplied from the factory therein mentioned.
The purchaser had to place an order with the first appellant.
stating the requirement, where the goods were to be sent and how they were to be sent.
In the present case, all the goods were sent against the authorisations from the various factories belonging to the second appellant which were all outside the State of Mysore and were received in the State of Mysore by the various 778 purchasers.
The Sales Tax Officer by his order dated March 31, 1958, took the view that though the property in the goods passed to the dealers and consumers outside the State, of Mysore, since the goods had actually been delivered in the State of Mysore as a direct result of such sales for purposes of consumption in the State, the sales must be deemed to have taken place in that State and, therefore, the sales effected by the first appellant as the sales manager of the second appellant, to customers in Mysore State amounted to intrastate sales and liable to tax under provisions of the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1948.
The High Court held that as the actual delivery to the purchasers was within the State of Mysore, the cement loaded outside the State and despatched to the purchaser did not convert the sales into inter State sales but were intrastate Wes.
Held, that the sales which took place in the present case in which the movement of goods was from one State to another as a result of a convenant or incident of the contract of sale, were in the course of inter State trade or commerce and fell within Art ' 286(2) of the Constitution of India, Consequently, the imposition of sales tax on such sales was unconstitutional.
M/S. Mohan Lai Hargobind vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , followed.
Endapuri Narasimhan & son vs The State of Orissa; , , Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, M/s. Ram Narain & Sons vs Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, ; and Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. Bombay vs section R Sarkar, [1961] 1 S.C.R. 379, relied on.
Rohtas Industries Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, [1961] 12 S.T.C. 615, distinguished.
