The appellants filed suit under the U.P Tenancy Act, 1939.
for the ejectment of the respondents who were tenants of sir.
The appellants filed the necessary extracts of papers in support of their case.
The trial court decreed the suits 905 holding the land in suit was sir, that the appellants were sirholders, that each of them did not pay a local rate exceeding Rs 25, that he did not hold more then 50 acres of sir land or more than 50 acres of sir and khudkast land which had not been sublet and that the respondents had not become hereditary tenants.
The respondents preferred appeals before the Commissioner.
During the pendency of the appeals the U.P Tenancy (Amendment) Act.1947, amended s.19 of the Act Amended section 19 provided that in suits for ejectment of tenants of sir the sir holder shall, before the first day fixed for recording evidence, furnish such particulars as may be prescribed and further provided that for failure to file such particulars the suit shall be dismissed.
Section 31 of the Amending Act provided that its provision shall apply to pending suits, appeals etc.
The respondents contended that the appellants had failed to comply with the provisions of amended section 19 and that the suits should be dismissed.
The Commissioner confirmed all the findings of the trial court and held that there had been sufficient compliance with the provisions of amended section 19 and according dismissed the appeals.
The respondents preferred second appeals before the Board of Revenue.
The Board held that the provisions of amended section 19 and of the rules framed thereunder had not been complied with and remanded the case to the trial court for compliance therewith and retrial.
Held, that there had been sufficient compliance with the provisions of amended section 19 and the rules framed thereunder and that the Board was riot justified in remanding the cases for retrial.
Section 19 did not bring about any real change in the substantive law affecting the question whether land was sir or not.
Even after the amendment, a sir holder, in order to succeed in his suit, had to establish the same facts which he had to establish prior to the amendment.
The only difference brought about by the amendment was in procedure and whereas prior to the amendment a sir holder could lead his evidence without informing the Court before hand about the material he would produce, after the amendment it was incumbent upon him to furnish such information to the Court before the date fixed for recording evidence, The necessary particulars had been furnished even prior to the amendment and the Commissioner could decide the appeals in accordance with the provisions of the Act as amended by the amending Act.
The attention of the Board was not drawn to the relevant documents filed by the appellants and it erred in stating that there had been no substantial compliance with the provisions of amended section 19 and of the rules framed thereunder.
