On July 1, 1956, the appellants made a rule that every workman employed on or before that date would be entitled to 30 days leave with wages after working for II months and workmen employed after that date would be entitled to earned leave in accordance with the provisions of s.79 of the Indian .
The State Government referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal the question whether all the employees should be allowed 30 days earned leave with full wages for every II months ' service without discrimination.
The Tribunal held that ail the workmen were entitled to 30 days earned leave without making any distinc tion between workmen who joined before July 1, 1956, and those who joined subsequently.
The appellants contended that they were entitled to fix the terms of employment on which they would employ the workmen and it was open to the workmen to accept those terms or not and the tribunal was not justified in interfering in such a matter.
Held, per Gajendragadkar and Das Gupta, JJ., that the Tribunal was justified in directing the appellants to provide for the same uniform rule as to earned leave for all their employees.
The doctrine of absolute freedom of contract had to yield to the higher claims for social justice and had to be regulated.
In industrial adjudication no attempt should be made to answer questions in the abstract for evolving any general or inflexible principles.
Each dispute has to be decided on its own facts without enlarging the scope of the enquiry.
If some principles have to be followed or evolved, care has to be taken not to evolve larger 931 principles.
In order that industrial adjudication should be free from the tyranny of dogmas or the sub conscious pressure of preconceived notions it is important that the temptation to lay down broad principles should be avoided.
Accordingly it is not necessary to decide the broad contention whether industrial adjudication can interfere with the contract between the employers and the employees.
In the present case, all the workmen were governed b the same terms and conditions of service, except in regard to earned leave.
The discrimination was not based upon any principle and was bound to lead to disaffection amongst the new employees.
The financial burden imposed by the award on the employers was slight.
The provisions for earned leave in respect of old employees were not unduly generous or extravagant.
Earned leave provided for by s.79 was the minimum statutory leave.
If the appellants thought it necessary to provide for additional earned leave for their old employees, there was no reason why they should not make a similar provision in respect of new employees as well.
Western Indian Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay, and Bharat Bank Ltd. vs The Employees of Bharat Bank Ltd. , referred to.
Per Mudholkar, J. The Tribunal was not justified in interfering with the rule made by the appellants.
It was open to the appellants to grant leave according to s.79 , to all the employees but still they did not wish to reduce the leave of 30 days which they were already giving to the old employees.
The appellants have put into one category persons who enjoyed the same kind of benefits until July 1, 1956, and have put in another category persons who did not enjoy such benefits.
All persons in each category were treated alike, and the question of dis crimination did not in fact arise.
If the State had pro vided that persons entering its service after a certain date would be governed by a set of conditions which were different and less favorable than those governing the existing servants its action would not be open to an attack under article 14 of the Constitution.
An identical action of a private employer could also not be regarded as discriminatory.
An award made with the intention of promoting social justice must take into consideration the interests of the community.
Even if there was discrimination it could not be a perpetual source of bitterness as gradually the old employees would fade out 932 till only one category of workers would remain.
The facts that the dispute was comparatively of a minor character and that the financial burden imposed on the appellants was small did not entitle the tribunal to alter the contract between the employer and employees.
Since the appellant had provided for its new entrants such leave facilities as were recognised by the itself as fair, it was not open to the Tribunal to revise the relevant term of the contract.
Budhan vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1956 section C. 191, Khandige Sham Bhat vs Agricultural Income Tax Officer [1963] 3 S.C.R. 809, State of M.P. vs Gwalior Sugar Co. Ltd. C.A. Nos. 98 & 99 of 1959, dated 30.1 1.60, Ramjilal vs Income tax Officer, Mohindargarh, ; , Sardar Inder Singh vs The State, of Rajasthan, ; and Hathisingh .Mfg.
Co. vs Union of India, A.1 R. 1960S. C. 931 referred to.
