Teja Singh and Jhandha Singh were co sharers in certain agricultural land.
They partitioned the land taking 1 and 7 shares respectively and applied for mutation of names to the revenue authorities.
In the mutation by mistake the entire land was shown against the name of Teja Singh.
On discovering the mistake jhandha Singh applied for correction of the entry.
During the pendency of these proceedings Teja Singh died and his brother and heir Mula Singh sold the entire land in favour of the appellant.
Mula Singh appeared before the revenue authorities and admitted the mistake.
On this admission and on the report of an enquiry made into the matter by a subordinate revenue officer the authorities corrected the mistake and the correct shares of Teja Singh and jhandha Singh were shown as 1/8 and 7/8.
The appellant filed a suit for declaration of his exclusive title to the land.
The trial court decreed the suit holding that the corrected mutation entry which was made on the admission of Mula Singh after he had already sold the property was not properly made.
On appeal the first appellate court upheld the decree, holding that Gurbaksh Singh was a bonafide purchaser in good faith but without giving any finding on the question of title.
In second appeal the High Court reversed the findings and dismissed the suit.
The appellant contended that the High Court had no jurisdiction to set aside concurrent findings of fact in second appeal and that no presumption could arise in favour of the corrected entry.
Held, that the High Court was justified in interfering in second appeal as the first appellate court had given no finding on the question of title.
The finding that the appellant was a bonafide purchaser in good faith was not based upon any evidence and the onus was on the transferee to show that the transferor was the ostensible owner.
The appellant had full knowledge of the defect in the title of Mula Singh.
56 Held, further, that the presumption under section 44 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act arose that the corrected entry was true as the entry was made in accordance with law.
Section 37 provided that such an entry could be made in accordance with facts proved or admitted to have occurred.
Though Mula Singh 's admission after he had parted with the interest in the property, could not have been relied upon, the entry was made in accordance with the facts proved before the revenue authorities by the report of the subordinate revenue officer which recited the, terms of the partition also.
The appellant did not adduce any evidence to rebut the presumption.
