The appellant 's mother died leaving a will executed in favour of the appellant her sister and her brother.
The appellant applied for a probate and it was granted to her.
Subsequently in connection with a criminal appeal before the Oudh Chief Court applications were filed by the counsel for the State as well as the appellant for proceeding against her brother one Mr. Forbes under the Contempt of Courts Act.
On the failure of Mr. Forbes to appear in pursuance of notices issued by the Court, a proclamation under s.87 of Code of Criminal Procedure was published and certain properties were attached under s.88 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
These properties were assumed to belong to Mr. Forbes and they were under the custody of the appellant.
Finding that Mr. Forbes did not even then appear the Court recorded an order that the attached properties were at the disposal of the Government and the contempt proceedings would be adjourned sine die until Mr. Forbes appears or is arrested.
On directions from the Court the appellant handed over the properties to the City Magistrate who in turn forwarded them to the Government.
Thereafter Mr. Forbes died.
After his death the appellant made an application to the 41 Government for the return of the properties.
The Government refused to comply with this request and following an abortive writ petition filed by the appellant before the High Court for the issue of a writ of Mandamus against the Government, she filed before the High Court an application for a direction on the Secretary to the U. P. Government to restore the attached property.
The High Court dismissed the application and the appellant appealed to the Supreme Court by way of special leave.
The main questions which were raised in the appeal were whether at the time of the attachment the properties formed part of the administered estate of the appellant 's mother, whether the properties could be legally attached for securing the arrest of Mr. Forbes and whether the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure applied to contempt proceedings.
A .further question raised was whether the property attached under section 88(7) of the Code of Criminal Procedure would be at the disposal of the Government.
Held, that the properties in the hands of the executrix could become vested in Mr. Forbes only on her handing over the same to him or to somebody on his behalf.
The properties did not cease to be unadministered assets of the estate of the appellant 's mother merely because under the orders of the Court the appellant who was the executrix handed over the properties to the Magistrate.
The properties therefore could not be legally attached in any proceeding for securing the arrest of Mr. Forbes.
The order of attachment being invalid there is no question of the application of section 88(7) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the properties being at the disposal of the Government.
Even if the properties belonged to Mr. Forbes the provisions of sections 87 and 88 of the Criminal Procedure would not be available for securing the presence of a person who is alleged to have committed contempt.
Assuming that apart from the Criminal Procedure Code, the Court had the power to attach the contemner 's property it had no right to make over the attached property to the Government.
The possession of the properties by the Government is therefore without the authority of law.
It was further held that even if the attachment order was valid and the Government came into possession of the properties under the authority of law the courts attachment order can only subsist so long as the contemner was alive and the rightful owner of the property would be entitled to restoration of the property on the contemmner 's death.
The Court will be failing in its duty if on discovering its mistake of ordering an illegal attachment and wrongful delivery to the Government refused to correct the mistake.
Sukhdev Singh Sodhi vs The Chief Justice and Judges of the, Pepsu High Court; , , followed.
42 Bodgar vs Comptoir d ' Escomute di Paris, 3 P. C. 465, referred to.
