The appellant was convicted under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code.
He was a Superintendent in the Chief Engineer 's office and got a file removed from the Secretariat through a clerk, took it home and made it available to his friend, the co accused, who removed certain documents by substituting others.
The appellant returned the file to the office that next day.
He made a confession when the Chief Engineer threatened that if he did not disclose the truth the matter would be placed in the hands of the Police.
That confession was later retracted.
The three courts below were of the opinion that the statement of the Chief Engineer did not amount to a threat in the circumstances of the case.
Held, that section 24 of the evidence Act waives the stringent rule of proof as laid down by section 3 of the Act and requires the court to form a prima facie opinion on the evidence and circumstances of the particular case whether a confession should or should not be excluded as being involuntary.
It is not possible to lay down any inflexible standard and the Supreme Court acting under article 136 of the Constitution would not ordinarily differ from the concurrent findings arrived at by the courts below.
A retracted confession may form the legal basis of a con viction if the court is satisfied that it was true and voluntarily made.
As a general rule of practice, however, it is unsafe to rely upon a confession, much less a retracted confession, unless the court is satisfied that the retracted confession was true, voluntarily made and corroborated in material particulars.
In the present case there could be no doubt that the necessary ingredients constituting the offence of theft were mad 690 To constitute theft the loss caused need not be permanent Even temporary dispossession, though the person taking the property intended to restore it, may constitute theft.
Illustrations (b) and (1) of section 378 of the Indian Penal Code clearly show that a temporary deprivation of another person of his property may cause wrongful loss to him.
