The assessee company was incorporated in 1935 and its Memorandum of association authorised it, inter alia, to promote and to undertake the formation and establishment of other companies and to assist any company financially or otherwise.
There was another company known as the Southern Agencies Ltd. and Mr. A. V. Thomas was director of both these companies.
In 1948 the Southern Agencies Ltd. began the promotion of a company to be known as the Rodier Textile Mills Ltd., with a view to buying up a Mill known as the Rodier Textile Mills.
The assessee company made an advance of Rs. 6 lakhs odd to the promoter for the purchase of 6000 shares of the new company.
The public took no interest in the new company and the whole project failed.
No application for shares was made on behalf of the assesee company and no share was acquired.
The Southern Agencies Ltd., however, did not return the entire amount.
On December 7, 1951, it paid back only Rs. 2 lakhs which was received in full satisfaction.
The balance of Rs. 4,05,071 8 6 was written off on December 31, 195 1, which was the close of the year of account of the assessee company.
For the assessment year 1952 33 the assessee company claimed a deduction of that amount as a bad debt actually written off, or alternatively as an Expenditure, not of a capital nature laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of its business.
777 Held, (1) that the amount advanced for the purchase of shares was of a capital nature and, therefore, the balance was not allowable as an expenditure under s 10 (2) (xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, as it was not the business of the assessee company to buy agencies and sell them; and in any event the amount was expended in 1948 and not in the year of account ending December 31, 1951.
(2) that it was not a bad debt under section 10 (2) (xi).
A debt in such cases is an outstanding which is recovered would have swelled the profits.
It is not money handed over to some one for purchasing a thing which that person has failed to return even though no purchase was made.
Curtis vs J. & G. Old field Ltd., , Arunachalam Chettiar vs Commissioner 'of Income tax, (1936) L. R. 63 I. A. 233, Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income tax; , and Commissioner of Income tax vs Abdullabhi Abdulakadar; , , relied on.
