The respondent, A Central Government servant, who was the Secretary of the Civil Accounts Association of non Gazetted Staff, was departmentally proceeded against under rr.
4(A) and 4(B) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1955, for participating in demonstrations in preparation of a general strike of Central Government employees and for refusing to dissociate from the Association after the Government had withdrawn its recognition of it.
He impugned, the validity of the said rules on the ground that they infringed his fundamental rights under article 19 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that r. 4(A) was wholly valid but quashed the proceeding under r. 4(B) which it held to be invalid.
Rule 4(A) provided that no Government servant shall participate in any demonstration or resort to any form of strike in connection with any matter pertaining to his conditions of service and r. 4(B) provided that no Government servant shall join or continue to be a member of any services Association which the 790 Government did not recognise or in respect of which recognition had been refused or withdrawn by it.
Held, that in view of the decision of this Court that r. 4(A) of the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1955, in so far as it prohibited any form of demonstration was violative of the Government servants ' fundamental rights under article 19(1) (a) and (b), the High Court was in error in holding that the rule was wholly valid.
Kameshwar Parsad vs The State of Bihar, [1962] supp.
3 S.C.R. 369, referred to.
Participation in demonstration organised for a strike and taking active part in preparation for it cannot, either in law or fact, mean participation in the strike.
The respondent could not, therefore, be said to have taken part in a strike as such and the proceeding against him under section 4(A) being based on that part of it which was invalid must also be invalid.
It was clear that r. 4(B) of the said Rules imposed res triction on the undoubted ' right of the Government Servants under article 19 which were neither reasonable nor in the interest of public order tinder article 19(4).
The rules clearly showed that in the granting or withdrawing, of recognition, the Government right be actuated by considerations other than those of efficiency or discipline amongst the services or public order.
The restriction imposed by r.4 (B), therefore, infringed article 19(1) (c) and must be held to be invalid.
The Super tenant, Central Prison, Fatehgarh vs Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia, ; and Rex vs Basudev, , referred to.
