A firm having two partners entered into a contract for the supply of 1306.5 tons of bottom boards for railway wagons of certain specified varieties of hardwood to the Central Railwaf 339 Administration.
The wood was to be supplied at different places in different quantities.
The firm supplied wood of inferior quality.
Thomson and other officers issued false inspection notes certifying the quality of the wood to be according to specification.
On the basis of those false inspection notes, the firm received payment of Rs. 3,77,771.
The accused were charged under sections 109,120 B and 420 of the Indian Penal Code and section 5 (1) (d) read with s.5 (2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, and were sent up for trial to the court of the Special judge Kerala.
Charges were also framed against them.
However,the case was transferred by this court to the court of the Special judge, Poona.
The latter amended certain charges and also added a new charge against certain appellants.
The accused went in revision to the High Court of Bombay and questioned the legality or propriety of various charges.
The High Court ordered certain minor modifications in the charges and against that order both the accused and the Union of India came to this court by special leave.
It was contended 'on behalf of the accused that the obtaining of money by submitting each separate bill amounted to one distinct offence for which a separate charge should have been framed in view of s 233 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the charge as framed was a combination of a number of charges with respect to several offences of cheating committed by obtaining money on the presentation of 18 or 19 bills and was, therefore, against the provisions of section 233.
It was also contended that the charge of cheating should have been framed against that partner who had submitted the bill and obtained money.
Held, that the expression "every distinct offence" in section 233 Code of Criminal Procedure has a different content from the expression "every offence" or "each offence" and that offences would be distinct if they be not in any way inter related.
Chunne vs The State, A. I. R. 1954 All. 795, approved.
Held, further that a single charge for the offence of cheat ing in pursuance of conspiracy did not contravene the provisions of section 233 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The conspiracy entered into by the appellants was not for obtaining diverse amounts by cheating but to obtain the entire contract money by cheating.
The offence of cheating contemplated by the conspirators was one offence of obtaining, by cheating, the full amount due under the contract for the material supplied.
While the obtaining of money by cheating on the presentation of an individual bill did constitute the offence of cheating, the obtaining of the entire money in pursuance of the terms of the single contract and the single conspiracy entered into also 340 constituted the offence of cheating.
When the accused could not be punished for more than one such offence, it could not be the intention of law that he be charged with each of the offences which were in a way included in the complete offence made up by the entire course of conduct of the accused in pursuance of the conspiracy.
Bhagat Singh vs The State, , refered to.
Empress vs Raghu Rai, , Poonit Singh vs Madho Bhot, Cal.
270, Joan Subrna vs The King Emperor, and Promotha Nath Bay vs King Emperor, , approved.
Both the partners conspired to cheat the Government.
The bills were presumably presented on behalf of the firm, and, therefore, both the partners were responsible for obtaining the money on the presentation of the bills.
Hence, both of them were rightly charged.
A court trying an accused for an offence of conspiracy is competent to try him for all offences committed in pursuance of that conspiracy irrespective of the fact that any or all the other offences were committed within its territorial jurisdiction.
The charge framed by the Special judge was approved.
Purushottam Das Dalmia v The State of West Bengal, ; and L. N. Mukherjee vs The State of Madras, ; , followed.
