The Municipal Board of Pushkar passed a resolution on May 24, 1948, for the shifting of the bus stand on the sacred lake to another site near the Police Station where it resolved to construct a passenger shed and provide other facilities for the pilgrims.
The Regional Transport Authority by a resolution dated December 3/4, 1959, accepted the suggestion and issued a public notification to that effect on June 28, 1960.
Long before the notification, two residents of Pushkar moved the State Transport Authority under section 64A of the Motor Vehicles Act for revision of the decision of the Regional Transport Authority dated December 3/4, 1959, changing the bus stand but that application was rejected on February 18, 1960.
Another petition for the revision of the same orders under the same section was moved by certain bus operators on April 13, 1960.
The State Transport Authority on January 6, 1961, allowed that application, reversed the decision of the Regional 'Trans port Authority of December 31, 1959, and directed that the old bus stand should continue.
The Municipal Board moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution against this order of State Transport Authority.
The High Court rejected the application.
The Board appealed to this Court by special leave.
Its case was that the order of the Regional Transport Authority changing the bus stand was made under section 76 of the, Motor Vehicles Act and, therefore, was not open to revision, that the revision application was barred by limitation and that the first revision application having been rejected the second did not lie inasmuch as on the rejection of the first, the Regional Transport Authority 's order ceased to exist having merged in the State Transport Authority 's order, 374 Held (per curiam), that it was well settled that equitable considerations have no place in interpreting provision of limitation and their strict grammatical meaning has to be adhered to.
The expression "date of the order" in the first proviso to section 64A of the Act, therefore, could not mean the date of the knowledge of the order.
Per Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo, Das Gupta and Ayyangar, JJ.
The order of the Regional Transport Authority fixing the new bus stand and discontinuing the old was one made not under section 76 of the Act, which had no application, but under r. 134 of the Rajasthan Motor Vehicles Rules, 1955, made in exercise of the powers conferred by section 68 (2) (r) the Motor Vehicles Act.
The order was, therefore, open to revision tinder section 64A by the State Transport Authority.
T.B. Ibrahim vs Regional Transport Authority, Tanjore, ; , applied.
Section 76 had nothing to do with the fixation or alteration of a bus stand.
Although the word bus stand ' had not been defined in the Act, it was clear that a bus stand meant a place where bus services commenced or terminated.
Section 76, properly construed, dealt with the determination of parking places referred to by section 91(2)(e) of the Act.
The fixation of bus stands was within section 68(2)(r) of the Act and the power to issue the necessary notification was implied in that clause.
Nagendranath vs Suresh, A.I.R. (1 , General Accident Fire and Life, Assurance Corporation Ltd, vs Janmohomed Abdul Rahim, and Boota Mal vs Union of India; , , referred to.
In the instant case the effective order fixing the new bus stand was made not by the declaration of intention in the resolution of December 3/4, 1959, but by the publication of the notification on June 28, 1960, and the impugned application for revision under section 64A of the Act having been made before that date, no question of limitation could arise.
There was no scope for the application of the principle of merger in the present case since the State Transport Authority 's order rejecting the first revision application had been made before the effective and lawful order fixing the new bus stand was made by the notification.
Collector of Customs, Calcutta vs East India Commercial Co. Ltd. ; and Madan Gopal Bungta vs Secretary to the Government of Orissa[1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 906, distinguished.
375 Since the notice obligatory under the second proviso to section 64A was not admittedly (riven by the State Transport Autho rity before it passed its order dated January 6, 1961, this Court should, in the ends of justice, exercise its powers under article 142 of the Constitution and send the matter back to the revisional authority for disposal according to law.
Per Sarkar,J. The State Transport Authority 's order of January 6, 1961 was patently erroneous and should have been set aside as it was passed under section 64A on an application made set aside an order of the Regional Transport Authority, passed on December 3, 4, 1939, after the period of 30 days prescribed for such application under that section had expired.
Assuming that the Regional Transport Authority 's order which could be set aside under section 64A was the one made on June 28, 1960.
The State Transport Authority 's order of .January 6, 1961, would still be patently wrong for it set aside not that order but the order of December 3/4, 1959, which the State Transport Authority had no power tinder section 64A to set aside.
The State Transport Authority had no power suo motu to treat the application to set aside the order of December 3/4, 1959, as an application to set aside the order of June 28, 1960.
It had never been moved to do so nor had it in fact suo motu treated the application as one to set aside the order of June 28, 1960, for it expressly set aside only the Regional Transport Authority 's order of December 3/4, 1959.
The High Court was in error in holding that as the Notification of June 28, 1960, contained the order which could be set aside Linder section 64A, the application under that section which had been made before that date was not beyond time, for it omitted to notice that that application asked nothing concerning that order.
The application for setting aside the order of December 3/4, 1959, could not by amendment be turned into an application to set aside an order of June 28, 1960, after thirty days from the last mentioned day had expired.
