Dr. Vimla purchased a car in the name of her minor daughter Nalini aged about 6 months.
The price of tile car was paid by her.
The transfer of the car was notified in the name of Nalini to the Motor Registration Authority.
The insurance policy already issued was transferred in the name of Nalini after the proposal form was signed by Dr. Vimla.
Subsequently, Dr. Vimla filed two claims on the ground that the car met with accidents.
She signed the claim forms as Nalini.
She also signed the receipts acknowledging the pay ment of compensation money as Nalini.
Dr. Vimla and her husband were prosecuted under sections 120 B, 419, 467 and 468 of the Indian Penal Code.
Both the accused were acquitted by the Sessions Judge.
The State went in appeal and the High Court convicted Dr. Vimla under section 467 and 468 of the Indian Penal Code.
Dr. Vimla came to this Court by special leave.
Held, that appellant was not guilty of the offence under section 467 and 468 of the Indian Penal Code.
She was certainly guilty of deceit because though her name was Vimla, she signed in all the relevant papers as Nalini and made the Insurance Company believe that her name was Nalini, but the said deceit did not either secure to her advantage or cause any noneconomic loss or injury to the Insurance Company.
The charge did not disclose any such advantage or injury nor was there any evidence to prove the same.
The entire transaction was that of Dr. Vimla and it was only put through in the name of her minor daughter.
Nalini was in fact either a Benamidar for Dr. Vimla or her name was used for luck or other sentimental considerations.
The Insurance Company would not have acted differently even if the car stood in the name of Dr. Vimla.
586 The definition of 'false document ' is a part of the defini tion of forgery ' and both must be read together.
If so read, the ingredients of the offence of forgery relevant to the present case are as follows: (1) fradulently signing a document or a part of a document with an intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of a document was signed by another under his authority ; and (2) making of such a document with an intention to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed.
The expression 'fraud ' involves two elements, deceit and injury to the person deceived.
Injury is something other than economic loss, that is, deprivation of property, whether movable or immovable or of money and it will include and any harm whatever caused to any person in body, mind, reputation or such others.
In short, it is a non economic or non pecuniary loss.
A benefit or advantage to the deceiver, will almost always cause loss or detriment to the deceived.
Even in those rare cases where there is a benefit or advantage to the deceiver, but no corresponding loss to the deceived, the second condition is satisfied.
Haycraft vs Creasy, ; , in re.
London and Globe Finance Corporation Ltd., R. vs Welham, , Kotamraju Yenkatrayadu vs Emperor Mad. 90, Surendra Nath Ghose vs Emperor, Cal. 75, Sanjiv Ratnappa vs Emperor, A. I. R. and Emperor vs Abdul Hamid, A. 1.
R. , referred to.
