The main question involved in both the appeals was whether the marriage of Bangaru Ammal was in Asura form or in Brahma form.
The contention of the appellant was that it was not in Asura form.
Except a bare allegation in the plaint that the said marriage was held in Asura form, the plaintiffs did not give any particulars or set up any custom in the community to which the parties to the marriage belonged.
They had given evidence that 'a sum of Rs. 1000 was paid as 'Parisam ' to the father of bride but that evidence had been rejected by both the courts.
Respondents pointed out to the giving of Kambu by bridegroom 's party to the bride 's party at the time of betrothal and expenditure of Rs. 300/ by bridegroom 's party in connection with the marriage of Bangaru Ammal and maintained that it was Asura marriage.
Held, that the marriage of Bangaru Ammal was not in Asura form but in Brahma form.
There was nothing to show that there was a practice in the family to give Kambu as 'Parisam for the bride or Kambu was paid as 'parisam ' at the time of the betrothal ceremony in connection with the marriage of Bangaru Ammal.
The father of the bride had spent large amounts and the bridegroom 's party had spent only about Rs. 300/ in connection with the said marriage.
The expenditure incurred by the bridegroom 's party was not and could not have been the consideration for the father giving his daughter in marriage.
There is a presumption in Hindu Law that every Hindu marriage is in Brahma form and that pre sumption has not been rebutted in this case.
The court was entitled to presume that the necessary ceremony of Kanyadan must have been performed.
As no consideration passed from the bridegroom to the father of the bride, the father must be held to have made a gift of the girl to the bridegroom.
245 The essence of the Asura marriage is the sale of a bride for a price and it is one of the unapproved forms of marriage prohibited by Manu for all the four castes of Hindu society.
The vice of the said marriage lies in the receipt of the price by the bride 's father or other persons entitled to give away the bride as a consideration for the bride.
If the amount paid or the ornament given is not the consideration for taking the bride but only given to the bride or even to the bride 's father out of affection or in token of respect to them or to comply with a traditional or ritualistic form, such payment does not make the marriage an Asura marriage.
There is also nothing in the texts to indicate that the bearing of the expenditure wholly or in part by the bridegroom or his parents is a condition or a criterion of such a marriage, for in such a case the bride 's father or others entitled to give her in marriage do not take any consideration for the marriage, or in any way benefit thereunder.
The fact that the bridgeroom 's party bears the expenditure may be due to varied circumstances.
Prestige, vanity, social custom, the poverty or the disinclination of the bride 's father or some of them may be the reasons for the incurring of expenditure by bridegroom 's father on the marriage but the money so spent is not the price or consideration for the bride.
Even in a case where the bride 's father, though rich, is disinclined to spend a large amount on the marriage functions and allows the bridegroom to incur the whole or part of it, it cannot be said that he has received any consideration or price for the bride.
Though in such a case if the bridegroom 's father had not incurred the said expenditure in whole or in part, the bride 's father might have to spend some money on that account, such an indirect result could not be described as price or consideration for giving the bride.
Asura marriage is a marriage where the bride 's father or any other person entitled to give away the bride takes Sulka or price for giving the bride in marriage.
The test is two fold.
There shall not only be a benefit to the father, but that benefit shall form a consideration for the sale of the bride.
When this element of consideration is absent, such a marriage cannot be described as Asura marriage.
Jaikisondas Gopaldas vs Harikisandas Hulleshandas Born.
9, Vijarangam vs Lakshman, (1871) 8 Born.
H. C. Report.
244, Muthu Aiyar vs Chidambara Aiyar, , Chunilal vs Surajram, (1909) I. L.R. 33 Born.
433, section Authikesayulu Chetty vs section Ramanvjan Chetty" (1909) 1.
L. R. , Gabrielnathaswami vs Valliammai Ammal, A. 1.
R. , Ratnathanni vs Somasundara 246 Mudaliar, , Samu Asari vs Anachi Ammal, ; Kailasanath Mudaliar vs Parasakthti Vadivanni, Mad. 488, Sivangalingam Pillai vs K. V. Ambalayana Pillai, A. 1.
R. ; V. section Velavutha Pandaram vs section Suryamurthi Pillai (1941) 2 M. L. J. 770 and Vedakummapprath Pillai vs Kulathinkai Kuppan, , referred to.
