The appellant was convicted under s.5(1)(d)of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, on the ground that by abusing his position as a public servant he obtained an assignment of Government land in the name of his brother in law without revealing the relationship and by undervaluing the trees standing on the land.
The High Court on appeal directed that a statement showing the value of the timber calculated on the basis contended by the appellant may be submitted by either of the parties.
The appellant did not file any statement but a statement was filed on behalf of the prosecution.
The High Court without giving an opportunity to the appellant to file objections to the correctness of the report and the reliability of the statement filed by the prosecution relied upon the statement to come to the conclusion that there had been an under valuation by the appellant.
It was contended that section 5(1) (d) did not apply to the case and that before the High Court there had been a failure of natural justice.
Held, that a penal statute must be construed strictly and only such thing,; are offences as come within not merely the letter but also the spirit of the statute.
Dyke, vs Elliot, , referred to.
Held, further, that considering the object and scope of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, the expression otherwise ' in section 5(1) (d) is employed to bring in every abuse of official position by a public servant.
But the juxtaposition of the word otherwise with the words 'corrupt ' or 'illegal means ' and the fact that dishonesty is implicit in the word 'abuse ' indicate the necessity for a dishonest intention as an ingredient of the offence and innocuous acts will not be covered by the said clause.
725 Held, further, that the spirit of the Act which.
is in accord with the words used therein is to take in every form of corruption, and the facts in the instant case if established constitute an offence under.
vs 5(1)(d).
Ram Krishna vs State Of Delhi, ; and Dhaneshwar Narain Saxena vs Delhi Administration, ; , referred to.
Held, also that before the High Court, there had been violation of the principles of natural justice and that the matter had to go back to the High Court for the appellant being given an opportunity to meet the material put in by the prosecution before the High Court.
