A Receiver authorised and appointed by a Court to collect the debts due to the plaintiff respondent instituted a suit against the appellant firm and its alleged partners for the recovery of the price of tobacco and interest thereon.
The right of the receiver to institute a suit in his own name was challenged by the appellant.
Thereupon the respondent firm amended the Plaint by describing the plaintiff as "M/s. T. R. & Co., represented by I. Surayanarayana Garu receiver appoin.
ted in O.S. 275 of 1948 on the file of the District Munsiff 's Court Guntur.
" The appellant firm amended the written statement and contended that the amendment of the plaint was timebarred, that it did not cure the initial defect in the suit and that consequently, the suit was barred by limitation.
The trial court dismissed the suit on the ground that Suryanarayana was not entitled to institute a suit in his capacity as Receiver, that the amendment of the plaint was beyond time and that the suit was therefore time barred.
On appeal the High 996 Court held that the Receiver was entitled to institute the suit, that at the most there was a misdescription of the plaintifffirm in the cause title of the suit which could be corrected any time, that consequently the suit was within time and that the plaintiff was entitled to a decree with interest from the date of delivery of the goods till realization.
Held, that a Receiver invested with full powers to administer the property which is custodia legis or who is expressly authorised by the court to institute a suit for collection of the assets is entitled to institute a suit in his own name provided he does so in his capacity as a Receiver.
His function cannot be limited merely to the preservation of the property and it is open to a court, if occasion demands, to confer upon him the power to take such steps including instituting suits in the interest of the parties themselves.
The suit as originally instituted, was thus perfectly competent.
The High Court rightly held, that where there is a case of misdescription of parties it is open to the court to allow an amendment of the plaint at any time and the question of limitation would not arise in such a case.
Jagat Tarini Dasi vs Naba Gopal Chaki (1907) r. L. R. , relied on.
Held, further that this court does not interfere with the concurrent findings of the courts below on a pure question of fact, unless there are exceptional circumstances or unusual reasons which induce it to re examine the entire evidence.
Srimati Bibhabati Devi vs Kumar Ramendra Narayan Boy, (1946) L. R. 73 1.
A. 246 and Sriniwas Ram Kumar vs Mahabir Prasad, ; , referred to.
