The plaintiff filed a suit against his brothers who had for merly constituted a joint family for a declaration that the partnership which had been formed by them after they ceased to be joint in respect of a sugar mill stood dissolved on May 13, 1944, on which date one of the brothers had filed an earlier suit for dissolution of the partnership.
The earlier suit had been dismissed for default.
The plaintiff in the present suit also prayed for a decree for accounts from defendants I and 2 as well as for the appointment of a Receiver.
The trial court decreed the suit, ordered winding up and appointed a Commissioner.
It also directed the accounts prayed for.
Before the High Court Kanshi Ram who had not filed a written statement and against whom the proceedings in the trial court had been ex parte contended that the suit was barred by limitation and in any event he should not be called upon to account.
The plaintiff contended that the suit was one for distribution of the assets of a dissolved firm and was not barred by limitation.
The High Court while noticing that the plea of limitation taken by one of the parties was raised before it for the first time, held that by reason of section 3 of the Limitation Act it was bound to take notice of the bar of limitation and dismissed the suit.
Having decided Kanshi Ram 's plea the High Court passed consequential orders with regard to the several appeals by the other defendants.
On appeal it was contended in this Court that the question of limitation which was not raised even in the grounds of appeal before the High Court was a mixed question of fact and law and it should not have been entertained by the High Court.
Hold, that the suit for dissolution filed on May 13, 1944, had ended in a dismissal for default, and as such no date 317 of dissolution of the partnership as contemplated by 0.20, r. 15, of the Code of Civil Procedure had been fixed by the Court; the plaint could not be construed as the notice contemplated by section 43 of the Partnership Act, to terminate the partnership.
Even on the assumption that the summons accompanied by the plaint could be said to be the service of notice for dissolution of the partnership, the date of dissolution could only be the date on which the last of the partners was served.
With all these questions of fact to be investigated, the High Court had committed an error in treating the question of limitation as purely one of law and allowing it to be raised at the hearing for the first time before it, at the instance of a party who had not filed a written statement and raised an issue on the question before the trial court.
