The petitioners were holders of Stage carriage permits on Jodhpur Bilara arid Bilara Beawar routes.
The Rajasthan Roadways published a draft scheme which provided for taking over the transport service on the Jodhpur Bilara Beawar Aj mer route by the Roadways and also for taking over three overlapping routes or portions thereof which were entirely on Jodhpur Bilara Beawar Ajmer road and the names of the permit holders on these three overlapping routes with their permits were also specified for cancellation and no other transport vehicles were to ply on the route to be taken over.
The petitioners filed objection and challenged the scheme on the ground of discrimination before the Legal Remembrancer as some overlapping routes were not notified.
He held that even though these routes were not specified in the draft scheme and no notice had been given to the permit holders thereof, it was open to him to render the permits ineffective with respect to these routes also and passed orders accordingly.
The permitholders affected by the order of the Legal Remembrance filed writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court directed the Legal Remembrancer to go into the matter again and to leave the question of the twelve partially overlapping routes for a subsequent scheme.
The effect of the decision of the Legal Remembrancer considered in tile light of the decision of the High Court was that all the twelve partially overlapping routes were left out of the scheme and only the three routes notified in the draft scheme were affected.
The present petition is directed against his decision approving the scheme as modified by him and published on August 31, 1962.
In this Court it was urged (1) that the procedure of approving a part of the scheme once and another part later was illegal; 221 (ii)that the approval of the scheme by the Legal Rem embrancer after abdication of his own judgment was not a valid approval ; (iii) that the Legal Remembrancer ought to have given a fresh hearing ab initio to the objectors ; (iv) that there was no proper hearing and (v) that there was discrimination, as the, operators of the twelve partially overlapping routes were left out of the scheme.
Held, that as the twelve overlapping routes were never included in the draft scheme, the approval given to the craft scheme without touching these routes cannot be called 0an approval of a part of the scheme.
Held, further that in the present case the order of the High Court was analogous to a remand order and therefore, the decision of the Legal Remembrancer must be treated as a fresh decision and not a review of his earlier decision and there was no abdication by him of his functions.
Held, further, that when the objectors had been given full opportunity to lead evidence on the previous occasion which was still there for the Legal Remembrancer to take into account, it was sufficient for him to hear the objector 's arguments.
If it is borne in mind that the order passed by the High Court in the proceedings was in the nature of a remand order, this objection must fail.
Held, further, that the fact that the rules did not provide for a coercive process to secure attendance of witnesses did not mean that there could be no proper hearing without it.
Held, further, that under section 68C it was open to the State Government to take over any area or route to the complete or partial exclusion of other persons and there was no discrimination in the present case, for routes completely covered, by the route taken over stand on a different footing from the routes only partially covered.
