One Ittiyavira, the deceased father of the appellant purchased properties and paid part of the consideration for the transaction in cash and for the balance executed two hypothecation bonds in favour of his vendors, Ramalinga Iyer and Raman Vela Yudhan.
Ramalinga Iyer assigned his hypothe cation bond in favour of one Sankara Rama Iyer.
He had executed a promissory note in favour of one Anantha Iyer who, after his death, instituted a suit against his son Sankara Subha Iyer for recovery of the amount thereunder and obtained a decree.
Treating the deed of assignment executed by Ramalinga 496 Iyer in favour of Sankara Rama Iyer as a sham document, Anantha Iyer attached the mortgagee rights of Ramalinga Iyer in the hypothecation bond and eventually purchased them.
In a partition in Anantha Iyer 's family, the rights under the hypothecation bond purchased by him were allotted to his share and to that of his brother.
These two persons instituted a suit against Ittiyavira being O. section No. 59 of 1093 and obtained a decree for realisation of the amount against him and transferred their decree to one Venkiteswara Iyer who.
at the court auction held in execution of that decree, purchased the hypothecated properties which are properties in the suit and eventually obtained possession of the properties on 12. 7: 1099.
Before the institution of O. section 59 of 1093 by Anantha Iyer and his brother, Ittiyavira had executed a sale deed of these properties on 8. 10.
1093 in favour of his son, the appellant.
The appellant was not.
male a party to O. section No. 59 of 1093.
Ituyavira died in the 1107 and on 2. 2.
1108, Venkiteswara Iyer sold all the suit properties to the plaintiffsrespondents.
Thereafter the respondents instituted proceedings under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the Court of Magistrate claiming their possession over the suit properties which was disputed by the appellant.
The properties were attached and placed in the possession of the Receiver appointed by the court.
Eventually, the court held that the appellant 's possession over the properties be maintained until otherwise ordered by the competent civil court.
The High Court of Travancore affirmed the order of the Magistrate and the appellant was handed over the possession of the properties by the Receiver.
Consequently, the respondents instituted a suit out of which this appeal arises.
The trial court dismissed the suit and that decision was reversed by the High Court.
It was contended before this Court that the decree obtained by Anantha Iyer in O. section 59/1093 was a nullity because the suit was barred by time.
It was further urged that the appeal before tile High Court should have been heard not by a Division Bench of merely two judge but by a Bench of three judges as provided in section II (1) of the Travancore High Court Act, 1099.
Held, that if the suit was barred by time and yet, the court decreed it, the court would be committing an illegality and the aggrieved party would be entitled to have the decree set aside by preferring an appeal against it.
As has often been said, courts have Jurisdiction to decide right or to decide wrong and even though they decide wrong the decree rendered by them cannot be treated as nullities, 497 Maqbul Ahmad vs Onkar Pratap Narain Singh, A. 1.
R. , held inapplicable.
Where the question of limitation was not raised in the High Court, it cannot be allowed to be raised in this Court when the question was one of mixed fact of law.
In the instant case the possession of the Receiver during the proceedings under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure would necessarily unure for the benefit of the successful party and if this period is taken into account, the respondent 's suit would be well within time.
Held, further that no party has a vested right to have his appeal heard by a specified number of judges and no right of the party has been infringed merely because it was heard by two judges and not by three judges.
A litigant has no right to contend that a tribunal before whom he.
should have taken an appeal when he instituted the suit, should not be abolished and unless it can be shown that the repeal of the Travancore High Court Act was unconstitutional, whatever right of appeal may have vested in the party stood abrogated by the competent legislature.
