The respondents were the employees of the appellant and while a strike was going on in the concern of the appellant they physically obstructed the loyal and willing trammers from working in the colliery and insisted on other workmen to join them in the obstruction.
A charge sheet was served on the respondents and they were asked to show cause why disciplinary action should not be taken against them.
The respondents submitted their explanation and on an inquiry held by the welfare officer they were found guilty and the welfare officer recommended their dismissal.
The appellant filed an application before the Industrial Tribunal under section 33 (2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act and the tribunal approved of the dismissal.
Thereafter reference was made under section 10 of the Act and the present appeal is by way of special leave against the order of the Industrial Tribunal made in that reference.
The Tribunal has held that the enquiry by the management was proper but it further held that the dismissal amounted to victimisation.
The main question in the appeal was whether there was victimisation.
Hold, where a domestic inquiry is held properly the tribunal cannot sit in appeal on the findings of the domestic tribunal and it can only interfere with the punishment inflicted as a result of the domestic inquiry where there is want of good faith or basic error or the violation of the principles of natural justice or where the findings are perverse or baseless or the case is one of victimisation.
710 Though in a case of proved misconduct normally the imposition of a penalty may be within the discretion of the management there may by cases where the punishment of dismissal for misconduct proved may be unconscionable or so grossly out of proportion to the nature of the offence that the tribunal may be able to draw an inference of victimisation merely from the punishment inflicted.
Such was not the case here.
National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd. vs Fourth Industrial Tribunal, , referred to.
