The four accused persons stood their trial before the Additional Sessions judge for the murder of one Vishwanath.
The charge against them was that they in view of their common grudge a against the deceased, combined together and did away with the deceased.
They were charged under section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal code and were also separately charged under section 302 of the Penal Code.
All pleaded not guilty to the charge and accused 1, 3 and 4 pleaded alibi, while accused 2 raised a plea of private defence.
The learned Additional Sessions judge acquitted all the accused on the ground that the prosecution witnesses were not speaking the truth and the version given by accused 2 was the probable one.
The State preferred an appeal to the High Court against the order of acquittal under section 302, read with section 34, but not against the acquittal under section 302 of the Penal Code.
The High Court acquitted accused 1, 3 and 4 on the ground that it was doubtful whether any one of them participated in the commission of the offence and convicted accused 2 on the ground that one or more of them might have participated in the offence.
Accused 2, the appellant, therefore, filed this appeal and contended that when three of the four named accused, who were charged under section 302, read with section 34, were acquitted, the court could not convict only one of the accused on the basis of constrictive liability.
Held that before a court could convict a person under section 302, read with section 34, it should come to a definite conclusion that the said person had a prior concert with one or more other persons, named or unnamed, for committing the said offence.
Held, further, that when accused were acquitted either on the ground that the evidence was not acceptable or by giving 679 benefit of doubt to them, the result in law would be the same it would mean that they did not take part in the offence.
The effect of the acquittal of accused 1, 3 and 4 is that they did not conjointly act with accused 2 in committing the murder.
If they did not act conjointly with the appellant, he could not have acted conjointly with them.
The judgment of the High Court does not indicate that persons other than the said accused participated in the offence, nor is there any evidence in that regard, therefore, the conviction of the appellant must be set aside.
Mohan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp.
3 section C. R. 848, held inapplicable.
