The appellant filed a suit against the respondent for a decree for Rs. 8339/ on the ground that the said amount had been illegally recovered from it under the Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, for the years 1952 54.
The respondent 753 resisted the claim on the ground that the suit was incompetent under section I 8 A of the Act.
On the merits, it was contended that the transactions in regard to groundnuts on which sales tax was levied and recovered from the appellant were transactions of purchase and not of sale, and it was urged that the appellant having voluntarily made the return and paid the taxes, it was not open to it to contend that the transactions were not taxable under the Act.
Besides it was argued that the appellant had not preferred an appeal either to the Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes or to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal against the assessments and bence the suit was not maintainable.
The suit was decreed by the trial court but the High Court reversed that decision and dismissed the suit on the ground that in view of the provisions of section 18 A of the Act, the suit was incompetent.
Alternatively.
it was found on merits that the claim made by the appellant was not justified.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Held, that section 18 A excludes the jurisdiction of Civil Courts to set aside or modify any assessment made under the Act.
There is no express provision in the Act under which the suit can be said to have been filed and it falls under the prohibition contained in this section.
The prohibition is express and unambiguous and no suit can be entertained by a Civil Court, if by instituting the suit.
the plaintiff wants to set aside or modify any assessment made under the Act.
Where an order of assessment has been made by an appropriate authority under the provisions of the Act, any challenge to its correctness and any attempt either to have it set aside or modified must be made before the appellate or revisional forum prescribed by the relevant provisions of the Act.
A suit instituted for that purpose is barred under section 18 A. When the appellant made its voluntary returns and paid the tax in advance to be adjusted at the end of the year from time to time, it treated the groundnut transactions as taxable.
The appellant having conceded the taxable character of the transactions in question, no occasion arose for the taxing authorities to consider whether the said transactions could be taxed or not.
Even after the impugned orders of assessment were made, the appellant did not choose to file an appeal and urge before the appellate authority that.
the transactions were sale transactions and as such were outside the purview of section 5A (2).
If an order made by a taxing authority under the relevant provisions of the Act in a case where the taxable character of a transaction is disputed, is final and cannot be challenged in a civil court by a separate suit, the position is just 754 the same where the taxable character of the transactions is not even disputed by the dealer who accepts the order for the purposes of the Act and then institutes a suit to set aside or modify it.
The expression "any assessment made under this Act" is wide enough to cover all assessments made by the appropriate authorities under this Act whether the said assessments arc correct or not.
It is the activity of the assessing officer acting as such officer which is intended to be projected and as soon as it is shown that exercising his jurisdiction and authority under this Act, an assessing officer has made an order of assessment, that clearly falls within the scope of section 18 A.
The fact that the order passed by the assessing authority may in fact be incorrect or wrong does not affect the position that in law the said order has been passed by an appropriate authority and the assessment made by it must be treated as made under this Act.
Whether or not an assessment has been made under this Act will not depend on the correctness or accuracy of the order passed by the assessing authority.
There is a general presumption that there must be a remedy in the ordinary civil courts to a citizen claiming that an amount has been recovered from him illegally and such a remedy could be held to be barred only on very clear and unmistakable indications to the contrary.
The exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts to entertain civil causes will not be assumed unless the relevant statute contains an express provision to the effect or leads to a necessary and inevitable implication of that nature.
The mere fact that a special statute provides for certain remedies may not by itself necessarily exclude the jurisdiction of the civil courts to deal with a case brought before it in respect of some of the matters covered by the said statute.
There is no justification for the assumption that if a decision has been made by a taxing authority under the provisions of a taxing statute, its validity can be challenged by a suit on the ground that it is incorrect on merits and as such it can be claimed that the provisions of the said statute have not been complied with.
Non compliance with the provisions of the statute must be non compliance with such fundamental provisions of the statute as would make the entire proceedings before the appropriate authority illegal and without jurisdiction.
If an appropriate authority has acted in violation of the fundamental principles of judicial procedure, that may also tend to make the proceedings illegal and void and that infirmily may affect the validity of the order passed by the authority in question.
It is cases of this character where the 755 defect or infirmity in the order goes to the root of the order and makes it in law invalid and void that these observations may perhaps be invoked in support of the plea that the civil court can exercise its jurisdiction notwithstanding a provision to the contrary contained in the relevant statute.
Secretary of State vs Mask & Co., (1940) 67 I.A. 222 and Reliegh Investment Co. Ltd. vs Governor General in 'Council, (1947) 74 I.A. 50, relied on.
State of Andhra Pradesh vs Sri Krishna Coconut Co. (1960) 1 Andhra W.R. 279, overruled.
