On applications for permits made to it the Regional Transport Authority, applying the markinig system prescribed by the Government order issued under section 43A of the Motor Vehicles Act, granted the permit to the appellant.
On appeal by the first respondent, the State Transport Appellate Tribunal recast the marks but in doing so did not allot any mark to the first respondent under the head of "residence or place of business" and thereby treating the appellant and the first respondent as equal, gave the appellant the further advantage of four marks under the head "viable unit".
The first respondent challenged the order of the Appellate Tribunal before the High Court under article 226 on the ground that the Appellate Tribunal had failed to allot him any mark in respect of his admitted residential qualification and had thereby committed a breach of section 47 (1) (a) and (c) of the Motor Vehicles Act.
This contention was accepted by the learned single judge of the High Court who quashed the order of the Appellate Tribunal and directed it to proceed according to law.
On appeal the Division Bench confirmed the issue of the writ.
On appeal by special leave by the appellant it was contended in this Court that the High Court has no jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari, as the error, if any, was one of fact and that the directions issued by the Government under section 43A of the Motor Vehicles Act being only administrative in character, order made in breach thereof did not give rise to an error of law which could be the subject matter of a writ.
Held, that the question whether or not there was such an error apparent on the face of the record as to enable the High Court to interfere under article 226 of the Constitution was one to be determined in each case and no particular test can or need be laid down as a general rule.
810 Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmad Ishaque, [1955] 1 section C. R. 1104, Nagendra Nath Bora vs Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam ; , Satya narayan vs Mallikarjun, [1960] 1 section C. R. 890, Shri Ambica Mills Co. vs section B. Bhatt, ; , Provincial Transport Service vs State Industrial Court [1963] 3 section C. R. 650, Batuk Vyas vs Surat Municipality, A. I. R. 1953 Bom.
133 and M/s. Raman & Raman Ltd. vs The State of Madras, [1959] Supp. 2 section C. R. 227, referred to.
Held, further, that though the directions issued under section 43A of the Act were administrative, they were intended to facilitate an objective, judgment of the considerations laid down in section 47 of the Motor Vehicles Act and if applying the directions to a given case result in the breach of section 47, namely, ignoring a relevant consideration, it must give rise to a manifest error of law and furnish a ground for interference under article 226 of the Constitution.
M/s. Raman & Baman Ltd. vs State of Madras [1959] Supp. 2 section C. R. 227, Abdulla Rowther vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Madras, A. 1.
R. , Ayyasswani Gounder vs M/s. Soudambigai Motor Service C. A. No. 198 of 1962 decided on 17 9 62 and Sankara Ayyar vs Marayanaswami Naidu, C. A. No. 213 of 1960 decided on 10 10 60, distinguished.
