The facts alleged by the prosecution were these The first appellant brought with him in a truck to the scene of the occurrence a mob of 40 to 50 persons including the other two appellants and four other persons who were acquitted by the trial court.
The first appellant fired a shot from the gun which he was carrying which hit Laldeo Singh on the chest as a result of which he fell down.
Thereupon none of the acquitted persons fired from his gun and the shot hit Laldeo Singh again.
Thereupon another of the acquitted persons fired a shot at Laldeo Singh which.
killed him instantaneously.
The first appellant fired two shots at one Deva Singh who was hit on his thigh.
The other two appellants assaulted Deva Singh with lathis of the seven persons charged, four were acquitted.
The appellants were convicted under section 304 Part II read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code by the trial court.
On appeal the High Court altered their conviction into one under section 326 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code but maintained the convictions under section 147 and section 426 of the Indian Penal Code.
It was contended before the Supreme Court that as there was no appeal before the High Court against the acquittal of the four acquitted persons who were alleged to have constituted the unlawful assembly along with the appellants there could be no finding that there was an unlawful assembly of which appellants were members and therefore, were liable, for the acts of other members 776 thereof and that an accused person cannot be held liable vicariously for the act of an acquitted person.
Held, that even assuming that the fatal in juries were caused to Laldeo Singh by one of the four acquitted persons, it was not open to the High Court to hold any of the appellants liable for that act by resort to section 149 of the Indian Penal Code.
Held, further that the legal position deducible from the authorities was (i) that it is competent to a court to come to the conclusion that there was an unlawful assembly of five or more persons, and actually convict less than that number for the offence if (a) the charge states that apart from the persons named, several other unidentified persons were also members of the unlawful assembly whose common object was to commit an unlawful act and the evidence led to prove this is accepted by the court ; (b) or that the first information report and the evidence shows such to be the case even though the charge does not state so ; (c) or that though the charge and the prosecution witnesses named only the acquitted and the convicted accused persons there is other evidence which discloses the existence of named or other persons provided that in cases (b) and (c) no prejudice has resulted to the convicted person by reason of the omission to mention in the charge that the other unnamed persons had also participated in the offence.
Harchandra vs Rex.
I.L.R. (1951) 2 All. 62, approved.
To pandas vs State of Bombay, , R. vs Plummer, , Bharwad Mepa Dana vs State of Bombay, ; , Kartar Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , Sunder Singh vs State of Punjab [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R 634, Mohan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 848, and Krishna Govind Patil vs State of Maharashtra, [1964) Vol.
1 S.C.R. 678, referred to.
Held, also that the High Court had failed to determine material questions necessary for property deciding the case, namely that it had not fully examined the evidence to come, to a definite conclusion as to whether there was an unlawful assembly or not consisting of persons other than the acquitted persons and that the High Court had also failed to ascertain the particular act committed by any member or members of that assembly in furtherance of the common object as also whether any of the appellants had participated in, the said incident.
