Harnam Singh died leaving behind two daughters.
They also died without leaving any issue surviving them.
The Revenue authorities ordered that the entire estate of Harnam Singh be entered in the revenue records in the names of the defendants.
The plaintiffs filed a suit for possession of the estate of Harnam Singh.
Their contention was that notwithstanding the adoption of Ghuda Singh, their predecessor, by his maternal uncle, they as descendants of Ghuda Singh were not excluded from inheritance to the estate of a member in the natural family of Ghuda Singh.
It was also contended that the family of the plaintiffs and Harnam Singh was governed by Zamindara Riwaj i am by virtue of which a son adopted in another family and his decendants did not lose their right to inherit in the natural family because by the adoption according to the custom of the community, the adopted son did not completely sever his connection with his natural family.
The contention of defendants appellants was that in the District of Ferozeporc, every adoption in a Hindu family was formal and according to the Riwaj i am of the District, an adopted son was excluded from the right to inherit in his natural family.
Consequently, Ghuda Singh, who was adopted by Bhan Singh, could not inherit the estate because his adoption operated as complete severance from the natural family.
The suit was dismissed by the Subordinate judge and his order was confirmed by the District judge.
However, the High Court set aside the order of the District judge and held that the record disclosed no evidence that the adoption of Ghuda Singh was formal and hence it must be presumed that the adoption was a customary appointment of an heir and not a formal adoption under the Hindu Law.
It was also held that there was overwhelming authority in favour of the proposition that by reason of a customary adoption, the adopted 20 son and his descendants were not excluded from the right to inherit to collaterals in the natural family.
The plaintiffs as grandsons in the male line of Ghuda Singh were entitled to inherit the estate.
The appellants came to this Court by a certificate of fitness granted by High Court.
Held, that the view of the High Court was correct.
A person adopted according to the customs of the community, i.e. who is appointed as a heir to inherit the property of a person outside the family, does not.
by virtue of such appointment, lose his right to inherit in his natural family except the right to inherit the property of his natural father when there are natural brothers.
The natural brothers would take the property to the exclusion of such an adopted son and his defendants.
Daya Ram vs Sohel Singh (1906) P. R. No. 110 (F.B.), Abdul Hussain Khan vs Bibi Sona Dero 1917) L.R. 45 I .A. 10, Vaishno Ditti vs Rameshri (1928) L. R. 55 I. A. 407, Mela Singh vs Gurdas, (1922) 1.
L. R. , Jagat Singh vs Ishar Singh Lah.
615, Kanshi Ram vs Situ (1934) I. L. R.16 Lah. 214, Rahmat vs Ziledar (1945) 1.
L. R.26 Lah.
504 and Jai Kapur vs Sher Singh, [1960] 3 section C. R.975, referred to.
