On account of injuries received in a motor accident the appellant was taken to the hospital at 6 A. M. on April 3, 1961.
As he was found smelling of alcohol, a specimen of his blood was taken and collected in a phial.
Subsequently, when investigation started this phial was taken by the In vestigation Officer on April 13 and sent to the Chemical Examiner on April 18.
On examination, it was found to have a concentration of alcohol in excess of that mentioned in section 66 (2) of Bombay Prohibition Act.
The trial Court convicted the appellant relying upon the presumption arising on the report of the Chemical Examiner.
On appeal, the Sessions judge found that no evidence had been produced regarding the safe custody of the phial from April 3 to April 18, regard ing its storage at a place where it was not liable to deteriorate and regarding its delivery to the Chemical Examiner, and ordered a retrial.
This order was upheld by the High Court.
The appellant contended (i) that the report of the Chemical Examiner was not admissible in evidence at the trial of the appellant for an offence under the Bombay Prohibition Act as the blood had not been collected in the manner prescribed by section 129 A, and (ii) that the order for a fresh trial was illegal.
Held, (per Sinha, C. J., Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo and Shah jj., Das Gupta, J. contra) that the report of the Chemical Examiner was admissible in evidence.
Section 129A was intended primarily for compelling a person to submit himself for medical examination and for collection of blood; this power could be exercised only in the course of investigation of an offence under the Act and only when a 927 Prohibition Officer or a Police Officer had reasonable ground for believing that a person bad consumed liquor.
If the examination of blood is made otherwise than in accordance with section 129 A the result may still be proved by virtue of subs.
(8) to section 129 A and there is nothing in section 129A or section 129B which precludes proof of that fact if it tends to establish that the person had consumed illicit liquor.
By enacting sections 129 A and 129B the law provided one method of collection of evidence in respect of an offence under section 66 (2) but it did not thereby exclude other methods.
Bombay Act No. 12 of 1959 which introduced sections 129 A and 129 B and which had been reserved for the consideration of the President and had received his assent prevailed, in the State of Bombay, over section 510 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the extent of inconsistency between the two.
Accordingly, the report of a Chemical Examiner in respect of blood collected in the course of investigation of an offence under the Act otherwise than in the manner set out in section 129A cannot be used in evidence, but a report in respect of blood collected at a time when no investigation was pending or at the instance of a Police Officer or a Prohibition Officer, is admissible under section 510 of the Code.
Nazir Ahmad vs The King Emperor, (1936) L. R. 63 I.A. 372, Taylor vs Taylor, , Deep Chand vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1959] Supp.
2 S.C. R. 8 and Ch.
Tikaramji vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , referred to.
Held, further, that the order for retrial was bad and that the Sessions judge should himself take additional evidence in respect of the safe custody etc.
of the phial of blood.
An order for retrial of a criminal case is made only in exceptional cases as it "pose. , the accused to another trial affording the prosecution an opportunity to rectify infirmities disclosed at the earlier trial.
An order for retrial is not made unless the appellate court is satisfied that the trial court had no jurisdiction to try the case, or that the trial was vitiated by serious illegalities or irregularities or on account of the misconception of the nature of the proceedings there has been no real trial or that any of the parties had, for reasons over which it had,, no control, been prevented from producing material evidence.
Since the Sessions judge was of the view that "additional evidence was necessary" he should have proceeded under s.428 (1) of the Code.
Ramanlal Rathi vs State, A.I.R. (1931) Cal. 305, referred to.
928 Per Das Gupta, J.
The report of the Chemical Examiner in respect of blood taken not in accordance with the provisions of section 129A was not admissible.
In view of sub section (8) of section 129A the fact that a person has consumed an intoxicant may be proved by evidence other than that made available under section 129A; but for the determination of the percentage of alcohol in the blood no other procedure except that provided by section 129 A was permisible.
Section 66 (2), which provided for the drawing of a presumption in favour of the prosecution if the percentage of alcohol found in the blood of an accused exceeded that mentioned in the section, was introduced in the Act by the very Amending Act which introduced section 129 A.
It was reasonable to infer that the legislature intended the presumption under section 66 (2) to be drawn only in cases where tile procedure prescribed by section 129A had been followed.
Nazir Ahmad vs The King Emperor, (1936) L. R. 63 I. A. 372 relied on.
