The respondent was An Extra Assistant Commissioner.
He was charge sheeted and lie submitted an elaborate explanation in respect of all the charges.
The enquiry was held by the Commissioner and a report submitted by him.
After giving his findings, the Commissioner added that the lapses proved did not cast any serious doubt on the honesty arid integrity of the respondent and hence the withholding of three increments from his pay would meet the ends of justice.
The appellant served a second notice on the respondent and the latter was asked to submit his explanation wiry penalty of removal from service should not be imposed upon him.
The respondent submitted an explanation and the Governor of Assam, after considering the explanation, ordered his demotion.
That order was challenged by the respondent by a writ petition filed in the High Court.
The writ petition was allowed by the High Court and a writ of mandamus was issued directing the appellant not to give effect to the order of demotion.
The High Court held that the second notice did not clearly indicate that the Government had accepted the findings of Enquiry officer and as such a statement was not made in the notice, the respondent could not have known on what grounds the Government had provisionally decided to 2 impose upon him the penalty of removal from service.
It was also held that the notice must show that the dismissing authority had applied its mind to the findings of the Enquiry officer and had accepted the said findings against the respondent.
The notice should expressly state the conclusions of the dismissing authority because unless those conclusions were communicated to the respondent, he was not in a position to make an adequate or effective representation, the dismissing authority must also indicate the reasons on which it bad come to those conclusions.
As the impugned notice did not contain a specific averment that the dismissing authority had accepted the findings of the Enquiry officer and otherwise gave no grounds or reasons for the action proposed to be taken against the respondent, it contravened the provisions of article 311 (2).
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Held, that the High Court was in error in coming to the conclusion that the order of demotion passed against the respondent was invalid on the ground that the respondent had not been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action to be taken against him under article 311 (2) of the Constitution.
A public officer against whom disciplinary proceedings are intended to be taken is entitled to have two opportunities.
Ali enquiry must be held and it must be conducted according to the rules prescribed in that behalf and consistently with tile requirements of natural justice.
When the Enquiry Officer submits his report, the dismissing authority has to consider the report and decide whether it agrees with the conclusions of the report or not.
If the findings in the report are against the public officer and the dismissing authority agrees with them, another notice has to be given.
In issuing the second notice, the dismissing authority has to come to a tentative or provisional conclusion about the guilt of the public officer as well as about the punishment which would meet the ends of justice.
in response to this notice, the public officer is entitled to show cause not only against the action proposed to be taken against him but also against the validity or correctness of the findings recorded by tile Enquiry officer and provisionally accepted by the dismissing authority.
If the dismissing authority differs from the findings recorded in the enquiry report, it is necessary that its provisional conclusions should be specified in the second notice.
If the dismissing authority accepts the findings against the delinquent officer and differs from some or all of those recorded in his favour and proceeds to specify the nature of the action 3 proposed to be taken on its own conclusions, it is necessary that the said conclusions should be briefly indicated in the notice.
Where the dismissing authority purports to issue the notice against the delinquent officer after accepting the enquiry report in its entirety, it cannot be said that it is essential that the dismissing authority must say that it has so accepted the report.
However, it is desirable that even in such cases a statement to that effect should be made, but failure to make such statement does not contravene the provisions of article 311 (2).
As regards the functions of the Enquiry officer unless there is any rule or statutory provision to the contrary, he is not required to specify the punishment which may be imposed on the delinquent officer.
His task is merely to hold an enquiry into the charges and make his report stating forth his con clusions and findings in respect of the said charges.
Sometimes, the Enquiry officers do indicate the nature of the action that may be taken against the delinquent officer, that ordinarily is outside the scope of the enquiry.
A.N. D 'Silva vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.
1 section C. R. 968, High Commissioner of India vs I. M. Lal, , Khem Chand vs Union of India, ; , The State of Orissa vs Govindadas Pahda, C. A. No. 412/58, dt. 10 12 1958, State of Andhra vs T. Ramayya Suri, A. 1.
R. 1957 Andhra 370, Bimal Charan Mitra vs State of Orissa A. 1.
R. 1957 Orissa 184, Krishan Gopal Mukherjee vs The State, A. 1.
R. 1960 Orissa 37 and State of Bombay vs Gajnan Mahadev Baldev, A. 1.
R. , referred to.
