The respondent who was born in the Ludhiana District was married to the first appellant.
He took up a job in Africa and after staving there for some time he came to India and stayed with his wife for 5 months, He then went to Africa and after staying there for 5 or 6 years came to India and took the appellant with him to Africa and a daughter was born to them there.
The appellant was sent back with the child and she was staying in the District of Ludhiana with the child.
It is admitted that the respondent had bought property worth Rs. 25,000/ in that District and that the petition for maintenance was filed by the appellant and the notice was served on him while the respondent was in that District.
The respondent filed a counter affidavit, obtained exemption from personal appearance it the time of hearing of that petition and thereafter left for Africa.
74 The 1st Class Magistrate Ludhiana held that he had jurisdiction to entertain the petition filed by the appellant under section 488 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as the appellant and the respondent had last resided in the District Ludhiana.
He awarded for the wife 's maintenance at the rate of Rs. 100/ per month and for the daughter at the rate of Rs. 50/ per month.
A revision petition filed by the respondent before the Additional Sessions judge was rejected.
But the High Court holding that the 1st Class Magistrate had no jurisdiction to entertain the petition allowed the revision petition filed by the respondent.
The present appeal is by way of special leave granted by this Court.
The main contention on behalf of the appellants before this Court was that the respondent having last resided with his wife in the District of Ludhiana and he having been there at the time when the petition tinder section 488 was presented the Magistrate had jurisdiction to entertain the petition.
It was further contended that the respondent having submitted to the jurisdiction of the Magistrate could not question his jurisdiction.
Held, that Ch.
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure providing for maintenance of wife and children intends to serve a social purpose.
Section 488 prescribes alternative forums to enable a deserted wife or a helpless child, legitimate or illegitimate to get urgent relief.
Proceedings under the section can be taken against the husband or the father as the case may be, in a place where he resides permanently or temporarily, or where lie last resided in any District in India or where he happens to be at the time the proceedings are initiated.
The expression "resides" implied something more than a brief visit but not such continuity as to amount to domicile.
Sampoornam vs N. Sandaram, , referred to.
A casual or flying visit to a place for a temporary purpose was not covered by the word residence.
Khairunnissa vs Baskir Ahmad, Bom.
781, Flowers vs Flowers, (1910) 1.
R. 32 All.
203 and Balakrishna vs Sakuntala Rai, A. 1.
R. , referred to.
The sole test on the question of residence was whether a party had animus manendi or an intention to stay for an in definite period at the place.
75 Charan Das vs Surasti Bai, A. 1.
R. referred to.
The appellant not having raised the plea of submission to jurisdiction either in the pleadings or in any of the courts below will not in the absence of special circumstances be allowed to raise it before this Court.
Where a legislature has no power to make laws in respect of any territory the operation of the law made by it cannot extend to that territory.
The facts and circumstances of the case show that the respondent last resided with his wife in a place within the jurisdiction of the First Class Magistrate, Ludhiana, and that he was in a place within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate on the date when the appellant filed her application for maintenance against him.
In re Druker (No. 2) Basden, Ex Parte, referred to.
