In January, 1956, there was an incident in which a group of workmen assaulted the Manager and two Assistant Managers of tile appellant company.
All the three officers Were Wound ed.
Some workmen were suspended, and charge sheets were served on them, charging them with participation in the riot.
After an inquiry the workmen were dismissed.
The inquiry was held by the Manager and one of the Assistant Managers,During the inquiry, no witness was examined and no statement made by any witness was tendered in evidence.
(1) , 166 The dispute was first referred to the Labour Court and then to the Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal.
The Tribunal set aside the inquiry held by the appellant company and asked the company to prove the allegations against each workman de novo before it.
The company examined five witnesses.
The Tribunal held that orders for dismissal of 15 workmen were justified but it ordered the remaining workmen to be reinstated.
The company came to this Court by special leave.
Held, that the view of the Tribunal was correct that the inquiry made by the company was not in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
The inquiry consisted of putting questions to each workman in turn.
No witness was examined in support of the charge before the workman was questioned.
It is an elementary principle that a person who is required to answer a charge must not only know the accusation but also the testimony by which the accusation is supported.
He must be given a clear chance to hear the evidence in support of the charge and to put such relevant questions by way of cross examination as he desires.
He must also be given a chance to rebut the evidence led against him.
As regards two workmen, this Court held that the Tribunal was justified in not accepting the findings which proceeded almost on no evidence.
As regards one workman, this Court held that as the Tribunal had the opportunity of hearing and seeing the two Assistant Managers, this Court would be slow to reach a conclusion different from that of the Tribunal.
Moreover, in such cases, it is not the practice of this Court to enter into evidence with a view to finding facts for itself.
