The history of the Nathdwara Temple in the District of Udaipur showed that Vallabha, who was the founder of the denomination known as Pushtimargiya Vaishnava Sampradaya, installed the idol of Srinathji in a temple and that later on his descendants built the Nathdwara Temple in 1761.
The religious reputation of the temple grew in importance and several grants were made and thousands of devotees visiting the temple made offering to the temple.
The succession to the Gaddi of the Tilkayat received recognition from the Rulers of Mewar, but on several occasions the Rulers interfered whenever it was found that the affairs of the temple were not managed properly.
In 1934 a Firman was issued by the Udaipur Darbar, by which, inter alia, it was declared that according to the law of Udaipur all the property dedicated or presented to or otherwise coming to the Deity Shrinathji was property of the shrine, that the Tilkayat Maharaj for the time being was merely a custodian, Manager and Trustee of the said property and that the Udaipur Darbar had absolute right to supervise that the 562 property dedicated to the shrine was used for the legitimate purposes of the shrine.
The management of the affairs ' by the appellant Tilkayat was not successful and it became necessary that a scheme should be framed for the management of the Temple.
On February 6, 1939, the Governor of Rajasthan promulgated an Ordinance, which was in due course replaced by the Nathdwara Temple Act, 1939.
The appellant challenged the validity of the Act on the grounds, inter alia, that the idol of Shrinathji in the Nathdwara Temple and all the property pertaining to it were his private properties and, as such, the State Legislature was not competent to pass the Act, that even if the Nathdwara Temple was held to be a public temple, he as Mahoney or Shebait had a beneficial interest in the office of the high priest as well as the properties of the temple and that on that footing, his rights under articles 14, 19 (1) (f) and 31 (2) of the Constitution of India had been contravened by the Act.
it was also urged that the provisions of the Act infringed the fundamental rights guaranteed to the Denomination under article 55 (1) and 26 (b) and (c) of the Constitution.
The question was also raised as to Whether the tenets of the Vallablia denomination and its religious practices required that the worship by the devotees should be performed at the private temple and so the existence of public temples was inconsistent with the said tenets and practices.
Held, (1) that neither that tenets nor the religious prac tices of the ' Vallablia school necessarily postulate that the followers of the school must worship in a private temple.
(2)that in view of the documentary evidence in the case it could not be held that the temple was built by the Tilkayat of the day as his private temple or that it still continues to have the character of a private temple; that though from the outside it had the of a Haveli, the majestic structure inside was consistent with the dignity of the idol and with the character of the temple as a public temple.
(3)that ail absolute monarch was the fountain head of all legislative, executive and judicial powers, that it was of the very essence of sovereignty which vested in him that he could supervise arid control the administration of public charity, and that this principle applied as much to Hindu monarchs as to ,my other absolute monarch.
Any order issued by such a Ruler would have the force of law and govern the rights of the parties affected there by and that, accordingly, the Firman issued by the Maharana of Udaipur in 1934 was a law by which the affairs of the Nathdwara Temple were governed after its issue, 563 Madhaorao Phalke vs The State of Madhya Bharat, [1961] 1 section C. R. 957, relied on.
(4)that under the law of Udaipur the Nathdwara Temple was a public temple and that the Tilkayat was no more than the Custodian, Manager and Trustee of the property belonging to the temple.
(5)that having regard to the terms of the Firman of 1934 the right claimed by the Tilkayat could not amount to a right to property under article 19 (1) (f) or constitute property under article 31 (2) of the Constitution,; that even if it were held that this right constituted a right to hold property, the restrictions imposed by the Act must be considered as reasonable and in the interests of the public under article 19 (5).
Vidya Varuthi Thirtha vs Balusami Ayyar, (1921) L. R. 48 1.
A. 302 and the Commissioner Hindu Reliqious Endowment,Madras vs
Sri Lakshmindra Tirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt; , , considered.
(6) that the Act was not invalid on the ground of discrimination under article 14.
Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice section R. Tendolkar, ; , relied on.
(7)that the right to manage the properties of a temple was a purely secular matter and could not be regarded as a religious practice under article 25 (1) or as amounting to affairs in matters of religion under article 26 (b).
Consequently, the Act in so fit, as it provided for the management of the properties of the Nathdwara Temple tinder the provisions of the Act, did not contravene articles 25 (1) and 26 (b).
The Durgah Committee, Ajmer vs Syed Hussain Ali, [1962] 1 section C. R. 333, referred to.
(8)that the expression "Law" in article 26 (d) meant a law passed by a competent legislature and under that Article the legislature was competent to make a law in regard to the ad.
ministration of the property belonging to the denomination and that the provisions of the Act providing for the constitution of a Board to administer the property were valid.
Ratilal Panachand Candhi vs The State of Bombay, , referred to.
564 (9)that the scheme envisaged by sections 3, 4, 16, 22 and 34 of the Act merely allowed the administration of the Properties Of the temple which was a purely secular matter to be undertaken by the Board and that the sections were valid.
(10)that under section 5 (2) (g) it was necessary that the members of the Board other than the Collector of Udaipur District should not only profess Hindu religion but must also belong to the Pushti Margiya Vallabhi Sampradaya; and that the proviso to section 5 (2) (g) which enabled a Collector to be a statutory member of the Board even though he may not be a Hindu and may not belong to the denomination, did not contravene articles 25 (1) and 26 (b).
(11) that the expression "affairs of the temple" in section 16 referred only the purely secular affairs in regard to the administration of the temple and that the section was valid.
(12)that section 30 (2) (a) in so far as it conferred on the State Government power to make rules in respect of the qualifications for holding the office of the Goswami, was invalid.
(13)that sections 5, 7, 10, 11, 21, 27. 28, 35, 36 and 37 were valid.
