The respondent was appointed a Naib Tehsildar under the appellant, in the year 1937.
On August 4, 1952, he was suspended on complaints received against him and his case was referred for investigation to the Administrative Tribunal appointed under the Rules.
While the proceedings were pending, additional complaints were received by the appellant against his conduct and they were communicated to the Tribunal with an intimation that the appellant proposed to send those further charges against the respondent for enquiry.
The Tribunal did not wait for receipt of the said additional charges and on enquiry exonerated him from the charges framed against him, in August, 1952.
On October 28, 1956, the respondent was again suspended and the charges framed on the additional complaints were delivered to him.
The respondent submitted his explanation and pleaded that the enquiry might be entrusted to the Administrative Tribunal in accordance with the Rules; but his request was rejected and the case was entrusted to the Commissioner with directions to take disciplinary proceeding , against him.
The High Court allowed the writ petition of the respondent and the order directing the enquiry to be held by the appointed authority under r. 55 of the said Civil Services Rules was quashed.
The question for decision in this Court was, whether like the word "may" in r. 4 (1) which confers the discretion on the Governor, the word "may" in sub r.
(2) confers discretion on him, or does the word "may" in sub r.(2) really mean "shall" or "must".
Held, that the whole purpose of r. 4 (2) would be frustrated if the word ,may" in the said rule receives the same construction as in sub r.
The plain and unambiguous object of enacting rule 4 (2) is to provide an option to the 198 .
Gazetted Government servants to request the Governor that their cases should be tried by a Tribunal and not otherwise.
Thus r. 4 (2) imposes an obligation on the Governor to grant a request made by the Gazetted Government Servant and such a request not having been granted in the present case, the appeal must fail.
