The facts of the three appeals are similar and the questions of law involved are identical.
Industrial disputes having arisen between the appellants and their workmen the disputes were referred for adjudication.
After the Tribunal forwarded their Awards to the Government the parties in each dispute came to settlement.
Thereafter letters were sent to the Government requesting them to withhold the publication of the Awards.
The Government replied that under section 17 of the Act it was mandatory for the Government to publish the Awards and they could not withhold publication.
Thereupon writ petitions were filed before the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution praying that the Government might be directed to withhold the publication.
The High Court held that since the provisions of section 17 of the Act were mandatory it was not open to the High Court to issue writs as prayed for and rejected, the petitions.
The present appeals are by way of certificate granted by the High Court.
The main contentions in the appeals were that the provisions of section 17 were not mandatory but were only directory and in the alternative that even if they were mandatory some via media had to be found in view of the conflict that would arise between an award published under section 17 (1) and a settlement which was binding under section 18 (1) and therefore where there was a settlement which was binding under section 18 (1) it would be open to the Government not to publish the award.
It was con.
tended on behalf of the respondent that if the argument of the appellants was accepted it would create a difficult situation in as much as it would be possible for one party or the other to represent to the Government that the settlement had been arrived at 449 as a result of fraud, misrepresentation or undue influence and corruption etc.
Held, that it is clear on a reading of section 17 and section 17A together that the intention behind section 17 (1) is that a duty is cast on Government to publish the award within thirty days of its receipt and the provision for its publication is mandatory and not merely directory.
When an agreement at has been arrived at between the parties, though not in the course course of conciliation proceedings, it becomes a settlement as per the definition under section 2 (p) and section 18 (1) lays down that such a Settlement shall be binding on all the parties to it.
If a situation like the one in the present case arises which may lead to a conflict between a settlement under section 18 (1) and an award binding under section 18 (3) on publication, the only solution is to withhold the award from publication.
This would not in any way affect the mandatory nature of the provisions in section 17 (1) for the Government would ordinarily have to publish the award but for the special situation arising in such cases.
If any dispute arises as to the binding nature of the settlement on grounds of fraud or misrepresentation etc.
that would be another industrial dispute, which the Government may refer for adjudication and if such a settlement is found not to be binding under section 18 (1) of the Act it will always be open to the Government to publish the Award which it had withheld.
State of Bihar vs D. N. Ganguly, ; , referred to.
