The appellant entered into contracts with the respondent (for sale of groundnuts) which were described as ready delivery contracts and were subject to the rules and regulations.
of the Veraval Merchants Association.
The contracts specified the price and quality of the goods and stipulated delivery at a specific price.
But there was nothing in the contracts indicating whether they were transferable to third parties.
The respondent claimed certain amounts of money in respect of these transactions but the appellant resisted the claim on the ground that the contracts, being forward contracts, were prohibited by the Saurashtra Groundnut and Groundnut Products (Forward Contracts Prohibition) Order, 1949, and were illegal, The appellant contended that the contracts for the delivery of groundnuts at a future date, even though they were for specific quality and for specific delivery at a specific price, must be deemed to be forward contracts unless it was expressly recited that they were not transferable to third parties.
Held that the contracts were not forward contracts and were not hit by the Prohibition Order.
A contract for delivery of goods at a future date, even though for a specific price and specific quality, can be excluded from the definition of forward contracts only if the contract is non transferable.
But from the mere absence of an express stipulation as to non transferability in the contract, it cannot be deemed to be transferable and outside the exception.
It is not required either by the Order or by the object of the Order that the condition regarding non transferability should be mentioned in the contract itself before the contract can be excluded from the definition of forward contract.
Absence of a specific stipulation in this regard is not conclusive.
It has to be seen whether upon the 687 language of the contract interpreted in the light of surrounding circumstances it can be field that there was an agreement between the parties that the contract was not transferable.
The rules and regulations of the Association to which the contracts in dispute were subject clearly showed that the contracts were not transferable.
Khardah Company Ltd. vs Raymon & Co. (India) Private Ltd., ; , applied.
Firm Hansraj vs Vasanji (1948) 4 D.L.R. Bom.
7, Uma Satyanarayanamurty vs Kothamasu Sitaramayya & Co. Boddu Seetharamaswami vs Bhagavathi Oil Company, I.L.R. , Hussain Kasam Dada vs Vijayanagaram Commercial Association, and Vaddadi Venkataswami vs Hanura Noor Muhammad Beegum, A.I.R. (1956) Andhra 9, referred to.
