The appellant runs a tile factory and an engineering works at Quilon.
These two industries are indepedent of each other, but they arc carried on by the same company and on the same premises.
The tile factory was started in 1943 and the engineering works in 1950.
The engineering industry was included in Schedule I of the Act and it employed only 24 workers, whereas the tile industry employed more than 50.
The license issued to the appellant under the , was for the entire premises.
The appellant moved a writ petition in the High Court in which he alleged that its factory did not attract the provisions of section 1 (3) (a) of the Employees ' Provident Funds Act 1952.
The 'writ petition was dismissed with costs.
It is against this order that the appellant has come to this Court.
Held (i) that a factory is an "establishment" within the meaning of section 1 (3) (a) of the Act if it satisfies the requirements of the section, namely, (1) that its one or all industries fall under Schedule I of the Act, (2) that it satisfies the numerical strength as prescribed under the section.
(ii)that the character of the dominant or primary industry will determine the question of the application of section I (3) (a) if a factory carries on both the dominant and subsidiary industries.
(iii)That if the factory runs more industries than one an of 'which are independent of each other, section I (3) (a) will 906 apply to the factory even if one or more, but not all, of the industries run by it fall under Shedule I. (iv)that neither the tile industry was dominant nor the engineering industry was subsidiary; rather both the industries were independent of each other.
(v)that the factory of the appellant will be deemed to be a composite factory and the provisions of section 1 (3) (a) will be attracted as one of its industries i. e. engineering industry, falls under Schedule I.
The Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Bombay vs Shree Krishna Metal Manufacturing Co. Bhandara [1962] Supp.3 section C. R. 815, approved.
