The appellant filed a suit on the Original Side of the Calcutta High Court against the respondent for the recovery of a certain amount representing the price of coal supplied to the respondent.
The appellant 's case was that if the contract under which the coal was supplied was illegal by, reason of it being in contravention of section 175 (3) of the Government of India Act, 1935, the respondent was liable to pay compensation under section 70 of the Indian Contract Act, since the Coal was not supplied gratuitously and the respondent had enjoyed the benefit thereof.
The respondent 's case was that the contract was illegal and section 70 of the Indian Contract Act was not attracted.
It was further alleged that the respondent had issued and sent bills to cover the amount and intimation cards in accordance with the usual practice and ordinary course of dealings.
The respondent, it was allowed paid the amount by a cheque to a person authorised by the appellant and on presentation of proper receipts.
It was therefore alternatively pleaded that the appellant 's claim having been satisfied, he had no cause of action.
It was established in the course of the trial that the appellant had not in fact authorised any person to issue the receipts but a certain person not connected with the appellant 860 firm, without the consent or knowledge of the appellant got hold of the intimation cards and bills addressed to the appellant forged the documents and fraudulently received the cheque from the respondent and appropriated the amount for himself.
The respondent had not pleaded in its written statement that it was due to the negligence of the appellant that the third person was able to get hold of the intimation card and perpetrate the fraud.
Neither was it proved in the case that the appellant was in fact negligent.
The Trial Judge found that the respondent was bound to pay compensation under section 70 of the Indian Contract Act and rejected the alleged payment of the bills and in the result decreed the amount prayed for by the appellant.
The respondent thereupon appealed to a Division Bench.
Both the judges agreed that the appeal should be allowed.
Regarding the invalidity of the agreement and the inapplicability of section 70 of the Contract Act both the Judges agreed in favour of the present respondent.
But while one of the Judges was not prepared to consider the plea of negligence which was raised by the present respondent for the first time in the appeal the other judge held that there was negligence on the part of the present appellant.
The present appeal was filed on a certificate granted by the High Court.
In this Court, apart from the questions of the invalidity of the contract under section 175 (3) of the Government of India Act and the applicability of s: 70 of the Contract Act, it was argued on behalf of the appellant that a plea of negligence should have been raised by the respondent in its pleadings and that the appellate court was in error in allowing such a plea to be raised for the first time in appeal.
It Was contended further that in support of the plea of negligence it must be shown that the party against whom the plea is raised owed a duty to the party who raises the plea and that the negligence must not be merely or indirectly connected with the misleading effect but must be the proximate cause of the result.
Held that the contract is illegal and void.
If in pursuance of the void contract, the appellant has performed his part and the respondent has received the benefit of the performance of the contract by the appellant, section 70 of the Contract Act would justify the claim made by the appellant against the respondent.
State of West Bengal v, B. K .
Mondal, [1962] Supp 1, section C. R. 876, referred to.
861 Since a plea of negligence was not raised by the respondent in the trial court the appellant is entitled to contend that it had no opportunity to meet this plea and dealing with it in appeal has, therefore, been unfair to it.
Before invoking a plea of estoppel on the ground of negligence, some duty must be shown to exist between the parties and negligence must be proved in relation to such duty.
The Arnold v, The Cheque Bank, , referred to.
The negligence alleged must be proved to be the proximate or the immediate cause of the loss.
Bexendale vs Bennett, , referred to.
The broad proposition "that whenever one of two innocent persons must suffer by the acts of a third, he who enables such third person to occasion the loss, must sustain it" laid down by Ashhurst, J., in Lickbarrow vs Mason, 2 T. R. 63, on which one of the,Judges of the Division Bench has based his decision cannot be sustained as valid in law.
Commonwealth Trust Ltd. vs Akotey, , Mercantile Bank of India Ltd. vs Central Bank of India Ltd. (1937) L. R. 65 I. A. 75, R. E. Jones Ltd. vs Waring & Gillow Ltd., and Farquharson Bros. & Co. vs King & Co., , referred to.
The appellant cannot be charged with negligence.
which, in turn, can be held to be the proximate cause of the loss caused to the respondent.
The appellant is entitled to be compensated under section 70 of the Contract Act.
