The assessee appellant carried on the business of manu facturing and selling textile piece goods.
In the assessment year 1945 46, the Income tax officer added to the taxable income of the assessee a sum of Rs. 1,86,931 which was later on reduced to Rs. 1,23,840 as a revenue receipt, representing an amount by which the sale price exceeded the original cost of certain shares and securities purchased and sold by the appellant.
The assessee was held to be a dealer in shares and securities.
The contention of the assessee was that it was not a dealer in shares and securities in the relevant account year or in the years past and the shares and securities were held by way of investment and the investment surplus was in the nature of capital receipt.
Even if the assessee was a dealer in shares and securities in the relevant account year, the Income tax officer committed an error in the matter of the computation of profits in not taking the market value of the shares as at the opening day of that year as the cost thereof.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the contentions of the appellant and held that the number of transactions was sufficiently large to show that the assessee was a dealer in shares.
The Appellate Tribunal rejected the contentions of the appellant.
These assertions were then referred to the High Court and they were decided against the assessec appellant.
972 Held that the assessee was a dealer in shares and securities and the income from their sale was a revenue receipt and not capital receipt.
The profits of the assessee were the difference between the original cost price of the shares to the assessee at the time of purchase and the price realized at the time of sale.
Held also that in the matter of taxation, there was no question of resjudicata.
It was open to the taxing authorities to consider the position of the assessee in 1943 for the purpose of determining how the gains made in 1944 should be computed, even though the subject of the assessment proceedings was the computation of the profits made in 1944.
The circumstance that in an earlier assessment relating to 1943, the assessee was treated as an investor would not estop the assessing authorities from considering, for the purpose of computation of the profits of 1944, as to when the trading activity of the assessee in shares began.
The assessing authorities found that it began in 1943 and on that finding, the profits were correctly computed.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Bai Shirinbai K. Kooka, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 391, Broken Hill Property Company vs Broken Hill Municipal Council, , Boystead vs Commissioner of Taxation, Society of Medical officer of Health vs Hope, , Caffoor vs Income tax Commissioner, and Installment Supply (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, ; , referred to,
