The appellant along with five other.
people, one of whom was driving the car, were traveling in a car belonging to the appellant 's brother.
The car was stopped by the Excise Inspector who conducted a search of the car and recovered five bundles of Ganja, four from the luggage boot and one from the leg space in front of the seat of the car.
The boot could be opened with the keys in the possession of the appellant as well as one of the keys in the possession of the driver.
The appellant made a confession to the Excise Inspector admitting his guilt.
At the trial of the appellant alongwith the other persons he pleaded an alibi and pleaded innocence.
The 753 trial court acquitted all the other accused but convicted the appellant under section 47 (a) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act.
1915, and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000.
On appeal the High Court affirmed this conviction and sentence.
The appellant thereupon appealed to this Court with special leave.
In the appeal before this Court it was contended that the confessional statement exhibit 3 upon which reliance was placed by the High Court as supporting the evidence of P. W. 2, P. W. 3 and P. W. 4 was inadmissible and if this statement was put aside the evidence of these prosecution witnesses was insufficient in law to sustain the conviction of the appellant.
In objecting to the admissibility of the statement reliance was placed on section 25 of the and section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in as much as it was recorded by the Inspector of Excise while he was investigating into an excise offence under Ch.
XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Held (per Subba Rao and; Mudholkar JJ.) the words, "Police Officer" in section 25 of the Evidence Act are not to be construed in a narrow way but have to be construed in a wide and popular sense.
Those words are however not to be construed in so wide a sense as to include persons on whom only some of the powers exercised by the police are conferred.
State of Punjab vs Barkat Ram ; referred to.
By virtue of section 77 (2) read with section 78 (3) of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915, an Excise Inspector or Sub Inspector in the State of Bihar shall be deemed to be an of charge of a police station and is entitled to investigate any offence under the Excise Act.
He can exercise all the powers which an officer in charge of a police station can exercise under Ch.
XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Therefore a confession recorded by him during an investigation into an excise offence cannot reasonably be regarded as anything 'different from a confession to a police officer.
The test for determining whether a person is a "police officer" for the purpose of section 25 of the Evidence Act would be whether the powers of a police officer which are conferred on him or which arc exercisable by him because he is deemed to be an officer in charge of a police station establish a direct or 754 substantial relationship with the prohibition enacted by section 25 of the Evidence Act that is the recording of a confession.
in other words the test would be whether the powers are such as would tend to facilitate the obtaining by him of a confession from a suspect delinquent.
It is the power of investigation which establishes a direct relationship with the prohibitions under section 25 of the Evidence Act.
Therefore where such power is conferred upon an officer, the mere fact that he possesses some other powers under another law would not make him any the less a police officer for the purpose of section 25.
The object of enacting section 25 of the Evidence Act was to eliminate from consideration confession made to an officer who by virtue of his position, could extract by force, torture or inducement a confession.
An Excise Officer acting under section 78 (3) of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915, would be in the same position as an officer in charge of a police station making an investigation under Ch.
XIV of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
He would likewise have the same opportunity of extracting confession from a suspect.
It is therefore difficult to draw a rational distinction between a ,confession recorded by a Police Officer strictly so called and recorded by an Excise Officer who is deemed to be a police officer.
Case law reviewed.
Harbhanian Sao vs Emperor, (1927) 1.
L. R. , Matilal Kalwar vs Emperor, A. I. R. , Ameen Sharief vs Emperor, (1934) 1.
L. R. , Nanoo Sheikh Ahmed vs Emperor, Bom.
78, Public Prosecutor vs O. Paramasivam, A. I. R. , Ibrahim vs Emperor, A. 1.
R. , Radha Kishun Maruwari V. King Emperor, Pat.
46 and Queen vs Hurribole Chunder Ghose, (1876) 1.
L. R. referred to.
There is one more reason also why the confession made to an Excise Sub Inspector must be excluded, that is, it is a statement made during the course of investigation to a person who exercises the power of an officer in charge of a police station.
Such a statement is excluded from evidence by section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure except for the purposes of contradiction.
Therefore both by section 25 of the Evidence Act as well as section 162 of the Criminal Procedure Code the confession of the appellant is inadmissible in evidence.
755 Per Raghubar Dayal, J. The appeal should be allowed but for different reasons.
A scrutiny of the various provisions of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915, leads to the conclusion that the legal position of an Excise Officer is similar to that of the Customs Officer whom this Court has held to be not a "Police officer" in the case of State of Punjab vs Barkat Ram, A. 1.
The provisions of sections 7, 89, 95 and 96 of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act, 1915, are sufficient to indicate that the action of Excise Officers under the Act and under any other law relating to excise revenue is treated alike.
The Act is like Sea Customs Act primarily concerned with the collection of the Excise revenue.
An Excise Officer cannot be a police officer for the purpose of section 25 of the Evidence Act at all times.
He cannot be a police officer only when he is discharging the duties of an investigating officer.
The mere fact that the Excise Officer possesses certain powers similar to those of police officers in regard to infraction of excise laws is not a sufficient ground for holding them to be police officers within the meaning of section 25 Evidence Act.
Under section 85(3) of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915 all officers other than collectors who make arrests, searches or seizures under the Act are deemed to be police officers for the purpose of the provisions relating to arrests, searches and seizures in the Criminal Procedure Code.
It is therefore clear that the Legislature did not contemplate that Excise Officers performing other duties corresponding to the duties of the regular police officers be deemed to be police officers merely on account of their performing those duties.
It follows that Excise Officers when investigating offenses under the Act are not to be deemed police officers for the purpose of the provisions about investigation in the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The effect of section 78(3) can only be that in view of the provisions of sub 3s.
(2) and (3) of section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure no proceedings by the Excise Officer so empowered shall be called into question on the ground that he was not empowered to investigate an offence.
The history of the Code of Criminal Procedure as well as the Excise law shows that Excise Officers have been considered 756 different from police officers and that clear provisions were created for certain officers of the Revenue and Police departments to be deemed Excise Officers.
The Excise Inspector and Sub Inspector empowered by the State Government under section 77(2) of the Act are not police officers within the meaning of section 25 of the Evidence Act and that the aforesaid officers cannot be treated to be police officers for the purpose of section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
