The appellant was the cashier of the Municipal Board Hardwar.
He was in charge of the cash and it was his duty to see that funds above Rs. 4,000/ were deposited 'in the treasury or the Imperial Bank.
On audit it was found that money received by the Board totalling Rs. 52,144/ was not deposited as required by the rules.
On complaint by the Chairman of the Board, a Sub Inspector of Police investigated the case and a case was registered under section 409 of the Indian Penal Code, But this case was withdrawn and the accused discharged on the ground that it was covered .by section 5 (2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Thereafter investigation was conducted by an officer as required by section 5A of the Act.
But this investigation consisted of this that the duly authorised investigating officer went through the papers of the earlier investigation and decided to file a fresh prosecution on the basis of the earlier investigation.
Sanction was obtained for (2) of the Act.
Subsequently the four cases, in which the appellant and his brother were jointly charged were split up into 7 cases.
In the three new cases only the appellant was tried.
The Trial Judge found the appellant guilty unders 5 (2) read with section 5 (1) of the Act and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment and to pay fine.
On appeal to the High Court, it upheld the conviction but reduced the sentence and.
set aside the sentence of fine.
The appellant appealed to this Court with special leave.
The following points were urged in the appeal before this Court.
Firstly, it was urged that the investigation 89 irregular and not in accordance. ,with section 5A of the Act in as much as the investigation was not conducted by a person authorised by that section.
Secondly, it was contended that sanction was obtained only for the first four cases and no sanction was obtained for the three new cases (after splitting up the four) out of which the present appeals have arisen.
It was further contended that the sanction was not with respect to section 5 (1) (C) or ' the Act though it was under section 5 (2)of the Act and therefore it was insufficient to confer ,jurisdiction on.the Special Judge to try the appellant under section 5 (1) (c) read with section 5 (2) of the Act.
Held that section 5A is mandatory and not directory and an investigation conducted in violation thereof is illegal.
But this illegality wilt not vitiate the results of the trial unless it is shown that it has brought about a miscarriage of justice; neither does it affect the competence or jurisdiction of the court to try the case.
In the present appeals it is not shown that there has been miscarriage of justice as a result of the illegal investigation.
H.N. Rishbud & Inder Singh vs State of Delhi, [1955] I S.C.R. 1150 followed State of Madhya Pradesh vs Mubarak All [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 201 distinguished.
The mere fact that in view of the provisions of section 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, the Special Judge thought it necessary to separate the trial of the appellant with respect to certain items for which there was sanction would not mean that these cases had no sanction behind it.
The sanction of the original four cases would cover these three cases also.
The allegations made in the sanction show that the sanctioning authority had section 5 (1) (c) in mind because the sanction speaks of misappropriation and embezzlement of the 'money of the ' Board and misappropriation and embezzlement is only to be found in section 5 (1) (c).
As the words of the sanction stand they would cover a case of misappropriation or conversion to Ins own case by the appellant himself or by allowing others to do so.
The sanction is sufficient for the purpose of giving jurisdiction to the Special Judge to take cognizance of the cases out of which the present appeals have arisen.
