The appellant was the Zonal officer of the Refugee Rehabilitation office and the co accused Ganesh De was a peon in the said office.
One Sandhyarani, a minor girl was staying with her mother in the Refugee colony.
She was induced by one Manibala to go to her place with a promise for a nurse 's job.
In course of time, she was taken to the appellant 's house in about the middle of November 1958 on the representation that he wanted to give her employment.
The appellant held out the hope of a job for her and managed to ravish her.
Similarly, she was taken to the house of the appellant on two or three occasions within a period of one month and each time he bad sexual intercourse with her.
Sandhya 's mother filed a complaint which was investigated and she was recovered from the house of Ganesh De.
Sandhya 's statement was recorded and challan was forwarded which specified the dates on which the appellant had raped Sandhya.
The charge was framed against the appellant on three counts and in the three counts, periods were mentioned within which the appellant was alleged to have committed rape on Sandhya.
The first period was between 18.11.1958 to 21.11.1958, second was 1.
12.1958 to 6.12.1958 and the third was 9.12.1958 to 15.12.
Ganesh De was charged under s, 376 read with section 109 of the Indian Penal Code.
They were tried by the City Sessions Court with the aid of jury.
The jury returned a verdict of guilty against the appellant in respect of all the three counts which was accepted by the Sessions Judge and the appellant was convicted and sentenced under section 376 to undergo rigorous imprisonment for four years on the first charge.
No separate sentence was 238 awarded in respect of the other charges.
Ganesh De was also sentenced to a similar period of imprisonment.
The appellant preferred an appeal, which was summarily dismissed by a vision Bench of the High Court.
The appellant then obtained a certificate under article 134(1) (c) of the Constitution, hence this appeal.
Held that where it is possible to specify precisely the necessary particulars required by section 222(1), the prosecution ought to mention the said particulars in the charge but where the said particulars cannot be precisely specified in the charge having regard to the nature of the information available to the prosecution, failure to mention such particulars may not invalidate the charge.
In dealing with the question as to whether the charge framed in a criminal trial has contravened section 222(1), the court will have to examine all the relevant facts and if it appears to the Court that having regard to them, the charge could and ought to have been framed more precisely, the court may reach that conclusion and then enquire whether the defective charge has led to the prejudice of the accused.
The charge framed in the present case did not contravene the requirement of section 22(1),2 and was therefore, valid.
Ali Hyder vs Emperor, , held in applicable.
Held further, that the position under section 421 is clear and unambiguous.
If the High Court in dealing with criminal appeals takes the view that there is no substance in the appeal, it is not necessary that it should record reasons for its conclusion in summarily dismissing it.
Therefore, the High Court was not right in granting certificate to the appellant on the ground that his appeal should not have been summarily dismissed by another Division Bench of the High Court.
Mushtak Husain vs State of Bombay, A.I.R. 1953 S.C.282 and Shreekantiah Ramayya Municipally vs State of Bombay, A.I.R. , distinguished.
Held further that the requirement as to corroboration in regard to the evidence of a prosecutrix had been elaborately explained by the Sessions Judge to the Jury and having regard to the several statements made by the learned Judge in his charge on this topic, it is difficult to accept that the charge was materially defective in this matter.
239 The failure of the learned judge to mention the point about onus to prove the age of the girl once again, when he dealt with the actual relevant evidence, cannot be said to constitute a misdirection, much less a material misdirection which may have led to the prejudice of the appellant.
When a previous statement is put to a witness in cross examination under a. 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, its primary purpose is to contradict the witness by reference to the evidence given at the trial, and so, it cannot be said that the learned judge was wrong in law in telling the jury that the previous statement on which the defence relied may help the defence to contend that the girl was not a straightforward witness and was changing her story from time to time, but the said previous statement cannot be treated as substantive evidence at the trial.
That being the true legal position the charge did not suffer from serious misdirection.
In a jury trial where questions of fact are left to the ver dict of the jury sometimes the verdicts returned by the jury may cause a disagreeable surprise to the Judge, but that itself can be no justification for characterising the verdict as perverse.
The appeal, therefore, must be dismissed.
