One Raja Sahib took a lease from the District Board, Allahabad,.
with respect to the realisation of bayai and bazar dues on the sale of commodities in the bazar.
The appellant was his employee to collect these dues.
A peon of Raja Sahib asked Shyam Lal, P.W. 2, who had sold linseed to Mewa Lal, respondent No. 2, to come to the Munim and pay the beyai dues.
Mewa Lal asked Shyam Lal not to pay those dues.
The peon took Shyam Lal to the appellant.
The respondent No. 2 armed with a lathi, came there and on appellant 's asking him as to why he was creating obstruction in the realisation of the dues, filthily abused him and threatened to kill him.
The appellant, thereafter, on obtaining sanction of the District Magistrate, instituted a complaint against Respondent No. 2 for prosecuting him for an offence under section 107 of the United Provinces District Board Act.
The trial Magistrate convicted him of the offences under sections 504 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code and also of an offence under section 107 of the Act.
On appeal, Sessions judge acquitted him of all the charges.
Against acquittal, the appellant filed an appeal to the High Court which was dismissed.
On appeal by certificates three contentions were raised by the appellant in this Court: (i) The order of the Sessions judge aquitting Mewa Lal was bad as no notice of hearing of the appeal was issued to the appellant, on whose complaint the Magistrate convicted him, (ii) The High Court was wrong in holding that the Raja could not collect the Tah Bazari dues through his agents, and (iii) that the appellant had requisite sanction under section 182 of the Act, for prosecuting Mewa Lal, respondent No. 2.
Held that section 107 of the Act does not make obstruction or molestation of an employee of the person under contract with 359 the Board, an offence.
The section speaks of the obstruction or molestation of two classes of persons.
One class consists of persons employed by the District Board under the Act.
The Raja or the appellant is not an employee of the District Board.
The second class consists of those persons who are under contract with the Board under the Act.
Surely, the person under contract with the Board is the Raja and not the appellant.
The appellant is only an employee of the Raja.
In view of these considerations, the acquittal of the respondent No. 2 could not be interfered with merits.
The appeal, therefore, must be dismissed.
The appeal was not heard on merits.
If was considered not necessary to decide the first contention and the Court did not express any opinion on the second contention as the terms of the lease were not known.
The third contention was held to be correct.
