The respondent Is a partnership firm.
It instituted a suit in the Bombay City Civil Court against the appellant.
It was alleged in the plaint that by virtue of an agreement appellant No. I appointed the respondent as his commission agent for the sale of his cloth in the shop which was in the possession of the respondent.
The agreement was to remain in force for four years.
Persuant to the agreement the appellants, their family members, servants and agents were allowed by the respondent to visit the shop only for the purpose of looking after the business of commission agency.
On the expiry of the agreement the appellants had no further rights to enter into the shop.
The respondent prayed for a declaration that it was in lawful possession of the shop, for an injunction restraining the appellants, their family members, servants and agents from entering into the shop and for an amount of commission payable to it under the agreement.
The plaint proceeded on the footing that 215 during the period of agreement the appellants were mere licensees and after the expiry of the agreement they were mere trespassers.
The plaint in terms negatives any relationship of landlord and tenant as between the parties to the suit.
The defence of the appellants was that the respondent had sublet the shop to them at a certain monthly rent.
But since no subletting is possible under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, without the consent of the land lord the parties entered into a sham agreement which was never acted upon and which was only a cloak to conceal the true relationship.
The relationship was that of a land lord and tenant.
On these averments in the written statement the appellants took the plea that the Court of Small Causes Bombay alone had jurisdiction to try the suit.
The City Civil Court relying on a decision of this Court upheld the contention of the appellants and made an order that the plaint be returned for presentation to the proper court.
The respondent thereupon appealed to the High Court.
The High Court held that on a correct interpretation of s.28 of the Act the suit out of which the appeal had arisen was not a suit within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Small Causes Bombay and setting aside the order of the City Civil judge directed that it should dispose of the suit in accordance with law.
The present appeal is by way of special leave.
In the appeal the same question as to the jurisdiction of the City Civil Court was raised.
Held (per S.K. Das and M. Hidayatullah, JJ.) that section 28 no doubt gives exclusive jurisdiction to the Court of Small Causes to entertain and try a suit or proceeding between a landlord and a tenant relating to recovery of rent or possession of any premises to which any of the provisions of Part II of the Act apply; it also gives exclusive jurisdiction to decide any application under the Act and any claim or question arising out of the Act or any of its provisions.
Section 28 does not invest the Court of Small Causes with exclusive power to try questions of title as between the rightful owner and a trespasser or a licensee, for such questions do not arise under the Act.
If therefore the plaintiff in his plaint does not admit a relation which would attract any of the provisions of the Act on which the exclusive jurisdiction given under section 28 depends, the defendant by his plea cannot force the plaintiff to go to a forum where on his own averments he cannot go.
If the suit as framed is by a land lord or a tenant and the relief asked for is in the nature of a claim which arises 216 out of the Act or any of its provisions then only and not otherwise will it be covered by section 28.
The City Civil Court had jurisdiction to entertain the suit and the High Court correctly came to that conclusion.
Ananti vs Ghhannu, All.
501 Govindram Salamatrai vs Dharampal, , and Jaswantlal vs Western Company, India (1959), 61 Bom.
L R. 1087, approved.
Babulal Bhuramal vs Nandram Shivram ; , explained.
Per Sarkar, J. The suit is not one between a land lord and a tenant for recovery of possession of premises and there.
fore it does not come under the first kind of matters mentioned in section 28(1).
The suit does not come under the second kind mentioned in that section as that deals with certain applications only.
Section 28 thirdly provides that no court other than a Court of Small Causes shall have jurisdiction to deal with any claim or question arising under the Act concerning properties in Greater Bombay.
This part of the section does not purport to affect any court 's jurisdiction to entertain and try a suit but it only prevents a court from dealing with certain claims and questions.
Therefore a court may try a suit in so far as it does not thereby have to deal with a claim or question arising out of the Act.
It is unnecessary to decide the dispute whether it is per missible under the section to look at the defence for ascertaining whether a claim or question under the Act, arises in the suit because even the defence in the present case does not raise any claim or question under the Act.
The defence really is that the appellants arc not licensees.
That being so, the only question that the suit involves is whether the appellants are licensees of the shop.
Quite clearly, such a question is neither a question nor a claim arising out of the Act.
Neither is a question whether the appellants are sub tenants one arising out of the Act for the Act says nothing as to the creation of a tenancy.
No discussion of any question or claim arising out of the Act is necessary for deciding the suit.
