The appellant as well as the respondents are the heirs of one Hemendra Nath Sen who died intestate in 1929 leaving considerable properties.
Dispute having arisen between his heirs an agreement for partition was entered into determining their shares Among other provisions there was one by which the 2nd appellant was to have 5 annas shares in a glass factory and the rest of the members dividing the balance of the II annas share Further disputes arose and the parties executed an arbitration agreement in which the dispute between the parties was set out Before the reference was submitted to the arbitrator the respondents applied to the High Court under section 20 of the Arbitration Act for an order directing the agreement to be filed in the Court and for making a reference to the arbitrator appointed by the parties.
The present appellants were impleaded as respondents.
The court made an order referring the disputes to the 411 arbitrator named in the agreement.
The arbitrator entered on the reference and after following the prescribed procedure he pronounced the award.
The award was filed in the court where upon the appellants applied for setting it aside on various grounds the principal of which was that the award was incomplete.
, in that all the disputes which had been referred for arbitration had not been disposed of by it.
The Single judge before whom the application came for hearing rejected the application and directed a decree to be passed in terms of the award.
The two appeals filed by the appellants in the High Court, one from the order refusing to set aside the award and the other from the decree in terms of the award were dismissed.
The present appeal is by way of special leave granted by this Court The main contention raised was that the award was incomplete in as much as the award did not dispose of three matters referred to the arbitrator.
These three matters were (a) the award bad given no direction regarding the rendition of accounts and profits with reference to a lease of the Glass Works Ltd. which the award had declared invalid (b) the award had failed to comply with the request, contained in the arbitration agreement, that the arbitrator should give directions as regards the future management of the Glass Co., (c) there was an allegation in the arbitration agreement as regards which evidence was led before the arbitrator, in relation as to miappropriation of moneys by 6th respondent but the arbitrator had not specified in the award whether this allegation had been made out or not and no direction had been given in regard to the matter.
Held that a court should approach an award with a desire to support it if that is reasonably possible, rather than to destroy it by calling it illegal.
Salby vs Whitbread and Co. [1917] I.K.B.736 referred to.
Unless the reference to arbitration specifically so requires the arbitrator is not bound to deal, with each claim or matter separately, but can deliver a consolidated award.
Re Brown and the Croydon Canal Co. (1839) 9 Ad & E11 522 : ; and Jewell vs Christe , referred to.
The silence of the arbitrator upon the subject placed before him means that the arbitrator has negatived such plea.
Unless the contrary appears the court will presume that the 412 award disposes of finally all the matters in difference.
Where an award is made de praemissis, the presumption is that the arbitrator intended to dispose finally of all the matters in difference and his award will be held final if by any intendment it can be made so.
Harrison vs Creswick, ; referred to.
Since the impugned award expressly states that it is made de praemissis", i.e. of and concerning all matters in dispute referred to the arbitrator, there is a presumption that the award is complete.
The silence of the award as regards the claim for accounting must therefore be taken to be intended as a decision rejecting the claim to the relief.
If the lease were set aside because of technical informality.
it would not necessarily follow that the relief of accounting was implicit in the declaration of the invalidity of the lease.
Non constat, the amount due on taking an account has not been taken into account adjusted in making the other provisions of the award.
Hence the contention that the nature of the claims required a specific adjudication is repelled.
The silence of the arbitrator on the question of the award in the facts and circumstances of the case, on the question of future management of the Glass Company and his failure to make any specific provision in regard to the management did not therefore leave any lacuna as regards the rights and must be taken to have left the right of the parties to be determined by the relevant general law applicable to the management of the company.
The absence of any provision regarding the claims of the appellants to relief from the respondents on the ground that they misappropriated the money of the company is capable of only one interpretation and that is that the arbitrator rejected the claims.
