Five bales, containing woollen shawls and mufflers dispatched from Kanpur by the British India Corporation Ltd. and another bale despatched from Haimanpur to Kanpur, were loaded in wagon at Itarsi railway station.
The lock of the wagon was found broken open and on checking at nagpur the aforesaid bales were found missing.
On search, certain articles including some torn labels were recovered from the house of one Gopinath.
The same day the appellant and few other persons were found by the Police,coming out of Gopinath 's house whose front door was locked.
They were taken to the Police Station and at the instance of the appellant the police recovered woollen shawls, mufflers, bed sheets and certain house breaking implements from different places of that house.
After investigation, six persons including the appellant were put on trial before the Magistrate for several charges under sections 120 B, 379 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code and except one Birendra Nath, all were convicted.
On appeal, all the convicted persons were acquitted by the Additional Sessions Judge, on further appeal by the State, against the acquittal of Gopinath and the appellant, the High Court allowed the appeal only against the appellant with respect to the offence under section 414 of the Indian Penal Code.
On appeal by special leave, this Court held : Held that the mere fact that the other accused persons were acquitted on the ground that the property recovered was not proved to be stolen property did not preclude the State from appealing against the acquittal of the appellant against 290 whom there is better evidence.
The State could challenge the correctness of the findings of the Additional Sessions Judge about the property being stolen property and the High Court could record its own findings on that question.
Held further, that it is not necessary for a person to be convicted under section 414 Indian Penal Code that another person must be traced out and convicted of an offence of committing theft.
The prosecution has simply to establish that the property recovered is stolen property and that the appellant provided help in its concealment and disposal.
The circum stances of the recovery in the present case sufficiently prove that the appellant had assisted in the concealment of the stolen property and had thus committed the offence under section 414 Indian Penal Code.
The appeal therefore, must be dismissed.
