The appellant dismissed one of its workmen on a domestic enquiry held by its Manager who did not record any findings, took some of the evidence in the absence of the workman and found him guilty of misconduct under Rule 14 (c) (i) and (viii) of the Standing Orders.
The Industrial Tribunal held that the dismissal was unjustified and directed the appellant to reinstate the employee.
The respondent Union 's case was that the dismissed workman, who was the Organising Secretary of the union, was dismissed by the appellant mala fide with the purpose of victimising him for his trade union activities.
The dispute centered round the question whether the strike which the dismissed workman was charged as having instigated was really instigated by him or was the spontaneous result of the treatment meted out by the appellant to another workman who was sick and fainted on the day the strike started.
The case of the appellant was that this latter workman was not present on that day at all.
This was belied by the record and the Industrial Tribunal without attaching any importance to the domestic enquiry held by the Manager dealt with the merits of the dispute itself and found in favour of the respondent, holding that the management was unjustified in dismissing the workman on the report of the Manager which was neither fair nor honest.
On behalf of the appellant reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen and it was contended that the Industrial Tribunal was in error in interfering with the decision of the management.
Held the Industrial Tribunal was right in discarding the domestic enquiry.
Although this Court has consistently 507 refrained from interfering with the conclusions of domestic enquiries in industrial matters unless one of the four tests laid down in Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen was satisfied, the essential basis on which this view is founded is that the domestic enquiry must be conducted fairly and properly in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
The evidence on which the charges are sought to be proved against the workman must normally be led in his presence.
The procedure of recording statements of witnesses ex parte and thereafter producing the witnesses for cross examination, unless there are compelling reasons to do so, must be discouraged.
Departmental enquiries under article 311 of the Consti tution where the question of motive is hardly relevant do not stand on the same footing as those in industrial enquiries where the question of bona fides or mala fides of the employee is often in issue.
Indian Iron & Steel Co. vs Their Workmen, , explained.
State of Mysore vs section section Makapur, ; ; M/s. Ke.8oram Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Gangadhar, [1961] Vol. 2 S.C.R. 809, and Union Territory of Tripura vs Gopal Chander Dutta Choudhri, [1963] Supp.
I S.C.R. 266, referred to.
The failure of the Manager to record any findings after holding the enquiry was a serious infirmity in the enquiry and it is not for this Court to go into the evidence to decide whether the dismissal was justified.
It is the duty of the enquiry officer in an industrial enquiry to record clearly and precisely his conclusions and to indicate briefly the reasons therefor so that the Industrial Tribunal can judge whether they arc basically erroneous or perverse.
Although the Industrial Tribunal should not as a normal procedure allow evidence to be led by one party in absence of the other or admit evidence after the case has been fully argued unless both the parties agree, the mere calling for the authenticated record to see whether the workman was the Organising Secretary could not amount to a breach of the rule.
