The appellant acquired a plot of land on which the respondent 's property stands, consisting of the main house and an outhouse with an open space in front of them.
The land acquired covered a space 50 ft.
in width for the electric wire to run over and this included a portion of the open space as also the outhouse.
The Land Acquisition Officer fixed a compensation of Rs. 4,451/5/6.
Not being satisfied with this award the respondents appealed under section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
One of the grounds taken in the petition for reference was that the other lands and buildings contiguous to the land and building acquired which belonged to them had not been acquired, they had to suffer a huge loss, the electric rope line passed close to the rest of the property and so it could not be used as it might be dangerous for human habitation.
On this basis compensation of about Rs. 21,765/8/which had been spent in the constructions of the principal house was claimed Before the District Judge, on reference, Respondent No. I gave evidence that he had made I an application before the award was given for the payment of the higher compensation on the above stated ground.
The District judge considered this ground and held that since only a narrow strip of land was left in front of the main building its utility was diminished and awarded an additional compensation of Rs. 1,000/ .
The respondents preferred an appeal to the High Court in which they prayed for a declaration that the Land Acquisition Officer should acquire the main building along with the other properties acquired.
The present appellant contended that the respondents should not be allowed to raise this contention 383 because this plea could have been raised by them only under section 49 of the Act and the plea was foreign to the scope of the reference out of which the appeal arose.
It was also contended that his plea was not taken before the Land Acquisition Officer.
The High Court rejected these contentions of the Appellants and granted the declaration as prayed for by the respondents.
The present appeal is by way of a certificate granted by the High Court.
Substantially the same contentions as were raised before the High Court were raised in this appeal before this Court.
Held that the claim was made by the respondents under section 23 of the Act and not under section 49 and what they have in fact done is to claim additional compensation under section 23 (1).
It is clear that the scope of the enquiry under section 18 (1) is specifically indicated by the section itself and the grounds on which objection can be taken.
The Court cannot consider the pleas raised by the owner of the property under section 49 in an enquiry under section 18 (1).
The scheme of section 49 is that the owner has to express his desire that the whole of his house should be acquired before the award is made and once such a desire is expressed the procedure prescribed by section 49 has to be followed.
This procedure is distinct and separate from the procedure which has to be followed in making a reference under section 18.
In the present case the respondents have not taken any steps to express their desire that the whole of their house should be acquired and it was not open to the High Court to allow them to raise this point in appeal which Arose out of an order passed by the District Judge under section 18.
Case law reviewed.
Pramatha Nath Mullick vs Secretary of State for India in Council, (1929) L. R. 57 I. A. 100.
The Secretary of State for India in Council V. R. Narayanaswami Chettiar, Mad. 391, distinguished.
Krishna Das Roy vs The Land Acquisition Collector of Pabna,
