An industrial dispute was referred by the Government of Uttar Pradesh for adjudication to the Adjudicator, Kanpur.
,Me Adjudicator held that the Malis were workmen under the U.p.
but they were not Industrial employees and hence were not entitled to claim dear food allowance under the Government order dated December 6, 1948.
The claims of the Malis with regard to weekly holidays and leave with wages were also rejected by the Adjudicator.
725 Two crow appeals were filed against the order of the Adjudicator before the Labour Appellate Tribunal.
The appeal of the appellant was dismissed.
As regards the appeal of respondents, the Tribunal gave the Malis benefit of dear food allowance.
Their claim for leave with wages was also allowed on the ground of social justice.
However, their claim for weekly holiday was rejected.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court but that was dismissed as in fructuous.
The appellant came to this court by special leave.
The contentions raised by the appellant in this court were that the Malis were not workers within the meaning of section 2 of the U.P. , that Malis were not industrial employees within the meaning of Government order dated December 6, 1948, and hence were not entitled to dear food allowance and that the Labour Appellate Tribunal should not have granted the demand of the respondents for leave on ground of fair play and social justice.
Held that the Malis were workers within the meaning of section 2, of the U.P.
They were employed by the appellant, were paid by it and were, subject, to its control and supervision and *discharged the function of looking after the properties of the appellant.
Their conditions, of service were also determined by the appellant and the continuance of their service also depended upon the pleasure of the appellant.
The bungalows and gardens on which they worked were a kind of amenity supplied by the appellant to its officers.
Hence, the Malis were engaged in operations which were incidentally connected with the main industry carried on by the employers The case of the Malis was similar to that of the bus drivers.
The relation of the work carried on by the Malis with the industry was not remote, indirect or far fetched.
The employee who is engaged in any work or operation which is incidentally,connected with the main industry of the employer is a workman, provided the other requirements of section 2 (s) of the industrial Disputes Act are satisfied.
Held also, that the Malis were industrial employees within the meaning of the Government order dated December 6, 1948, and hence were entitled to claim the benefit of dear food allowance.
The Tribunal was in error in limiting the scope of the expression, " Industrial , employees" by reference to the definition of the word "worker" as given in the Factories Act, 726 Held also, that the Tribunal was justified in granting the demand of the respondents for leave on grounds of fair play and social justice.
The concept of social justice has now become such an integral part of industrial law that it is idle for any party to suggest that industrial adjudication can or should ignore the claims of social justice in dealing with industrial disputes.
The concept of social justice is not narrow, one sided or pedantic and is not confined to industrial adjudication alone.
Its sweep is comprehensive.
It is founded on the basic ideal of socioeconomic equality and its aim is to assist the removal of socioeconomic disparities and inequalities.
In dealing with industrial matters, it does not adopt a doctrinaire approach and refuses to yield blindly to abstract notions, but adopts a realistic and pragmatic approach.
It endeavors to resolve the competing claims of employers and employees by finding a solution which is just and fair to both parties with the object of establishing harmony between capita i labour and relationship.
Shri Bhikari, Kanpur vs Messrs. Cooper Allen & Co., Kanpur, ; The Upper India Chini Mills Mazdoor Union vs The Upper India Sugar Mills ; The Suti Mill Mazdoor Sabha, Kanpur vs Messrs.
The British India Corporation Ltd., Kanpur, ; J.K. Iron& Steel Co. Lid, Kanpur vs The Iron and Steel Masdoor Union, Kanpur, ; Muir Mills Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; ; Messrs. Crown Aluminium Works vs Their Workmen, ; and The State of Mysore vs The Workers of Gold Mines, [1959] S.C.R. 895, referred to.
