Petitions were filed by sixteen respondents under section 33C(2) of the , claiming certain benefits under an award made by an Industrial Tribunal.
The prayer was to compute the benefits in terms of money and direct the appellant to pay the same to them.
Many objections were raised by the appellant but these were rejected by the Labour Court which accepted the claim of the respondents and directed the appellant to pay to the respondents the respective amounts specified against their names in the award.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The contentions raised by the appellant before this Court were that the award, on which the claim was based, was without jurisdiction and hence the Labour Court should have refused to implement it; that in order to get benefit, the workers must show that they actually worked on all Sundays in the year before September, 1948; and that as the claims of the respondents were belated, those should not have been awarded.
Held that the Labour Court would have been justified In refusing to implement the award if it was satisfied that the 710 direction in the award on which the respondents ' claim was based, was without jurisdiction, but as that was not actually so, the impugned direction was according to law.
The applications made by respondents were competent and the Labour Court had jurisdiction to deal with the question as to the computation of the benefit conferred on the respon dents in terms of money.
The proceedings contemplated by section 330 (2) were, in many cases, analogous to execution proceed ings and the Labour Court which was called upon to compute in terms of money the benefit claimed by an industrial employee, was in the position of an executing court and was competent to interpret the award on which the claim was based and also consider the plea that the award, sought to be enforced, was a nullity.
Held also, that there was no substance in the argument that since the respondents had not been actually required to work on all Sundays in the relevant year, they were not entitled to the benefit given in the award.
The test which had to be satisfied by the workers was that they could have been required to work on Sundays in that year and not that they actually so worked.
Held also, that the legislature has not made any provision for limitation for applications under section 33C (2) and it was not open to the Courts to introduce any such limitation on grounds of fairness or justice, The words of section 33 C (2) were plain and unambiguous and it was the duty of the Labour Court to give effect to the said provisions without any considerations of limitation.
The employees who are entitled to take the benefit of section 33C (2) may not always be conscious of their right and it would not be right to put the restriction of limitation in respect of claims which they may have to make under the said provision.
There was no justification for applying the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act and article 181 of the Limitation Act to the proceeding under section 33C (2).
Claims like bonus arc distinguishable from claims made under section 33C (2).
A claim for bonus is entertained on grounds of social justice and is not based on any statutory provision and in such a case, it is open to industrial adjudication to have regard to all the relevant considerations before awarding the claim and in doing so if it appears that a claim for bonus was made after long lapse of time, industrial adjudication may refuse to entertain the claim or Government may refuse to make the reference in that , behalf.
711 However, those considerations are irrelevant when claims we made under section 330 (2).
In such cases limitation cannot be introduced by industrial adjudication on academic grounds of social justice.
Central Bank of India Ltd. vs P. section Rajagopalan, [1964] Vol.
3 S.C.R. 140; Rai Manekbai vs Manekji Kavasji, (1883) 7 Bom.
213; Hansral Gupta vs Official Liquidators, Dehra Dun Musoorie Electric Tramway Co. Ltd., (1932) L.R. 60 I.A. 13 and Sha Mulchand & Co. Ltd. vs Jawahar Millar Ltd. ; , referred to.
