The appellant, a Hindu reversioner, brought the suit out of which the appeal arose for recovery of certain properties alienated by two widows having widow 's estates under the will of their husband.
The respondents resisted the suit mainly on the grounds that the appellant, who was an undischarged insolvent at the time the succession opened, could not maintain the suit even after his absolute discharge as the properties must be taken to have vested in the official receiver and that under the will of their husband the widows got not a widow 's estate but an absolute estate and had the right to alienate the properties which they did.
The trial court found in favour of the appellant and directed delivery of possession of the properties to him.
On appeal the High Court took the contrary view on both the points and dismissed the suit.
The appellant came up to this Court on the certificate granted by the High Court.
Held that the High Court was in error in holding that the appellant could not maintain the suit.
There is nothing in the Provincial Insolvency Act that takes away the right of the insolvent to sue in courts after he is granted a discharge for he then becomes a free man.
Though there is no specific provision in the Act with respect to the property that may remain undisposed of by the court or by the receiver, the provisions in section 67 by necessary implication read in the light of the general scheme of the Act provides an answer to this and all such property must be treated as surplus to which an insolvent is entitled, after an absolute order of discharge is made in his favour, subject always to the condition that if any debts provable under the Act have not been discharged before such order, 521 the property will remain liable for such discharge as also the expenses of all proceedings under the Act till they are fully met.
Cohen vs Mitchel, (I 890) ; Sayad Daud Sayed Mahomed vs Mulna Mahomed Sayad, (1926) 28 Bom.
L. R. 334; Yellavajjhula Suraya vs Tummalapali Mangayya, A.I.R. , Rup Narain Singh vs Har Gopal Tewari, 'I. L. R. (1933), 53 All. 503; Diwan Chand vs Manak Chand, A.I.R. (1934) Lah.
809; Arjun Das Kundu vs Marchhiya Tolinee, I.L.R. ; Kanshi Ram vs Hari Ram, A. I .R. and Parsu vs Balaji, I.L.R. (I , discussed.
In order to determine the true intention of a testator, the clauses of the will should be read as a whole in the light of the surrounding circumstances as also in contrast to the other clauses and where the testator, as in the instant case, having used the word owner ' in the previous clause, follows up by using the words "during her lifetime enjoy as owner the income in any manner she likes" the latter words clearly limit the bequest and indicate that what is given is no more than a life estate.
Where the interests of the various defendants in possession of various properties are independent, the appeal cannot abate as a whole by reason of the heirs of a deceased defendant in possession of a property not having been brought on the record within the prescribed time.
