The appellant was a chartered accountant and a partner of a firm of auditors.
This firm acted as auditors of two companies, among others, registered under the Indian , the entirety of the shares of one of which are owned by the Union Government and the entirety of the shares of the other by the West Bengal Government.
The appellant was declared elected to the Lok Sabha.
His election was challenged by two voters of the constituency by means of an election petition.
The main ground raised was that the appellant was at the relevant period the holder of an office of profit under the Government of India as well as the State Government and hence he was disqualified from standing for election under article 102(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The Election Tribunal accepted this contention and declared the election of the appellant void.
The appellant filed an appeal before the High Court in which he did not succeed.
The present appeal was by virtue of a certificate granted by the High Court under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution.
It was contended before this Court that on a true construction of the expression "under the Government of India or the Government of any State" occurring in cl.
(a) of article 102 (I.) of the Constitution the appellant could not be said to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of West Bengal.
It was argued that the various tests, namely, who has the power to appoint, who has the right to remove, who pays the remuneration, what are the functions and who exercises the control should all co exist and each must show subordination to the Government.
The fulfillment of some of the tests alone, would not be sufficient to determine that a person holds an office of profit under the Government.
It was contented on behalf of the respondent that the tests were not cumulative and that the court should look to the substance rather than to the form.
Held : (i)For holding an office of profit, under the Government a person need not be in the service of the Government and there need not be any relationship of master and servant between them.
312 (ii)The examination of the various provisions of the Com panies Act, 1956 (sections 224, 227, 618 and 619) showed that so far as the two companies in question were concerned the appellant was appointed as an auditor by the Central Government, was removable by the Central Government, that the Comptroller and the Auditor General of India exercised full control over him and that his remuneration was fixed by the Central Government under sub section
(8) of section 224 of the though it was paid by the companies concerned.
(iii)Where the several elements, the power to appoint, the power to dismiss, the power to control and give directions as to the manner in which the duties of the office are to be performed and the power to determine the question of remuneration are all present in a given case then the officer in question holds the office under the authority so empowered.
It is not necessary that all these must co exist nor is the fact that the source from which the remuneration is paid is not from public revenue decisive.
(iv)The appellant held an office of profit under the Government of India within the meaning of article 102(1)(a) of the Constitution of India and as such he was disqualified for being chosen as a member of Parliament.
Maulana Abdul Shakur vs Rikhab Chand, [1958] S.C.R. 387, distinguished.
Ramappa vs Sangappa, ; , referred to.
