The appellant and nine others were tried before the Sessions Judge for offences of rioting and being members of an unlaw ful assembly and causing in furtherance of their common object death of one person and serious injuries to four others.
The appellant was also charged for the substantive offence of causing the death by gun shot injuries.
All the accused persons were acquitted at the trial.
In appeal against acquittal by the State, the High Court set aside the acquittal of the appellant and sentenced him to imprisonment for life under section 302 Indian Penal Code and confirmed the order in respect of the rest.
The appellant 's main con tention in this Court was that under section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure it was obligatory upon an investigating officer to record the statements of witnesses examined by him and if those statements were not made available to the accused at the trial, a valuable right was lost to the accused, and the trial must on that account alone be regarded as vitiated.
34 2 section C. India/64 522 Held : (i) Where the circumstances are such that the court may reasonable infer that prejudice has resulted to the accused from the failure to supply the statements recorded under section 161, the court would be justified in directing that the convict on be set aside and a proper case to direct that the defect be rectified in such manner as the circumstances, may warrant.
It is only where the court is satisfied, having regard to the manner in which the case has been conducted and the attitude adopted by the accused in relation to the defect, that no prejudice has resulted to the accused that the court would, notwithstanding the breach of the statutory provisions, be justified in maintaining the conviction.
On the facts of the present case no prejudice was caused to the accused and the plea of prejudice was neither raised in the High Court, nor any substantial argument in support of the same was advanced in this Court.
Narayan Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A. I. R. 1957 section C. 737 and Pulukuri Kotyya vs Emperor, L. R. 74 I. A. 65, relied on.
Baliram vs Emperor, I.L.R. , Maganlal vs Em peror, I.L.R. and Maroti Mahagoo vs Emperor, I.L.R. , disapproved.
(ii) In the present case the Sessions Judge did not found his conclusion upon the demeanour of the witnesses and the High Court rightly observed that the presence of the four injured persons at the scene of offence was assured by the evidence of injuries, and must be regarded as established beyond reasonable doubt.
Sheo Swarup vs King Emperor, L. R. 61 I. A. 398, referred to.
