The appellants were convicted by the High Court for com mitting three murders.
In this case the High Court considered the testimony of one "Parwati", given by her in the committing court.
She was in eye witness of the occurrence according to her testimony in the committing court.
In the sessions court she resiled from her previous statement before the committing Magistrate and made a definite statement that she had not seen the occurrence.
Her evidence before the committing court was tendered as evidence under section 288 Criminal Procedure Code in the court of sessions.
Her evidence before the committing court was not corroborated in respect of participation in the occurrence by four appellants.
The High Court convicted the appellants on the basis of the statement made by Parwati before the committing Magistrate on the ground that it was substantive evidence which did not require any corrobo ration.
Held, that the evidence of a witness tendered under section 288 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the Sessions Court is substantive evidence.
In law such evidence is not required to be corroborated.
But where a person has made two contradictory statements on oath it is ordinarily unsafe to rely implicitly on her 590 evidence and the judge, before he accepts one or the other of the statements as true, must be satisfied that this is so.
For such satisfaction it will ordinarily be necessary for the evidence to be supported by extrinsic evidence not only as to the occurrence in general but also about the participation of the accused in particular.
But in a case where even without any extrinsic evidence the judge is satisfied about the truth of one of the statements, his duty will be to rely on such evidence and act accordingly.
Bhuboni Sahu vs The King, A.I.R. 1949 P.C. 257, relied on.
On the facts of this case, it was held that without corrobo ration from extrinsic evidence, the High Court was not justified in acting on the evidence of the only eye witness Parwati, given in the committing court.
