The eight appellants variously armed attacked one 'T ' and as a result of the assault 'T ' died.
These appellants then proceeded to loot the house of 'T ' and on the way met four others who joined them.
They then came across one 'P ' and assaulted him.
There was a small gap of time and 'the places of assault were different.
The magistrate framed a single charge but the Session Judge framed two charges namely one connected with the attack on 'T ' and the other connected with the attack on 'P '.
He also separated the trials on the two charges.
The Sessions judge convicted the appellants in both cases.
The appeal in the second case i.e. the case relating to assault on 'P ' was heard first by the High Court and the appellants were acquitted of the charges of being members of an unlawful assembly.
Later the appeal connected with the assault on 'T ' was heard by the High Court and in that appeal their convictions and sentences were confirmed.
The present appeal arises out of the convictions and sentences passed by the High Court.
The appellants contended that the prior acquittal in the second case operated as a bar to the conviction in the present case.
The appellants relied on a decision of the Privy Council namely Sarnbasivam vs Public Prosecutor Federation of Malaya and of this Court in Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab.
Held: (i) There was nothing in common between the present appeal and the aforesaid two cases relied upon by the appellants.
In this case the assault on 'T ' was over when the unlawful assembly formed its new common object namely the assault on 'P '.
(ii) A plea of autrefois acquit which is statutorily recognised in India under section 403 of the Code of Criminal Procedure arose when a person is tried again for the same offence or on the same facts for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have been made under section 236 or for which he might have been convicted under section 237.
The prior acquittal in the other case did not operate as a bar to the conviction in the present case as the charge in the other case was quite different from and independent of the charge in the present case, and sections 236 and 237 of Code of Criminal Procedure were not applicable to the present facts because the two offences were distinct.
Sambasivam vs Public Prosecutor Federation of Malaya, [ , Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415, Gurcharan Singh vs State of Punjab, and 674 Mohinder Singh vs State of Punjab, Cr.
A. No. 140 of 1961 decided on 31 7 63, explained.
(iii) This court, in the absence of special circumstances, does not review for the third time evidence which has been accepted in the High Court and the trial court.
