The appellant was an overseer and then became a Sub Divi sional Officer in the Irrigation Department.
On the basis of a complaint, a case was registered against him and after sanction by the Government had been obtained for his prosecution under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and section 161/165 of the Indian Penal Code he was tried by the special judge on a charge under section 5(2) of the Act.
The allegation made was that the appellant demanded his commission from the contractors on the cheques issued to them and on are Used he started with holding their payments and putting obstacles in the smooth execution of the work entrusted to them.
The commission was then paid from time to time and the payments were fully entered in the regular Rokar and Khata Bhais.
The trial court accepted the prosecution case and found that the total pecuniary resources and property in appellant 's possession or in the possession of his wife and son were disproportionate to his known sources of income and that such possession had not been satisfactorily accounted for.
On these findings the presumption under section 5(3) of the Prevention of Corruption Act was raised and the appellant was convicted and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs. 5,000/ in default, rigorous imprisonment for six months.
On appeal, the conviction and sentence were confirmed by the High Court.
The two learned judges of the High Court, however, differed on the question whether pecuniary resources and property acquired before the Prevention of Corruption Act came into force, could be taken into consideration for the purpose of section 5(3) of the Act.
Held, that to take into consideration the pecuniary resources or property in the possession of the accused or any other person on his behalf which were acquired before the date of the Act, was in no way giving the Act a retrospective operation.
Maxwell on Interpretation of statutes, 11th Edition, P. 210 and State of Bomaby vs Vishnu Ramchandra, [1961] 2 S.C.R. 26, relied on.
Sub section 3 of section 5 does not create a new kind of offence.
It merely prescribes a rule of evidence for the purpose of proving the offence of criminal misconduct as defined in section 5(l) for which an accused person is already under trial.
C.S.D. Swamy vs The State, [196 of 1 S.C.R. 461 and Surajpal Singh vs State of U.P. ; , relied on.
631 On proper construction of the words of the section and giving them their plain and natural meaning, it is clear, that the pecuinary resources and property in possession of the accused person or any other person on his behalf have to be taken into consideration for the purpose of section 5(3), whether these were acquired before or after the Act came into force.
While it is quite true that pecuniary resources and property are themselves sources of income, that does not present any difficulty in understanding a position that at a particular point of time the total pecuniary resources or property can be regarded as assets, and an attempt being made to see whether the known sources of income, including, it may be, these very items of property, in the past, could yield such income as to explain reasonably the emergence of these assets at this point of time.
There is no warrant for the proposition that where the law provides that in certain circumstances a presumption shall be made against the accused, the prosecution is barred from adducing evidence in support of its case if it wants to rely on the presumption.
D. Del Vecchio vs Bowers, ; ; 80 L. ed. 229 and Bratty vs Attorney General for Northern Ireland, ; , held inapplicable.
The facts proved in this case raise a presumption under section 5(3) of the Act and the appellant 's conviction must be maintained on the basis of that presumption.
