The appellant was found carrying 286 tolas of gold in running train between Kerla and Pali stations by the Sub Inspector of Barmer District.
After the gold was seized, criminal proceedings were instituted against the appellant.
The trial court acquitted the appellant but the High Court convicted him.
The appellant 's case in this Court was that the seizure of the gold from him had not been proved; that the Sub Inspector was not a Customs Officer for the place where the seizure was made, and so the 709 seizure was not under the Land Customs Act; and that, in any view of the case, the prosecution had failed to prove the necessary mens rea in the appellant.
Section 3 of the Land Customs Act authorises the Central Government to appoint by notification one person to be the Collector of Land Customs for any area adjoining a foreign frontier and specified in the notification.
The section also authorises the Central Government to appoint such other persons as it thinks fit to be customs officer for the same area by a similar notification.
The relevant notification issued was as follows: "1.
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (1) of section 3 of the (19 of 1924) read with the notification of the Government of India in the late Finance Deptt.
(Central Revenues) No. 5444, dated 1st December 1924, the Central Board of Revenue hereby appoints for the areas adjoining the Land Customs Frontier separating West Pakistan from India, the officers of the Government of Rajasthan specified in the Schedule hereto annexed, to be land Customs Officers within the jurisdiction of the Collector of Land Customs Delhi.
""The Schedule." "All officers of the Rajasthan Civil Police and the Rajasthan Armed Constabulary of and above the rank of Head Constable posted in the Districts of Barmer, Bikaner, Ganganagar, Jaisalmer and Jalore in the State of Rajasthan.
" Held, that the word "adjoining" in the above notification means the whole compact block consisting of the State of Punjab, Jammu and Kashmir and Rajasthan and the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh and Delhi as one area adjoining the West Pakistan Frontier, and that for this entire area one person was appointed the Collector of Land Customs.
Every officer, therefore, mentioned in the Schedule would be a Customs Officer not for any particular District mentioned in the Schedule but for the whole area which forms the jurisdiction of the Collector of Land Customs Delhi.
Since in the instant case, the Sub Inspector was an officer mentioned in the Schedule, he would be an officer for the entire area which formed the jurisdiction of the Collector of Land Customs, Delhi, including the place where the seizure was made, and was therefore, competent to make the seizure.
Held, further, that on the evidence the story of the re covery of gold from the appellant was true, and that the circumstances, manner, quantity and the form in which gold was carried, clearly showed that the appellant was smuggling gold knowingly and with the intention of evading the prohibition in force with respect to the import of gold into the country.
