The respondent lodged a complaint before the Sub Divisional Magistrate alleging that the appellants assaulted him with lathis and forcibly took away currency notes from his pocket.
After completing the examination under section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Magistrate made the following order "Examined the complaint on s.a.
The offence is cognizable one.
To S.I. Baikunthpur for instituting a case and report by 12.12.56.
" Ultimately, a charge sheet was submitted by the police and the appellants were committed to the court of sessions but the trial ended in acquittal.
On appeal by the respondent under section 417(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the order of acquittal was set aside by the High Court and the appellants were convicted under section 395 of the Penal Code and sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment.
It was mainly urged on behalf of the appellants that in this case no appeal lay to the High Court under section 417(3) as the case against them was not instituted on any complaint but on a police report.
Held: (i) When on a petition of complaint being filed before him a Magistrate applies his mind for proceeding under the various provisions of Chapter XVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, he must be held to have taken cognizance of the offences mentioned in the complaint.
When however he applies his mind not for such purpose but for purposes of ordering investigation under section 156(3) or issues a search warrant for the purpose of investigation.
he cannot be said to have taken cognizance of any offence.
R.R. Chari vs State of U.P., ; and Gopal Das vs State of Assam, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 986, applied.
In the present case, as it is clear from the very fact that the Magistrate took action under section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, that he had taken cognizance of the offences mentioned in the complaint, it was open to him to order investigation only under section 202 and not under section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Therefore, it must be held that though the Magistrate used the words "for instituting a case" in his order he was actually taking action under section 202 of the Code, that being the only section under which he was in law entitled to act.
38 Cognizance having already been taken by the Magistrate before he made the order there was no scope of cognizance being taken afresh of the same offence after the police officers ' report was received.
Thus the case was instituted on complaint and not on the police report submitted later.
The contention therefore that the appeal d d not lie under section 417(3) must be rejected.
(ii) The order of the Magistrate asking the police to institute a case and to send a report should properly and reasonably be read as one made under section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
So the contention that he acted without jurisdiction cannot be accepted.
At most it might be said that in so far as he asked the police to institute a case he acted irregularly, but there is no reason to think that it has resulted in any failure of justice.
