The appellant was declared elected to the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
Another candidate Himmat Singh withdrew his candidature before the date of polling.
Respondent 1 one of the defeated candidates, challenged the election by a petition under the Representation of the People Act alleging that the appellant had disqualified himself by committing corrupt practices.
It was alleged that he had shortly before the polling of votes published two leaflets in Hindi containing statements of fact with regard to the personal character or conduct of respondent 1 which were false and which the appellant believed to be false or did not believe to be true and that the statements were calculated to prejudice the prospects of respondent 1 at the election.
The appellant denied 13 the said allegations and applied to the Election Tribunal for dismissing the petition in limine because Himmat Singh against whom allegations of corrupt practice in regard to the withdrawal of candidature were made, was not joined as a respondent.
The Tribunal rejected the application and held that it was established on the evidence that the appellant did commit corrupt practice by publishing the two leaflets.
In appeal the High Court agreed with the Tribunal.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant that the election petition was liable to be dismissed in limine, as it did not comply with the requirements of s.82 of the Act, that the appellant did not publish the leaflets, and that in any event the publication did not constitute a corrupt practice within the meaning section 123(4) of the Act.
Held: (i) The election petition was not detective.
There was no allegation of corrupt practice against Himmat Singh.
It was merely alleged that the appellant had offered to assist or help Himmat Singh in obtaining employment with "Dalauda Sugar Factory or elsewhere".
The acceptance of offer which constitutes a motive or reward for withdrawing from the candidature must be acceptance of gratification.
Gratification does not include offers and acceptances of mere promises, but requires ,an offer and acceptance relating to a thing of some value, though not necessarily estimable in terms of money.
A mere offer to help in getting employment is not such offer of gratification within the meaning of section 123(1)(B) as to constitute it a corrupt practice.
On the allegations therefore, it was not necessary to implead Himmat Singh as a respondent to the petition.
(ii) The onus of establishing a corrupt practice is undoubtedly on the person who sets it up, and the onus is not discharged on proof of mere preponderance of probability, as in the trial of a civil suit; the corrupt practice must be established beyond reasonable doubt by evidence which is clear and unambiguous.
(iii) In considering whether a publication amounts to a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(4) the Tribunal would be entitled to take into account matters of common knowledge among the electorate and read the publication in that background, for one of the ingredients of the particular corrupt practice is the tendency of the statement in the publication to be reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate 's election.
The test in cases under section 123(4) is whether the imputation, besides being false in fact, is published with the object of lowering the candidate in the estimation of the electorate and calculated to prejudice his prospects at the election.
In ascertaining whether the candidate is lowered in the estimation of the electorate, the imputation made must be viewed in the light of matters generally known to them.
