The State Transport Authority issued a notification under the , calling for applications for the grant of two stage carriage permits for the route Madras to Chidambaram.
A large number of applications were received.
The authority granted the first permit to one of the applicants and for the second it decided to call for fresh applications.
The appellant, as also a number of other applicants, appealed to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal confirmed the grant of the first permit and as regards the second it allowed the appeal of the appellant and directed that it should be granted to him.
Respondent No. 1 moved the High Court under Art.226 of the Constitution for the issue of a writ of certiorari and the single Judge who heard the matter held that the Appellate Tribunal had overlooked relevant considerations, and allowed irrelevant considerations to prevail and so made the Rule absolute.
A Letters Patent appeal was preferred by the appellant.
The Division Bench affirmed the order of the single Judge on the ground that the Appellate Tribunal had overlooked material considerations in favour of the respondent No. 1 and dismissed the appeal The appellant came to this Court by special leave and it was contended on his behalf that in issuing the writ of certiorari the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution.
Held: (per Gajendragadkar, Wanchoo, Shah and Dayal JJ.).
The contention raised on behalf of the appellant was well founded and must prevail.
A writ of certiorari is issued for correcting errors of jurisdiction committed by courts or tribunals, in cases where they exceed their jurisdiction or fail to exercise it or exercise it illegally or improperly, i.e. where an order is passed without hearing the party sought to be affected by it or where the procedure adopted is opposed to principles of natural justice.
The jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari is a supervisory one and in exercising it, the court is not entitled to act as a court of appeal.
That necessarily means that the findings of fact arrived at by the inferior court or tribunal arc binding.
65 An error of law apparent on the face of the record can, however, be corrected by a writ of certiorari, but not an error of fact however grave it may appear to be.
A writ of certiorari can also be issued if it is shown that in recording a finding of fact, admissible and material evidence has, not been admitted, or inadmissible evidence affecting the impugned finding has been admitted.
A finding of fact based on no evidence would also be an error of law and as Such amenable to such a writ.
But a finding of fact cannot be challenged in such a proceeding on the ground that the relevant and material evidence was insufficient to sustain the finding.
Adequacy or sufficiency of evidence or an inference of fact to be drawn from the evidence or finding of fact are entirely within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.
Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmed Ishaque, ; , Nagendra Nath Bora vs The Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; and Kaushalya Devi vs Bachittar Singh, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 1168, relied on.
It is neither possible nor desirable to define or describe all cases of errors which can be said to be errors of law apparent on the face of the record.
Whether or not an error is such an error would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and the nature and scope of the law misconstrued or contravened.
It was not open to a party on the authority of the decision of this Court in K.M. Shanmugam vs
S.R.V.S. (P) Ltd., to come to the High Court under article 226 to have all questions of fact reconsidered so as to invoke the plea of 'public interest ' under section 47 of the .
K. M. Shamnugam vs S.R.V.S. (P) Ltd., 1 [1964] 1 S.C.R. 809, held inapplicable.
In the present case the controversy centered round the fact whether the respondent No. 1 had a workshop at Chidambaram, one of the two terminii of the route and that the tribunal had failed to duly consider some evidence in that connection.
That argument was an argument related to appreciation of evidence and as such was outside the purview of a proceeding for a writ of certiorari.
The High Court was therefore, in error in issuing the writ of certiorari.
In issuing a writ and in making it absolute, care should be taken to draw the order accurately.
Unless allegations are made against them, the State Transport Authority or the Appellate Tribunal should not be represented through lawyers.
Their position in ordinary cases is just the same as that of courts and other tribunals.
Per Subba Rao J. Where the tribunal ignores or fails to investigate a material circumstance germane to a question of public 1 SCI/64 5 66 interest under section 47 of the Act put forward by a claimant for permit and gives a finding against him, that finding is vitiated by an error of law apparent on the face of the record and is liable to be quashed by a writ of certiorari.
and the Appellate Tribunal failed to consider the specific claim of the respondent 1 as to the existence of his workshop at Chidambaram and was, therefore, right in setting aside their orders.
The High Court could not be said to have exceeded its jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution.
This was a clear case where the Tribunal made a finding that was based on no evidence and was contrary to the specific claim made before it.
Since the first respondent had secured the highest number of marks, this claim, if substantiated, would tilt the balance in his favour.
This Court would not interfere in such a matter in the exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under article 136 of the Constitution to set aside the High Court 's order.
