The High Court of Calcutta had separately allotted rooms in the Court premises to the Barristers for use and occupation for their Bar Library Club, to Advocates other than Barristers for their Bar Association and to the Attorneys for their Incorporated Law Society.
The petitioners, who were Advocates of the Calcutta High Court and generally practiced on its Original Side and were called to the English Bar, had not read for a period of 12 months in the Chambers of a practising Barrister in England or in Calcutta as required by the rules of the Original bide but applied for becoming members of the Bar Library Club and their applications were refused.
Their representation to the Chief Justice was also refused.
On their application under article 32 the Constitution this Court issued a Rule against the State of West Bengal and the Chief Justice.
The Joint Secretaries of the Bar Library Club were later on added as parties and the Bar Association appeared as intervener.
The result of this intervention of the Bar Association was that the petition as it originally stood was broadend into a claim to abolish the exclusiveness of the Bar Library Club in favour of all other Advocates as was indicated in the representation made by the Association to the Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court which to the following effect : 46 We on behalf of the Bar Association humbly represent that no separate space may be allotted to the said group of advocates who call themselves Barristers but who practice in this Court as Advocates and are therefore in no way to be separately treated from the Advocates in general, and this allotment of separate rooms to the Bar Library Club offends against article 14 of the Constitution.
We demand justice and pray for redress of our aforesaid grievance so that there should be one Bar Association for all the Advocates practicing in this High Court and the rooms now occupied by Bar Library Club may be allotted to such Bar Association.
" While the matter was pending in this Court, the Bar Library Club altered its rules so as to admit all such Advocates as would undertake only to plead and not to act and the Attorney General, appearing on its behalf, gave the assurance that there would be no discrimination, all Advocates who undertook not to act would be eligible for admission to the club.
This position was agreed to by the Joint Secretaries representing the Bar Library Club.
field: This altered position meant a great improvement on the existing one and no better could be expected in the presents proceeding.
Regard being had to the historical growth of the three sections of the Bar in the Calcutta High Court, namely, (1) those who only pleaded, (2) those who both pleaded and acted, and (3) those who only acted, it could not be said that classification was unreasonable or that the grant of separate accommodation to them amounted to a denial of equality before the law.
Since the Bar Library Club had agreed to change its rules so as to conform exactly to the first classification, admission to it would be governed by rules which would be common to all lawyers who wanted to plead only and, consequently, there was no reason to interfere with the separate grant of accommodation by the court to the three sections.
If the Bar Library Club failed to carry out the undertaking given by it would be the duty of the Chief Justice to frame such rules as were necessary to carry out the purpose for which the accommodation was granted and to see that there was no violation of equality.
