Proceedings under section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and article 226 of the Constitution of India were started by one Mahesh for a writ, order or direction in the nature of a writ of habeas corpus to release his alleged wife Kaniz Fatima alias Sheela from unlawful detention by the appellant, her father and for delivery of the said Kaniz Fatima to him.
On August 26, 1960, the High Court passed an order by which the objections of the appellant were overruled and he was directed to bring before the Court Kaniz Fatima alleged to be held in unlawful confinement.
The appellant was given ten days time to obey the direction.
As the direction was not complied with and Kaniz Fatima was not produced in Court 87 the High Court passed another order on September 16, 1960 by which the appellant was committed for contempt and sentenced to simple imprisonment for three months and to pay the costs.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave against the orders of the High Court.
Held: The order of the High Court committing the appellant for contempt was justified because the High Court rightly reached the conclusion that the appellant having knowledge of the whereabouts of Kaniz Fatima and having the custody of her through another, was wailfully and deliberately disobeying the direction of the Court.
In so far as the offence of contempt was concerned, there was manifest disobedience of the order and the High Court could punish by ordering the appellant to be detained in prison.
(ii) A writ of habeas corpus issues not only for release from detention by the State but also for release from private detention.
At common law, a writ of habeas corpus is available to the husband for regaining the custody of his wife if she is wrongfully detained by anyone without her consent.
Hence the order of the High Court was not without jurisdiction.
However, issuing of a writ of habeas corpus at the instance of a husband is very rare in English law.
In India, such a writ is probably never used by a husband to regain his wife and the alternative remedy under section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is always used.
There is also the remedy of a civil suit for restitution of conjugal rights.
In both these cases, all the issues of fact can be tried and the writ of habeas corpus is probably not demanded in similar cases if issues of fact have first to be established.
This is because the writ of habeas corpus is festinum remedium and the power can only be exercised in a a clear case.
That is particularly so in cases where the petitioner is himself charged with a criminal offence in respect of the very person for whose custody he demands the writ.
A writ of habeas corpus at the instance of a man to obtain possession of a woman alleged to be his wife does not issue as a matter of course.
Though a writ of right, it is not a writ of course, especially when a man seeks the assistance of the court to regain the custody of a woman.
Before a court accedes to his request, it must satisfy itself at least primafacie that the person claiming the writ is in fact the husband and whether a valid marriage between him and the woman could at all have taken place.
(iii) The writ nisi for the production of Kaniz Fatima should have been preceded by some more inquiry.
It is wrong to think that in habeas corpus proceedings the Court is prohibited from ordering an inquiry into a fact.
All procedure is always open to a Court which is not expressly prohibited and no rule of the Court has laid down that evidence shall not be received if the court requires it.
The Queen vs Barnardo, ; The Queen vs Barnardo, and Thomas, John Barnardo v, Mary Ford, , referred to. 88
