One Chathilal Sah of Sahebganj, Bihar, was the owner of a house and two golas which stood on a rent paying land and he executed a will bequeathing the said property to his daughter and nephew in equal shares.
In 1940 the nephew sold one half of the property to respondent No. 1 who two years later acquired under a patta some adjoining lands.
In 1949 respondent No. 3 alleging to be the husband of the daughter sold the remaining half of the property to appellants 1 and 2.
In December 1949 respondent filed a title suit for declaration that he has a right to pre empt the property purchased by appellants 1 and 2 and for directing them to transfer the same to him.
The trial court dismissed the suit but in the appeal before the Subordinate Judge he succeeded and the High Court dismissed the appeal presented by the appellant.
The present appeal is by special leave granted by this Court.
Before this Court four contentions were raised by the appellants, two of which being pure questions of fact and not having been raised in the courts below were not considered by this Court.
The questions of law raised were (a) the right of pre emption infringes the fundamental right of a citizen under article 19 (1) (f) of the Constitution and (b) there is no right of pre emption in respect of leasehold interest and therefore there cannot be a right of pre emption in respect of a house standing on such land.
Held: (i) The law of pre emption vis a vis co sharers does not infringe the fundamental right conferred under article 19(1) (f) of the Constitution.
Bahu Ram vs Baij Nath, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 724 and Nuri Mian vs
Ambica Singh, Cal.
(ii) A right of pre emption is annexed to full ownership of property of co sharers.
It is not attached to property held on subordinate tenure, such as lease etc.
It is an incident of the co sharer 's property operating both as a right and as a burden in different situations.
It is a right of substitution taking in the entire bargain.
It must take the whole or nothing.
It does not matter if the inability to take the house arises out of a voluntary act or out of a legal limitation inherent in the nature of the property transferred.
It is reciprocal in operation, that is, if the situation was reversed and the vendor became the pre emptor, he should 106 be in a position to pre empt the co sharers ' whole bargains.
The two doctrines which may, for convenience be referred to as "entire bargain" and "reciprocity" cannot operate unless both the co sharers are full owners of their respective properties.
Akar or a house standing on a freehold land is subject to the right of preemption, but a house on a leasehold land stands on a different footing.
As there is no right of pre emption in respect of a land on subordinate tenure the right of pre emption cannot be enforced against the house either, as the pre emptor cannot be substituted for the entire bargain.
The right must fail also on the ground that the super structure disannexed from the land would be movable property and it is well settled that the right of pre emption cannot be enforced in respect of movables.
Case law reviewed.
Bishan Singh vs Khazan Singh, ; , Goblad Dayal vs Inayatullah, All 775, Sakina Bibi vs Amiran, All 472, Dashrathlal vs Bai Dhondubai, A.I.R. (1941) Bom.
262, Shri Audh Behari Singh vs Gajadhar Jaipuria; , , Mr. Bibi Saleha vs Amiruddin(1929)I.L.R. 8 Pat. 251, Baboo Ram Golam Singh vs Nursingh Sabey, Mohammad Jamil vs Khub Lal Raut, , Phul Mohammad Khan vs Qazi Kutubuddin, A.I.R. 1937 Pat.
578, Mooroof ly Ram vs Baboo Hari Ram, , Rameshwar Lal vs Ramdeo Jha, A.I.R. 1957 Pat.
695, Nathuni Ram vs Gopinath, A.I.R. 1962 Pat. 226 (F.B), Zahur vs Nur Ali, All 99 and Chariter Dusadh vs Bhagwati Pandey A.I.R. 1934 Pat.
Per Raghubar Dayal J While agreeing with the majority judgment on other points, no opinion is expressed on the point whether in certain circumstances the pre emptor can or cannot pre empt part of the property sold.
There have been cases where partial pre emption has been allowed.
Zainab Bibi vs Umar Hayat Khan, (1936) All.
L.J. 456 and Bishan Singh vs Khazan Singh, ; Sale of leasehold interest in land is not pre emptible and that the super structure of the house is also not pre emptible and therefore the plaintiff pre emptor cannot pre empt the property sold.
The appeal should be allowed.
