Suits were filed against the Union of India representing the Western Railway for the refund of amounts collected by the Western Railway as wharfage and demurrage charges from the appellants.
It was alleged in the plaint that Railway notifications and rules under which the Railway had charged the wharfage at two annas to four annas per maund per day were illegal and ultra rites and that in any view the railway had no power under the rules to collect charges from appellant firm for the "free time" under the head of wharfage charges.
The respondent pleaded that Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suits and that rules were not ultra rites and money was not collected against the rules.
Suits were dismissed by the trial court on the ground that they were barred under section 26 of the Indian Railways Act.
Revisions were also dismissed by the High Court.
The appellants came to this Court by Special Leave.
Accepting the appeals, Held, that section 26 of the Indian Railways Act is not a bar to the maintainability of a suit for the refund of what fage or demurrage charged in excess.
The bar under section 26 is not comprehensive.
It is limited by the opening words "Except as provided in the Act" in the section.
Two conditions must be complied with before applying section 26.
The railway administration should have done an act or omitted to do an act in contravention of the provisions of Chapter V of the Indian Railways Act and the Act should provide a remedy in respect of that act or omission.
In the present case, the Act does not provide for any remedy for an aggrieved party to approach the Tribunal appointed under section 34 of the Act for the refund of the amount collected in excess by the Railway Administration by way of wharfage or demurrage.
The Tribunal has no jurisdiction to decide whether the rules empowering the administration to collect wharfage or demurrage charges are ultra vires or the amounts collected are in excess of what is leviable under the rules.
Wharfage and demurrage are charges in respect of goods unloaded from wagons and kept at the station and also in respect of the goods kept on a platform of the station, beyond the free time allowed for clearance under the rules.
The said charges 149 can certainly be described as charges in respect of the station and are terminals within the meaning of the definition of the term in the Act.
