On the 20th November, 1962, an order of detention was passed against the appellant under Rule 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
This order was served on the appellant on the 21st November, 1962, while lie was in jail custody as an under trial prisoner in connection with a criminal case pending against him.
He was arrested on the 25th October, 1962 in connection with the .said criminal case and since then he was in jail custody.
On the 26th October, 1962, Emergency was declared by the President.
Whilst the appellant was in jail custody, he was allowed to interview his friends and about nine persons interviewed him between 3rd November to the 19th November, 1962.
It was alleged by the respondent that during these interviews, the appellant instigated the persons who saw him, to commit prejudicial activities.
The appellant moved a writ petition in the High Court against the said detention order.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition on the ground that the appellant had failed to make out a case that his detention was illegal.
Held : (i) The decision in Rameshwar Shaw 's case would be applicable to the present appeal, because the scheme of Rule 30(1) is not radically different from the scheme of section 3(1)(a) of the preventive Detention Act and does not affect the construction of Rule 30(1)(b) of the Rules.
933 Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdhwan, ; relied on.
(ii) It is true that the nature and scope of the orders which can be validly passed under Rule 30(1) of the Defence of India Rules is very much wider than the order of detention which alone can be made under section 3(1) of the Preventive Detention Act.
But the operative portion of Rule 30(1) is substantially similar to section 3(1) of the Act.
(iii) Rule 30(1)(b), like section 3(1)(a), of the Act clearly postulates that an order can be made under it only where it is shown that but for the imposition of the said detention, the person concerned would be able to carry out a prejudicial activity of the character specified in Rule 30(1).
On a plain construction of Rule 30(1)(b) it must be held that the order permitted by it can be served on a person who would be free otherwise to carry out his prejudicial activity.
Such freedom cannot be predicated of the appellant in the present case because he was in jail at the relevant time.
(iv) The service of a detention order on a person who is already in jail custody virtually seeks to effectuate what may be called 'a double detention ' and such double detention is not intended either by section 3(1)(a) or by Rule 3O(1)(b); it is plainly unnecessary and outside the purview of both the provisions.
(v) If the appropriate authority wants to detain a person under Rule 30(1)(b), it must be shown that when the order of detention is served on him, he was free to carry out his prejudicial activities and his prejudicial activities could be prevented only by his detention.
Therefore, the service of the order of detention on the appellant whilst he was in jail custody was invalid.
Emperor vs Mool Chand, A.I.R. 1948 All 288, inapplicable.
Dayanand Modi vs State of Bihar, I.L.R. 30 Pat.
630 and Meledath Bharathan Malyali vs Commissioner of Police , I.L.R. , referred to.
(vi) On principle, it would be difficult to state as a general proposition that an order of detention cannot be validly made against a person who is in jail custody for the reason that investigation is proceeding in regard to an offence alleged to have been committed by him.
This Court has held in Rameshwar Shaw that as an abstract proposition of law an order of detention can be validly made against a person in jail custody.
Whether or not the said making of the order is valid in a particular case may have to be determined in the light of the relevant and material facts.
In the present case, the making of the order of detention was not invalid.
In Rameshwar Shaw the petitioner was ordered to be released on the ground that he was served with the order of detention whilst he was in jail and not on the ground that the making of the order was invalid.
934 (vii) The plea of malafide cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in the petition for special leave for the reason that a plea of malafides must always be made by proper pleadings at the trial stage, so that the respondent has an opportunity to meet the said proceedings.
(viii) The order of detention passed against the appellant is set aside on the ground that the service of the order is invalid and is outside the scope of the Rules.
