On the enactment of the , providing for the nationalisation of life insurance business.
the 126 controlled business i.e., the life insurance business of the appellant, a composite insurer, vested in the respondent corporation.
Thereafter disputes arose between the appellant and the respondent in the matter of ascertainment of the compensation payable to the appellant and in respect of incidental and consequential matters thereto.
The respondent offered to pay the appellant towards compensation a certain amount after setting off the amount due to it from the appellant in respect of part of the paid up capital of the controlled business and assets representing that part.
The appellant refused to accept this offer in toto.
The dispute was referred to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal ascertained the compensation payable to the appellant and set off against that amount the balance of the amount due from the appellant towards the allocable paid up capital.
Relying upon the books of account of the appellant to find out whether the unpaid dividends of any share holder of the appellant was the liability of one department or the other, the Tribunal held that the entire liability for the unclaimed dividends and assets appertained to the controlled business, and therefore, statutorily vested in the respondent.
The Tribunal held that it had no jurisdiction to award interest on the amount of compensation.
On appeal by special leave, it was contended (i)that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to decide on the question of the capital allocable to the controlled business as there was no dispute thereto between the parties and the said question was not referred to it; (ii) the liability of the appellant for the unclaimed dividends and assets equivalent to the liability were not transferred to and vested in the respondent under section 7(1) of the Act, and (iii) that the appellant would be entitled to interest on the amount of compensation payable to it and the Tribunal had jurisdiction to award the same.
Held: The dispute between the parties related not only to compensation, but to the set off also, that the dispute was referred to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal had jurisdiction to decide that dispute.
A combined reading of cls.
(iv) and (vi) of r. 12A of the Rules under the Act makes it abundantly clear that a claim for set off is certainly covered by the wide phraseology of cl.
(iv) of r. 12A.
The calculations under r. 18(1) show that there is an integral connection between the compensation payable to the insurer and the amount representing the capital allocable to the controlled business transferred to the respondent.
As these figures cannot be dissociated, the respondent made a composite offer.
The Act contemplates the setting off one against the other.
National Insurance Co. v Life Insurance Corporation of India ; , followed.
(ii) The definition of assets and liability of a controlled business in sub section
(2) of section 7 of the Act is certainly comprehensive enough to take in unclaimed dividends and corresponding assets.
Sub sections (1) and (2) of section 7 of the Act provides that the assists and liabilities to be transferred must belong to the controlled 127 business of the insurer.
The antithesis is not between the company and its business but between the controlled business and other business of the insurer.
All the rights and liabilities pertaining to the controlled business are transferred to the Corporation.
(iii) When a company declared a dividend on its shares, a debt immediately becomes payable to each shareholder in respect of his share of the dividend 'for which he can sue at law and the declaration does not make the company a trustee of the dividend for the shareholder.
In re Seven and Wye Severn Bridge Railway Co. , applied.
(iv) The provisions of the do not, expressly or by necessary implication, exclude the jurisdiction of the Courts and Tribunals from going into the correctness of the balance sheet certified by the Controller.
For the purpose of the it would be accepted as correct.
There is no provision in the making the contents of the balance sheet final for the purpose of transfer to and vesting in the Corporation the assets and liabilities of the insurer.
It certainly affords valuable evidence in an enquiry before the Tribunal; but the contents of the balance sheet can be proved to be wrong.
(v) The circumstances of the ease do not justify this Court exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction under article 136 of the Constitution to permit the appellant to raise the plea of apportionment of the unclaimed dividends for the first time here and to remand the matter to the Tribunal for apportionment of the dividends and the corresponding assets.
(vi) In view of the decision of this Court in the National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Life Insurance Corporation of India, the appellant will be entitled to interest at the rate of 4% on the amount of compensation.
National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Life Insurance Corporation of India ; , followed.
