' Eldee ', one of the branches of the respondent had advanced a loan to another concern, 'Castle '.
The respondent claimed under section 15C of the Income Tax Act, exemption from tax in respect of 6 % of the capital employed in 'Eldee ' as a newly established undertaking and sought to include in the computation of the capital so employed the amount advanced to Castle '.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal directed inclusion of the amount advanced to 'Castle ' in the computation of capital invested for the purpose of section 15C. The Commissioner 's application under section 66(1) of the Act to the Tribunal to refer a question which arose out of the order of the Tribunal was rejected and his petition under s 66(2) for an order directing the Tribunal to state the case and refer it to the High Court was also dismissed.
The question in dispute before the Revenue Authorities was whether 'Castle ' was a branch of the assessee.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner thought that the same eight persons were partners in these two undertakings and that the constitution of both the undertakings being the same, 'Castle ' could not be regarded as a separate entity.
The Tribunal disagreed with that view relying upon only one circumstance that in the assessment for the year 1951 52 the income from 'Castle ' had not been computed and included in the assessment of the respondent.
Held : Under the Income tax Act it is for the Tribunal to decide all questions of fact: the High Court has the power merely to advise the Tribunal on questions of law arising out of the order of the Tribunal.
In so advising the High Court must accept the findings of the Tribunal on matters of appreciation of evidence.
But the refusal of the Tribunal to state a case for the opinion of the High Court, on the view that a question of law does not arise out of the order is not conclusive.
The High Court has the power to call upon the Tribunal to state the case if in its view a question of law arises out of the order of the Tribunal, and also if the Tribunal has misdirected itself in law in arriving at its findings.
It is not open to the court to discard the Tribunal 's finding of fact, if there is some evidence to support the finding of the Tribunal on a question of fact, even if on a review of the evidence the court might have arrived at a difficult conclusion.
It must however appear that the Tribunal had considered evidence covering all the essential matters before arriving at its con 428 clusion.
If the conclusion of the Tribunal is based upon some evidence ignoring other essential matters it cannot be regarded as a finding not giving rise to a question liable to be referred to the Court.
(ii) The conclusion of the Tribunal suffers from a double infirmity: it assumed the only fact on which its conclusion was founded and ignored other relevant matters on which the Appellate Assistant Commissioner relied.
The Tribunal had therefore misdirected itself in law in arriving at its finding, and in refusing to require the Tribunal to state the case and to refer it, the High Court was in error.
