The plaintiff respondent No. 1 instituted a suit for recovery of the amount lent to the defendant with interest upto the date of the suit.
His claim was decreed in a sum of Rs. 13,033 6 6 with future interest from the date of suit till realisation at 4 % per annum on a sum of Rs.10,120.
Against this decree the defendant appealed to the High Court and valued the appeal at Rs. 13,033 6 6 and paid the requisite court fee on that amount.
All his grounds of appeal related to the merits of the plaintiff 's claims and did not deal with the correctness of the trial court awarding future pendente lite interest on the rate at which it was to be calculated.
The Taxing Officer directed the defendant to pay the deficit court fee of Rs. 70 on the memorandum of appeal as he was of the opinion that the appeal was against the whole decree and that the amount of value of the subject matter in dispute for purpose of court fee was Rs. 14,036.80nP. as the amount of interest from the date of the suit till the date of the decree on Rs. 10,120 came to Rs. 1,033.40nP. 231 The defendant challenged this order in revision before the High Court under section 5(2) of the Bombay Court fees Act, 1959.
The High Court set aside the order of the Taxing Officer and the learned Judge expressed the view: "The subjectmatter in appeal is the real matter in dispute between the parties and not something which must stand or fall with the decision on it.
In other words, it must mean the right which is in dispute between the parties".
In this Court the appellant State challenged the correctness of the said view of the High Court and relied mainly on the construction put by courts on expression " value or subject matter in dispute," in the relevant provisions relating to the High Court 's giving leave to appeal to the Privy Council.
Held:(i) That the expression 'amount or value of the subjectmatter in dispute ' in article 1 of Schedule 1 of the Bombay Court fees Act, cannot be construed in the light of the construction placed on a similar expression for the purposes of considering whether the case had come within the rule allowing the High Courts to give leave for appeal to the Privy Council.
The Act is a taxing statute and its provisions have to be construed strictly, in favour of the subject litigant.
Gooroopersad Khoond vs Juggutchunder, 8 M.I.A. 166 and Doorga Doss Chowdry vs Ramanauth Chowdry, 8 M.I.A. 262, held in applicable.
(ii)Claims not based on any asserted right but dependent on the decision of the disputed right and reliefs in regard to which are in the discretion of the court do not come within the purview of the expression 'subject matter in dispute in plaint or memo of appeal '.
(iii)The amount of pendente lite interest decreed is not to be included in the 'amount or value of the subject matter in dispute in appeal ' for the purposes of article 1 of Sch. 1 of the Act unless the appellant specifically challenges the correctness of the decree for the amount of interest pendente lite independently of the claim to set aside that decree.
In the present case, the decree in that respect was not specifically challenged and therefore the view of the High Court must be held to be correct.
Mitthu Lal vs Chameli, 57 All.
7 1, Keolapati Mst.
vs B.N. Varma, I.L.R. 12 Luck.
466 and Ashutosh vs Satindra Kumar, 54 C.W.N.380, referred to.
