The disputes between the appellant companies and the workmen which were referred to the Industrial Tribunal for adjudication, related to wages, dearness allowance and gratuity.
The companies raised objections to the award of the Tribunal on various grounds.
Held:(i) The reference in the award to the recommendations of the Tripartite Conference wherein the need based minimum wage was evolved, did not vitiate the award, as the final decision was based not on them but on a consideration of the wages prevalent incomparable concerns so far as clerical and subordinate staff were considered.
(ii) In applying the industry cum region formula for fixing wage scales the Tribunal should lay stress on the industry part of the formula if there were large number of concerns in the same region carrying on the same industry, but where the number of industries of the same kind in a particular region was small, it was the region part of the formula which assumed importance particularly in the case of clerical and subordinate staff.
In the present case, the Tribunal was right in leaning more on the region part of the industry cum region formula and less on the Industry part.
Workman of Hindustan Motors vs Hindustan Motors, [1962] 2.
J.352 and French Motor Car Company vs Their Workman [1963] Supp.
considered.
(iii)The Tribunal was not justified in creating two classes of higher unskilled and lower unskilled in the category of unskilled factory workmen in the matter of fixation of wage scales.
(iv)Employees getting same wages should get the same scales of dearness allowance irrespective of whether they were working as clerks, or members of subordinate staff or factory workmen.
(v)In fixing the same rates of dearness allowance for factory workmen as for clerical staff, it was necessary for the Tribunal when making comparisons to take into account the total wage packet and then compare it with the total wage packet of comparable 363 concerns and thus arrive at a just figure for basic wage for each category of factory workmen.
(vi)There is nothing in law to prevent an industrial tribunal from granting adjustments to the employees in the revised wage scales even in a case where previously pay scales were in existence, but this has to be done sparingly, taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of each case.
