The appellant joined the Indian Civil Service in 1939 and was posted in the province of Madras.
After the transfer of power under the Indian independence Act on August 15,1947, he was 432 transferred to the Punjab and later when the Indian Administrative Service was constituted he became its member.
On July 18, 1959, he was suspended by the Governor of the State of Punjab under r. 7(3) of the Indian Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, on the ground that a criminal case was pending against him.
He challenged the order of suspension by a writ petition in the Punjab High Court as being violative of the guarantee contained in article 314 of the Constitution and contrary to r. 49 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules which provided only for suspension as a penalty.
His case was that there was no provision immediately before January 26, 1950, that provided for suspension otherwise than as penalty.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Held: (per Gajendragadkar, Subba Rao, Wanchoo and Shah, JJ).
The general law of master and servant and section 247 of the Government of India Act, r. 53 of the Fundamental Rules and rr. 49, 56 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, read together clearly show that members of the former Secretary of State 's Services were on August 14, 1947, liable to suspension either as an interim measure or as a punishment.
Interim suspension could be imposed either by the Secretary of State as the appointing authority or the Governor General or the Governor, as the case might be, as the statutory authority.
Management of Hotel Imperial, New Delhi v Hotel Workers ' Union, [19601 1 S.C.R. 476 and T. Cajee vs U. Jormanik Siem, ; , referred to.
It was not therefore correct to say that there could be no suspension except by way of punishment under r.49 of the Appeal Rules before 1947.
In a case of interim suspension before 1947 there was however no right of appeal.
Article 314 of the Constitution, properly construed, affords such protection to the members of the Secretary of State 's Services as they were entitled to immediately before the commencement of the Constitution.
There can be no doubt that suspension pending a departmental enquiry or a criminal proceeding falls within the word 'disciplinary matters ' used in that Article.
It was not correct to say that as independence was conferred on India and the Services automatically terminated, there was in law reappointment of all the former Secretary of State 's Services, and those serving in a province must be deemed to have been reappointed by the Governor and that, consequently, the Governor as the appointing authority had the power to order suspension.
Article 7(1) of India (Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, G.G.O. 14, read with section 10 of the Independence Act, 1947, in the light of other relevant circumstances shows that the final decision whether or not the former members of the Secretary of State 's Services should continue was of the Government of India and that Government, therefore, must be deemed to have appointed 433 them to posts either under itself or in the Provinces.
Section 241(b) of the Government of India Act, as it then stood, and s.240(2) of the said Act, as amended by G.G.O. 14, could not alter this position.
State of Madras vs K.M. Rajagopalan, ; , referred to.
On the eve of the commencement of the Constitution i.e. January 25, 1950, a former member of the Secretary of State 's Services could be suspended under the general law by the Government of India alone as the appointing authority as an interim measure pending departmental enquiry or criminal proceeding and by no other authority.
He was liable to suspension as punishment under section 49 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
Rule 53 of the Fundamental Rules governed pay during interim suspension or suspension as penalty.
While there was no appeal from an order of interim suspension, r. 56 of the Appeal Rules provided for an appeal from an order of suspension as penalty.
It was this position which article 314 of the Constitution sought to protect.
Rule 7 of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, violated the guarantee contained in article 314 in respect to interim suspension and was to that extent ultra vires in so far as it applied to the members of the Indian Administrative Services who fell within cls.
(a) and (b) of r.3 of the Indian Administrative Services (Recruitment) Rules, 1954.
The Governor 's Order under r.7(3) directing interim suspension of the appellant must, therefore, be set aside.
The proper procedure would be to approach Government of India for such interim suspension.
The Accountant General, Bihar vs N. Bakshi, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 505, referred to.
Per Dayal, J. In view of the provisions of section 241 of the Government of India Act as modified by the India (Provisional Constitution) Order, 1947, G.G.O. 14 of 1947, members of the Secretary of State 's Services who were holding posts under a provincial Government immediately before the appointed day, i.e., August 15, 1947, and continued in service thereafter must be deemed in view of article 7(1) of the said Order to have been appointed to the corresponding posts by the appropriate authority, the Governor of the Province.
That article generally applied to all appointments on and after the appointed day.
The appellant cannot be deemed to have been appointed by the Governor General or the Government of India.
It was not intended that merely because that Order was made by the Governor General, the deemed appointments must be taken to have been made by him.
It would be anomalous to hold that the Governor, who was in administrative control of the services, could not pass an interim order of suspension against a person appointed by the Secretary of State, though he could impose a penalty of suspension under 1/SCI/64 28 434 rr.
49 and 52 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, which continued in force till the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules came into force in 1955.
The Indian Civil Services ceased to exist from August 15,1947, and the services of its members automatically terminated on August 14, 1947.
The appellant 's service, therefore, came to an end on August 14, 1947, but since he was serving under the Madras Government immediately before August 15, 1947, and continued to do so thereafter he must be deemed to have been appointed by the Governor of Madras to the post he was holding on the appointed day.
Rule 7 of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, does not violate the provision of article 314 of the Constitution, nor can the absence of a right of appeal against interim suspension do so since the appellant had none before the Constitution.
His suspension by the Governor of Punjab under r.7(3) was, therefore valid.
State of Madras vs K.M. Rajagopalan, ; , considered.
