An association of three persons carrying on business in liquor was dissolved.
No return was filed on behalf of the association or the individual members.
The Income tax Officer issued a notice under section 34 of the Income tax Act calling upon Baba Gowd, one of the members of the association, to file a return of the income of the association but he did not so.
The Income tax Officer then assessed the taxable income of the association under section 23(4) of the Act and determined the tax payable.
Attempts to recover tax from Baba Gowd were not successful.
The Income tax Officer then issued a notice of demand to the respondent, another member of the dissolved association.
The respondent applied under section 27 for cancellation of the assessment.
The application was rejected by Income tax Officer.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner ordered cancellation of the assessment and directed that fresh assessment be made after giving an opportunity to the respondent to file a return and to produce evidence in support thereof.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal held that a valid order of assessment had already been made and there was no occasion to issue a fresh notice to the respondent or to make a fresh assessment.
At the instance of the respondent, the Tribunal referred to the High Court two questions whether the order of assessment made by the Income tax Officer under section 23(4) on September 30, 1953 was bad in law or not and whether the respondent was or was not liable for the amount of tax payable as determined in that order of assessment by reason of the terms of section 44 of the Incometax Act.
The High Court held that the order of assessment under section 23 (4) was bad in law and the respondent was not liable.
In appeal to this Court.
Held:The order of assessment made by the lncome tax Officer under section 23(4) on September 30, 1953 was not bad in law and the respondent was liable for the amount of tax payable under the order of assessment.
Under Chapter IV of the Income tax Act, an association of persons can be assessed as a unit of assessment or the individual members can be assessed separately in respect of their respective shares of income.
The Act does not contain any machinery for assessing the income received by an association, in the hands of its members collectively.
The unit of assessment in respect of the income earned by the association is either the association or each individual member in respect of his share in the income.
This is so when the association is existing and the same is true after its dissolution.
There can be no partial assessment of the income of an association, limited to the share of the member who is served with notice of assessment.
The theory of assessment binding only those members who were served with the notice of assessment, is not valid.
The use of the expression "tax payable" in section 44 in the context in which it occurs can only mean tax which the association but for its dissolution or discontinuance of its business, would have been assessed to pay.
510 By virtue of section 44, the personality of the association is continued for the purposes of assessment.
What can be assessed is the income of the association recieved prior to its dissolution and the members of the association would be jointly and severally assessed thereto in their capacity as members of association.
For the purpose of such assessment, the procedure is that applicable for the assessment of the income of association as if it had continued.
A notice to the appropriate person under section 63(2) would, therefore, be sufficient to enable the authority to assess to tax the association.
The plea that the respondent was not served personally with the notice of assessment and was therefore not liable to pay the tax assessed, cannot be sustained.
C.A. Abraham, Uppoottil, Kottayam vs Income tax Officer, Kottayam, ; , referred to.
