The appellant, a firm of Surat, had a branch at Bangkok, to which it exported cloth, and the branch also made purchases locally and sold them.
During the war the business of the branch had been in abeyance, but was re started after the termination of the hostilities.
in its return for the assessment year 1949 50 the appellant did not include any profit of the branch, but stated that the books of account of branch were not available, and therefore its profits might now be assessed on an estimate basis subject to 561 action under s.34 or 35.The assessment was made on the basis of profit at 5 % on the export to the branch appearing in the Surat books.
A similar estimate was made for year 1950 51.
For the year 1951 52 also the business profits of the branch were not shown but the Income tax officerissued a notice to the assessee to produce the relevant accountsand books.
The appellant excused itself by promising that in thefollowing year these accounts for the year 1950 would be produced.
Thereupon the Income tax Officer made an estimate of the sales of the branch and of the net profits at 5 % thereon, amounting to Rs. 37,500/ , and the same day he issued a notice to show cause why a penalty for concealment of the particulars of the income of 1951 52 should not be levied.
Subsequently, the Income tax Officer imposed a penalty of Rs. 20,000/ on it as its explanation was not acceptable.
In the meantime assessment proceedings for the year 1952 53 had commenced and the appellant adopted a similar attitude.
The Income tax Officer was insistent and, therefore, appellants had to produce the accounts and books of the branch, from which it appeared that for the year 1951 52 the appellant had made a profit of Rs. 1,25,520/ .
The Income tax Officer issued a further notice to the appellant to show cause why penalty should not be levied for deliberately concealing income for the year 1951 52.
Pursuant to this notice the Income tax Officer passed another order imposing a penalty of Rs. 68,501/ .
The appellant 's appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against both the orders of penalty was rejected.
On appeal, the Tribunal cancelled the first order of penalty but confirmed the second one.
This hereafter, the appellant obtained a reference to the High Court on the question: "Whether the levy of Rs. 68,501/ as penalty for concealment in the original return for the assessment year 1951 52 is legal?" The High Court answered the question in the affirmative.
On the appeal by special leave it was urged that the second order for penalty was illegal because there was one concealment and in respect of that a penalty of Rs. 20,000/ had earlier been imposed, that there was no jurisdiction to make the second order of penalty while the first order stood and for that reason the second order must be treated as a nullity; and that the fact that the first order was subsequently cancelled by the Tribunal would not set the second order on its feet for it was from the beginning a nullity as having been made when the first order stood.
Held: (i) The contentions must be rejected.
The Income tax Officer had full jurisdiction to make the second order and he would not lose that jurisdiction because he had omitted to recall the earlier order, though it may be that the two orders in respect of the same concealment could not be enforced simultaneously or stand together.
When the Income tax Officer ascertained the true facts and realised that a much higher penalty could have been imposed, he was entitled to recall the earlier order and pass another order imposing the higher penalty.
If he had omitted to recall the earlier order that would not make the second order invalid, 1 SCI/64 36 562 (ii)In the present case the earlier order having been cancelled and no objection to the cancellation having been taken, there is only one order, which is a legal order.
C.V. Govindarajulu Iyer vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , distinguished.
