One Rajkumar Singh was the proprietor of three properties A,B and C.
He borrowed a loan from Rabindra Nath and mort gaged properties A and B and by the deed of mortgage undertook personal liability to pay the dues and agreed that in default of payment by the due date the mortgagee do recover his dues by sale of properties A, B and C.
He created a second mortgage t secure another sum borrowed from Sasindra Nath and Indra Nath stipulating that he would repay the loan on or before a fixed date, and further stipulating that the mortgagees may receive royalty from the terms of property C.
Five years later he assigned his interest in property A and about three months thereafter he assigned his interest in property Subsequent to this assignment an endorsement of part payment was recorded on the first mortgage deed.
The mortgagor 's right title and interest in property C were sold at a court auction and the purchaser took possession of that property.
But before this date the mortgagor had made another part payment and an endorsement was made to this effect on the mortgage bond.
Sometime later the appellant obtained assignments of the rights of the mortgagees under the mortgage deeds and filed a suit for a decree enforcement of the two mortgages by sale of the mortgage properties.
This suit was filed more than twelve years after t date on which the mortgage amounts became payable.
The trial court rejecting the pleas of limitation raised by t defendants decreed the suit.
On appeal by the fourth defend the High Court reversed the decree and dismissed the suit.
Held: (i) The High Court was in error in holding that t mortgagor 's interest in properties A & B only was mortgaged.
(ii) A mortgagor whose interest in the equity of redemption transferred by assignment sale or otherwise to another person not a "person liable to pay the debt" within the meaning of section of the Limitation Act.
Part payment in the mortgagor a transfer or assignment of his interest in the mortgaged property will not therefore extend the period of limitation under section 20 of the Limitation Act.
Pavai vs Palanivela Goundan I.L.R. 636 (iii) The right conferred by section 68 of the Transfer of Property Act is not a right to enforce the mortgage but a right to sue for the mortgage money on the personal covenant or to claim compensation when the mortgagee is deprived of his security.
A suit for enforcement of the personal covenant in such a case is governed by article 116 of the Limitation Act, 1908 and a suit for enforcement of a claim for compensation is governed by article 120 of the Act.
Unichaman vs Ahmed, I.L.R.
