The respondents are owners of agricultural land in Bhopal.
Their lands were taken possession of by the appellant under a notification under section 4 of the Bhopal Reclamation and Development of Land (Eradication of Kans) Act.
The object of this Act was to eradicate by 'deep tractorisation Kans weeds which are harmful to the productivity of land.
The Act provides for the taking possession of the land infested with kans, after issuing notifications under section 4 of the Act, and for the deep ploughing of the land by tractors.
The expenses incurred by the Government were to be apportioned among the owners in the area whose lands had been occupied and ploughed.
Demands were made on the respondents whose lands were occupied and tractorised to pay the costs so apportioned.
Thereupon they filed writ petitions before the Judicial Commissioner challenging the legality of the Act as well as the legality of the levy.
even assuming that the Act was valid.
The Judicial Commissioner allowed the petitions.
Thereupon the State appealed to this Court with certificate of fitness under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution.
In the appeals before this Court the same contentions as those which were raised before the Judicial Commisisoner were canvassed.
36 Held.
(i) The Act contains no provision for the person interested having an opportunity to establish that the particular land in which he was interested was not kans infested and therefore did not stand in need of any eradication operation.
Section 4(1) read in conjunction with the power contained in section 4(4) coupled with the absence of any provision for entertaining objections would, in the circumstances of there being admittedly patches of land in the same tehsil which had been cleared at least in 1941 must be characterised as arbitrary and imposing an unreasonable restriction on the right to hold and enjoy property within article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
(ii) The possession of the Reclamation Officer is exclusive and amounts to taking possession within article 31(2).
The shortness of the duration during which the owner is deprived of his possession has no relevancy to the question whether there has been a taking of possession of land by the State.
If the duration is short the compensation payable might be small.
The exemption from payment of land revenue 'during the period of occupation by the State as provided in the proviso to section 6(2) of the Act cannot in any sense be treated as compensation for the deprivation of possession, it only alleviates his loss.
Section 4(1) read with s.6(1)(h) is unconstitutional as violative of article 31(2).
(iii) Section 7 of the Act is mandatory and that as admittedly there was no compliance with it no lawful demand could be made for the contribution payable by any landhorder by the Central Government or by the State Government at the instance of the Central Government without recourse to the machinery provided by section 7.
The notices of demand were therefore illegal.
(iv) The extension of the Madhya Pradesh Act to the Bhopal area would be of no avail to the State because the Act was brought into force prospectively and not retrospectively.
If therefore the demand when made was illegal or invalid it cannot be sustained on the basis of the Madhya Pradesh Act.
