The property covered by the Tea Estate was granted by the Government by way of lease in 1898 for 30 years.
In 1913 it was purchased ' by Azam Ali.
When he died in 1917, he left behind 8 sons, 9 daughters and 3 widows.
The name of Ismail, his eldest son, was entered in the official records as next in succession.
Ismail borrowed considerable sums from National Agency Co. Ltd., and for securing the same, deposited the title deeds of the Tea Estate on the footing that he was its full owner.
As the amount under the mortgage was not paid, a suite was filed for realisation of the amount by sale of mortgage property.
193 The suit was decreed and in execution the property was auctioned and sale was confirmed in 1931 in favour of the decree holder who sold the same to Azamabad Tea Estate, the principal respondent in this case.
The heirs of Azam Ali brought suit No. 58 of 1931 to set aside the decree and sale in favour of the National Agency Co. Ltd., on ,various grounds but that suit was dismissed for default.
The suit out of which the present appeal has arisen was filed subsequently.
The plaintiffs appellants who claimed title under purchasers 'for the heirs of Azam Ali challenged the validity of the transactions by which the National Agency Co. Ltd. claimed to have purchased the entire 16 annas interest in the property at the court sale in pursuance ,of a decree obtained by them against Ismail.
The trial Court held that the purchase made by the National Agency Co. Ltd. was valid and extended to the entire interest in the property and hence the venders of the plaintiffs had no title to convey to them any interests in the property.
The High Court in appeal disagreed with this finding but dismissed the appeal on other grounds except to the extent of an 8 pies share in the property.
The appellants came to this Court on a certificate of fitness granted by the High Court.
The points raised before this Court were whether the High Court was right in holding that the present suit was barred by O. IX, r. 9 on the ,ground that when suit No. 58 of 1931 was dismissed in default, no action was taken to get it restored, this was raised by the respondent and whether in any event their claims to the 2 as 13 odd gundas share of Ashfaq, son of Ismail, should not have been decreed.
HELD (i) that the suit was substantially barred by 0.
TX, r. 9.
The essential bundle of facts on which the plaintiffs based their title and their right to relief were identical in the two suits the property sought to be recovered in the two suits was the same.
The title of the ,persons from whom the plaintiffs claimed title by purchase was based ,on the same facts.
The additional allegation about possession in October 1934 did not really destroy the basic and substantial identity of the ,causes of action in the two suits.
The ban imposed by 0.
IX, r. 9 does not create merely a personal bar or estoppel against the particular plaintiff suing on the same cause ,of action and does not leave the matter at large for those claiming under him.
The word "plaintiff" in the rule includes his assigns and legal representatives.
(ii)that when the Government granted the lease in 1928, the lease was granted not only in favour of Ismail but also in favour of the ,other co sharers although the name of Ismail alone was mentioned in the lease deed.
The provisions of section 3 of the Crown Grants Act did not affect the beneficial interest in the lease.
Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act did not help the respondent as there was no evidence to show that Ismail was put forward by 134 159 S.C. 13 194 the other co sharers as the ostensible owner of the property.
The conduct of the co sharers in permitting Ismail to manage the common property did not by itself raise any estoppel precluding them from asserting their rights.
Even a cursory enquiry by the mortgagee would have disclosed that Ismail was not the full owner.
As regards the contention of the appellants that they should have been granted a decree to the extent of 2 As.
13 odd gundas share of Ashfaq in addition to the 8 pies share decreed to them by the High Court, the case was ordered to be remitted to the trial Court for giving its finding regarding the reality of the sale by Ashfaq.
Gopi Ram vs Jagannath Singh, I.L.R. 9 Pat.
447, Mohammad Khalil Khan vs Muhbub Ali Mian, 75 I.A. 121 and Soorijomonee Dasee vs
Suddanund, (1873) 12 Ben.
L.R. 304, referred to.
