The decree holders filed an application for execution of the decree being E.P. No. 13/1939.
This execution proceeding had to be stayed .as a result of the stay order of the High Court.
Ultimately the executing court made an order on E.P. 13/1939 to the effect that the Execution Petition was "closed".
On January 21, 1952, the decree holders made an application for reopening the execution E.P. No. 13/1939 and for proceeding with the execution of the decree, The Subordinate Judge, (executing court) holding that the previous execution petition was merely closed" directed the decree holders to file a regular execution petition.
On October 11, 1952 the decree holders filed E.P. No. 58/53 to continue further proceedings in E.P. No. 13/1939.
The judgment debtors filed a counter affidavit pleading, inter alia that the decree sought to be executed was made on September 22, 1938, and that as E.P. No. 13/1939 was dismissed on December 28, 1948, the present application, having been filed more than 12 years from the date of decree, was barred under section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On these facts the Subordinate Judge held that though the decree holders were entitled to continue previous execution petition, E.P. No. 58/53 was a fresh application as it differed from the original execution petition.
On appeal, the High Court held that E.P. No. 13/1939 was merely closed for statistical purposes, and, therefore, the execution petition filed in 1939 was still pending and the decree holders were entitled to proceed with that petition.
Hence the appeal.
The question for consideration is whether E.P. No. 58/53 is a fresh application within the meaning of section 48 of the Code.
Held: (i) It is true courts have condemned the practice of executing courts using expressions like "closed", "closed for statistical purposes", struck off" "recorded" etc., and they have also pointed out that there is no provision in the Code of Civil Procedure for making such orders.
But assuming that the court has no such power, the passing of such ,in order cannot be tantamount to an order of dismissal, for the intention of the court in making an order "closed" for statistical purposes is manifest.
It is intended not to finally dispose of the application, but to keep it pending.
Whether the order was without jurisdiction or whether it was valid, the legal position would be the same: in one case it would be ignored and in the other it would mean what it stated.
In either case the execution petition would be pending on the file of the court.
It is not the phraseology used by the Executing Court that really 252 matters, but is is really the substance of the order that is material.
Whatever terminology may be used, it is for the Court to ascertain, having regard to the circumstances under which the said order was made, whether the Court intended to finally terminate the execution proceedings.
If it did not intend to do so, it must be held that the execution proceedings were pending on the file of the Court.
In the present case the subsequent application ie.
E.P. No. 58/53 is only an application to continue the previous application i.e. E.P. 13/1939.
Biswa Sonan Chunder Gossyamy vs Binanda Chander Dibingar Adhikar Gossyamy, Cal.
416, Vadlamannati Damodara Rao vs Official Receiver, Kistna, I.L.R. 1946 Mad. 527 and Moidin Kutty vs Doraiswami, A.I.R. 1952 Mad. 51, referred to.
(ii) An application made after 12 years from the date of decree would be a fresh application within the meaning of section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure, if the previous application was finally disposed of.
It would also be a fresh application if it asked for a relief against parties or properties different from those proceeded against in the previous execution petition or asked for a relief substantially different from that asked for in the earlier petition.
In the present case the parties are substantially the same in both proceedings, and the decree holders are only proceeding against properties included in the previous application ie.
E.P. No. 13/1939.
It cannot, therefore, be treated as a fresh application within the meaning of section 48 of the Code.
Bandhu Singh vs Kayastha Trading Bank, All. 419, Sri Raja D. K. Venkata Lingama Nayanim vs Raja Inuganti Rajagopala Venkata Narasimha Rayanim, I.L.R. [1947] Mad.
525, Ippagunta Lakshminarasinga Rao vs Ippagunta Balasubrahamanyam, and Gajanand Sah vs Dayanand Thakur Pat.
discussed.
