The respondent challenged the election of the appellant, inter alia, on the ground that there had been improper reception, refusal and rejection of votes at the time of counting and that on a true count he would have received a majority of valid votes and that he was entitled to be declared duly elected.
He claimed that by inspection of the ballot papers he would be able to establish his case on the aforesaid allegations and that the Tribunal was bound to grant an order for inspection, because he had tendered the sealed boxes of ballot papers in evidence, and on that account all the ballot papers were part of the record.
The Tribunal in its order stated that nothing was brought to its notice which would justify granting an order for inspection.
It further observed: "If in future from the facts that may be brought to the notice of the Tribunal, it appears that in the interests of justice inspection should be allowed, necessary orders allowing an inspection could always be passed".
Thereupon, another application was submitted by the respondent asking for inspection but no additional materials were placed before the Tribunal and no oral evidence was led at the trial.
The Tribunal rejected the application for inspection.
On appeal, the High Court held that ballot papers had actually been called for from the Returning Officer and were before the Tribunal, and there was nothing in the Code of Civil Procedure which prevented the Tribunal from allowing inspection of the ballot papers in the custody of the Court.
The Tribunal had therefore rejected the application for inspection without any adequate reasons.
The sole question for determination was whether the Election Tribunal erred in declining to grant an order for inspection of the ballot papers which had been, pursuant to an order in that behalf, lodged before the Tribunal in sealed boxes by the Returning Officer.
Held: By the mere production of the sealed boxes, the ballot papers did not become part of the record and they were not liable to be inspected unless the Tribunal was satisfied that such inspection was in the circumstances of the case necessary in the interests of justice.
239 The Returning Officer is not a party to an election petition, and an order for production of the ballot papers cannot be made under 0.
XI of the Code of Civil Procedure.
But the Election Tribunal is not on that account without authority in respect of the ballot papers.
Where the interests of justice demand it, the Tribunal may call upon the Returning Officer to produce the ballot papers and may permit inspection by the parties before it of the ballot papers: that power is clearly implicit in sections 100(1)(d)(iii), 101, 102 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and rule 93 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
This power to order inspection of the ballot papers which is apart from 0.
XI Code of Civil Procedure may be exercised, subject to the statutory restrictions about the secrecy of the ballot papers prescribed by sections 94 and 128(1) of the Act.
Bhim Sen vs Gopali, , distinguished.
