The appellant entered into a contract with the karta for the purchase of property belonging to a joint Hindu family.
This property consisted of a fractional share belonging to the family in a large plot of land.
Earnest money was paid to the karta.
As the karta did not execute the sale deed the appellant instituted a suit for specific performance.
The other members who are the brothers of the karta and who were adults (1) A.I.R. 1962 Raj 3.
(2) 1959 All.
L.J. 340.
134 159 S.C. 21 322 at the time of the contract were also impleaded in the suit as defendants.
The suit was resisted on the ground that there was no legal necessity and that the contract for sale was not for the benefit of the family.
The trial court as well as the High Court upheld these contentions.
Before this Court it was contended that even though there was no legal necessity the transaction was for the benefit of the family which the karta as a prudent owner was entitled to enter into for the benefit of the family.
Held:(i) For a transaction to be regarded as one which is of benefit to the family it need not necessarily be only of a defensive character, but what transactions would be for the benefit of the family would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
In each case the Court must be satisfied from the material before it that it was in fact such as conferred or was necessarily expected to confer benefit on the family at the time it was entered into.
(ii) No part of the joint family property could be parted with or agreed to be parted with by the manager on the ground of alleged benefit to the family when the transaction is opposed by the adult members of the family.
(iii)In the present case the appropriate pleas were not raised by the plaintiff nor the necessary evidence led.
The granting of specific performance is always in the discretion of the court.
In the facts and circumstances of the case the courts below were justified in refusing to order specific performance and the appeal is dismissed.
Jagatnarain vs Mathura Das, I.L.R. 50 All.
969, Honooman Prasad Pandey vs Babooee Munraj Koonwaree, (1856) 6 Moo.
I.A. 393 Sahu Ram Chandra vs Bhup Singh, I.L.R. 39 All.
437, Palaniappa Chetty vs Sreemath Daiyasikamony Pandara Sannadhi, 44 I.A. 147, Sital Prasad Singh vs Ajablal Mander, I.L.R. 18 Pat.
306 and In the matter of A. V. Vasudevan & Ors.
Minors.
A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 260.
referred to.
