The petitioners in these three writ petitions challenged the operative provisions of the Orissa Private Lands of Rulers (Assessment of Rent) Act, 1958 and the, Rules framed thereunder.
These petitioners possess 302 private lands in the State of Orissa, which before the impugned Act were not subjected to the payment of rent, but which were assessed by the Revenue Officers in conformity with the Rules framed under the Act.
The petitioners claims a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the said orders of assessment.
The Act was passed by the Orissa Legislature because it was thought expedient to provide for assessment of rent with respert to the private lands of Rulers in the State of Orissa.
The main object of the Act is to authorise the levy of rent in respect of the private lands of persons included in the definition of the word "Ruler" prescribed by section 2(h) of the Act.
Section 2(h) defines a "Ruler" as meaning the Ruler of a merged territory in the State of Orissa and includes his relatives and dependants.
The petitioners attacked the pro visions of the Act mainly on the ground that they contravened article 14 of the Constitution.
Held:(i) that section 6 of the Act does not contravene article 14 of the Constitution for the reason that fair and equitable tests have been laid down under section 6 of the Act for determining the rent which should be assessed in respect of the private lands of the Rulers.
In the present case the legislature had prescribed the method of determining the rent payable on the private lands; and the relevant factors specified by section 6 appear to be just and substantially similar to the considerations which are generally taken into account at the time of survey settlement for determining the proper revenue assessment on ryotwari lands.
The problem posed by the requirement to levy assessment on these private lands had to be dealt with by the legislature on an ad hoc basis.
The settlement of rent and assessment introduced by the Act had been made applicable to these lands for the first time, and so, these lands could not be treated as comparable in every respect with the lands which were governed by the rates prescribed under the previous settlement.
(ii)In considering the validity of a statute under article 14 the wellestablished principle is that the legislature can make class legislation, provided the classification on which it purports to be based is rational and has a reasonable nexus with the object intended to be achieved by it.
If the party fails to show that the said classification is irrational, or has no nexus with the object intended to be achieved by the impugned Act, the initial presumption of constitutionality would help the State to urge that the failure of the party challenging the validity to rebut the initial presumption goes against his claim that the Act is invalid.
In all cases where the material adduced before the court in matters relating to article 14 is unsatisfactory, the court may have to allow the State to lean on the initial presumption of constitutionality.
(iii)There is no substance in the contention that the impugned Act is void because the definition of the word "Ruler" is inconsistent with Art, 366(22) of the Constitution.
There is no doubt that the definition of the word "Ruler" prescribed by section 2(h) of the Act is wider than that prescribed by article 366(22) of the Constitution.
303 The definitions prescribed by article 366 are intended for the purpose of interpreting the articles in the Constitution itself, unless the context otherwise requires.
The whole object of defining the word "Ruler" in the Act is to specify and describe the lands in respect of which the operative provisions of the Act would come into play.
It is in that connection that the word "Ruler" has been broadly defined in an inclusive manner.
(iv) The impugned Act is entirely outside the purview of article 31 of the Constitution as it has not purported either to deprive the Rulers of their property, or to acquire or requisition the said property.
It is a simple measure authorising the levy of a tax in respect of agricultural lands.
Pratap Kesari Deo vs The State of Orissa, A.I.R. 1961 Orissa 131, relied on.
