The Government issued a notification on December 3, 1960 under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act stating that the land described in the annexure to the notification was required fora public purpose, namely, for the construction of buildings for godownsand administrative office.
The appellants challenged the validity of thenotification in the High Court contending that the notification unders.
6 of the Act did not describe the land to be acquired with sufficient particularity and that although the notification mentioned that the land was required for a public purpose, in fact it was required for a company, which was entirely different from Government and was therefore invalid.
Soon after the writ petition was filed, the State Government issued a fresh notification on April 19.
1961 mainly under section 17(1) read with section 17(4) of the Act.
The notification stated that it was declared under section 6 of the Act that the land was required for a public purpose, namely, "for the Premier Refractory Factory and work connected therewith.
" At the time of hearing of the writ petition in the High Court, it was urged on behalf of the appellants that both the notifications under section 6 of the December 3, 1960 and April 19.
637 1961 were invalid because the acquisition was not for a public purpose as stated therein; in fact it was for a company which was entirely different from Government.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition and held that the notifications under section 6 must in substance and in law be demed to be for acquisition of land for a company in the present case.
Held: Where the 'entire compensation is to be paid by a company.
the notification under section 6 must contain a declaration that the land is needed for a company.
No notification under section 6 can be made where the entire compensation is to be paid by a company declaring that the acquisition is for a public purpose, for, such a declaration requires that either wholly or in part, compensation must come out of public revenues ,or some fund controlled or managed by a local authority.
Pandif Jhandu Lal vs State of Punjab, ; , followed.
In the present case, the whole compensation was to be paid by the company, therefore the notification under section 6 had to declare that the land was needed for a company.
There was nothing in either of the two notifications of December 3, 1960 and April 19, 1961 to show that the land was needed for a company, therefore they were invalid in view of the proviso to section 6 (1) of the Act and all proceedings following on such notifications would be of no effect under the Act.
