The Government of Mysore by an order defined backward classes and directed that 30 per cent of the seats in professional and technical colleges and institutions shall be reserved for them and 18 per cent to the Schedule castes and Scheduled Tribes.
It was laid down that classification of socially and educationally backward classes should be made on the basis of economic condition and occupation.
By a letter the Government informed the Director of Technical Education that it had been decided that 25% of the maximum marks for the examination in optional subjects shall be fixed as interview marks.
The selection will be conducted by a committee composed of Heads of Technical Institutions aid in allotting marks for interview factors like general knowledge, personality and extracurricular activities of the candidates should be ' taken into consideration.
On the basis of the above criteria selections were made for admission to Engineering and Medical Colleges.
Thereupon some of the candidates whose applications for admission were rejected filed writ petitions before the High Court of Mysore for quashing the orders issued by the Government and for directing that they shall be admitted in the colleges strictly in the order of merit.
The High Court rejected the contentions raised on points of law but found that the selection committee has abused its power and directed that the petitioners be interviewed afresh and admissions be made in accordance with the Government Order and letter which were declared valid.
Before this Court it was contended that the Government letter was invalid inasmuch as it did not comply with the provisions of article 166 of the Constitution.
The next contention was that the Government had no power to appoint a selection committee for admitting students to colleges on the basis of higher or different qualifications than those prescribed by the University.
Another contention was that selection by viva voce examination was illegal by reason of the fact that it enables the interviewers to act arbitrarily and therefore it contravenes article 44 of the Constitution.
Lastly it was contended that unless the observation of the High Court that the classification was not perfect since the Government has not applied the caste test as well as the economic test is corrected it will mislead the Government.
Held: (Per B. P. Sinha, C.J., Subba Rao, Raghubar Dayal and Rajagopala Ayyangar JJ.) (i) The provisions of article 166 of the Constitution are only directory and not mandatory and, if they are not complied with, it can be established as a question of fact that the impugned order was issued in fact by the State Government or the Governor.
In the present case the impugned order though it does not conform to the provisions of article 166 ex facie says that an order to the effect mentioned therein was issued by the Government and it is not denied by the appellants that the order was made by the Government and neither it is denied that it was communicated to the selection committee.
Therefore it is valid.
134 159 S.C. 24 370 Dattatraya Moreshwar Pangarkar vs State of Bombay ; , State of Bombay vs Purushottam log Naik, , Ghaio Mall & sons vs State of Delhi, [1959] S.C.A. 1424 and Bachittar Singh vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 713, referred to.
(ii) If the impact of the State law providing for standards of education on entry 66 of List I is so heavy and devastating as to wipe out or appreciably abridge the Central field it may be struck down.
But that is a question of fact to be ascertained in each case.
If a State law Prescribes higher percentage of marks for extra curricular activities in the matter of admission to colleges it cannot be said that it would be directly encroaching on the field covered by entry 66 of List I.
The Government Orders do not contravene the minimum qualification prescribed by the Mysore University; what the Government did was to appoint a selection committee and prescribe for selection of students who have the minimum qualifications prescribed by the University.
Since they cannot admit all the students who have secured the minimum marks prescribed by the University they had necessarily to select the applicants on some reasonable basis.
The State Government is therefore entitled to prescribe a machinery and also the criteria for admission of qualified students to medical and engineering colleges run by the Government and with the consent of the management of the Government aided colleges, to the said colleges also.
Gujarat University vs Shri Krishna, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 112, distinguished.
(iii) The selection by viva voce is one of the methods suggested by modern authorities on education in preference to written tests.
It is no ', for the court to say which method should be adopted, it should be left to the authorities concerned.
The fact that one particular method is capable of abuse is not sufficient ground for quashing it as being violative of article 14.
If in a given case the selection committee abuses its powers in violation of article 14 the selection will be held invalid and will be set aside as the High Court has done in the present case.
(iv) A classification of backward classes based on economic conditions and occupation is not bad and does not offend article 15(4).
The caste of a group of citizens may be a relevant circumstance in ascertaining their social backwardness and though it is a relevant factor to determine social backwardness of a class, it cannot be the sole or dominent test in that behalf.
If in a given selection caste is excluded in ascertaining a class within the meaning of article 15(4) it does not vitiate the classification if it satisfied other tests.
The inference to the contrary which may be drawn from the observation of the High Court in the impugned judgment will not be correct in law or a correct reading of the observations of this Court in M. R. Balaji vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 439.
(v) Various provisions of the Constitution like articles 15, 29, 46, 341 and 342 which recognise the factual existence of backward classes in our 371 country and which make a sincere attempt to promote the welfare of the weaker sections thereof should be construed to effectuate that policy and not to give weightage to progressive sections of the society under the false colour of caste to which they happen to belong.
Under no circumstances a "class" can be equated to a "caste" though the caste of an individual or group of individuals may be a relevant factor in putting him in a particular class.
If in a given situation caste is excluded in ascertaining a class within the meaning of article 15(4) it would not violate the classification if it satisfied other tests.
If an entire sub caste by and large, is backward, it may be included in the Scheduled Castes by following the appropriate procedure laid down by the Constitution.
Per Mudholkar, J. (dissenting): (i) The decisions of this Court dealing with article 166 of the Constitution have definitely held that where the ' existence of a Government Order itself is challenged by a person who is affected by it the burden is upon the Government to establish that an order was in fact made by the Governor in the manner provided for in the rules of business framed by the Governor under cl.
(3) of article 166.
(ii) It is not correct to say, in this case, that the appellants have not denied the existence of the order.
Right from the beginning they have been saying that there was no "Government Order" in so far as admission to the Medical College was concerned.
Since both the appellants were concerned only with the admission to a Medical College they had no necessity to deny the existence of the Government Order regarding admission to an Engineering College.
The document which is relied on the State to establish that there was a Government Order is nothing but a communication from the Secretary to Government of Mysore addressed to the selection committee and Deans Medical College Mysore.
It is thus not an order of the kind contemplated by article 166.
Except a statement in that communication that the Under Secretary is "directed to state" that the Government has taken a decision there is no evidence or averment that the Governor has made an order providing for interview.
In no case has this Court held that such a document.
can be treated as the Governor 's Order or even evidence of the existence of the Governor 's Order.
(iii) The decision of this Court in Gujarat University vs Shri Krishna, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 112, establishes that the power to provide for coordination and determination of standards in certain institutions like the medical colleges is vested in the Parliament and even though Parliament may not have exercised that power the State Legislature cannot step in and provide for the determination and coordination of standards by requiring that marks on the basis of interviews be awarded to the applicants for admission of candidates to, such institutions as is done in the present case.
It constitutes an interference with the standards of admission laid down by the University.
(iv) The executive power of the State which is co extensive with legislative power under article 162 of the Constitution cannot be exercised where such exercise is contrary to law or where it has been assigned to 372 other authorities or bodies.
Section 23 of the Mysore University Act, provides that the Acadamic Council shall have power to prescribe the conditions of admission to the University and therefore the executive cannot encroach on this power.
Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur vs State of Punjab, and Motilal vs Government of State of Uttar Pradesh, A.I.R. 1951 All 259 (F.13.).
(v) It would not be in accordance with cl.
(1) of article 15 or cl.
(2) of article 29 to require the consideration of the caste of persons to be borne in mind for determining what are socially and educationally backward classes.
