Appellants were first detained on November 7, 1962 under .
That order was revoked by the Government and the appellants were released but re arrested under Rule 30 of the Defence of India Rules.
The orders of detention were served on appellants in Jail.
The appellants challenged those orders in the High Court by filing habeas corpus petitions under article 226 of the Constitution and section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The writ petitions were dismissed by the High Court and the appellants came to this Court under a certificate from the High Court.
The contentions raised by the appellants were that their detention was illegal because the detention order was served on them when they were in jail, that the orders of detention were passed without the satisfaction of the authority concerned regarding their necessity, the satisfaction was to be that of the Governor and not of any Minister, that there should have been fresh allocation of business by the Governor under article 166(3) of the Constitution after the passing of the Defence of India Ordinance, Act and Rules, that before the State Government could exercise the power conferred by Rule 30, there had to be delegation by the Central Government that the order of detention did not show that section 44 of Defence of India Act was kept in mind when the order was made and that unless the order showed on the face of it that the State Government thought that detention was the only mode in which the purpose of the Act and Rules could be carried out, the order was bad.
Dismissing the appeals.
Held: The orders of detention passed by the State Government and their service on the appellants in jail were perfectly valid and did not make the detention illegal.
The appellants were detained not as undertrials or as convicted persons but as detenus and hence the cases of Rameshwar Shaw and Makhan Singh Tarsikka did not apply in the present case.
Reading the detention order as a whole, it was clear that it did Ray in substance that it was necessary to detain the appellants with a view to preventing them from acting in a manner prejudicial to the Defence of India, public safety and maintenance of public order.
There was no difference between the words "so to do" in Rule 30 and the words "to make the following order ' in the detention order.
As the detention order mentioned both the defence of India and maintenance of public order, such an order could be made on the satisfaction of a Minister who was incharge of both the subjects in view of the Rules of Business promulgated by the Governor.
It was not necessary that fresh allocation of business should be made by the Governor under article 166(3) after the passing of the Defence of India Ordinance, Act and Rules.
It Is enough if the allocation of the 448 subject to which the Defence of India Ordinance, Act and Rules refer has been made with reference to the three lists in the Seventh Schedule and if such allocation already exists, it may be taken advantage of if and when laws are passed.
Rule 30 of the Defence of India Rules lays down that the power can be exercised by the Central Government or the State Government and hence no further delegation is necessary in favour of the State Government for the exercise of power under Rule 30.
It is true that section 44 of the Defence of India Act provides that there should be as little interference with the ordinary avocation of life as possible when orders are made under the Act or the Rules, but that does not mean that a detention order must show on the face of it that the State Government had considered the various clauses of Rule 30(1) and had come to the conclusion that the only way in which the purpose of the Act and the Rules could be carried out was by the use of Rule 30(1) (b).
When the order says that it is necessary to make an order of detention in order to restrain the prejudicial activities mentioned therein, it means that that was the only way which the State Government thought was necessary to adopt in order to meet the situation.
It is for the detenu to show that the order had gone beyond the needs of the situation and was therefore contrary to section 44.
Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs State of Punjab A.I.R. 1964 S.C: 381 Keshav Talpade vs King Emperor, , Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan, ; , Alakhon Singh Tarasikka vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. , referred to
