The appellant and respondent were rival candidates for election to the Bihar Legislative Assembly.
The appellant obtained a majority of votes and was declared elected.
This election was challenged by the respondent on the ground that the appellant had not attained the age of 25 years on the date of filing the nomination papers and was on that account disqualified under article 173 of the Constitution from being a member of the Assembly; that he held subsisting contracts under the Bihar Government in his individual and personal capacity and was thus disqualified under section 7(d) of the Representation of the People Act and that he and his party men were directly responsible for publication and distribution of copies of leaflets entitled "Bagula Neta Se Hoshiar" containing direct insinuations and aspersions against the personal character of the respondent, those being false to the knowledge of the appellant.
The Election Petition was dismissed by the Election Tribunal.
The respondent appealed to the High Court.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the allegation that the appellant held Governpapers and that the appellant was.
gulty of a corrupt practice in the appeal and set aside the election of the appellant on the ground that he was below the age of 25 on the date of filling the nomination papers and that the appellant was guilty of.
a corrupt practice in that he had published the offending leaflets.
With certificate ' of fitness granted by the High Court the appellant appealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeal: HELD: (i) The burden of proving that appellant had not attained the age of 25 years on the date of has nomination was on the respondent and he had failed to prove that and hence the election of the appellant could not be set aside on that ground.
The entry made in an official record maintained by an illiterate Chowkidar, by somebody else at his request, does not come within Section 35 of the Evidence Act.
(ii) The respondent had not been able to prove the publication of the leaflets by the appellant or has agent or by any other person with the consent of the appellant o.r of his election agent, and hence the Election Tribunal was right in coming to the conclusion that the commission of any corrupt practice by appellant under section 123(4) had not been proved.
