The plaintiff appellant filed a suit to enforce a mortgage by deposit of title deeds.
The case of the plaintiff was that on 10th May, 1947, the 1st defendant deposited with the plaintiff at Madras other title deeds and papers relating to his half share in items specified in Schedule 'B ' attached to the plaint with intent to create a security over the same in respect of advances made by the plaintiff.
Before the 10th May, 1947, the 1st defendant borrowed from the plaintiff from time to time Rs. 16,500/ on 7 promissory notes. 'Me case of the plaintiff further was that the 1st defendant executed a memorandum of agreement, dated 5th July, 1947, in which the equitable mortgage thus created and the amount borrowed by him till then were acknowledged and he had undertaken to repay the said sum of Rs. 16,500/ with interest.
This memorandum of agreement had been duly registered.
This suit was for recovery of the principal amount of Rs. 16,500/ and interest thereon.
The 1st defendant did not file any written statement denying the said allegations.
The 3rd defendant (a subsequent mortgagee), the only contesting defendant, filed a written statement wherein he put the plaintiff to strict proof of the fact that the sums claimed in the plaint were due to him from the 1st defendant and of the fact that the 1st defendant effected a mortgage in his favour by deposit of title deeds.
The Trial Court held that the 1st defendant had no intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds on May 10, 1947.
On appeal the HIgh Court also affirmed the finding of the trial Court.
The question for consideration was whether on 10th May, 1947, there was a loan and whether the 1st defendant delivered to the appellant the documents of title of B Schedule properties with the intent to create a security thereon.
Held:(i) Under the Transfer of the Property Act, a mortgage by deposit of title deeds is one of the forms of mortgages whereunder there is a transfer of interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing payment of money advanced or to be advanced by way of loan.
Therefore, such a mortgage of property takes effect against a mortgage deed subsequently executed and registered in respect of the same property under Section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act.
The three requisites of a mortgage by deposit of title deeds are, (i) debt, (ii) deposit of title deeds, and (iii) an intention than the deeds shall be security for the debt.
Whether there is an intention that the deeds shall be security for the debt is a question of fact in each case.
The 728 said fact will have to be decided on the basis of the evidence.
There is no presumption of law that the mere deposit of title deeds constitutes a mortgage, for no such presumption has been laid down either in the Evidence Act or in the Transfer of Property Act.
But a court may presume under section 114 of the Evidence Act that under certain circumstances a loan and a deposit of title deeds constitute a mortgage.
But that is really an inference as to the existence of one fact from the existence of some other fact or facts.
Nor the fact that at the time the title deeds were deposited there was an intention to execute a mortgage deed in itself negatives, or is inconsistent with, the intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds to be in force till the mortgage deed was executed.
On the facts of this case the intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds can be inferred from the document dated 5th July, 1947 which was subsequently registered and in which the deposit of title deeds on May 10, 1947 was duly acknowledged.
Norris vs Wilkinson, ; , Keys V. Williams, (1838)51 Revised Reports, 339, Whitbread, Ex Parte, ; , In re.
Beetham, Ex Parte Broderick, , Dayal Jairaj vs Jivraj Ratansi, Bom. 237, Jaitha Bhima vs Haji Abdul Vyad Cosman, Bom.
634, Behram Bashid Irani vs Sorabji Rustomji Elavia, Bom. 372 and V.E.R.M.A.R. Chettyar vs Ma Joo Teen, Rang.
239, discussed.
(ii)Physical delivery of documents by the debtor to the creditor is not the only mode of deposit.
There may be a constructive deposit.
A court will have to ascertain in each case whether in substance there is a delivery of the title deeds by the debtor to the creditor.
If the creditor was already in possession of the title deeds, it would be hypertechnical to insist upon the formality of the creditor delivering the title deeds to the debtor, and the debtor re delivering them to the creditor.
What would be necessary in these circumstances is whether the parties agreed to treat the documents in the possession of the creditor or his agent as delivery to him for the purpose of the transaction.
In the present case the plaintiff the mortgagee had the physical possession of the title deeds at Madras on May 10, 1947.
On the facts of this case, though the form of physical delivery of title deeds had not been gone through, on May 10, 1947, there was constructive delivery of the title deeds coupled with the intention to create a mortgage by deposit of title deeds.
Such delivery satisfied the condition laid down by section 58(f) of the Transfer of Property Act.
(Iii)There is nothing unusual in this conduct of the parties either.
If there was a mortgage by deposit of title deeds at an earlier stage, even though there was at that time an agreement to execute a formal document later on, there would be nothing out of the way in the parties, for their own reasons, giving up the idea of executing a formal document and being satisfied with the memorandum acknowledging the earlier form of security.
