The respondent, a company incorporated in the former State of Bhopal, presented a petition in August 1960 under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh for a writ restraining the State of Madhya Pradesh from enforcing the Bhopal State Agricultural Income tax Act, 1953, claiming that the Act contravened the respondent 's right under article 14 of the Constitution.
By the the territory of the State of Bhopal was 847 incorporated from November 1, 1956 into the newly formed State of Madhya Pradesh.
The by section 119 continued the operation of the laws in force in the territories in which they were previously in force until the competent legislature or authority amended, altered or modified these laws.
Shortly after the reorganisation.
the Madhya Pradesh Adaptation of Laws Order, 1956 was issued so as to make certain laws applicable uniformly to the entire State and later the Legislature by the Madhya Pradesh Extension of Laws Act, 1958 made other alterations in the laws applicable to the State.
But Bhopal Act 11 of 1953 remained unamended or unaltered: nor was its operation extended to the other areas or regions in the State with the result that Agricultural Income tax was levied within the territory of the former State of Bhopal and not in the rest of the territory of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
The High Court held that the provisions of Bhopal Act 11 of 1953 contravened article 14 of the Constitution and observed that though the State had removed diversity in some of the laws of the component regions, no attempt was made to remove discrimination between the territory of the former Bhopal State and the rest of the territories of the State of Madhya Pradesh with respect to this law.
Held: (i) Where application of unequal laws is reasonably justified for historical reasons, a geographical classification founded on those historical reasons would be upheld.
The legislature has always the power to make special laws to attain particular objects and for that purpose has authority to select or classify persons, objects or transactions upon which the law is intended to operate.
Differential treatment becomes unlawful only when it is arbitrary or not supported by a rational relation with the object of the statute.
Bhaiyalal Shukla vs State of Madhya Pradesh, [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 257, The State of Madhya Pradesh vs The Gwalior Sugar Co., , Maharaj Kumar Prithivi Rai vs State of Rajasthan, C.A. Nos.
327 328, dated 2 11 1960 and Anand Prasad Lakshminivas Ganeriwal vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 853.
relied on.
State of Rajasthan vs Rao Manohar Singhji, [1954] S.C.R. 996, explained.
(ii) It would be impossible to lay down any definite time limit within which the State had to make necessary adjustments so as to effectuate the equality clause of the Constitution.
It cannot be said that because a certain number of years have elapsed or that the State has made other laws uniform, the State has acted improperly in con tinuing an impost which operates upon a class of citizens more harshly than upon others.
(iii) To make out a case of denial of the equal protection of laws under article 14, a plea of differential treatment is by itself not sufficient.
An applicant pleading such denial must make out that not only he 848 had been treated differently from others but he has been so treated from persons similarly circumstanced without any reasonable basis, and such differential treatment is Unjustifiably made.
