Rupees 85,000/ was deposited with the appellant by his sister in January 1946.
The appellant 's sister migrated to Pakistan sometimes between June to August 1949.
The Assistant Custodian called upon the appellant to pay this sum lying in deposit under section 48 of the .
The appellant pleaded that the amount could not be recovered from him because the money had been given to him as a loan and its recovery was barred in January 1949.
The Assistant Custodian rejected the contention of the appellant and directed him to pay the amount under section 48 of the Act, as it then stood.
This decision was affirmed in appeal as well as in revision.
Then the appellant moved a writ petition before the High Court which was dismissed by the single Judge.
On Latters Patent Appeal the High Court held that the amount was not recoverable under section 48 of the Act as it stood at the relevant time.
This decision was given on December 9, 1957.
In the meantime, section 48 had been amended on October 22, 1956.
On January 22, 1958 another notice of demand was served on the appellant by the Assistant Custodian.
The Assistant Custodian again directed the amount to be recovered The appellant preferred an appeal before the Custodian General.
The Custodian General allowed the appeal and remanded the proceedings for further enquiry as directed by him.
After the remand further evidence was taken and it was held that the amount in question was payable by the appellant as it was a deposit and was still recoverable when the property vested in the Custodian.
Thereupon the appellant preferred an appeal to the Custodian General and that appeal was dismissed.
Then the appellant applied to this Court for special leave which was granted.
Hence the appeal.
Held: (i) Sub sections 1 and 2 of the amended section 48 of the are clearly procedural and would apply to all cases which have to be investigated in accordance therewith after October 22, 1956, even though the claim may have arisen before the amended section was inserted in the Act.
It is well settled that procedural amendments to a law apply, in the absence of anything to the contrary, retrospectively in the sense that they apply to all actions after the date they come into force even though the actions may have begun earlier or the claim on which the action may be based may be of an anterior date.
In the present case when the Assistant Custodian issued notice to the appellant on January 22, 1958, claiming the amount from him, the recovery could be dealt with under sub sections
(1) and (2) of the amended a. 48, as they are merely procedural provisions.
(ii) In the present case the property which vested in the Custodian was not the actual money in specie lying with the appellant who must be treated as a banker with respect to the property with him; on the other hand the property which vested in the Custodian would be the right of the appellant 's sister to recover the amount from the appellant 839 and that would be incorporeal property in the form of an actionable claim.
It is in respect of that actionable claim that the Custodian can proceed under section 48 sub sections
(1) and (2), to recover the sum payable to him in respect of that property, namely, the actionable claim.
The Custodian could not take action under section 9 by physically seizing the amount because the amount cannot be treated as specific property which is liable to be seized under that section.
(iii) As this amount was a deposit, limitation would run at the earliest from the date of demand and there is no evidence that any demand was made by the appellant 's sister for the return of the money before she migrated to Pakistan.
Therefore, the period of limitation had not even begun to run on the date the appellant 's sister migrated to Pakistan, assuming article 60 of the Limitation Act No. 9 of 1908 applied.
Consequently the right of the appellant 's sister to recover the amount vested in the Custodian and was not barred by limitation & the time when she became an evacuee.
