The petitioner is the owner of certain land in Kanpur, U.P.
On a previous occasion land acquisition proceedings were taken regarding this land for acquiring it for an industrialist.
The petitioner questioned ' the validity of these proceedings and this Court by its judgment reported as R. L. Arora vs State of U.P; [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 149, quashed the notification made under section 6 of Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
Thereafter certain amendments were made to sections 40 and 41 of that Act by the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1961.
The petitioner thereupon filed before this Court a petition under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the amended sections 40, 41 and section 7 of the amending Act.
The petitioner contended that the said sections violated article 31(2) and article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution inasmuch as cl.
(aa) of the amended section 40 provided that all acquisitions made for a company for construction of some building are permissible even though the building may not be for a public purpose.
The validity of section 7 of the amending Act was challenged on the ground ' that it contravened article 31(2) inasmuch as it makes acquisition for a company before July 20, 1962 as being for a public purpose even though it may not be so in fact.
Section 7 was also challenged on the ground that it contravenes article 14 inasmuch as it makes an unreasonable discrimination in the matter of acquisition for a company before July 20, 1962 and after that date insofar as the former acquisitions are validated on the basis of their being deemed to be for a public purpose while the latter acquisitions are not so deemed and have to satisfy the test of public purpose.
Held (per P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR, C.J., K. N. WANCHOO, K. C. DAS GUPTA and J. C. SHAH JJ.): (i) If the language of a provision of law is capable of only one construction and if according to that construction the provision contravenes a constitutional provision it must be struck down.
A literal interpretation is not always the only interpretation of a provision in a statute and the court has to look at the setting in which the words are used and the circumstances in which the law came to be passed to decide whether there is something implicit behind the words actually used which would control the literal meaning of the words used.
The Mysore State Electricity Board vs Bangalore Woollen, Cotton ,and Silk Mills, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 127; followed.
(ii) It is well settled that if certain provisions of law construed in one way will be consistent with the Constitution and if another interpretation would render them unconstitutional the court would bear in favour of the former construction.
Kedar Nath Singh vs State of Bihar, [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 769, followed.
134 159 S.C. 50 786 (iii) Applying the above principles of construction it cannot be paid that section 40(aa) contravenes article 31(2) for the public purpose required therein is present where land is acquired for the construction of a building or work which must subserve the public purpose of the industry or work in which a company is engaged or is about to be engaged.
Nor can it be said that the provision is hit by article 19(1)(f) or it would be a reasonable restriction on the right to hold property.
The amendments to section 41 are only consequential to the insertion of c.l (aa) in section 40(1) and would therefore be equally valid.
(IV) The first of the two fictions introduced by section 7 of the Amendment Act merely lays down that where a notification under section 6 of the Act cannot be justified under cl.
(a)1 and cl.
(b) of section 40(1) it will be juded in accordance with the provisions contained in cl.
(aa) and it satisfies those provisions the acquisition will be deemed for the purpose of that clause as if that clause existed at the relevant time,though in actual fact it did not.
The first fiction does not provide that even though the purpose of the acquisition does not fall within cl.
(aa) it will still be deemed to be a public purpose.
Therefore a. 7 does not violate article 31(2).
(v) The acquisition made before July 20, 1962 as well as the acquisitions made thereafter have to satisfy the conditions of cl.
(aa) of section 40 and section 7 of the Amendment Act validates only acquisitions before July 20, 1962 which actually satisfy the provisions in cl.
Therefore it cannot be said that section 7 violates article 14.
(vi) Section 7 specifically validates acquisition made before July 20.
1962 "notwithstanding any judgment, decree or orders of any court ' and therefore the petitioner 's contention that the acquisition of the petitioners land declared to be invalid by reason of the judgment of this Court reported as R. L. Arora vs State of U.P., [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 149 is bad is rejected.
(vii) The various provisions in the agreement between the Government and the industrialist for whom the land in question has been acquired conclusively establish that the acquisition is for a public purpose within the meaning of cl.
(aa) of section 40.
Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advant; , , distinguished.
(viii) A distinction in the matter of acquisition of land between public companies and Government companies on the one hand and private individuals and private companies on the other is justified considering the object behind cl.
(aa) of section 40 of the Act and therefore It does not violate article 14.
Per Ayyangar J. (dissenting) (i) The wording of cl.
(aa) of section 40 is not capable of two interpretations and there is no ambiguity in the wording It is a well established principle of construction that it is only when there is an ambiguity and the words are capable of 787 more than one construction that any extrinsic aid in the shape of the purpose of the legislature or the object of the legislation come in for consideration Where the language of an Act is clear and explicit the court must give effect to it whatever may be the consequence for in that case the words of the statute speak the intention of the legislature.
The intention of the legislature is not a matter to be speculated upon.
Interpretation or construction cannot mean that a court first reaches a conclusion as to what in its opinion the legislature intended, even though this involves attributing a meaning divorced from the words used and then adjust the meaning to the conclusion it has reached.
Warburton vs Loveland, 2 D. & Cl.
(H.L.) 480.
Salomon vs A. Salomon & Co., ; and Cox vs Hakes, 15 App.
506,followed.
(iv) The only way cl.
(aa) could be read is to relate the words "public purpose" to the nature of the industry carried on by the company and by no rule of construction with or without extrinsic aide or with reference to the context, not to speak of rules of grammer, can the reference to public purpose be related to the building or work for which the acquisition is permitted to be made (v) Where the provisions, as in the present case, gives a case blanche to Government to acquire land for any purpose it Is not possible to sustain the validity of such law and strike down merely the particular acquisition where land is acquired for a purpose which is not a public purpose, for here the vice is in the law itself and not merely in its application.
Clause (aa) of section 40 is violative of article 21(2) of the Constitution.
