Respondent No. 1 obtained a mortgage decree for Rs. 1,14,581/14/6 against one Rao Raja Inder Singh (the judgment debtor).
The mortgage money was advanced under three mortgages, and the mortgaged properties consisted of Jagirs and some non Jagir immovable property.
The latter property was sold in execution and Rs. 33,750/ paid to the decree holder in partial satisfaction of the decree.
Then the decree holder filed an execution petition in the Court of the District Judge for the balance amount i.e. Rs. 99,965/3/6, praying for attachment of the amount of compensation and rehabilitation grant which would be paid to the judgment debtor on account of resumption of his Jagir.
The judgmment debtor submitted two applications in which he claimed relief under sections 5 and 7 of the Rajasthan Jagirdars ' Debt Reduction Act.
The decree holder, in his reply, to those petitions urged that the provisions relied in were ultra vires the Constitution of India, being in contravention of articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
Thereafter the decree holder moved a petition under article 228 of the Constitution before the High Court, praying that the execution case pending in the Court of the District Judge, be withdrawn from that court to the High Court.
The High Court transferred the case to its file.
By its judgment the High Court could held that apart from the later part of section 2(e) excluding certain debts and section 7 (2) of the Act, the rest of the Act was valid.
The High Court granted a certificate under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution to the State of Rajasthan to file an appeal to this Court.
Hence the appeal: Held: (i) That the impugned part of section 2(e) infringes article 14 of the Constitution for the reason that no reasonable classification is disclosed for the purpose of sustaining the impugned part of section 2(e).
It is now well settled that in order to pass the test of permissible classification, two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentiation which distinguishes persons or things that are to be put together from others left out of the group, and (2) that the differential must have a rational relationship to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
The said condition No. 2 above has clearly not been satisfied in this case.
The object sought to be achieved by the impugned Act was to reduce the debts secured on the Jagir lands which had been resumed under the provisions of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act.
The fact that the debts are owed to a Government or local authority or other bodies mentioned in the impugned part of section (2) (e) has no rational relationship with the object sought to be achieved by the Act.
Further, no intelligible principle underlies the exempted categories of debts.
The reason why a debt advanced on behalf of a person by the Court of Wards is clubbed with a debt due to a State or a scheduled bank and why a debt due to a non scheduled bank is not excluded from the purview of the Act is not discernible.
Manna Lal vs Collector of Jhalwar.
; , Nand Ram Chhotey Lai vs Kishore Raman Singh, A.I.R. (1962) All 521 and 905 Jamnalal Ramlal Kimtee vs Kishendas and State of Hyderabad, A.I.R. (1955) Hyd. 194, distinguished.
(ii) Section 7(2) is valid as it imposes reasonable restrictions, in the interests of general public.
on the rights of a secured creditor.
This sub section has been designed with the object of rehabilitating a Jagirdar whose Jagir properties have been taken over by the State for a public purpose at a low valuation.
If this provision was not made, the Jagirdar would find it diffcult to start life afresh because his future income and acquired properties would be liable to attachment and sale for the purpose of satisfying the demands of such creditors.
