One K had obtained sanction to irrigate certain lands from a canal.
The same year the Government proposed to reserve certain area along the canal as factory area.
According to the appellant after some correspondence between the Government and K, the Superintending Engineer agreed to exclude K 's land from the factory area and also to give water perpetually on the condition that he concentrated all his holding on the tail outlet of the canal and to take the supply of water on volumetric basis.
Pursuant to that arrangement, K concentrated his holdings and shifted his operations to that area and he was supplied water on the agreed basis.
Later the appellant and K entered into a partnership in respect of exploiting this area.
Disputes arose between the appellant and K which culminated in a consent decree whereunder the appellant became the full owner of the land including the right to use this canal water.
When the appellant applied for the recognition of the transfer the canal officer refused to do so.
On appeal be was informed that his request for supply of the canal water could not be granted.
The supply was stopped.
After giving them statutory notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the appellant filed a suit against the State for a declaration of his right to water from the canal and for consequential reliefs.
The State contested the suit contending, inter alia, that there was no concluded agreement between the Government and K. that even so, the agreement was void inasmuch as it 'did not comply with the provisions of section 175(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935 and in any view the appellant could not legally get the benefit of the agreement under section 30 of the Bombay Irrigation Act.
The Civil Judge held that there was a concluded agreement between the Government and K, but the transfer by K of the said right in favour of the appellant was in violation of the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act and dismissed the suit.
On appeal, the High Court held that there was neither a concluded agreement between K and the Government nor did it comply with the requirements of law, and the appeal was dismissed.
On appeal by special leave: Held (i) The documents in the instant case record a concluded agreement between the Superintendent Engineer, acting on the order of 985 the Minister of Public Works Department, on the one hand and K on the other agreeing to supply water so long as K had cane cultivation in the concentrated area.
(ii) The provisions of Bombay Irrigation Act establishes that every person desiring to have supply of water from a canal shall apply in the prescribed manner to the Canal Officer and that person to whom water is supplied cannot transfer his right to another without the permission of the Canal Officer.
But if the land in respect whereof the water is supplied is transferred, the agreement for the supply of water also shall be presumed to have been transferred along with it.
(iii) The conduct on the part of the Government as well as that on the part of K and the appellant also establishes that the agreement was not under the Bombay Irrigation Act, but between the Government and K. (iv) The agreement is void, as it has not complied with the provisions of section 175(3) of the Government of India Act.
The contract was not either entered into by the person legally authorised by the Government to do so or expressed to be made in the name of Governor.
Seth Bikhraj Jaipurja vs Union of India, and New Marine Coal Co. vs Union of India, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 859, referred to.
Union of India vs Rallia Ram, ; , referred to.
Semble: While it is the duty of a private party to a litigation to Place all the relevant matters before the court, a higher responsibility rests upon the Government not to withhold such document from the Court.
