The appellants as workmen of respondent No. 1 in all the three respondent concerns were getting free medical benefits of a very high order in a well furnished hospital maintained by respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 3.
the Union of India issued a notification under section 1(3) of the Employees State Insurance Act appointing 28th August, 1960 as the date on which some provisions of the Act should come into force in certain areas of the State of Bihar and the area in which the appellants were working came within the scope of the Act.
In pursuance of the said notification, the Chief Executive Officer of Respondent No. 1 issued notices to the appellants that the medical benefits upto the extent admissible under the Act will cease to be provided to insurable persons from the appointed day and the medical benefits would thereafter be governed by the relevant provisions of the Act.
The appellants in a writ petition to the High Court challenged the validity of section 1(3) of the Act and legality of the notifications issued under it, inter alia, on the ground that it contravened article 14 of the Constitution and suffers from the vice of excessive delegation.
The High Court rejected the plea and dismissed the writ petitions.
On appeal by special leave the appellants contended that section 1(3) of the Act suffers from excessive delegation and is, therefore, invalid.
Held: (i) section 1(3) of the Act is not an illustration of delegated legislation at all, it can be described as conditional legislation.
It purports to authorise the Central Government to establish a corporation for the administration of the scheme of Employees ' State Insurance by a notification.
As to when the notification should be issued and in respect of what factories it should be issued, has been left to the discretion of the Central Government and that is precisely what is usually done by conditional legislation.
Queen vs Burah, 5.
I.A. 178, relied on.
(ii) Assuming there is an element of delegation, the plea is equally unsustainable, because there is enough guidance given by the relevant provisions of the Act and the very scheme of the Act itself.
In the very nature of things, it would have been impossible for the legislature to decide in what areas and in respect of which factories the Employees ' State Insurance Corporation should be established.
It is obvious that a scheme of this kind, though very beneficent, could not be introduced 34 159 S.C. 58 914 in the whole of the country all at once.
Such beneficial measures which need careful experimentation have sometimes to be adopted by stages and in different phases, and so, inevitably, the question of extending the statutory benefits contemplated by the Act has to be left to the discretion of the appropriate Government.
That cannot amount to excessive delegation.
Edward Mills Co. Ltd. Beawar vs The State of Ajmer, ; , M/s Bhikusa Yamasa Kshatriya vs Sangamner Akola Taluka Bidi Kamgar Union, [1963] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 524 and Bhikusa Yamasa Kahtriva vs Union of India, ; followed:
