In a trial by jury the appellants were jointly charged along with accused No. 1 with an offence punishable under sections 471 and 467 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
The first charge was that in 921 furtherance of their common intention to cheat the railway administration, accused No. 1 had fraudulently or dishonestly used the forged railway receipt.
The second charge was framed in the alternative.
Firstly it charged all the accused under section 467 read with section 34 I.P.C. on account of accused No. 1 having forged the bill portion.
In the alternative, accused No. 1 was charged under section 467 I.P.C. and the appellants were charged under section 467 read with section 109 I.P.C. for having abetted accused No. 1 in the commission of that offence.
Similarly charges Nos.
3 to 6 were framed in the alternative.
The jury returned a unani nious verdict of guilty against all the accused for the various offences read with section 34 I.P.C.
The verdict of the jury was not recorded with respect to the five alternative charges against accused No. 1 regarding substantive offences and against appellants with respect to various offences read with section 109 I.P.C.
The Sessions Judge accepted the verdict of the jury and convicted them of the various offences read with section 34 P.C.
Their appeals to the High Court also failed.
On appeal by Special Leave the appellants mainly contended that the learned Sessions Judge misdirected the jury with respect to the requirements of section 34 I.P.C.
It was urged that the various offences were actually committed by accused No. 1, that the appellants were not present when accused No. 1 presented the forged railway receipts, did other criminal acts and took 'delivery of the goods and that therefore even if they had agreed with accused No. 1 for the cheating of the railway by obtaining the goods dishonestly by presenting the forged receipt.
they might have abetted the commission of the various offences, but could not lye guilty of those offences with the aid of section 34 I.P.C. whose provisions do not apply in the circumstances of the case.
For the applicability of section 34 against an accused, it is necessary that that accused had actually participated in the commission of the crime either by doing something which forms part of the criminal act or by at least doing something which would indicate that he was a participant in the commission of that criminal act at the time, it was committed.
Held: In the present case, accused No. 1 alone did the various acts which constituted the offences of which he was convicted.
The appellants took no part in the actual commission of those acts.
Whatever they might have done prior to the doing of those acts, did not form an ingredient of the offences committed by accused No. 1.
They could not be said to have participated in the commission of the criminal act which amounted to those various offences.
They could not be therefore held liable, by virtue of section 34 I.P.C., for the acts committed by accused No. 1 alone, even if those acts had been committed in furtherance of the common intention of all the three accused.
Therefore, the conviction of the appellants, for the various offences read with section 34 I.P.C. must be set aside.
Barendra Kumar Ghosh vs The King Emperor, (1929) L.R. 52 I.A. 40, Shree Kantiah Ramayya Munipalli vs State of Bombay ; and Jaikrishnadas Manohardas Desai vs State of Bombay , referred to.
