The appellant held office as the last Governor General of India.
He has been drawing Rs. 15,000/ per annum as pension while residing in the city of Madras.
The Corporation of Madras demanded profession tax from him under section 111(i)(b) of the City Municipal Act, 1919 for the year 1958 59 on the ground of his residence being within Madras city and his drawing the pension to which he was entitled.
The appellant addressed a communication to the Corporation asserting that this demand was illegal as the Corporation was empowered by the relevant constitutional provisions merely to levy a tax "on a profession, trade calling or employment" and that as he as a pensioner did not fall under any of these classes, the said demand was illegal.
The Corporation did not accept the contention of the appellant and therefore, the appellant filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition of the appellant.
The High Court granted a certificate under Art.133(1)(c ) of the Constitution to the appellant to file on appeal to the Supreme Court.
Hence the appeal.
The question before the Supreme Court was whetherthe Corporation was entitled to levy a tax on pensioners in respect of thepensions received by them in Madras City.
Held:(1) that the power of the Corporation to levy the tax is dependent on the subject of the tax being within the State Legislative power under the Constitution.
The present levy comes within the purview of item 60 in the State list in Schedule VIII of the Constitution, which reads as follows: "Taxes on profession, trades, callings and employments.
" Being a "pensioner" cannot be a "profession, trade, business or calling", nor could a tax on a person because he is in receipt of a pension be said to be a tax on 'employments".
The tax, therefore, under the last portion of sec.
111(1)(b) reading profession tax on persons "in receipt of any pension or income from investments" is nothing but a tax on income falling within Entry 82 of the Union List.
963 The taxes specified in item 60 are taxes on the carrying on of a profession, trade etc., and would, therefore, apply only to a case of present C. ' employment.
The mere fact that a person has previously been in a profession or carried on trade etc.
cannot justify a tax under this entry.
The tax on the receipt of pension or on the income from investments which is referred to in the last part of sec.
111(1) is in truth and substance a taxon income.
At the time the tax is levied the appellant pen sioner is inno employment but is only in receipt of income.
(ii) The present levy of tax cannot be saved by article 277 of the Constitution because the tax was a new levy and not a continuance of a tax which had been levied just prior to April 1, 1937.
On the facts of this case it was held that if the statutory charge to profession tax imposed on pensioners by the Act of 1919, was lifted by the Act of 1936, and the tax again came into operation only on April 1, 1937, it would follow that there was no "levy of the tax ' immediately before the commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act.
so as to bring it within the saving in section 143(2) of that Act.
Besides, the two circumstances, viz., that residence within the city for a specified period was made a condition of the liability to the tax, as well as the increase in the rates would both serve to emphasise that the levy was a new one, with a different texture and not a continuation of the tax which was leved just prior to April 1, 1937.
(iii)The mere fact that prior to 1st April, 1937 the Corporation had under Act of 1936 the power to bring the tax into force by a resolution does not on a proper construction of section 143(2) bring it within the range of those taxes or duties which "were being lawfully levied" prior to the commencement of Part III of the Government of India Act 1935, which alone are permitted to be continued to be levied notwithstanding that these duties were in the Federal Legislative List.
The mere existence of a power to bring a tax into operation, cannot be equated with "a tax which was being lawfully levied" before Part III of the Government of India Act, 1935.
The High Court erred in holding that section 292 of the Government of India Act applies to this case.
The Town Municipal Committee, Amravati vs Ramchandra Vasudeo Chimote, ; , South India Corporation (P) Ltd. V. The Secretary, Board of Revenue, Trivandrum, A.I.R. , relied on.
(iv)Under section 111(1) as amended, the tax could be levied only in accordance with the rules in Schedule IV and as those rules did not make a provision for the levy of a tax on pensioners, it would follow that the tax "was not being lawfully levied" on them.
The High Court erred in holding that such defect would be removed by section 18 of the Madras General Clauses Act.
(v)S. 142 A(1) of the Government of India Act, 1935 would assist the respondent 's case only if tax imposed were on a profession, trade, calling or employment.
In the present case, the tax is being imposed 664 on an income of a pensioner and so this provision has no application.
It is not the intention of Parliament that State might levy a tax on income and call it "profession" tax.
