The respondents in the above appeals are owners of certain lands which are to be compulsorily acquired udder Madras Lignite (Acquion of Land) Act, 1953.
This Act came into force on August 20, 53 before article 31 of the Constitution was amended by the Constituion (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955.
By the said Act substantially o provisions which are material to the present appeals were made.
,e first was that compensation for acquisition of lignite bearing lands der the Land Acquisition Act is to be assessed on the market value the land prevailing on August 28, 1947 and not on the date on which notification is issued under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act.
condly it was provided that in awarding compensation the value of non agricultural improvements commenced since April 28, 1947 win not taken into consideration.
In accordance with the above provisions, after issuing the notices as acquired under sections 4(1) and 6 of the Land Acquisition Act the Land acquisition Officer made awards regarding the lands of the respondents.
he respondents thereupon filed petitions under article 226 of the Constition before the High Court of Madras challenging the validity of the ward on the ground that the provisions of the Act relating to the ward of compensation violate article 31(2) of the Constitution [as it food before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, [955].
The High Court upheld the contention.
In appeal, Held: (i) The validity of the Act impugned in the present appeal ,is to be examined in the light of the provisions of article 31 of the constitution as they stood before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955.
Chiranjit Lai Chowdhuri V. Union of India, [1950] S.C.R. 869, State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose, ; , and State of lest Bengal vs Mrs. Bela Banerjee, ; , relied.
937 (ii) The principle laid down in Bela Banerjee 's case, that the ceiling on the compensation without reference to the value of the land at the time of the acquisition is arbitrary and cannot be regarded as due compensation in letter and spirit within the requirement of article 31(2), would apply to the impugned Act.
Fixation of compensation for compulsory acquisition of land notified many years after that date on the market value prevailing on the date on which lignite was discovered is wholly arbitrary and inconsistent with the letter and spirit of article 31(2) as it stood before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955.
(iii) Any principle for determination of compensation denying to the owner all increments in value between a fixed date and the date of issue of the notice under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act must prima facie, be regarded as denying him the true equivalent of the land which is ex propriated and it is for the State to show that fixation of compensation on the market value on an anterior date does not amount to a violation of the Constitutional guarantee.
In the present appeals no materials have been placed by the State which would support any such case.
(iv) Denial of compensation for the value of non agricultural improvements would be denying to him just compensation for the loss suffered by him on account of compulsory acquisition of his holding and would amount to infringement of article 31(2) of the Constitution.
