The appellant is a bus operator in the State of Madras.
On an invitation for applications for the grant of two stage carriage permits he submitted his applications along with many others.
The State Transport Authority considered the merits of the application awarding marks in accordance with the principles prescribed by Madras G.O. No. 1298, dated April 28, 1956 issued under section 43A of the inserted by the Madras Amending Act 20 of 1948.
The Transport Authority on this basis granted the two permits to the appellant.
Against this order a number of appeals were filed by some of the unsuccessful applicants including respondents Nos. 2 and 3 in the present appeal.
The Appellate Tribunal re allotted marks in accordance with the above G.O. and respondents 2 and 3 having secured the maximum number of marks were granted the permits.
On the rejection of a petition under article 226 of the Constitution and after appealing without success to a Division Bench the appellant applied for a certificate to appeal to this Court which rejected.
The present appeal was filed on special leave granted by this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant before this Court that since Madras G.O. No. 1298, dated April 28, 1956, purports to issue direction to the Transport Authority in the discharge of its quasi judicial functions it is beyond the powers conferred by section 43A of the which authorises only the issue of directions to the said authority in the discharge of its administrative functions and therefore it is bad.
Held, (i) Section 43A confers power on the State Government to issue orders and directions to the State Transport Authority only in relation to its administrative functions.
M/s. Raman and Raman vs The State of Madras [1959] 2 S.C.R. 227, relied on.
(ii)It is well settled that sections 47, 48, 57, 60, 64 and 64A deal with quasi judicial functions and when the transport authorities are dealing with applications for permits and evaluating the respective claims of the parties, the transport authorities are discharging quasi judicial functions and their orders are quasi judicial orders subject to the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226.
L/P(D)1SCI 1 2 New Prakash Transport Co. Ltd. vs Suwarna Transport Co. Ltd. M/s Raman and Raman Ltd. vs State of Madras, , B. Abdulla Rowther vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, Madras, A.I.R. 1959, S.C. 896, relied on.
(iii) In interpreting section 43A it is legitimate to assume that the legislature intended to respect the basic and elementary postulate of the, rule of law that in exercising their authority and discharging their quasi judicial functions, the tribunals constituted under the Act must be left absolutely free to deal with the matter according to their best judgement.
It is of the essence of fair and objective administration of law that the decision of judges or tribunals must be absolutely unfettered by any extraneous guidance by the executive or administrative wing of the State.
(iv) The impugned order is outside the purview of section 43A inasmuch as it purports to give directions in respect of matters which have been entrusted to the tribunals constituted under the Act and which have to be dealt with by them in quasi judicial manner.
(v) The decision of the appellate Tribunal is solely based on the provisions of the impugned order and since the said order is invalid, the decision is also bad.
