The petitioners applied for the consent of the Central Government under section 87B of the Code of Civil Procedure to sue the Maharaja of Tripura, Ruler of a former Indian State, which has merged with India.
They wanted to implead the Union of India as well, as party to the suit as their case was that they were entitled, as members of a joint Hindu family to receive either from the said Ruler or from the Union appropriate maintenance allowance under the custom of the Ruling family.
Consent having been refused, they applied to this Court under article 32 of the Constitution.
Their case was that section 87B of the Code in granting exemption to Rulers of former Indian States from being sued except with the consent of the Central Government contravened articles 14 and 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Held, that in view of the previous decision of this Court section 87B of the Code of Civil Procedure was no longer open to challenge under article 14 of the Constitution.
Mohan Lal Jain vs His Highness Maharaja Shri Sawai Man Singhji [1962] 1 S.C.R. 702, referred to.
Regard being had to the legislative and historical back ground of section 87B of the Code, it could not be said that, that section in giving special treatment to ex Rulers had imposed an unreasonable restriction on the petitioner 's fundamental rights.
Motivated as it was by the sole object of bringing the entire country including the former Indian States under one Central Government, it must be held to be reasonable and in the interest of the general public.
But considered in the light of the basic principle of equality before law it would be odd to allow the section to continue prospectively for all time to come.
It would therefore, be for the Central Government to consider whether it should not be confined to dealings and transactions previous to January 26, 1950.
Nor should the section be used to stifle claims except such as are clearly far fetched or frivolous and consent should ordinarily if not as matter of course, be granted in the case of a genuine dispute which prima facie appears to be triable by a court of law such as the present one.
