The appellant who was granted a license to import "iron and steel bolts, nuts, set screws, machine screws and machine studs, excluding bolts, nuts and screws adopted for use on cycles", imported nuts and bolts which were the components of "Jackson Type Single bolt oval plate belts fasteners" which were described in the bill of Entry as "Stove Bolts and Nuts.
" The importation of "Jackson Type Single bolt oval plate belt fasteners" had been prohibited.
When the goods were attempted to be passed through the customs, the collector issued notice to the appellant to show cause why penalties should not be imposed on him(a) for misdescribing the goods and (b) for attempting to import goods without a proper import license.
After receiving his explanation, penalties were imposed on the appellant.
One of the facts which the Collector of Customs bad taken into consideration in arriving at the conclusion that the nuts and bolts imported were in reality the actual components of the prohibited articles was that washers, the third component of the prohibited articles were imported by a firm owned or controlled by close relations of the appellant.
An appeal to the Central Board of Revenue from the order of the Collector imposing the penalties was dismissed.
Thereafter, the appellant filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court which was dismissed in limine.
On appeal by special leave: Held: (i) A component part which has no use other than as a component of an article whose importation is prohibited is included in a ban or restriction as regards the importation,of that article.
D. P. Anand vs M/s. T. M. Thakore and Co., Appeal No. 4 of 1959 of Bombay High Court referred to.
(ii) There was no force in the contention that the decision of the Collector of Customs was vitiated by a patent error, in that he misconstrued the scope of Entry 22 of Part 1 of the Import Trade Control Hand book.
A court dealing with a petition under Article 226 is not sitting in appeal over the decision of the Customs Authorities and therefore the correctness of the conclusion reached by those authorities on the appreciation of the several items in the Hand book or in the Indian Tariff Act which is referred to in these items, is not a matter which falls within the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
63 A. V. Venkateswaran, Collector of Customs, Bombay vs Ramchand Sobhraj Wadhiwani; , , referred to.
(iii)Taking into consideration the importation of washers by another firm was merely evidence to confirm the conclusion reached by the Collector that the nuts and bolts imported were in reality the components of the prohibited article.
The charge which the importer was called upon to answer did specify the nature of offence which he was alleged to have committed and if the evidence which the appellant could have rebutted was brought on record and considered in his presence and that evidence conclusively proved the real nature of the articles imported, there could be no justifiable complaint of violation of the principles of natural justice.
