A writ petition was filed in the Orissa, High Court by the father of the appellant challenging the validity of Shri Jagannath Temple Act, 1954.
The petition was dismissed by High Court which held that the Act was valid and constitutional except section 28(2)(f).
The High Court struck down that provision and upheld the constitutionality of the rest of the Act.
The appellant came to this Court after obtaining a certificate of fitness to appeal to Supreme Court.
The contentions raised before this Court were that the Act was discriminatory as the Jagannath Temple alone had been singled out for special treatment as compared to other temples in the State of Orissa.
The Act took away the sole management of the Temple which had so far been vested in the appellant or his ancestors.
section 15 (1) of the Act interfered with the religious affairs of the temple.
The validity of sections 11, 19, 21, 21A and 30 of the Act was also attacked.
Dismissing the appeal, Held: There is no violation of article 14 of the Constitution.
The Jagannath Temple occupies a unique position in the State of Orissa, and is a temple of national importance and no other temple in that State can compare with it.
It stands in a class by itself and considering the fact that it attracts pilgrims from all over India in large numbers, it could be the subject of special consideration by the State Government.
A law may be constitutional even though it related to a single individual if on account of special circumstances or reasons applicable to him and not applicable to others, that single individual may be treated as a class by himself.
(ii) There was no violation of article 19(1) (f) or article 31 (2) of the Constitution.
All that the Act has done is that it has taken away the sole right of the appellant to manage the property of the Temple and another body has been set up in its place with the appellant as its Chairman.
Such a process cannot be said to constitute the acquisition of the extinguished office or of the vesting of the rights in the person holding that office.
The appellant occupied a dual position as Superintendent and Adya Sevak.
His position as Superintendent hers gone and in that place he has become the Chairman of the Committee set up under section 6.
The position of the applicant as Adya Sevak is safeguarded by section 8 of the Act inasmuch as the rights and privileges in respect of Gajapati Maharaja Seva axe protected even though he may cease to be Chairman on account of his minority or on account of some other reason.
(iii) section 15(1) of the Act does not interfere with the religious, affairs of the Temple.
Sevapuja of the Temple has two aspects.
One aspect is the provision of materials and that is a secular, 33 function.
The second aspect is the performance of the Sevapuja and other rights as required by religion.
section 15(1) has nothing to do with the second aspect which is the religious aspect of Seva Raj puja.
While section 15(1) imposes a duty on the committee to look after the secular aspect of the Sevapuja, it leave the religious part entirely untouched.
(iv) Ss. 11, 19 and 21 were valid provisions and could not be attacked sections 5 and 6 constituting the committee in place of the Raja, were valid.
21A and 30 were also valid.
articles 27 and.
28 had nothing to do with the matter dealt with under Act.
It was not open to the appellant to argue that the Act was bad as it was hit by article 26(d).
No such contention was _properly raised in the High Court.
Tilkayat, Shri Govindlal ji vs State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. , referred to.
