The Income tax Officer (respondent No.(1) served a notice under section 22 of the Income tax Act on the appellant.
Upon the receipt of the notice, the appellant appeared before the Income tax Officer.
The appellant pleaded before the Income tax Officer that it did not fall under any of the five categories of assessees under section 3 of the Income tax Act.
The appellant also raised the contention that it was a local authority exempt from income tax.
All these contentions were rejected by respondent No. 1 with the result that the impugned orders of assessment came to be passed.
The appellant filed Writ Petitions before the High Court in which it challenged the impugned orders of assessment passed by respondent No. 1.
In its Writ Petitions, the appellant claimed an ,order, writ or other appropriate direction quashing the assessment orders passed by respondent No. 1.
The High Court dismissed these writ petitions.
The High Court held that the appellant could not claim the exemption under article 289(1) because it was not a state owned Corporation.
The High Court granted a certificate under article 133 of the Constitution and hence the appeal.
Held: (i) article 289 of the Constitution consists of three clauses.
The first clause confers exemption from union taxation on the property and income of a State.
Clause (2) then provides that the income from trade or busi ness carried on by the Government of a State or on its behalf which would not have been taxable under cl.
(1), can be taxed, provided a law is made by Parliament in that behalf.
In other words cl.
(2) is an exception to cl.
Clause (3) then empowers Parliament to declare by law that any trade or business would be taken out of the purview of cl.
(2) and restored to the area covered by cl.
(1) by declaring that the said trade or business is incidental to the ordinary functions of Government.
In other words, cl.
(3) is an exception to the exception prescribed by cl.
(ii) A trading activity carried on by the corporation (appellant) is not a trading activity carried on by the State departmentally, nor is it a trading activity carried on by a State through its agents appointed in that behalf because according to statute the Corporation has a personality of its own and this personality is distinct from that of the State or other shareholders.
All the relevant provisions of the impugned Act also emphatically bring out the separate personality of the Corporation.
Section 30 of the Act also does not suggest that the income of the 18 Corporation is the income of the State.
All that section 30 requires is that a part of that income may be entrusted to the State Government for a specific purpose of road development.
Therefore, the income derived by the appellant from its trading activity cannot be said to be the income of the State either under cl.
(1) or cl.
(2) of article 289.
The American doctrine of the immunity of State agencies or instrumentalities from Federal taxation has no application to the present case.
Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 691, distinguished.
Mark Graves, John J. Merrill and John P. Hennessy vs People of the State of New York Upon the Relation of James B.O 'keefe, ; and Clallan County vs United States of America, ; , no application.
State of West Bengal vs Union of India [1964] 1 S.C.R. 371, relied on.
M 'Culloch vs Maryland, ; , Bank of Toronto vs Lambe and Webb vs Outrim [1907] A.C. 81, referred to.
Tamlin vs Hansaford, , relied on.
(iii)It is hardly necessary for the Act to make a provision that tax,if chargeable would be paid.
In fact, the Companies Act which deals with companies does not make such a specific provision, though no one can seriously suggest that there would be repugnancy between the provisions of the Companies Act and the Income tax Act.
There is no repugnancy between the charging section of the Income tax Act and sections 29 and 30 of the Act.
All that sections 29 and 30 of the impugned Act purport to do is to provide for the administration of the funds vesting in the Corporation and their disposal.
These provisions are not inconsistent with the liability to pay tax which is imposed by the Income tax Act.
