The respondent was appointed in 1949 a Tahvildar in the District of Azamgarh in the State of Uttar Pradesh and he worked, in the Cash Department of the Government Treasury of that District.
His appointment was made by Government Treasurer with the approval of Collector of the District.
In 1956, he was removed from service under instructions from the Collector.
He filed a writ petition in the High Court in which he challenged the legality of the order removing him from service on the ground that he was a member of the civil service of the State of Uttar Pradesh or held a civil post under the State and hence was not liable to be removed from service without being afforded a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him under article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the respondent was an employee of the State Government and as the provisions of article 311(2) had not been observed, the order terminating his services was illegal.
The appellant has come to this Court by special leave.
The only question raised before this Court was, whether a Tahvildar appointed in the Cash Department in the State of Uttar Pradesh is a civil servant of the State of Uttar Pradesh or holds a civil post in the State.
Dismissing the appeal, Held:The respondent was a civil servant of the State of Uttar Pradesh and as the requirements of article 311(2) were not conformed to, the order terminating his services was invalid.
The Government Treasurer is a civil servant of the State holding a specific post and he is authorised by the terms of his employment to employ Tahvildars to assist him in discharging his duties.
Payment of remuneration to Tahvildars is for services rendered in the Cash Department of the District Treasury of the State.
The Tahvildars receive their remuneration directly from the State and are subject to the control of the District Officers in the matter of transfer, removal and disciplinary action.
Employment of Tahvildars being for the purpose of carrying out the work of the State, even though a degree of control is exercised by the Government Treasurer and the appointment is in the first instance made by the Treasurer subject to the approval of the District Officers, the Tahvildar is entitled to the protection of article 311.
Whether in a given case, the relationship of master and ser vant exists is a question of fact which must be determined on a consideration of all material and relevant circumstances having a bearing on that question.
In general, selection by the employer,.
coupled with payment by him of remuneration or wages, the, 90 right to control the method of work and a power to suspend or remove from employment are indicative of the relation of master and servant.
However, co existence of all these indicia is not predicted in every case to make the relation one of master and ,servant.
In special classes of employment, the contract of service may exist, even in the absence of one or more of these indicia.
But ordinarily, the right of an employer to control the method of doing the work and the power of superintendence and control may be treated as strongly indicative of the relation of master and servant, for that relation imports the power not only to direct the doing of some work, but also to direct the manner in which work is to be done.
If the employer has such power, prima facie, the relation is one of master and servant.
Shivanandan Sharma vs The Punjab National Bank Ltd. ; , Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State of Saurashtra ; and M/s Piyare Lal Adisivar Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi ; , referred to.
