The appellants constitute a partnership engaged in mining and they held a prospecting license as well as a certificate of approval from the State Government under the Mineral Concessions Rules, 1949 framed under the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948.
The approval certificate was granted for one year and until December 1955 it had been renewed from year to year when the State Government refused to renew it on the ground that the partners composing the firm had changed.
Thereupon the appellants applied under r. 57 of the Minerals Concession Rules to the Union Government for the review of the order of the State Government refusing to renew the certificate of approval.
While this application Was pending the Union Government corresponded with the State Government and gathered information and received the latter 's remarks regarding the merits of the matter behind the appellants ' back.
The request made by the appellants for copies of the correspondence and for an opportunity to be heard was refused by the Union Government.
Ultimately the Union Government refused the review application on the ground that there was no valid ground to interfere with the decision of the State Government.
The present appeal was filed on special leave granted by this 'Court.
On behalf of the appellants it was contended that the Union Government while disposing of an application under r. 57(2) in terms of r. 59 acts as a quasi judicial authority and the ,order which was passed taking into consideration the report of the State Government behind the appellants ' back and without affording a reasonable opportunity for presenting their case was contrary to natural justice and was therefore void.
Held:(i) The Union Government when disposing of an ap plication for review under r. 59 is functioning as a quasi judicial authority.
Shivji Nathubhai vs Union of India, , relied ,on.
(ii)Though Shivji Nathubhai 's case was concerned with a case where an order had been passed prejudicial to the respon dents before the Central Government without affording them L/P(D)1 SCI 4. 98 an opportunity to meet the case of an applicant for review the same principle would apply even where a petition for review is rejected based on materials which were not made available to the applicant for review.
(iii) Applying the above principle to the present case the order of the Central Government is vitiated as being contrary to the principles of natural justice in that the decision was rendered without affording to the appellants a reasonable opportunity of being heard which is a sine qua non of a fair hearing.
