The appellants were directors of Palai Central Bank Ltd. OD an application made by the Reserve Bank of India the High Court of Kerala ordered the winding up of the Bank and appointed an Official Liquidator who filed a number of reports under section 45G(1) of Banking Companies Act, 1949.
The appellants filed their objections and the learned single Judge after hearing the parties made an order directing the public examination of the appellants under section 45G(2) of the Act.
After appealing without success to a Division Bench the appellants filed the present ,appeals on a certificate granted by the High Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the provi sion of section 45G(2) in as much as it would compel a person ordered to be publicly examined to be a witness against himself is violative of article 20(3) of the Constitution and therefore bad.
It was further contended that the acts or omissions alleged as contemplated by section 45G(1) should be acts or omissions which are prohibited by law or enjoined by law and on this basis the reports of the Liquidator have not made out a case for public examination.
The third contention was that the High Court has misconstrued the effect of the provisions of section 45G and has refused to give an opportunity to the appellants.
Held:A person examined publicly under section 45G may in some cases be compelled to be a witness against himself and thus one elementof article 20(3) is satisfied.
But it is only when a person can be said to have been accused of an offence that the prohibition prescribed by article 20(3) comes into operation.
If a person who is not accused of any offence, is compelled to give evidence and it ultimately leads to an accusation against him, that would not be a case which would attract the provisions of article 20(3).
After the examination under section 45G is over and materials adduced before the court have been examined by the court an occasion may or may not arise to take any action.
In such a case, what may conceivably follow cannot said to be existing before the order is passed under section 45G; an accusation may follow the enquiry but an accusation is not in existence at the time when public examination is ordered.
Hence the appellant cannot be said to have been accused.
Since the essential condition precedent for the application of article 20(3) is absent in all cases covered by section 45C it cannot be said that section 45G is violative of article 20(3) of the Constitution.
138 Mallala Suryanarayana vs Vijaya Commercial Bank Ltd. decided on 26 10 61 (C.A. No. 286/59) and a a Narayaulal Bansilal vs Maneck Phiroz Mistry and Anr., ; , referred to.
(ii) The acts or omissions contemplated under section 45G need not necessarily be criminal, they may even include acts or omissions which are commercially unsound or unwise.
The court has only to see whether the acts or omissions "as to the promo tion or formation or the conduct of the business of the banking company or as to his conduct and dealings in so far as they relate to the affairs of the banking company" have led to loss to the banking company.
For this, what the court can and should do is to read the report submitted by the Official Liquidator, consider whether the opinion expressed in the report appears to be prima facie reasonable, hear the explanation of the persons concerned; and find Out Prima facie whether the explanation tendered by the person is sufficient to reject the liquidator 's ' request for such person 's public examination and whether on the whole it is just and beneficial to the interest of the banking company that public examination should be held.
The High Court has dealt with the matter precisely in this way in the present case and hence the appellants cannot have any grievance.
Ex parte George Stapylton Barnes, , Sir Fazal Ibrahim Rahimtoola vs Appabhai C. Desai, A.I.R. 1949 Bom.
339 and The Ahmedabad Advance Spinning and Weaving Co. vs Lakshmishankar, I.L.R. , distinguished.
(iii) Applying the above principles and examining the reports submitted by the Official Liquidator it is clear that the courts below have taken into account those reports and after considering the objections raised by the appellant, they have come to the right conclusion that the appellants should face a public examination.
