The father of the appellant owned considerable agricultural property in Pakistan and he with the members of his family moved over to India on partition.
The appellant 's father had some unsatisfied claim for allotment and on December 29.
1955 he was allotted some plots in Urban area within a certain municipality.
The appellant 's father died in 1952 and the allotment made was actually to the appellant in lieu of the claim of his father.
On the allotment being made, a sanad was issued to the appellant by the Managing Officer.
When the appellant tried to take possession of these lands, disputes were raised by respondents Nos. 4 and 5.
These respondents moved the Assistant Settlement Commissioner for cancellation of the allotment on the ground that these disputed plots were within an "urban area" within the meaning of r. 2(h) of the Displaced Persons, Compensation and Rehabilitation Rules, 1955 and, therefore, the allotment to the appellant was contrary to law.
The Assistant Settlement Commissioner accepted the contention of the res pondents and allowed the appeal and cancelled the allotment.
The appellant then applied to the Chief Settlement Com missioner in revision.
He rejected the petition.
Then the appellant moved a petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution before the High Court.
This petition was also dismissed.
the High Court granted certificate of fitness under article 133 of the Constitution and hence the appeal.
Held:(i) Where an order making an allotment was set aside by the Assistant Commissioner or Settlement Commissioner the title which was obtained on the basis of the continuance of that sanad or order also fell with it.
Shri Mithoo Shahani vs Union of India, ; , relied on.
(ii)The contention of the appellant that r. 2(h) of the Displaced Persons Compensation and Rehabilitation Rules, 1955, was unconstitutional as contravening article 14 of the Constitution must fail.
This contention is based on the basis of the proviso to Rule 2(h).
Rule 2(h) was framed under section 40 of the Act.
This rule along with other rules came into force on May 21, 1955.
The allotment was made to the appellant on December 29, 1955 and the Sanad was issued two days later.
In other words the allotment in favour of the appellant was after the rule came into force and was not one "already made" as stated in the proviso to r. 2(h).
Therefore, if on the date of the allotment the land was in an urban area, the allotment would be governed by the main para of the definition and the proviso, had no application.
193 The discrimination is said to consist in the rule having drawn a dividing line at the date when it came into force, for determining whether the allotment was valid or not.
Such a contention is patently self contradictory.
Every law must have a beginning or time from which it operates, and no rule which seeks to change the law can be held invalid for the mere reason that it effects an alternation in the law.
It is sometimes possible to plead injustice in a rule which is made to operate with retrospective effect, but to say that a rule which operates prospectively is invalid because thereby a difference is made between the past and the future, is one which cannot be accepted.
