The petitioner, a merchant, carrying on business in "bullion and specie" and gold and silver ornaments was a registered 'dealer ' under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947.
The Government purporting to exercise its authority under section 6 of the said Act issued a notification on July 1, 1949 exempting certain articles from the operation of the charging section of that Act.
Under the notification gold ornaments were ordered to be exempted from sales tax when the manufacturer selling them charges separately for the value of gold and the cost of manufacture.
The petitioner filed his returns before the Sales tax Officer and claimed exemption of sales tax under the said notification.
Up to June 1952, the claim for exemption was upheld.
Subsequently, however, these assessments were reopened under section 12(7) of the Act and it was claimed that the deductions made on certain sale transactions of gold ornaments were not justified and the petitioner had escaped assessment.
The petitioner pleaded that lie was entitled to exemption, because he belonged to the class of manufacturers to which the notification referred.
The Sales tax Officer disallowed the petitioner 's contention.
The petitioner then challenged the said decision by preferring appeals, but the said appeals were also dismissed.
Pending these appeals, similar assessments made in respect of other dealers including the petitioner were challenged by writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court upheld the petitioner 's case and issued writs directing the Sales tax Officer to allow the petitioners ' claim for exemption.
After this judgement was pronounced, the impugned Act was passed by the legislature on August 1, 1961 and was published on September 18, 1961, containing one operative provision in section 2.
It provided that notwithstanding anything contained in any judgement, decree or order of any court, the word 'manufacturer ' occuring against item 33 in the schedule to the notification of the Government dated July 28, 1947 as amended by another notification of the 1st July, 1949 shall mean and shall always be deemed to have meant a person who by his own labour works up materials into suitable forms and a person who owns or runs a manufactory for the purpose of business with respect to the articles manufactured therein.
The validity of this section was challenged in the present writ petition.
186 It was urged (i) that since the exemption was granted by the State Government by virtue of the Powers conferred on it by section 6, it was not open to the legislature to take away that exemption retrospectively; (ii) that the provision in section 2 of the impugned Act was discriminatory and as such contravened the equality before the law guaranteed by article 14 and (iii) that the retrospective operation of the impugned section should be struck down as unconstitutional, because it imposes an unreasonable restriction on the petitioner 's fundamental right under article 19 (1) (g) Held: (i) What the legislature had purported to do by section 2 of the impugned Act, was to make the intention of the notification clear.
And, if the State Government was given the power either to grant or withdraw the exemption, that could not possibly affect the legislature 's competence to make any provision in that behalf either prospectively or retrospectively.
(ii) The notification as interpreted by section 2 of the impugned Act benefits the artisans who produce ornaments themselves and who run manufactories.
That is why the main object of granting exemption can be said to be achieved by holding that ,manufacturer ' means either a manufacturer properly so called or one who engages artisans to manufacture gold ornaments.
In the present case the petitioners were not directly concerned with the production of ornaments, and admittedly, they did not produce the said ornaments themselves.
Therefore, the persons who get the benefit of the exemption notification as a result of the provisions of section 2 of the impugned Act cannot be said to belong to the same class as that of the petitioners.
The two categories are distinct and there is no sameness or similarity between them, and if that is so, the main argument on the basis of article 14 does not subsist.
(ii) It would be difficult to accept the argument that because the retrospective operation may operate harshly in some cases, therefore, the legislation itself is invalid.
In the circumstances of the present case it would not be possible to hold that by making the provision of section 2 of the impugned Act retrospective the legislature has imposed a restriction on the petitioner 's fundamental rights under article 19(1) (g) which is not reasonable and is not in the interest of the general public.
