The appellant, a Cotton Mill in Indore in Holkar State was taxed in respect of profits, gains and income under the Indore Industrial Tax Rules, 1927 by the then Ruler of Indore.
The Holkar State merged into the State of Madhya Bharat which acceded to India.
The Rajpramukh of the new State promulgated an Ordinance No. 1 of 1948 to provide for peace and good Government of the State.
This Ordinance was superseded by Act 1 of 1948.
Thereafter on December 28, 1949, me Government issued a Notification under r. 18 of the Tax Rules purporting to make rules under r. 17 thereof.
These rules made certain amendments in the Tax Rules.
The State of Madhya Bharat became one of the Part B States on January 26, 1950.
From April 1, 1950, Finance Act No. 25 of 1950 came into force and applied to Madhya Bharat also.
According to its provision, the Tax Rules came to be repealed from after the accounting year ending on March 31, 1949 and assessments could only be made under the Tax Rules upto the end of the accounting period ending on or before March 31, 1949.
It further provided that even the assessments for the years previous to the accounting year ending on March 31, 1949 could only be made by the corresponding authorities under the Income tax Act, and that appeals would lie to the corresponding authorities under the Income tax Act; no levy and assessment could be made by the authorities under the repealed law and no appeal would lie to the authorities or Court under that law.
This provision as to the authorities competent to make assessments was lost sight of with the result that assessments were made for the years in dispute which were all before the accounting year ending on March 31, 1949 by the authorities under the Tax Rules, as they were before their repeal.
When this mistake was discovered, Parliament passed the Madhya Bharat Taxes on Income (Validation) Act, No. 38 of 1954.
The appellant then challenged the validity of the assessments under the Tax Rules, on the grounds: (1) that the amendments of the Tax Rules on December 28, 1949 were invalid as such amendments could not be made under r. 17 of the Tax Rules, as was purported to be done; (2) even if the amendments were good, they could not have retroactive effect and could not take away the vested right of appeal; (3) as after the Finance Act, 1950, assessments were made by the old officers appointed tinder the Tax Rules and not by the corresponding officers under the Income tax Act, the assessments were invalid and the Validating Act could not validate them because, (i) the Validating Act itself was discriminatory and was hit by article 14, and (ii) because in any case it did not apply to the present assessments.
The High Court repelled all these contentions and dismissed the writ petition.
On appeal by certificate this Court, Held: (i) The amendments which were made in the Tax Rules on December 28, 1948, could be justified on the basis of Act 1 of 1948.
All that section 5 of Act 1 of 1948 requires is the publication of the 859 regulation made thereunder and their being made by Government, and that has been complied with in this case.
There is no other formality required for making regulations and therefore, even though there was a mistake in the opening part of the Notification of December 28, 1949, the amendments made in the Tax Rules can be upheld under section 5 of Act 1 of 1948 as regulations.
(ii) Even a vested right of appeal can be taken away by express legislation or by legislation which, though it may not expressly repeal the vested right of appeal, has the effect of such repeal by necessary implication.
Though the right of second appeal on facts is taken away by the new rule 13 inserted in the Tax Rules, such right is taken away by legislation by necessary intendment.
Therefore, the right of second appeal after the amendment must be confined in all cases by necessary intendment to questions of law only.
(iii) The Validating Act is not hit by article 14.
The present cases are with reference to years 1940 48, that is before the accounting year ending on March 31, 1949.
The assessments in these cases were carried on by the old officers under the old law and the Validating Act specifically validates such assessments.
In these circumstances it cannot be said that these assessments have not been validated by the Validating Act.
