The appellant company owns several estates wherein tea is grown and it was assessed to sales tax by the Sales Tax Officer in respect of the tea sold by it during the years 1954 55 and 1955 56.
An appeal filed by the appellant was rejected by the, Appellate Assistant commissioner on the ground that the tea when sold was admittedly in godowns in the State of Travancore Cochin and that consequently the sales must be deemed to have taken place within the State of Travancore Cochin and hence liable to be included in the taxable turn over.
When a further appeal was taken to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, it was held that the property in the goods sold passed at Fort Cochin in Madras State on the fall of the hammer at the auction and hence the same was not taxable.
The State filed a revision petition to the High Court.
While the High Court accepted the finding of the Tribunal that the property in the goods sold passed at Fort.
Cochin on the fall of the hammer at the auction, it differed from the Tribunal as regards the effect of the circumstance that the tea sold was, at the point of sale, physically in godowns situated in the State of Travancore Cochin and held the sales to be taxable.
The appellant came to this Court after obtaining a certificate of fitness from the High Court.
The only question argued before this court was whether a sale of tea effected by the appellant by auction at Fort Cochin in Madras State was a sale outside the State of Travancore Cochin orinside it and whether the same was taxable or not.
Accepting.the appeal.
HELD: No sales tax was to be levied in this case as the sales took place outside the State of Travancore Cochin.
The test for determining whether a sale is inside or outside a State is where the property in the goods passed and in the present case the property in the goods passed in Fort Cochin in Madras State on the fall of the hammer at the auction.
The point about the property not having passed in the Madras State was not argued before the High Court and was also not urged in the statement of case filed by respondent and hence the same was not allowed to be argued in the Supreme Court.
Per Shah.
The property in the goods passed at Fort Cochin in Madras State and as the goods were delivered not for the purpose of consumption in any particular State, the sales were not inside Travancore Cochin but were outside the 392 State and were as held by this Court in A. V. Thomas & Co. vs Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax and Sales Tax Trivandrum, 14 S.T.C. 363, not liable to be taxed under the Travancore Cochin General Sales Tax Act, 1950.
The doctrine of territorial nexus had full play in sales tax legislation under the Government of India, Act, 1935 and was not abrogated by the enactment of Art, 286 of the Constitution.
It continued to be in operation in the interregnum between the promulgation of the Constitution and the amendment of article 286 by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956.
It also applies now subject to certain modifications.
Parliament has been given the power to formulate principles for determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes place outside the State or in the course of the import of the goods into or export of the goods out of the territory of India.
Exercising the power under cl.
(2) Parliament has enacted the and by section 4(2) the doctrine of territorial nexus has been given legislative recognition though in somewhat limited form.
Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax and Salestax, Trivandrum vs A.V. Thomas & Co., I.L.R. 1960 Kerala 1395; India Copper Corporation Limited vs State of Bihar, ; ; A. V. Thomas & Co. Ltd. vs Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax and Sales tax, Trivandrum 1953 Supp.
2 S.C.R. 608 363; Poppat Lal Shah vs The State of Madras, ; ; and the Tata Iron & Steel Company Ltd. vs The State of Bihar , referred to.
