The respondent is a manufacturer of cotton yarn and is registered as a dealer under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
This act came into force on April 1, 1948.
Under this Act, sales tax was payable on sales of cotton yarn at a uniform rate of 3 pies in a rupee.
Under section 3(A) of the Act the Government of U.P. issued a notification declaring that with effect from June 9, 1948, the Sales Tax would be charged at the rate of six pies per rupee in respect of sales of the cotton yam.
In the present case, the assessee had opted under section 7 of the Act to be assessed on the turnover of previous year.
The Sales Tax Officer held on the basis of the notification dated June 9, 1948, that the rate of three pies per rupee in respect of sales of cotton yarn was to apply in the year of assessment for the first 69 days and for the remaining part of the year the rate of six pies per rupee was to apply.
The decision of the Sales Tax Officer was affirmed by the Judge (Revisions) Sales Tax.
The Judge referred the case to the High Court.
On reference the High Court held on the basis of its judgment in Modi Food Products Ltd. that the rate of three pies per rupee would apply for the assessment of 1948 49 because the assessee had opted under section 7 to be assessed on the basis of the turnover of the previous year.
In the meantime the legislature of Uttar Pradesh by Act III of 1963 enacted section 31 which makes Sales tax exigible from an assessee who has opted to pay tax on the turnover of the previous year, as if the altered rates were in force during the previous year.
The amendment is given retroactive operation and applies to assessments pending or closed.
The question for consideration before this Court was whether this Amending Act would apply to the present assessment.
Held:(i) The law found incorporated in section 31 by Amending Act III of 1963 would apply to the present case.
This Court in giving its opinion on the question in the light of the amending Act is seeking to apply a legislative provision which was, by express enactment, in force at the time when the liability arose, for section 31 enacted by Act III of 1963 is to be deemed to have been in operation at all material times in supersession of the previous law declared by this Court in Modi Sugar Mills Ltd. 's case.
This Court is, therefore, not seeking to apply any law to the question posed before the High Court which was not in force on the date of the transaction which is the subject matter of the reference Modi Food Products Ltd. vs Commissioner of Sales tax, U.P. A.I.R. 1956 All.
35 and Commissioner of Sales tax, U.P. vs Modi Sugar Mills Ltd.; , explained.
384 (ii)When the question has been referred to the High Court and in the meantime the law has been amended with retroactive operation, it would be the duty of the High Court to apply the law so amended as if it applies.
By taking notice of the law which has been substituted for the original provision, the High Court is giving effect to the legislative intent and does no more than what must be deemed to be necessarily implicit in the question referred by the Tribunal, provided the question is couched in terms of sufficient amplitude to cover an enquiry into the question in the light of the amended law, and the enquiry does not necessitate investigation of fresh facts.
M/s. Chatturam Horilram Ltd. vs Commissioner of Incometax, Bihar and Orissa, ; and M/s. Rampur Distillery Chemical Works Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P., I.T. Reference No. 362/58 dt.
17 1 64, distinguished.
