The petitioner was serving as an officiating Teleprinter Supervisor at Jaipur when the employees of the Posts and Telegraphs Department went on strike from the midnight of July 11, 1960, throughout India and there was a similar strike at Jaipur.
The petitioner 's case was that he was on duty that day from 12 noon to 8 p.m. and after his duty was over, he did not go home but went to the dormitory where he fell asleep as he was tired.
On hearing some noise he woke up at 11 30 p.m. and wanted to go home but was arrested by the police under the Essential Services Maintenance Ordinance, No. 1 of 1960.
The criminal charge was however withdrawn.
On July 21, 1960, a chargesheet was served on the petitioner in the following terms: "That Shri Radhey Shyam Sharma I C/S Telegraphist, CTO Jaipur committed gross misconduct in that on the midnight of the 11th July, 1960, he took part in a demonstration in furtherance of the strike of the P. & T. Employees in violation of the orders dated 8 7 1960 issued by the Government of India under the 'Essential Services Maintenance Ordinance, 1960 (1 of 1960) ' prohibiting strikes in any Postal, telegraph or telephone service".
The enquiry officer found him guilty of the charge and ordered that his pay should be reduced in the time scale by three stage,% for a period of two years and on restoration the period of reduction was not to operate to postpone his future increments.
0n appeal, the Director General considered the whole matter on merits and rejected the appeal.
In this Court it was urged that the punishment imposed upon the petitioner was violative of his fundamental rights under articles 19(1)(a) and (b), reliance being placed on two cases of this court in Kameshwar Prasad vs State of Bihar and O. K. Ghosh vs E. X. Joseph; that sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Ordinance were ultra vires, as they contravened article 19(1.)(a) and (b) and that in any case there was no evidence on which it could ' be found that the charge against him had been proved.
Held: The provisions of the Ordinance in sections 3, 4 and 5 did not violate the fundamental rights enshrined in article 19(1)(a) and (b).
A perusal of article 19(1) shows that there is no fundamental right to strike, and all that the ordinance provided was with respect to any illegal strike as provided in the Ordinance.
There was no provision in the Ordinance which in any way restricted those fundamental rights.
It was not in dispute that Parliament had the competence to make a law in the terms of the Ordinance and therefore the President had also the power to promulgate, such an Ordinance.
404 The competence of the legislature therefore being not in dispute it cannot be held that the Ordinance violated the fundamental rights guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) and (b).
All India Bank Employees Association vs National Industrial Tribunal, ; , referred to.
The two cases relied on by the petitioner have no relevance in connection with the charge in the present case.
The punishment given to the petitioner cannot therefore be set aside on the ground that the charge was in violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) and (b).
Kameshwar Prasad vs State of Bihar, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 369 and O. K. Ghosh vs E. X. Joseph, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 789, held inapplicable.
If on the undisputed facts the authorities came to the con clusion that the petitioner acted in furtherance of the strike 'Which was to commence half an hour later and was thus guilty of gross misconduct, it could not be said that there was no evidence on which the authorities concerned could find the charge framed against the petititoner proved.
