The Bill relating to the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1952, was published in the Gazette on the 3rd January, 1950.
It contained a provision that any sum payable for agricultural incomes Tax for the previous year should be deducted from the gross asset of an estate for the purpose of arriving at its not income on the basis on which compensation was payable to the estate owners.
On the 8th January, 1950, a Bill to amend the Orissa Agricultural Income tax Act of 1947 so as to enhance the highest rate of tax from 3 annas in the rupee to 4 annas and reduce the highest slab from Rs. 30,000 to Rs. 20,000 was published in the Gazette.
This Bill was dropped by the next Chief Minister who introduced a revised Bill on the 22nd July, 1950, enhancing the highest rate to 12 annas 6 pies in the rupee and reducing the highest slab to Rs. 15,000 and this was passed into law in August, 1950.
It was contended that the Orissa Agricultural Income tax (Amendment) Act of 1950 was a fraud on the Constitution and as such invalid as it was a colourable legislation to effect a drastic reduction in the compensation payable under the Estates Abolition Act: Held" (i) that the question whether a law was a colourable legislation and as such void did not depend on the. motive or bona fides of the legislature in passing the law but upon the competency of the legislature to pass that particular law, and what the courts have to determine in such cases is whether though the legislature has purported to act within the limits of its powers, it has in substance and reality transgressed those powers, the transgression being veiled by what appears, on proper,examination, to be a mere pretence or disguise.
The whole doctrine of colourable legislation is based upon the maxim that you cannot do indirectly what you cannot do directly.
2 (ii) The impugned Act was in substance and form a law in respect to the "taxing of agricultural income", as described in entry 46 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and, as the State Legislature was competent to legislate on this subject, the Act was not void, and the fact that the object of the legislature was to accomplish another purpose, viz., to reduce the compensation payable under the Estates Abolition Act, cannot render this law a colourable legislation and void as such, as the ulterior object itself was not beyond the competence of the legislature.
(iii) Assuming that in India there is no absolute rule of law that whatever is affixed to or built on the soil becomes a part of it and is subject to the same rights of property as the soil itself, there is nothing in law which prevents the State Legislature from providing as part of an estate abolition scheme that buildings lying within the ambit of an estate and used primarily for the management or administration of the estate should vest in the Government as appurtenances to the estate itself.
Such acquisition would come within article 31(2) of the Constitution and if the conditions laid down in clause (4) of that article are complied with, it would be protected by that clause even if the compensation provided for is not just and proper.
(iv) The provisions in the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1950, relating to private lands in the possession of temporary tenants are not unconstitutional.
Merely because compensation was based on the produce rent payable by the tenants it cannot be said that the landholder was given compensation only for the landholder 's rights and not for the kudivaram (tenant 's) rights also.
(v) The expression "passed by such legislature" in article 31(4) of the Constitution means passed with or without amendments and the fact that the provisions relating to vesting of private lands did not form a part of the Estates Abolition Bill as originally introduced but were added to the Bill after the new Constitution had come into force would not deprive those provisions of the protection of article 31(4) of the Constitution.
(vi) The provision contained in section 37 of the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1950, for payment of compensation by 30 annual instalments is not a piece of colourable legislation.
It comes clearly within entry 42 of List III of Schedule VII of the Constitution.
[The question whether the provisions of the Madras Estates Land (Orissa Amendment) Act, 1947, which empowered the Collector to settle and reduce rents were void because they involved an improper delegation of legislative powers to the executive and contravened article 14 of the Constitution was raised, but with the consent of the counsel, their Lordships decided to leave the question open as it did not relate to the validity of the Orissa 3 Estates Abolition Act, which was the subject matter in dispute in the present case].
State of Bihar vs Maharajah Kameshwar Singh and Others ([1952] S.C.R. 889) distinguished.
Surya Pal Singh vs The State of Uttar Pradesh ([1952] S.C.R. 1056) followed.
Attorney General for Ontario vs Reciprocal Insurers and Others ([1924] A.C. 328), Attorney General for Alberta vs Attorney General for Canada ([1939] A.C. 117), Union Colliery Co. of Br.
Columbia Ltd. vs Bryden ([1899] A.C. 580), Cunningham vs Tomeyhomma ([1903] A.C. 151), Be Insurance Act of Canada ([1932] A.C. 41), Moran vs Deputy Commissioner for Taxation, New South Wales ([1940] A.C. 838) referred to.
