Electricity was supplied to the appellants by the respon dent state for many years past, and several individual agreements were passed between them prescribing the terms and conditions for the supply.
One of these terms stipulated the rate at which the supply had to be charged.
These agreements did not contain any provision authorising the State to increase the rates during their operation.
The respondent state issued two notified orders enhancing the agreed rates.
The orders indicated that the main reason which inspired the increase was that the existing electricity tariffs which were formulated several years before, had become completely uneconomic and meant continuously growing loss to the State.
A large number of consumers challenged the validity of the two orders in the High Court under article 226.
The writ petitions were allowed and the respondent was restrained from enforcing the revised rates.
These decisions were challenged by the respondent by appeals in the High Court, which took a different view and dismissed the writ petitions.
On appeals to this Court, it was contended, inter alia that the respondent had no authority to increase the rate changing this important term of the contract by taking recourse to section 3(1) of the Madras Essential Articles Control and Requisitioning (Temporary) Powers Act, that the power to regulate the supply of essential articles had to be applied in regard to transactions between citizens and citizens and could not be applied to an essential article which the State itself supplied; that the power to regulate conferred on the respondent by section 3(1) could not include the power to increase the tariff rate, that the notified orders were invalid as they contravened the provisions of article 19(1)(f) and (g) and that of article 14 of the Constitution.
Held: (i) The challenge to the validity of the notified orders on the ground that they were outside the purview of section 3(1) of the Act could not be sustained.
The State is not bound by a statute unless it is so provided in express terms or by necessary implication.
In applying this rule, the court must attempt to ascertain the intention of the Legislature by considering all the relevant provisions of the statute together and not concentrating its attention on a particular provision which may be in dispute.
Where the question is not so much as to whether the State is bound by the statute, but whether it can claim the benefit of the provision of a statute, the same rule of construction 457 may have to be applied ' Where the statute may be for the public good and by claiming the benefit conferred on it by its provisions the State may allege that it is serving the public good, it would still be necessary to ascertain whether the intention of the legislature Was to make the relevant provisions applicable.
Director of Rationing and Distribution vs Corporation of Calcutta, ; and Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay, [1945 46] L.R. 73 I.A. 271, applied.
(ii) In construing section 3 of the Act of the usual rule of con struction must be adopted, section 3 must not be read in isolation, but must be considered in its proper setting and due regard must be had for the other provisions of the Act and its general scheme and purpose.
(iii) The purpose of the Act is to secure the supply of essential articles at fair prices, it would be irrelevant as to who makes the supply; what is relevant is to regulate the supply at a fair price.
(iv) It is well settled that the function of a clause like cl.
(2) of section 3 is merely illustrative.
In other words the proper approach to adopt in construing cls.
(1), and (2) of section 3 is to assume that whatever is included in cl.
(2) is also included in cl.
King Emperor vs Sibnath Banerjee, 72 I.A. 241 and Santosh Kumar Jain vs State, ; , applied.
(v) The word 'regulate ' is wide enough to confer power on the State to regulate either by increasing the rate or de creasing the rate, the test being what is it that is necessary or expedient to be done to maintain, increase or secure supply of the essential articles in question and to arrange for its equitable distribution and its availability at fair prices.
(vi) Having regard to all the circumstances in this case, the change made in the tariff were reasonable and in the in terests of the general public.
(vii) There was absolute no material on the record of the appeals on which a plea under article 14 of the Constitution could even be raised.
