An employee was summarily dismissed by the respondent employer after holding an enquiry on the allegation that he had instigated workers to go on an illegal strike.
The employee applied under section 16 of Central Provinces and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act to the Labour Commissioner, who held that authority to decide the legality of a strike had been entrusted by section 41 of the Act to the State Industrial Court or the District Industrial Court and that before a strike had been held by either of these authorities to be illegal the employer had no right to take any action against his workmen on his own view that a strike was illegal and ordered the reinstatement of the employee with full wages.
The revision application by the respondent employer to the State Industrial Court proved unsuccessful through it disagreed with the Labour Court 's view that the employer could not take action before a decision from the State Industrial Court or the District Industrial Court declaring the strike to be illegal had been obtained.
Thereafter, the employer moved the High Court under article 226.
The High Court was of the view that though the Labour Commissioner may not have the jurisdiction to decide the question of illegality of a strike, it may decide the question incidentally for the purposes mentioned in section 16 if in an enquiry such a question is raised, and quashed the orders of the Labour Commissioner and the State Industrial Court.
On appeal preferred by the Labour Commissioner in this Court.
Held: (i) The employer is free to take action against the employee as soon as he thinks that the strike in which he has participated comes within the provisions of section 40 of the Act.
The phrase "rendered illegal" in section 42(1)(g) has been deliberately used in contradistinction to the words "held illegal" used in sections 43, 44 and 45.
It would be an impossible position for industrial management if after notice has been given of a strike or a strike ha,,, started which the employer considers to be illegal within the meaning of section 4o he should be compelled to stay his hands and wait till a State Industrial Court or a District Industrial Court has given a declaration on the question.
The use of the word "shall" in section 41 in connection with the action to be taken on a reference by the State Government and "may" in connection with the action on an application by others in the same section compels the conclusion that on an application by anybody other than the State Government, the State Industrial Court or a District Industrial Court may also refuse to take action.
485 (ii) For performing its functions under section 16(3) of the Act the Labour Commissioner has jurisdiction to decide the question of legality or illegality of a strike when that question is raised before it.
