An industrial dispute arose between the appellant and its workmen as to payment of bonus for the years 1957 58 and 1958 59.
The dispute was referred for adjudication to the tribunal.
The respondents claimed bonus on the basis that payment of some bonus at Christmas had become an implied condition of service between the appellant and its workmen.
The workmen claimed 1 1/2 months wages for each year on the basis of an implied term of service.
On these facts the tribunal held on the basis of the decision of this Court in M/s. Ispahani Ltd. vs Ispahani Employees Union that payment of bouns at the rate of 1 1/2 months ' salary as an implied condition of service had been established.
It is this award of the tribunal which ha, , been challenged before this Court.
Held: (i) Where the payment of bonus is connected with a festival it is possible to infer that there is an implied condition to pay something at the time of the festival, even though the payment has not been made at a uniform rate in previous years.
In the present case, the payment has not been uniform over the years and before an implied term of service to pay bonus can be inferred it must be shown that the payment was connected with some festival.
Therefore the tribunal was not right in holding that there could be an implied condition of service as to payment of bonus unconnected with any festival.
In the present case, though the amount paid in December was originally called an advance, at least one month 's salary out of the so called advance always remained with the work men and was treated as bonus connected with Christmas festival.
On the facts of this case it was held that there was an implied condition of service between the appellant and its workmen that something would be paid every year about Christmas time as festival bonus.
M/s. Ispahani Ltd. vs Ispahani Employees ' Union, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 24, relied on.
(ii) In a case of payment which is made at different term and is not at a uniform rate the duty of the court is to connect the payment with a festival (in this case Christmas).
On the evidence in this case it is clear that the minimum is only one month 's salary payable about Christmas time and this was actually paid in 1951 52 and 1953 54.
Therefore the payment of one month 's salary as Christmas bonus is proved as an implied condition of service between the appellant and its workmen on the admitted facts of this case.
