The appellant company was supplying electricity under a licence issued in 1932 by the Government of Bombay under the .
The 'licence fixed the limits of the prices which the appellant could charge but these limits were altered by an order made by the Government on December 30, 1942, acting under para XI of the Schedule to that Act, Due to the conditions brought about by the second world war, the licensee was permitted to add a surcharge not exceeding 33 1/3% to the existing charges.
On September 30, 1946, the Bombay Electricity (Surcharge) Act, 1946, was passed which continued the surcharges for a period of three years.
Though the Surcharge Act of 1946 expired on September 30, 1949, the appellant continued charging the consumers at rates which included the surcharge and this was sought to be justified by resort to the provisions of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, which came into force on September 10, 1948.
On September 25, 1958, the appellant gave notice to its customers that with effect from November 1,1958, it would charge them at certain rates which the customers considered to be illegal and unauthorised on the ground that they were in excess of those prescribed in the order of December 30, 1942.
In the suits instituted on behalf of the consumers challenging the legality of the rates levied by the appellant in excess of the maximum pres cribed by the Government of Bombay in its order dated Decem ber 30, 1942, the defence of the appellant was that the charges were well within the limits prescribed by the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, which according to its contention, effected such a radical change in the method of determining the reasonable rate as to completely supersede the rates and the maxima fixed under the Electricity Act of 1910.
The question was also raised as to whether having regard to the provisions contained in sections 57 and 57A of the Act of 1948 a civil court would have jurisdiction to en tertain a suit challenging the legality of the rates levied by the appellant.
Held (i) The maxima prescribed by the State Government which bound the licensee under the , no longer limited the amount which he could charge after the Electricity Supply Act, 1948, came into force and that the licensee had a statutory right to adjust his rates as provided by Part 1 of Sch.
VI of the latter Act.
(ii) Where a party challenged the legality of the rates on the ground that they contravened the provisions contained in Sch.
VI of the Act of 1948 there was no duty on the licensee to prove that the rates were within the limits indicated in Sch.
VI and it was for the party alleging his right to relief to prove his case.
504 Per Sarkar, J. The respondents were not entitled to canvass in a civil court any question as to the rates of a licensee being in excess of the limit prescribed in para 1 of Sch.
VI to the Act of 1948.
A civil court could not declare that the rates charged by a licensee were illegal as they made, its clear profit exceed the reasonable return.
If there was such excess, the relief could be obtained only if the Government set up a rating committee, a refund became due thereupon under the last proviso to para 1 of Sch.
VI or if relief was available under para II(1) of that Schedule.
Per Das Gupta and Rajagopala Ayyangar, JJ. (i) There could be unilateral adjustment of the rates by a licensee but such an adjustment must not leave him with more than the reason able return.
Where the amount of reasonable return is exceeded, para II of Sch.
VI comes into play and the excess over the reasonable return is to be distributed in the manner laid down in that paragraph.
(ii) In view of the machinery that is provided for complaints in the event of the licensee deriving more than a reasonable return as contemplated by Sch.
VI, the failure consciously to adjust the rates by working out the details so as to reach at the same rate as was charged previously did not constitute a failure to adjust the rates as required by para 1.
(iii) There being no express bar to the jurisdiction of the civil court, its jurisdiction could not be held to be excluded in respect of such matters which were not assigned by section 57A of the Act of 1948 to the rating committee, or in regard to which the rating committee could not afford the consumer relief against an infraction of a statutory provision by which he was aggrieved.
