The respondent was a Government servant in one of the departments of the Bombay Government.
He was sent on deputation to another department and after serving there for a long period and getting a number of promotions he was re verted back to his parent department and ordered to be posted at a considerably lower grade, while another Government servant who was below his rank was promoted as Assistant Secretary.
Thereupon the respondent filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the order of his posting.
A preliminary objection was raised by the appellant that the petition was not maintainable.
But the High Court held that the respondent was entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court when there is a violation of a statutory rule and on merits it held that the respondent was entitled to the relief claimed.
The present appeal was filed on a certificate granted by the High Court under article 133 of the Constitution.
Before this Court in view of the decision State of U.P. vs Babu Ram Upadhya. ; it was not disputed that if there was a breach of a statutory rule framed under article 309 or continued under article 313 in relation to the condition of service the aggrieved Government servant could have recourse to the Court.
The main contention on behalf of the appellant was that the respondent was not entitled to be appointed to any higher post than as a Senior Assistant or to receive a salary higher than that which had been granted to him by the im pugned order.
Held: (i) Assuming that this was a case where the respon ,dent had a lien and his lien had not been suspended it was not possible to interpret Rule 50(b) of the Bombay Civil Service Rules as providing different criteria to cases where a Government servant had a lien and where his lien has been suspended.
The Rule and the circular make it abundantly clear that an officer on deputation in another department shall be re stored to the position he would have occupied in his parent department had he not been deputed.
(ii) Where promotions are based on seniority cum merit basis an officer on deputation has a legal right to claim pro motion to a higher post in his parent department provided his service in the department to which he is lent is satisfactory.
This may not be the case in regard to selection posts.
