The appellant was a registration clerk in a post office.
He was prosecuted on the allegation that he committed theft of a half of a ten rupee note contained in a registered letter along with a petition for exchanging it, for altering the petition and for detaining the registered letter for a day with the purpose of committing the theft and making the alteration.
He was charged under Ss. 52, 53 and 54 respectively of the Post Offices Act, 1898.
The Sessions Judges who tried the case found him not guilty of the offence under section 52 but guilty under Ss. 53 and 55.
On appeal to the High Court he was found not to be guilty of the offence under section 55; the conviction under section 53 was maintained.
Thereupon he appealed to this Court.
It was contended by the appellant before this Court that as suming that he detained the envelope he cannot be said to have detained it "wilfully", unless it is shown that he had some purpose in doing it and since the purpose alleged by the prosecution has not been proved the appellant cannot be said to have committed the offence under section 53.
Held: per K. Subba Rao and K. C. Das Gupta, JJ.
A review of the case law brings out clearly the guiding principle that the meaning to be attached to the words "wilful ' or ',wilfully" has to be ascertained on a close examination of the scheme and nature of the legislation in which the words appear and the context in which they are used.
Re Young and Harston, Wheeler vs New Merton Board Mills, United States of America vs Harry Murdock, , Hudson vs Official Liquidator, A.I.R. 1929 All. 826, In re T. M. K. Govindarajulu Chetty, 1951 2 S.T.C. 27 and In re Jayarama Chettiar, I.L.R. referred to.
(ii) A comparison of the various sections of the Act shows that the legislature took a more serious view of the offence of wilful detention of postal articles than any of the offences in Ch.
X and has, therefore, prescribed a comparatively heavy punishment.
Hence it is reasonable to think that in section 53 when the word "wilfully" was used the legislature also intended that the detention would be punishable only if made for some purpose.
(iii) The prosecution alleged in the present case that the purpose was theft of the note but the existence of that purpose has not been established and detention was not deliberate and hence the appellant cannot be said to have detained the article wilfully.
Per Raghubar Dayal, J. (dissenting) The legislature where it intended to make the purpose behind an act an ingredient expressly stated so, as for example in section 52.
If the word "wilful" or "wilfully" is used in the Act as 607 a synonym for an act done deliberately and for some purpose, the expression wilful could have been used in the place of "for any purpose whatsoever".
This the legislature did not do though it used that in section 53.
(ii) The mere act of detaining a postal article by any person other than a postal officer is made punishable with only fine under s, 67 and a higher punishment is provided under section 53 because the culprit is an officer of the post office who has opportunities to detain the, postal articles and who acts contrary to his duties.
(iii) The expression "wilfully" in section 53 means "intentionally and deliberately" and not "accidently" or "negligently".
(iv) From the facts of the case it is proved that the appel lant deliberately detained the registered letter.
His intention and deliberation were directed towards the detaining of the registered letter and to the non forwarding of it in due course with the mail that day.
Every intentional and relevant act must be with some purpose or object.
He, therefore obtained the letter wilfully and is guilty of the offence under section 53.
Taylor vs Vergette (861) , Reg.
vs Senior , Tamboli vs Great India Peninsular Railway Company, L.R. 55 I.A. 67, Wheeler vs New Merton Board Mills Ltd. , Hudson vs Official Liquidator, A.I.R., 1929 All. 826 and T. N. K. Govindarajulu Chetty, 1951 S.T.C. Vol. 2, 26, referred to.
