The appellant held shares in a company the Board of Directors of which by a resolution dated August 30, 1950 declared interim dividends.
The appellant received a dividend warrant dated December 28, 1950 for a certain amount being the interim dividend in respect of its share holdings in the company.
The appellant 's year of accounting had ended on September 30, 1950.
The revenue authorities brought to tax the amount so received with other income of the appellant in the assessment year 1952 53 after rejecting the objection of the appellant that it represented income for the assessment year 1951 52.
In a reference made under section 66(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, the High Court agreed with the Revenue authority that the dividend was in view of article 95 of the First Schedule to Indian Companies Act, 1913, liable to be included in the assessment year 1952 53.
Held: A declaration of dividend by a company in a general meeting gives rise to a debt.
In re Severn and Wile and Severn Bridge Railway Co. , referred to.
But a mere resolution of the Directors resolving to pay a certain amount as interim dividend does not create a debt enforceable against the company for it is always open to the Directors to rescind the resolution before payment of the dividend.
The Lagunas Nitrate Company (Ltd.) vs J. Henry Schroeder and Company, 17 Times Law Reports 625, referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Laxmidas Mutraj Khatau, , distinguished.
(ii) The test applied by Chagla C. J. (in C.I.T., Bombay vs Laxmidas Mulraj Khatau, that because the ,dividend becomes due to the assessee who has the right to deal with or dispose of the same in any manner he likes, it is taxable in the year in which it is declared cannot be regarded as correct.
(iii) Dividend may he said to be paid within the meaning of section 16(2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 when the company discharges its liability and makes the amount thereof unconditionally available to the member entitled thereto.
Purshottamdas Thakurdas vs C.I.T., Bombay, , referred to.
I P(1)) 1 S.C.I 17 (a) 580 (iv) The declaration of interim dividend capable of being rescinded by the directors does not operate as a payment under section 16(2) of the Income tax Act before the company has parted 'with the amount of dividend or discharged its obligation by some other act.
