As a result of the passing of the , Vidharbha area which was in the State of Madhya Pradesh became part of the State of Bombay and when the State of Bombay was divided under the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1950, the said area remained in the State of Maharashtra.
Before 1956.
the Bombay State Road Transport Corporation and Provincial Services established under the , were operating in the States of Bombay and Madhya Pradesh respectively.
To meet the situation arising from these territorial changes, Parliament made amendments to the , by which, inter alia section 47 A was introduced providing for the reconstitution, reorganisation and dissolution of the corporations established under the Act.
On May, 27, 1961, the Central Government made an Order under section 47 A of the Act, inter alia, approving a scheme for the reorganisation of the Bombay State Road Transport Corp oration and amalgamating with it the Provincial Transport Services which had, under the Reorganisation Act, 1956, become a commercial undertaking of the State of Bombay and which had been operating in the Vidharba area.
Clause 9(1) of this provided for the abolition of all the posts in the Provincial Transport Services and for discharge of all persons holding such posts for service but giving such people an option of continuing in the service of the Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation.
Notice ter minating the services of the persons employed by the Provincial Transport Services (operating in Vidharba) were issued.
Thereupon, two former employees of the Provincial Transport Services and the Union of the workmen of that concern made an application before the High Court of Bombay under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, challenging the validity, inter alia, of the notices of termination of service served on the employees on the ground that the action taken by the Government in abolishing the posts and issuing notices of termination of services of the employees was bad as it contravened, inter alia, the pro visions of section 31 of the Central Provinces and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947.
Held: Abolition of all posts of an establishment did not amount to reduction of posts within the meaning of Item 1 of the Schedule II of the Central Provinces and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947; and the Government order abolishing the posts and terminating the services of the employees.
640 did not amount to a change within the meaning of section 31 of the Act.
The Government was, therefore, not required to follow the procedure mentioned in section 31.
