On a report that R and M, both employees of the appellant waylaid A, another employee and assaulted him outside the factory, the appellant held an enquiry and sought approval for the dismissal of R and M from the Industrial Tribunal, before which an industrial dispute was pending.
The Tribunal approved the dismissal of R but not that of M. Thereupon R was dismissed.
The respondent raised an industrial dispute in regard to the propriety and validity of the said dismissal.
On reference of this dispute, the Industrial Tribunal held that the assault could be treated as a private matter between R and A with which the appellant was not concerned and as a result Standing Order 22(viii) could not be invoked against R, and it ordered the reinstatement of R. On appeal by special leave: Held: (i) that It would be unreasonable to, include within Standing Order 22(viii) any riotous behaviour without the factory which was the result of purely private and individual dispute and in course of which tempers of both the contestants become hot.
In order that standing order 22(viii) may be attracted, the appellant should be able to show that the disorderly or riotous behaviour had some rational connection with the employment of the assailant and the victim.
(ii) In the present case the assault by R on A was not a purely private or individual matter but was referable to the difference of opinion between the two in regard to the introduction of incentive bonus scheme and that cannot be said to be outside the purview of standing order 22(viii).
(iii) The Tribunal was in error in coming, to the conclusion that the enquiry suffered from the infirmity that it was conducted contrary to the principles of natural justice.
It is true that if it appears that by refusing to adjourn.
the hearing at the instance of charge sheeted workmen, the Enquiry Officer failed to give the said workmen a reasonable opportunity to lead evidence, that may in a proper case, be considered to introduce an element of infirmity in the enquiry; but in the circumstances of this case, it would not be possible to draw such an inference.
(iv) The finding of the Tribunal that the dismissal was malafic, cannot possibly be sustained.
The Tribunal has completely overlooked an elementary principle of judicial approach that even if a judge or Tribunal may reach an erroneous conclusion either of fact or of law, the mere error of the conclusion does not make the conclusion malafide.
556 (v) Since the domestic enquiry had been fairly conducted, and the findings recorded therein were based on Evidence which was believed, there was no justification for the Industrial Tribunal to consider the same facts for itself.
Findings properly recorded at such enquiries are binding on parties, unless, of course, it is shown that such findings are perverse or are not based on any evidence.
Phulbari Tea Estate vs Its Workmen, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 32, referred to.
(vi) The Industrial Tribunal was in error when it charac terised the result of the domestic enquiry as malafide partly because the enquiry was not stayed pending criminal proceedings against R.
It is desirable that if the incident giving rise to a charge framed against a workman in a domestic enquiry is being tried in a criminal court, the employer should stay the domestic enquiry pending the final disposal of the criminal case.
It would be particularly appropriate to adopt such a course when the charge is of a grave character because it would be unfair to compel the workman to disclose the, defence which he may take before the criminal court.
But to say that domestic enquiries may be stayed pending criminal trial is very different from saying that if an employer proceeds with the domestic enquiry inspite of the fact that the criminal trial is pending, the enquiry for that reason alone is vitiated and the conclusion arrived at in such, an enquiry is either bad in law or malafide.
Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. vs Kishan Bhan ; , referred to.
