On inspection three of the workmen were found working in a factory before their shift commenced.
It was stated that the Inspector of Factories was informed by a letter written a day prior to this inspection about the change of the timing though the letter did not reach the Inspector till the day after the inspection.
This change in the hours of work was not notified and displayed as required by section 61(1) of the .
The respondent as the occupied/manager of the factory was convicted under section 63 of the Act.
On appeal, the Sessions Judge acquitted the respondent holding that the second part of section 61(10) of the Act applied to a case of second or subsequent change in the system of work in a factory and this being the first change there was no need to wait for a week or to obtain the previous sanction of the Inspector as required by the later part of section 61(101), and further section 117 of the Act protected the action because it was bonafide.
The State appealed to the High Court which agreed with the Sessions Judge in his interpretation of section 61(10) but expressed no opinion on section 117 of the Act and it dismissed the appeal.
On appeal by special leave: Held: (i) The respondent was not saved from the opera tion of section 63 which is peremptory, by reason of anything contained in section 61(10) and the sending of the letter to the Inspector of Factories was therefore misconceived.
The words "change in the system of work in any factory which will necessitate a change in the notice" in section 61(10) refer not to departure from the notice but to a change in the system, a change which would require the notice to be recast.
The notice shows "the period during which adult workers may be required to work" and these words are descriptive of the scheme of employment of labour in the factory but are not apt to contemplate the time of employment for each individual worker.
That can only be found by referring to the register which goes with the notice.
Sub section (1) makes no mention of the change in the register but of the change in the notice and thereby indicates that the change which is contemplated is an over all change affective to a whole group and not an individual worker.
The latter part of the sub section also points in the same direction because it implies that such changes should not be frequent and if the change is for the second time it should not be made until one week has.
elapsed since the last change.
(ii) The language of section 117 of the Act is not limited to officers but is made wide to include "any person".
The protection conferred can only be claimed by a person who can plead that he was required to do or omit to do something under the Act or that he intended to comply with any of its provisions.
It cannot confer immunity in respect of actions which are not done under the Act but are done contrary to it.
657 (iii) The occupier and manager, are exempted from liabi lity in certain cases mentioned in section 101.
Where an occupier or a manager is charged with an offence he is entitled to make a complaint in his own turn against any person who was the actual offender and on such proof the occupier or the manager is a solved from liability.
This shows that compliance with the peremptory provisions of the Act is essential and unless the occupier or the manager brings the real offender to book he must bear the responsibility.
It is not necessary that means rea must always be established.
The responsibility exists without a guilty mind.
Ranjit Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. (1943) Oudh 308, Ranjit Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. (1943) Oudh 311, Public Prosecutor vs Mangaldas Thakkar, A.I.R. , In re P. Lakshmaiah Naidu, I.L.R. , Public Prosecutor vs Vattem Venkatramayya, A.I.R. 1963.
Pra. 106, Provincial Government C.P. and Berar vs Seth Chapsi Dhanji Oswal Bhate and Anr.
I.L.R. and Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, Bengal vs H. E. Watson, , referred to.
