The respondent is an employee of the English and Scottish Joint Co operative Wholesale Society Ltd. incorporated in England.
The Society established a superannuation scheme for the benefit of the male European members of its staff employed in India by means of deferred annuities.
Under the terms of the scheme, the trustee has to effect a policy of insurance for the purpose of ensuring an annuity to every member of the ,Society on his attaining the age of superannuation or on the happening of a specific contingency.
The Society contributed ,one third of the premium payable by each employee.
During the year 1956 57, the Society contributed Rs. 3333/ towards the premium payable by the respondent, an employee of the Society.
The Income tax Officer included the said amount in the taxable income of the respondent for the year 1956 57 under section 7(1), Explanation 1, sub cl.
(v) of the Act.
The appeals of the respondent were dismissed both by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income tax and the Income tax Appellate 'Tribunal.
The Tribunal referred to the High Court the following three questions of law: (1) Whether the contribution paid by the employer to the assessee under the terms of a trust deed in respect of a contract for a deferred annuity on the life of the assessee is a perquisite as contemplated by section 7(1) of the Income tax Act? (2) Whether the said contributions were allowed to, or due to the applicant by or from the employer in the accounting year? (3) Whether the deferred annuity aforesaid is annuity hit by section 7(1) and para (v) of Explanation 1 thereto.
The High Court held that the employer 's contribution under the terms of the trust deed was not a perquisite as con templated by section 7(1).
The employer 's contributions were not allowed to or due to the employee in the accounting year.
The legislature not having used the word "deferred" with annuity in section 7(1) and the statute being a taxing one, the deferred annuity would not hit para (v) of Explanation 1 to section 7 (1) of the Act.
Against the decision of High Court, the appellant came to this Court by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, 570 Held: The answers to the questions of law as given by the High Court were correct.
Unless a vested interest in the sum accrues to an employee, it is not taxable.
In the present case.
no interest in the sum contributed by the employer under the scheme vested in the employee, as it was only a contingent interest depending upon his reaching the age of superannuation.
it is not a perquisite allowed to him by the employer or an amount, due to him from the employer within the meaning of section 7(1) of the Act.
A perquisite is only that amount of money which is allowed to the employee by or is due to him from the employer or is paid to him to effect an insurance on his life.
Smyth vs Stretton, , and Edwards (H. M., Inspector of Taxes) vs Roberts, , referred to.
