The respondents are registered dealers carrying on the business of tanning hides and skins and selling the tanned skins.
The authorities under the Hyderabad General Sales Tax Act, 1950 assessed the respondent for the total turnover which included the price paid by the respondent for purchasing tanning bark used in the tanning process.
The respondent contended that the price paid for the purchase of tanning bark should be excluded from the taxable turnover because the tanning bark was bought by the respondent for consumption and not for sale and hence the respondent was not "dealer" qua the tanning bark.
His contention was not accepted by the Tax authorities.
In a petition to the High Court under section 22(1) of, the Hyderabad General Sales Tax Act the contention of the respondent was accepted and the assessment was modified.
In appeal filed with special leave, Held: The High Court was in error in holding that a purchaser is liable to pay tax under r. 5(2) of the Sales Tax Rules only when he is carrying on a business of buying and selling a commodity specified in sub r.
(2) and not when he buys it for consumption in a process for manufacturing a commodity to be sold by him.
(ii) To regard an activity as a business there must be a course of dealing either actually continued or contemplated.
to be continued with a profit motive and not for sport or pleasure.
But to be a dealer a person need not follow the activity of buying, selling and supplying the same commodity.
The Act requires merely that buying of the commodity mentioned in r. 5(2) must be in the course of business; that is it must be for sale or use with a view to take profit out of the integrated, activity of buying and disposal.
The commodity may itself be converted into another saleable commodity or it may be used as an ingredient or in aid of a manufacturing process leading to the production of such saleable commodity.
(iii) In the present case the tanning bark was not bought by the respondent for any purpose unconnected with the business.
Consumption of the tanning bark in the manufacturing process did not therefore exclude the respondents from the definition of dealer qua the tanning bark.
Sadak Thamby and Company vs State of Madras, 14 S.T.C. 753, approved.
