On May 14,1959 ,a number of documents were seized from the possession of the respondent by the Enforcement Officer in execution of a search warrant.
The search warrant was issued by the Chief Presidency Magistrate under sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
The Director of Enforcement with the permission of the Chief Presidency Magistrate retained those seized documents for a period exceeding four months.
On October 5, 1959, the respondent filed an application before the Chief Presidency Magistrate in which he claimed the return of the seized documents on the basis, of the provision of section 19 A of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
On this application the Chief Presidency Magistrate directed the return of all the documents to the respondent except those mentioned at items 2 and 7 of the search list.
The respondent went up in revision against this order for the continued retention of the two documents, and the High Court allowed the revision and ordered the return of these documents also to the respondent.
Against this order appeal was filed in this Court.
Held:(i) The Magistrate has no jurisdiction over the articles seized in execution of the search warrant issued under section 19(3) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and that he cannot permit the retention of such documents by the Director of Enforcement after the expiry of the period he is entitled to keep them in accordance with the provisions of section 19 A of the Act.
The Enforcement Officer has a right under section 19 A to retain the articles seized for a period not exceeding four months and it is not necessary for him to obtain permission from the Magistrate for retaining the seized documents within the statutory period.
Therefore, the Magistrate issuing the search warrant has nothing to do with the retention or disposal of the documents seized in execution of the search warrant either during the statutory period of four months or after the expiry of that period.
Mohammad Serajuddin vs R. C. Mishra, [1962] 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 545, distinguished.
(ii) In view of the specific provision for the issue of a search warrant under sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, the provisions of sections 96, 98 and Form No. 8 of Schedule V of the Code would not be applicable to the search warrants issued under sub section
(3) of section 19.
The provisions of SS. 101, 102, 103 of the Code will apply to searches under sub section
(3) of section 19 of the Act as there is no specific provision in the Act with respect to the conduct of the search.
725 (iii) The provisions of section 5(2) of the Code will not apply to an investigation conducted under the Act because the Act is a special Act and it provides under s.19 A for the necessary investigation into the alleged suspected commission of an offence" under the Act, by the Director of Enforcement.
(iv) No express provision is necessary in the statute for the return of documents after the expiry of the statutory period.
Provisions are necessary for retaining documents of others and not for returning them to persons entitled.
Therefore the documents seized have to be returned to the person from whose possession they had been seized after the expiry of the statutory period.
(v) Under s.19 A of the Act the Director of Enforcement can justifiably retain with himself the documents seized till the final disposal of the proceedings taken under s.23 of the Act if the proceedings had commenced before the period of four months, during which he could keep the documents.
In the present case he could not have retained those documents beyond four months because no such proceeding had been commenced within 4 months.
In the present case proceedings under s.23 did start prior to the order for the return of documents.
On the facts of this case it was held that the direction of the Magistrate in regard to the retention of documents was an order giving effect to the spirit behind the provision of section 19 A.
