The assessee firm acquired for Rs. 1,00,000/ the exploitation rights of a cinematograph film which were to enure for four years.
For the period, December 25, 1947 to August 2, 1948, which was the previous year corresponding to the assessment year 1949 50 the firm filed a voluntary return declaring that Rs. 28,643/ were earned by the exploitation of the film.
In the statement submitted by the firm the total receipts credited in the firm 's books were Rs. 1,46,849/ and against that amount were debited Rs. 18,206/ as expenditure and Rs. 1,00,000/ as the amount disbursed for acquiring the exploitation rights.
The Income tax Officer was of the view that from the statement of account which omitted to include at the close of the account year the value of the right in the film for the unexpired period, the profits of the firm could not properly be deduced.
Accordingly, he estimated the value of the rights for the unexpired period of exploitation to which the firm was entitled on August 2, 1948, at Rs. 65,000/ and computed the net profits of the firm as an unregistered firm at Rs. 93,642/ and assessed income tax and super tax payable by the firm on that footing.
In the appeals filed against the order or assessment, only the correctness of the estimated value of the rights of the film at Rs. 65,000/ was challenged, and the Appellate Tribunal reduced the valuation to Rs. 40,000/ .
On reference, the High Court of Madras took the view that it was the cash system that the assessee had adopted.
that valuation of the closing stock was not an incident of that system for ascertaining the profits and that the Incometax Officer had no power under the proviso to section 13 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, to force a different system on the assessee either the mercantile system or a hybrid system of cash plus valuation of closing stock.
Held: In a trading venture, for computing the true profits of the year, the stock in trade must be taken into account, whatever method of book keeping was adopted; and the High Court was in error in holding that because the assessee had maintained his accounts in the cash system it was not open to the Incometax Officer to add to the receipts from the business the value of the stock in trade at the end of the year for the purpose of properly deducing the profits of the business for the year in question.
There was not warrant in the case of assuming that the income tax Officer sought to displace the method of accountancy adopted by the assessee it " as only by applying the proviso to section 13 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, that the Income tax Officer made the computation upon the basis and in the manner in which in his opinion profits could be properly deduced. 777
