The appellant was the manager of a Bidi counting and labelling factory.
In 1951, the State of Madhya Pradesh fixed rates of minimum wages payable to workmen in accordance with the provisions of the .
These rates were revised in the year 1956 and new rates were notified by the Government by a notification dated December 30, 1958 directing that these rates would come into force from January 1, 1959.
The validity of this notification was successfully challenged by the appellant before the High Court.
To meet the situation the Legislature enacted the Minimum Wages Act, 1961 giving effect to the impugned notification.
On challenge ,of this Act by the appellant and other Bidi manufactories, the High Court allowed the applications and restrained the Government from giving effect to the impugned notification.
There after, the Madhya Pradesh Ordinance No. 4 of 1962 was passed fixing rates of minimum wages retrospectively.
The ordinance was later replaced by an Act, the Madhya Pradesh Minimum Wages Fixation Act, 1962.
On challenge of the validity of this Act by the appellant, the High Court held the Act to be valid ,and disallowed the application.
In this Court the validity of the Act was challenged on the ground (1) that in enacting the Act of 1962 the Legislature was not exercising its independent legislative power but only validating the notification dated December 30, 1958 which it was not competent to do, (2) that by giving retrospective effect to the: rates of wages fixed by this Act the State had put unreasonable restrictions on the appellant 's fundamental rights under article 19(l)(f) & (g) and (3) that by making the provisions of sections 20 and 22 of the Central Act of 1948 applicable to the wages now fixed the Act had contravened article 2b(1) of the Constitution.
Held:(i) The contention that the Act was not independent legislation cannot be accepted.
Section 2 of the Act merely says that the expressions used in this Act shall have the same meaning for the purpose of this Act as defined in the Minimum Wages Act of 1948.
The definition of expressions used in an Act with reference to another Act is a well known device in legislative practice generally adopted for the sake of brevity.
The definition would remain effective even after the other Act with reference to which the definition was given ceases to exist.
This fact of defining expressions in an Act with reference to some other Act cannot therefore have the effect of making this Act dependent on such other Act.
821 It is clear from section 3 of the impugned Act that the legislature was fixing for itself the minimum rates of wages in certain ,scheduled employments.
The fact that the rates mentioned in the Table appended to the Act happened to Le the same as the rates fixed elsewhere cannot reasonably justify a conclusion that the validation of the old rates was being affected.
Independent legislation does not cease to be so, merely because its effect is the same as it would have been if a validating Act had been passed.
(ii)The retrospective operation of legislation is a relevant circumstance in deciding its reasonableness.
It is, however, not necessarily a decisive test.
Section 3 of the Act does not make the new rates of wages payable on the 1st January 1959.
The proviso to section 4 is a clear statement of the legislature 's intention that it is on the 21st June 1962 that the rates which had become enforceable under section 3 with effect from 1st January 1959 became payable.
The appellant 's apprehension that he might be made liable for payment of compensation under section 20(3) or to prosecution under section 22 of the as a result of mere passing of the Act must therefore be held to be ground less.
The contention therefore that sections 3 and 4 of the impugned Act impose unreasonable restrictions on the appellant 's fundamental rights must be rejected.
Rai Ramkrishna vs State of Bihar, ; , applied.
(iii)On a proper construction of sections 3 and 4 of the impugned Act, the attack on the validity of the section on the ground of a contravention of article 20(l) of the Constitution must also fail.
