The assessee, who was the owner of a fleet of buses, rep laced the petrol engines in two of his buses by new Diesel engines incurring an expenditure of Rs. 18,544/ in this connection, during the year of account ending with March 31, 1950.
For the relevant assessment year he claimed deprecia tion allowance under the second para of cl.
(vi) and cl.
(via) of section 10(2) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, apart from the normal depreciation under the first para of cl.
(vi) but he was allowed only 25 per cent depreciation under the first para ,of cl.
(vi) on the ground that he was not entitled to extra depreciation under section 10(2)(vi).
or section 10(2)(via) because the ,engine was only part of an equipment and could not by itself become machinery and that when an engine was fixed in a motor vehicle it could not be said to be installed within the meaning of those sub sections.
Held: (per Subba Rao and Sikri, JJ.) (i) The assessee was entitled to extra depreciation under sections 10(2)(vi).
and 10(2) (via) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, in respect of the diesel oil engine fitted to the motor vehicles in replacement of the existing engines.
(ii)The definition of "machinery" given by the Privy Council in the case of Corporation of Calcutta vs Chairman, Cossipore and Chitpore Municipality (1922) L.R. 48 I.A. 435, is applicable, and according to that definition a diesel engine is clearly "machinery".
And when an engine is fixed in a vehicle it is installed within the meaning of the expression in cls.
(vi) and (via).
Per Shah, J. (dissenting) Replacement of a petrol engine by a new diesel engine in a motor car cannot be said to be installation of machinery.
To be installed, the machinery must for the purpose of the business be brought into service as a self contained unit, and it would be difficult to regard the introduction of a mere part, which has no independent use in the business conducted by the assesses, as machinery installed for the purpose of the second para of cl.
(vi) of section 10 (2).
