The respondent was an owner of an estate in Madhya Pradesh.
Under the provisions of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 the respondent 's estate was vested in the State and he became entitled to compensation.
The compensation was to be paid at the rate of ten times the net income.
The net in come would be calculated by deducting from the gross income, inter alia, the average of the income tax paid in respect of the income from big forest during 30 agricultural years proceeding March 31, 1951.
In calculating the net income the Compensation Officer deducted not only income tax but also super tax and the respondent appealed to the Settlement Commissioner against the deduction of super tax.
On the rejection of the appeal the respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court and the High Court held that on a construction of the various provisions of the Act it was wrong to deduct the super tax while calculating the compensation payable to the respondent.
The appellant filed this appeal on special leave granted by this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the object of the r. 2(2) (c) of Schedule I to the Act is to provide a method for ascertaining the net income of an estate and therefore there cannot be any distinction between income tax and super tax and the expression "income tax" has been used comprehensively to include super tax also.
The contention on behalf of the respondent was that from a historical point as well as from the provisions of the Act it is seen that income tax and super tax were distinct and separate and the former does not include the latter.
Held:(i) There are two essential differences between income tax and super tax.
They are (1) though both the taxes are assessed on the total income of a person, the total income for the purpose of income tax is computed on the basis of income classified chargeable under the different heads mentioned in section 6 of the Income tax Act whereas super tax is not concerned with the different heads, but is payable on the total income so ascertained and (2) while super tax 1, except in a few cases, is payable by the assessee direct, the income tax is payable by him direct as well as by deduction.
(ii)Examining the provisions of r. 2(2)(c) Schedule I of the Act it is evident that with the knowledge that under the In come tax Act two seperate duties namely income tax and super tax are imposed the Legislature has used the expression "income tax".
If the intention was to refer to both the taxes it would have stated income tax and super tax.
The mention of the one and the omission of the other is a sure indication of its intention.
The qualification that income tax paid should have been in respect of the income received from the big 839 forests necessarily excludes super tax for under the Income tax Act no super tax is payable in respect of the income re ceived from big forest but only in respect of the total income.
(iii)Having regard to the terms of r. 2(2)(c) of Sche dule I to the Act it is clear that income tax does not take in super tax.
Case law reviewed.
Brooks vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, , Bates.
In re: Salmea vs Bates, and Reckitt vs Reckitt,
