The Income tax Officer found that the respondent company had, declared during the three years ending March 31, 1947, March 31.
1948 (1) 10 and March 31, 1949, dividends which were considerably less than 60% of the amount available for distribution as computed under section 23 A of the Income tax Act, 1922.
He served a notice on respondent company to show cause why an order under section 23 A be not passed against it.
After hearing the respondent the Income tax Officer passed an order that the undistributed portion of the assessable income of the respondent as computed for income tax purposes and reduced by the amount of income tax and super tax payable by the company in respect thereof, shall be 'deemed to have been distributed as dividend among the share holders.
The order of the Income tax Officer was upheld by the Appellate Assis tant Commissioner and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
A reference was made to High Court and the relevant question referred was whether the provisions of section 23 A were correctly applied for the three relevant years.
The High Court held that respondent company was one in which the public were substantially interested and, therefore, the Income tax Officer had no jurisdiction to pass the order under section 23 A for any of the three years.
The appellant came to this Court with certificate of fitness from the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD: The respondent company was one in which the public were substantially interested and therefore, the Income tax Officer had no jurisdiction to pass an order under section 23 A.
The Indian Income tax Act, 1922 does not define the expression "company in which the Public are substantially interested".
Normally, a company would be deemed to be one in which the public are substantially interested where more than half the voting power is vested in the public.
Where the controlling interest i.e. a minimum of 51% of the voting right is held by a single individual or a group of individuals acting in concert, the company would be regarded as one in which the public are not substantially interested.
The distinction between the controlling group and public is not along the line which distinguishes directors from the remaining members of the company.
If a director does not belong to a controlling group, he will be regarded as a member of the public for purposes of the third proviso and explanation to section 23 A, even though such 'director was directly entrusted with the management of the affairs of the company.
Section 23 A was enacted with the object of preventing avoidance of super tax by share holders controlling the affairs of a company in which the public are not substantially interested, by the expedient of not distri buting dividends out of the profits.
For many years, the rates of super tax applicable to companies were much lower than the higher rates applicable to other assessees.
That gave inducement to Persons controlling companies to avoid the higher incidence of super tax by transferring to imited companies the businesses.
The profits of business could be accumulated till they were 'distributed in the form of capital and in 'the meanwhile accumulations of undistributed profits remained available to them for the purposes of their other businesses.
Section 23 A was enacted with a view to full attempts made by persons holding cotnrolling 11 interests in companies to avoid payment of super tax applicable to noncorporate assessees by refusing to agree to distribution of profits.
Under section 23 A an Income tax Officer was authorised to make an order by which .a fictional or notional income which was not in fact received by the ,share holders, was deemed to be distributed and was liable to tax as it had arisen or accrued to them.
However, no such order could be passed in respect of a company in which the public were substantially interested and to a subsidiary company of such a company if the whole of the share capital of such subsidiary company was held by the parent company or by the nominee thereof
