The respondent, a clerk in the appellant Bank, was promoted as Accountant and his pay was fixed in the new post.
The respondent filed an application under section 33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act claiming that he was entitled from the date of his joining as accountant (a) to the basic pay of his old grade with annual increments due on December 1, every year, (b) special allowance of Rs. 40 per month for the additional supervisory duties under para 164 of the Sastry Award, and (c) dearness allowance in terms of the award, and prayed to the Labour Court for recovery of the amount due to him.
In resisting this application the appellant contended (1) that such an application under section 33C(2) was incompetent, (2) that in any case the matter would be one within the jurisdiction of an industrial tribunal and not the Labour Court, (3) that the Sastry Award had ceased to be operative long before the date of the respondent 's appointment as an Accountant and so no benefits accrued to him under that Award, and (4) that by his appointment as accountant, the respondent had ceased to be a workman and therefore not entitled to the benefit of the Sastry Award.
The Labour Court rejected all these ob jections and allowed the application.
In appeal by special leave.
Held: (i) Such an application by workmen lies under s.33C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Central Bank of India vs P.S. Rajagopalan, [1964] 3 S.C.R. 140, followed.
(ii) In view of the provisions of section 7 and section 33C(2), the Labour Court as specified by the Government and not the Industrial Tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with this matter.
(iii) The objection that no benefit as claimed could accrue to the respondent after the Sastry Award had ceased to be operative, must be rejected.
The provision in section 19(6) as regards the period for which the award shall continue to be binding is not in any way affected by section 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking Companies) Decision Act.
The different provisions made by the legislature in section 19(3) and section 19(6) illustrate the distinction between an award being in operation and an award being binding on the parties.
Section 19(6) makes clear that after the period of operation of an award has expired, the award does not cease to be effective.
Though in consequence of section 4 of the Industrial Disputes (Banking companies) Decision Act, the Award remained in force only until March 31, 1959, it continued to have effect as a contract between the parties that had been made by industrial adjudication in place of the old contract.
(iv) On consideration of the evidence in the present case, the respondent was merely a senior clerk, doing mainly clerical duties 627 and going by the designation of accountant and was in reality a workman as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act doing an element of supervisory work.
The Labour Court has taken proper note of the distinction between accountants who are really officers and accountants who are merely senior clerks with supervisory duties as envisaged by the Sastry Award.
