There were five firms in Sivakasi manufacturing matches under the name and style of Shenbagam Match Works, Brilliant Match Works, Manoranjitha Match Works, Pioneer Match Works and Gnanam Match Works.
The sole proprietor of Shenbagam Match Works and one partner from each of the four firms entered into a partnership in their individual capacity and executed a partnership deed dated April 1, 1950.
The Income tax Officer registered the said partnership 'deed under section 26(A) of the Act; but the Commissioner of Income tax acting under section 33B of the Act, cancelled the registration of the said partnership deed.
On appeal, the Tribunal held that the said partnership deed was not a genuine one.
On a reference the High Court held on a construction of the partnership deed that the Match Works were not the real parties to the partnership but the parties to the document were the real partners.
This appeal has come by way of special leave.
HELD: (i) (per K. Subba Rao and section M. Sikri JJ) that the discretion conferred on the Income tax Officer under section 26 A of the Act is a judicial one and he cannot refuse to register a firm on mere speculation, but he shall base his conclusion on relevant evidence.
The jurisdiction of the Income tax Officer under section 20 A is, confined to the ascertaining of two facts namely, (i) whether the application for registration is in conformity with the rules made under the Act, and (ii) whether the firm shown in the document.
(Partnership deed) presented for registration is a bogus one or has no legal existence.
(ii) In the present case the partnership deed ex facie conforms to the requirements of the law of partnership as well as the Income tax Act.
There is no prohibition under the partnership Act against a partner or partners of other firms combining together to form a separate partnership to carry on a different business.
The fact that such a partner or partners entered into a sub partnership with others in respect of their share does not detract from the validity of the partnership; nor the manner in which the said partner deals with the share of his profits is of any relevance to the question of validity of the partnership.
(iii) The tribunal erred in holding the partnership deed as not a genuine one.
In the present case the assessde firm has a separate legal existence, and as such the two circumstances relied upon by the Tribunal, namely, that one of the partners of the assessee firm, brought in the capital from his parent firm or that the profits earned by some of the partners were surrendered to the parent firm, would be irrelevant.
A partner of a firm can certainly ' secure his capital from any source or 20 surrender his profits to his sub partner or any other person.
Those facts cannot conceivably convert a valid partnership into a bogus one.
In the present case the partnership deed is a genuine document and it complies with the requirements of law.
It is not an attempt to evade tax, but a legal device to reduce its tax liability.
(iv) A question of law within the meaning of section 66(2) of the Act arose for decision in this case as the Tribunal misconstrued the provisions of the partnership deed and relied upon irrelevant considerations in coming to the conclusion.
Sree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras.
[19561 S.C.R. 691, relied on.
Per Shah, J. (i) It was exclusively within the province of the Tribunal to decide the question whether the partners entered into the partnership in their individual capacities or as representing their match factories and its decision that in entering into the deed of partnership, the named partners represented their respective match factories, was not open to be canvassed in a reference under section 66(2) of the Indian Incometax Act.
In a reference under section 66(2) the High Court was not authorised to disregard the finding of the Tribunal on a question which was essentially one of fact.
In the present case the High Court was not justified in interfering with the finding of the Tribunal on a question of fact because it was not the case of the assessee that the conclusion of the Tribunal was based on no evidence or that it was perverse.
(ii) Where the law prescribes conditions for obtaining the benefit of reduced liability to taxation, those conditions, unless otherwise provided, must be strictly complied with, and if they are not so complied with, the taxing authorities would be bound to refuse to give the tax payer the benefit claimed.
It would be open to the Income tax Officer to decline to register a 'deed, even if under the general law of partnership the rights and obligations of the partners ex nomine thereto may otherwise be adjusted.
If the requirements relating to the form in which the petition is to be presented are not complied with, and the relevant information is withheld the Income tax Officer may be justified in refusing registration.
In the present case the Income tax Officer was bound to refuse registration as the application submitted by the five partners of the assessee did not conform to the requirements of rr. 2 and 3 of Indian Income tax Rules.
