Income tax was assessed upon the total income in the hands of the respondent assessee, an association of several persons combined together for the purpose of purchase of coal and its supply to customers for domestic purposes and other small scale industries.
The assessee claimed that it should not be assessed to tax as an association of persons, but the proportion of the income in the hands of each members of the association might be assessed to tax instead.
The Income tax Officer refused this request and an appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was dismissed.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal, on a further appeal.
held that though the Income tax Officer had power to assess income of the association of persons as such or in the alternative on the individual members thereof in respect of their proportionate share in the income, the tribunal had no power under the Act to direct the Income tax Officer to exercise his power in one way or other.
On a 86 reference, the High Court held that the Appellate Tribunal had power to set aside the Income tax Officer 's assessment against the association and to give consequential and ancillary 'directions to the said officer to assess individuals.
HELD: (i) Section 3 of the Income tax Act impliedly gives an option to an appropriate authority to assess the total income of either the association of persons or the members of such association individually.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Reddy Mallaram, followed.
(ii) Such an assessee has a right to appeal under section 30 of the Act against the order of the Income tax Officer assessing the association of persons instead of the members individually.
(iii) The Appellate Tribunal has jurisdiction to give directions to the appropriate authority to cancel the assessment made on the association of persons and to give appropriate directions to the authority concerned to make fresh assessment on the members of that associations individually.
The phraseology used both in section 31 and section 33 does not restrict the powers of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal; both have the power of such direction.
