The Free Press Company was a private limited company Carrying On business as printers and publishers of certain newspapers.
On August 31, 1946, the Free Press Company transferred the right to print and publish the newspapers to the assessee company and let out its machinery and assets to the latter with effect from September 1, 1946.
The assessee company accordingly started publishing newspapers from September 1, 1946.
The Free Press Company went into voluntary liquidation on October 31, 1946, and the Liquidator, on November 1, 1946, confirmed the transfer of the assets made by the Free Press Company to the assessee company.
On November 1, 1946 the aforesaid machinery was sold yielding a profit of Rs. 6,08,666.
That sum was made up of, of price machinery Rs. 2,14,090, (ii) the amount in excess over the original cost priceRs.
3,94,576.
In assessing the assessee to income tax for the accounting year 1946 47 the Income tax Officer included the said two items in the total income of the assessee company.
The first item was assessed as profit under proviso to section 10(2)(vii) of the Incometax Act and the second item was assessed as capital gains.
The matter went up to the High Court.
On a reference the High Court held that the assessee was not liable to tax in respect of the said two items.
Held: (i) The second proviso to section 10(2)(vii) of the Act would only apply to the sale of such machinery which was used for the purpose of business during the accounting year.
In order to bring the sale proceeds to charge under the second proviso the following conditions shall be fulfilled: (1) During the entire previous year or a part of it the business shall have been carried on by the assessee; (2) the machinery shall have been used in the business; and (3) the machinery shall have been sold when the business was being carried on and not for the purpose of closing it down or winding it up.
On the facts of this case it was held that the sale of the machinery in the instant case having taken place after the business was closed and during the winding up proceedings therefore it would fall outside the scope of the said proviso and thus the first item i.e. the sum of Rs. 2,14,090 could not be assessed to income tax.
190 The Liquidators of Pursa Limited vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar; , and K. M. section Reddy, Commissioner of Income tax, Kerala vs West Coast Chemicals and Industries Ltd. (in liquidation), Alleppy, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 960, relied on.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Circle II vs The National Syndicate, Bombay, ; , explained.
(ii) Both the sub section
(2) of section 26 and the proviso deal only with profits under the 4th head mentioned in section 6 and, so construed, it excludes capital gains.
The profits and gains of business and capital gains are two distinct concepts in the Income tax Act: the former arises from the activity which is called business and the latter accrues because capital assets are disposed of at a value higher than what they cost the assessee.
Therefore under section 26(2) of the Act the assessee being the successor could not be liable to income tax in respect of Rs. 3,94,576 (the second item) which represented the capital gains because capital gains are excluded from the purview of section 26(2) of the Act.
United Commercial Bank Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal; , , referred to.
