The respondent, who was the assignee mortgagee of a mortgage deed executed on February 15, 1945 by the appellant for a certain sum payable with interest, filed a suit for the recovery of the sum with Interest.
The suit ended in a compromise under which a decree was passed and certain payments were made towards the decree.
In due course the respondent moved for the passing of a final decree.
The appellant applied for scaling down of the debt under the Madras Agriculturists Relief Act.
The respondent, inter alia, contended in his objections filed against this application that as the debt sought to be scaled down was incurred subsequent to the date of commencement of the Act, the decree could not be scaled down under section 19(2) of the 307 Act.
The Subordinate Judge overruled the objection and held that the debt was liable to be scaled down in terms of section 13 of the Act.
On appeal, the High Court held that as the statutory right to have the interest scaled down was not put forward before the consent decree was passed, the decree could not be scaled down at the stage of the final decree R proceedings.
It further held that section 19(2) of the Act only applied to debts payable at the commencement of the Act and, therefore, the application for scaling down the decree was not maintainable.
On appeal by certificate, Held: Sections 7, 8, 9 and 13 form a group of sections providing the principles of scaling down of debts incurred by agriculturists under different situations.
A debt can be scaled down in an appropriate proceeding taken in respect of the same.
But in case of debts that have ripened into decrees, section 19(1) and (2) prescribe a special procedure for reopening the decree only in respect of debts incurred before the Act.
The Madras Agriculturists Relief Act does not provide for the reopening of decrees made in respect of debts incurred after it came into force, and for understandable reasons the relief in respect of such decrees is specifically confined only to a concession in the rate of interest.
