For the assessment years 1956 57 and 1957 58, the appellant was, assessed to sales tax in respect of Vanaspati and oil under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
By a notification issued on March 31, 1956 under section 3 A(2), the rate of tax on Vanaspati was fixed at one anna per rupee at the point of sale by the manufacturer.
The appellant and section P. Bhasin, a shareholder of the company, filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the U.P. Sales Tax Validation Act, 1958 and also prayed for the quashing of the assessment order dated October 15, 1960 and the order dated February 1, 1961, of the Sales Tax Judge (Appeals), Meerut, in connection with the assessment of tax on the sale of Vanaspati and other articles both on the ground that the sale tax was assessed at a higher rate than was permissible under a valid law and that the tax had been assessed at the rate of one anna and not at 6 Naya Paisa per rupee.
The writ petition was dismissed by a single Judge of the High Court and the Letters Patent Appeal was also dismissed by High Court.
The appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The only point urged before this Court was that the tax should have been calculated at the rate of 6 Naya Paisa per rupee and not at the rate of one anna per rupee as laid down in the relevant provisions of the U.P. Sales Tax Act and the notice issued under its provisions.
Dismissing the appeal, Held (per P, B. Gajendragadkar, C.J., M. Hidayatullah, K. C. Das Gupta and Raghubar Dayal, JJ.): The High Court was right in construing the provisions of sub section
(3) of section 14 of Indian to mean that references to values in any enactment, notification, rule or order under any enactment or in any contract, deed or instrument, expressed in old coins should be construed to be references to values expressed in new coins by converting the old values at the rate of16 annas, 64 pice and 192 pies to 100 Naya Paisa.
The values expressed in new coins must be absolutely equivalent to the value of the, old coins.
Per Shah, J.
The liability for sales tax after the amendment of the will be at the rate of 6 new coins for every rupee of sale price and not one anna.
By the notification issued on March 31, 1956, the liability for payment of sales tax was to be computed at the rate of one anna in a rupee of the turnover.
By virtue of section 14(3), for an anna mentioned in the notification, 6 1/4 new coins are to be substituted.
As the substituted rate involves a fraction, by the process of rounding off at the rate specified in section 14(2), the fraction of new coins has to be omitted and the nearest new coins, i.e., 6 new coins are to be deemed to be substituted in the statute.
J. K. Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , Ram Kishan Sunder Lal vs State of Uttar Pradesh, 13 S.T.C. 923, 315 M/s. Mangalore Ganesh Beedi Works vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 275, referred to.
