The appellants filed suits for the recovery of certain properties from the possession of the respondents.
The plaintiffs were the trustees of the temples and the defendants were the archakas and the alienees of the suit properties.
These suits were based on title and the relief asked for was the eviction of the archakas from the suit property as they, according to the plaintiffs, (appellants) had no title to remain in possession The plaintiff claimed that the suit properties were the properties of the deity and that the defendants had no right therein.
The archakas raised the plea that the title of the deity was confined only to melvaram in the plaint schedule lands and that they had title to the Kudivarani.
Both the Trial Court and the High Court confirmed the title of the deity to both the interests (Varams) and negatived the title of the defendant Archakas.
The High Court also held that the archakas were entitled to have a portion of the said properties allotted to them towards their remuneration for the services to the temples and gave a decree directing the division of the said properties into two halves and putting the archakas in possession of one half.
Against this decree of the High Court both the archakas and the trustees (appellants) preferred cross appeals to this Court.
348 The main point for consideration was whether the High Court, having held that the title to the suit property vested in the deity, had jurisdiction to compel the trustees of the temple to put the archakas in possession of specified extent of property towards their remuneration.
Held:(i) The principle of a Lost Grant can only be invoked where there is no acceptable evidence of the terms of the grant.
In the present case there is no scope for invoking the doctrine of Lost Grant as the terms of the grant are clear from the recitals in the lnam register and the inam statement, which conclusively establish that both the Varams were granted to the deity.
Sankaranarayana Pillayan vs H.R.E. Board, Madras I.L.R. , Buddu Satyanarayana vs Konduru Venkatapayya: ; , Maginiram Sitaram vs Kasturbai Manibhai, (1921) L.R. 49 I.A. 54 and Mohamed Muzafar Ali Musavi V. Jabeda Khatun, (1930) L.R. 57 A. 125, relied on.
(ii)The High Court erred in making an allocation of the lands between the trustees and the archakas in a suit for ejectment because there was absolutely no material either in the pleadings or in the evidence to make any such apportionment. 'Me High Court had De option but to deliver possession to the plaintiffs who had established their title to the suit properties.
In a suit for framing a scheme for temple a court may in an appropriate case put the archaka in possession of a portion of the temple lands towards his remuneration for services of the temple; but such considerations are out of place in a suit for ejectment.
Brahmayya vs Rajaswaraswami Temple, A.I.R. 1953 ',fad.
580 as Venkatadri V. Seshacharlu, I.L.R. referred to.
(iii)On the facts of this case it was held that the conduct of the archakas, was consistent with the recitals in the inam register, namely, that what was granted to the deity was the land i.e. both the Varams and that they had been put in enjoyment the said land in their capacity as archakas and de facto trustees.
They could not by mortgaging or otherwise alienating the property claim any right in derogation of the title of the deity.
They also cannot claim any right because their names are mentioned in addition to deity in the Inam register.
Their names in addition to the deity are mentioned as they were in possession of the land in their capacity as de facto trustees.
Arunachalam Chetti vs Venkata Chalapathi Guruswamligal, Mad. 253 and Secretary of State for India vs Vidhya Thirta Swamiga, I.L.R. , referred to.
Narayanamurthi V. Achaya Sastrulu, A.I.R. 1925 Mad.
411 relied on.
