The members of a raiding party led by the Licensing Inspector of the Delhi Corporation having taken into custody 25 or 30 stray cattle, were, while taking them to the cattle pound, belaboured with lathis by the three appellants and their friends, as a result of which they received injuries.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that (i) there was no proper delegation 'of authority to impound cattle in favour of the persons forming the raiding party, by the Commissioner, whose personal presence to supervise the exercise of the delegated authority was, in any case, required by the very order delegating the authority; (ii) the cattle were not "abandoned" in the sense of being "ownerless", and therefore could not be legally impounded; and (iii) that the injuries were inflicted by the appellants in the lawful exercise of their right of private defence of property.
HELD : (i) The order of the Commissioner placed before the Court along with the statement of case proved that the Commissioner had authorised licensing Inspectors to impound stray cattle.
Section 418(1) of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (Central Act 66 of 1957), did not require that the delegation of power must be to particular, named, individuals.
Nor was the personal presence of the Commissioner to supervise the exercise of the delegated power necessary although according to the terms of the order the delegation was "subject to my supervision ', control and revision." [11E F].
(ii) In the context in which the word "abandoned" occurred in section 418(1), the meaning which can reasonably be attached to it is "let loose" in the sense of being "left unattended" and certainly not "ownerless".
It is the duty of the Court in construing a statute to give effect to the intention of the legislature so as to "advance the remedy and suppress the mischief".
The legislature when it used the word "abandoned" in section 418(1) did not intend to say that the cattle must be "ownerless".
[12E G].
Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes (11th Edn.) pp.
221 224 and 266, referred to.
(iii) Section 99 of the Indian Penal Code specifically says that there is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done by the direction of a public servant acting in good faith, tinder colour of his office.
The protection extends even to acts which will not be strictly justified by law.
In the present case the act was fully justifiable by the law.
There was thus no right of private defence that could be claimed by the appellants.
[13B C].
