The appellant had been granted by the Zamindar of Simlapal in West Bengal a right to cut trees in certain forests of the zamindari.
The exercise of this right was interrupted by action taken against him under the West Bengal Private Forests Act, 1948.
The appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In the meantime, the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953, (Act 1 of 1954) was passed.
This Act provided that from the date specified in a notification under section 4 of the Act, property and interests specified in section 5 of the Act would vest in the State Government.
According to the Forest Department the right to cut trees enjoyed by the appellant was within the purview of section 5 of the Act and, therefore, had become vested in the State Government.
Certain decisions of the Calcutta High Court, however, went against this interpretation; it was held therein that a right to cut trees granted by an intermediary to a third person was not within the terms of section 5.
Thereupon the State Legislature of West Bengal passed Act 25 of 1957 which by adding section 5(aa) to the Act provided that upon the due publication of a notification under section 4, on and from the date of vesting, all lands in any estate comprised in a forest together with all rights to trees therein or the produce thereof and held by an intermediary or any other person shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree or order of any Court or Tribunal, vest in the State.
The appellant 's writ petition, coming up for hearing after this amendment, was dismissed.
An appeal to the Division Bench also failed.
Appeal before the Supreme Court came by virtue of a certificate of fitness under Article 133 (1) (c) of the Constitution.
The question for consideration was whether the terms of section 5(aa) were sufficient and apt to provide for the vesting of the right to cut the trees when such right belonged, on the date of vesting, not to the intermediary or zamindar but to another person to whom it had been granted under a contract with the said intermediary.
HELD : (i) The words "together with" used in section 5(aa), on the basis of which it was contended by counsel for the appellant that it was only where the right to the trees constituted an integral part of the right to the land that a vesting was effected of the latter right, meant in the context of the section no more than the expression 'as well as ' and imported no condition that the right to the trees should also belong to the owner of the land.
Also, it was not possible to read the words "held by an intermediary 2 or any other person" to mean that they were applicable only to cases where the entirety of the interest to the land, to the trees, and to the produce were vested in a single person be he the intermediary or another person.
These words would obviously apply equally to cases where the land belonged to an intermediary and the right to the trees or to the produce of the trees to another person.
In construing the section, moreover, the fact that it was amended to overcome certain decisions rendered under the original enactment was not an irrelevant factor to be taken into account.
[41 G; 5B D, 5G].
(ii) From the mere fact that there was no provision in the Act for compensating the interest of persons like the appellant, the Court could not hold that such an interest was not within the vesting section section 5(aa).
The absence ' of a provision for compensation might render the vesting section unconstitutional, but it could not detract from the clear operation of the words used in section 5(aa).
After the passing of the 17th Amendment to the Constitution and the inclusion of West Bengal Act 1 of 1954 among those specified in Schedule IX, the absence of a provision for compensation for the acquisition of the appellant 's rights would not render the West Bengal Act or the acquisition thereunder, unconstitutional.
[6B; 6E].
