The Indian Scrap Order, 1943, passed under the Defence of India Rules, was after the expiration of the said Rules, preserved by the Essential Supplies Act, 1946.
By (Central) Act 52 of 1950, the said Act was extended, inter alia to the Part B State of Madhya Bharat.
That State already had its corresponding law on the subject, namely, the Madhya Bharat Essential Supplies Act, 1948, under which the Madhya Bharat Scrap Order, 1949 had been issued.
While extending the Cen tral legislation to the Part B States, Act 52 of 1950 also laid down, in section 17(4) that the "corresponding law" in the State would stand repealed, with a proviso that the orders, directions etc., issued under the repealed law would continue.
The appellant who was President of the Scrap Dealers Association, Indore, was prosecuted under the allegation that the Association had sold scrap iron at rates higher than those fixed under the Indian Scrap Order.
The defence taken was that the prices at which the sales had been effected were those fixed by a notification dated 26th August, 1949 under the Madhya Bharat Scrap Order which continued in force.
The appellant was acquitted by the trial Court but was convicted by the High Court and appealed to the Supreme Court by special leave.
The contentions of the appellant were : (1) The Madhya Bharat Scrap Order had not been expressly repealed by the Indian Scrap Order and therefore it continued by force of the proviso to section 17(4) of the Act 52 of 1950, and, in any case, the notification dated 26th August, 1949, continued in force as an independent piece of subordinate legislation.
(2) The appellant as President of the Scrap Dealers Association which was an unincorporated body could not be held liable for a sale in excess of the authorised maximum price effected by a Munim or Munims of the Association.
HELD : (i) The Central notification by which the Indian Scrap Order was extended to Madhya Bharat, no doubt, did not expressly provide for the repeal of the Madhya Bharat Scrap Order, but the provisions of the two Orders were not identical and they could not, therefore, operate simultaneously.
It was therefore obvious that on the extension to Madhya Bharat of the Indian Scrap Order, the Madhya Bharat Scrap Order was repealed and replaced by the Indian law.
[331D].
(ii) The notification in question could not survive even if it was treated as an independent piece of subordinate legislation under the State law.
According to Craies, if the statute under which by laws are made is repealed, those bye laws are impliedly repealed and cease to have any validity unless the repealing statute contains some provision preserving the validity of the by laws, notwithstanding the repeal.
As the parent 324 order under which the notification dated August 26, 1949, was made had been repealed without a saving, the effect was that the said notification also stood repealed.
(333D; 333G H; 334H].
(iii) The definition of 'person ' in the General Clauses Act includes within that term an unincorporated body of persons.
In the present case it was the Association that was given the facility of obtaining scrap at more favourable prices than dealers, and it was that body which was subjected to control in the shape of having to sell what it had purchased from controlled sources at specified prices.
The argument could not be accepted that the Association as such could not be penalised for selling at unauthorised rates.
The appellant as President of the Association was liable to be convicted by virtue of section 8 of the Essential Supplies (Temporary Powers) Act, 1946 which made the abetment of contravention of any order under the Act, also an offence.
[335C D,E F].
Watson vs Winch.
and Craies on Statute Law.
6th Edn. 332, referred to.
