M, the candidate elected from Bangalore South (Scheduled Castes) constituency claimed to belong to Bhovi caste which was one of the Scheduled Castes mentioned in the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, but in the election petition filed against him by the appellant it was alleged that he belonged to Voddar caste which was not men tioned in the Order and that therefore he was not entitled to stand for election from the Scheduled Caste constituency.
The Election Tribunal recorded evidence on behalf of M to the effect that the Voddar caste was none other than the Bhovi caste.
The Tribunal held on the basis of the evidence produced that Bhovi was a sub caste of the Voddar caste, that M did not belong to the Bhovi sub caste, and that therefore he was not entitled to stand from the constituency.
The High Court however held that although Voddar caste as such was not included in the order, yet considering the facts and circumstances in existence at the time when the Order was passed in 1950, the Bhovi caste mentioned therein was the game as the Voddar caste.
On this finding it dismissed the election petition.
The appellant filed an appeal before this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that : (1) the High Court was wrong in looking into the evidence that was produced before the Tribunal and then coming to the conclusion that the caste Bhovi mentioned in the Order was meant for the caste Voddar (2) the Tribunal should not have allowed evidence to be produced which would have the effect of modifying the Order which was exhaustive, and gave full particulars of each scheduled caste recognised by it including alternative names and alternative spellings.
HELD : From the evidence it was clear that in 1950 when the Order was passed there was no caste in the then Mysore State which was known as Bhovi.
The Order could not have intended to recognise a caste which did not exist.
It was therefore necessary to find out which caste was meant by the use of the name Bhovi and for that purpose evidence was rightly recorded by the Tribunal and acted upon by the High Court.
It is only in such extraordinary circumstances that evidence can be so recorded.
Generally speaking it would not be open to any person to lead evidence to establish that his caste includes or is the same as another caste which is notified in the Order.
[32OA G; 322F G].
