Cash and ornaments worth Rs. 1,06,000 were robbed by dacoits from the Ramnagar branch of the Nainital Bank Ltd., a public limited company carrying on the business of banking.
The loss was claimed by the bank as a trading loss for the assessment year 1952 53.
The claim was disallowed by the Income tax Officer on the ground that the loss was not incidental to the business.
The finding being confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Incom tax Appellate Tribunal, a reference was made to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad which held that the loss by dacoity was incidental to the banking business and was, therefore a trading loss which the assessee could claim as a deduction under section 10(1) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
Appeal to this Court on behalf of the Revenue, came by way of a certificate under article 133 of the Constitution of India.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the risk of burglary was not incidental to the business of banking, and the loss in the present case fell on the assessee not as a person carrying on the business of banking but as an owner of funds.
HELD : Cash is the stock in trade of a banking company.
and its loss is therefore a trading loss.
But every loss is not deductible in computing the income of a business unless it is incurred in the carrying out of the operation of the business and is incidental to the operation.
Whether in a particular case an item of loss claimed as a deduction under section 10(1) of the Act is incidental to the operation of the assessee 's business or not is a question of fact to be decided on the facts of that case, having regard to the nature of the operations carried on and the nature of the risk involved in carrying them out.
The degree of risk or its frequency is not of much relevance but its nexus to the nature of the business is material.
[344 A; 349 D E].
It is an integral part of the business of banking that sufficient moneys should be kept in the bank duly guarded to meet the demands of the constituents.
Retention of the money in the bank is part of the operation of banking.
Retention of money in the bank carries with it the ordinary risk of its being the subject of embezzlement, theft, dacoity or destruction by fire and such other things.
Such risk of loss is incidental to the carrying on of the operation of the business of banking.
Loss incurred by dacoity in the present case is incidental to the carrying on of the business of banking.
[349 F G].
Case law discussed.
Motipur Sugar Factory Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, Charles Moore & Co. (W.A.) Pvt. Ltd. vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; and Gold Band Services Ltd. vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, , relied on.
341 Badridas Daga vs Commissioner of Income tax [1959] S.C.R. 690 distinguished.
Ramaswamy Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras I.L.R. (1930)53 Mad. 904, disapproved.
