The Quilon Municipality levied, in the pre Constitution period, a profession tax under powers conferred by the Travancore District Municipalities Act (Act 23 of 11 16 M.E., corresponding to 1940 A.D.).
The tax was leviable on a half yearly basis on companies and persons transacting busi ness in the municipal area for not less than a certain period in a year.
The rates were laid down in rule 16 of the Second Schedule to the aforesaid Act, and were on a graduated scale varying with the income of the assessee.
Under Rule 18(2), as it originally stood the income of an assessee transacting business inside as well as outside the area of the Municipality was to be deemed to be a prescribed percentage of the turnover of the business inside the Municipality.
A proviso was however added to Rule 18(2) in 1947 which laid down that in the case of the assessees who were assessed to income tax under the Travancore Income tax Act, the income for the purpose of levying the profession tax would be computed in the following manner i.e. the profits earned by the assessee in the whole State as disclosed by the assessment under the said Act would be divided in the proportion of the turnover of the business inside and outside the Municipality and the portion thus found attributable to the business in the Municipal area would be subjected to profession tax.
In 1950, after the promulgation of the Constitution, section 3 of the Finance Act (Act 25 of 1950) repealed the Travancore Income tax Act and replaced it by the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
Thereafter Municipalities in Travancore began to construe the re ferences to the Travancore Income tax Act in rule 18 as references to the Income tax Act, but this procedure was held to be illegal by the Travancore Cochin High Court by a judgment delivered in 1955.
The appropriate authority, thereupon by Notification dated 15th February 1956, amended rule 18 to provide, Inter alia, that, with effect from 1 4 50 references to the Travancore Income tax Act in that rule would be read as references to the Indian Income tax Act, and income under the proviso to sub rule (2) would be computed with reference to the income in the whole of the Indian Union instead of the income in the whole of Travancore State.
The amended proviso was also struck down by the High Court, on the ground that it was retrospective in operation.
Thereupon the Kerala Legislature passed the Kerala Profession Tax (Validation and Reassessment) Act, 1958 (Act 14 of 1958) which in section 2 provided that the levy of the tax under the aforesaid amendment would remain valid and would not be open to challenge on the ground that it had retrospective operation. 'Me respondents who were taxed by the Quilon Municipality under the amended proviso challenged the Validating Act before the Kerala High Court contending that it was a post Constitution law which in imposing a profession 582 tax of more than Rs. 250 per year on certain classes of assessees contravened the terms of article 276(2) of the Constitution.
This contention was upheld by the High Court.
Aggrieved thereby, the Quilon Municipality appealed to the Supreme Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that what the impugned Act did was merely to adapt the machinery for the assessment and levy of the tax to a situation arising out of the repeal of the Travancore Income tax Act and its replacement by the Indian Income tax Act in 1950, and therefore there was no contravention of article 276(2).
Nor was the Article contravened by the retrospective given to the provision in question.
HELD: (i) The proviso to rule 18(2) introduced in 1947 was not a mere machinery provision.
Under rule 18(2) as it originally stood the income of all assessees transacting business both inside and outside the Municipality was, for the purpose of levying profession tax, computed on the basis of a percentage of the turn over inside the municipality.
The proviso created a different procedure in the case of those who were assessed to income tax by linking up their income for the purpose of the profession tax with their profits in the whole State as assessed under the Travancore Income tax Act.
Thus a new class of assessees came into being which had not existed before the proviso was enacted.
The method of computing income laid down in the proviso was also likely to result in a different incidence of tax liability in the case of those covered by it.
Considering all this, the argument that the proviso did not affect either the basis or the incidence of the tax, could not be accepted.
[588 F].
(ii) The amendment of 1956 linked up the determination of the profits liable to profession tax with the Indian Income tax Act instead of the Travancore Income tax Act.
Also, under the amended proviso to rule 18(2), the profits in the whole of the Indian Union and not merely in the State of Travancore, would be the basis of computing income for the purpose of levying profession tax.
The provisions of the Indian and Travancore Income tax Acts were different and the territory of the Indian Union was much larger than that of Travancore, and these differences were likely to affect the tax liability of those covered by the said amendment.
[590 E F].
(iii) The argument that the Kerala Legislature was competent to give retrospectivity to a validating law and that since the legislature had validated the amendment to the proviso as from April 1950, the amendment was valid, could not be accepted.
The proviso had been given operation subsequent to the commencement of the Constitution and the provisions of article 276 would therefore stand in the way of the legislature which validated it.
[590 F H].
Jaclao Bahuji vs Municipal Committee, Khandwa, , distinguished.
