The appellants who were descendants of a former ruling chief and had lost their exemption from land revenue as a result of the operation of section 3 of the C.P. & Berar Revocation of Land Revenue Exemptions Act, 1948, applied for a pension or money grant under the provisions of section 5 of the Act.
their petition was rejected by the State Government without reasons being recorded.
They filed a writ petition under article 226 but the High Court held that the granting of a pension was completely within the discretion of the Government and the petition was therefore incompetent.
In appeal before the Supreme Court the appellants contended that rejection of their petition without any reasons being given amounted to no decision at all, and that once the conditions for the grant of a pension were satisfied it was obligatory on the State Government to make a grant of money or pension.
On behalf of the State Government reliance was placed on the words of section 5(2) that after enquiry in respect of the applications the Government 'may pass such orders as it deems fit ' and the directory word 'may ' used in section 5(3) itself.
HELD: (i) Sub section (2) and (3) of section 5 must be considered separately.
Under sub section
(2) all the applications for grant of money or pensionhad to be considered and Government could deal with them in several ways.
Notwithstanding its apparent discretion section 5(2) only enabled Government to pass orders as fit the occasion.
[683 E H].
In sub section
(3) special classes namely religious and charitable institutions etc.
and descendants of ruling chiefs had to be dealt with and therefore the discretion stood modified.
The rules highlighted the distinction between the two sub sections because they provided for special enquiries in cases falling under sub section
(3) [683 A D].
Enabling provisions sometimes acquire a compulsory force and in the present instance on the existence of the condition precedent, the grant of money or pension became obligatory on the Government notwithstanding that in sub section
(2) the Government had power to pass such orders as it thought fit and in sub section
(3) the word 'may ' was used.
Except in those cases where there were good grounds for not granting the pension, Government was bound to make a grant to those who fulfilled the desired conditions and the word 'may ' in the third sub section though apparently discretionary had to be read as 'must '.
[684 B H].
Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, referred to.
(ii)In passing orders on the appellants ' application Government had to act in a quasi judicial manner.
The appellants had to be given an 679 opportunity to state their case and were also entitled to know why their claim had been rejected.
[685 B D].
M/s. Hari Nagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunjhunwala and Others ; , referred to.
Order of the State Government set aside.
