The Income tax Officer issued a notice to the assessee under section 34 on the ground that two items of the assessee 's income, namely forest income and interest income, were not included in the original assessment for the year 1942 43.
In response the assessee filed a return fully disclosing his interest income but raised the plea that his forest income was not taxable.
The, Income tax Officer however, assessed both items to tax.
On appeal, the Appellate Tribunal in its order dated April 25, 1961, although dealing only with the forest income and holding that the Income tax Officer had no jurisdiction to initiate proceedings under section 34 in respect of such income, by inadvertence or by mistake, set aside the entire order of reassessment both in respect of forest income, as well as the interest income.
The Department did not take any steps to rectify the mistake under section 35 or to have the question of illegality referred to the High Court.
Having allowed the order of the Tribunal to become final, the Income tax Officer initiated fresh proceedings under section 34 in respect of the interest income and made a revised assessment order which included this income.
The Appellate Tribunal confirmed the assessment but the High Court, on a reference to it under section 66(1), took the view that fresh proceedings under section 24 could not be taken for the reason, inter alia, that the Tribunal 's order dated April 25, 1949 had become final.
HELD : The Tribunal had committed a mistake in setting aside the reassessment order in respect of interest income also, but the income tax Officer did not resort to the obvious remedy of having the mistake rectified as provided for under section 35 and allowed the Tribunal 's order dated April 25, 1949 to become final.
He could not in the circumstances, reopen the assessment by initiating proceedings under section 34, as otherwise there would be an unrestricted power of review in the hands of the Income tax Officer to go behind the findings of a hierarchy of Tribunals and Courts.
[995 E F; 996 F H] C.I.T. Bombay and Aden vs Khemchand Ramdas, (1938)6 I.T.R. 414 and C.I.T. West Punjab vs The Tribune Trust, Lahore, (1948)16 I.T.R. 214, referred to.
R. K. Das & Co. vs C.I.T., West Bengal, (1956)30 I.T.R. 439 and C.I.T., Bihar & Orissa vs Maharaja Pratapsingh Bahadur of Gidhaur, distinguished.
