The members of the Bombay Bullion Association, respondent herein, were permitted under the Forward Contracts Control Act (Bom.
Act 64 of 1947) to carry on forward dealings in bullion subject to the bye laws framed by the Association.
The appellant who was a member of the Association and was carrying on business as bullion merchant, defaulted in performing his obligation to tender silver of which he was the forward seller, on the settlement day, and so the Association, purporting to act under its bye laws, purchased a quantity of silver at the risk of the appellant and claimed from him the difference in price.
The appellant paid the amount and challenging the legality of his being treated as in default filed a suit for its refund.
The suit was dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended that the Association should not have made the purchase because the purchasers had not fulfilled the terms of their obligations under the bye laws in making their payments to the Association.
The contentions were that : (i) certain of the purchasers who had made payments into the Clearing House of the Association by cheques, drawn on their account in the Clearing House, had not had the cheques certified as good for payment as required by bye law 137 B, and (ii) one payment was made by a purchaser, by a cheque drawn, not on the Clearing House but on a branch of the Clearing House in the city, and which besides was not certified good for payment as required by the bye law.
HELD : (i) Where a payment was made by a cheque drawn on in account with the Clearing House and the amount represented by that cheque was transferred to the Clearing House Account of the Association, it is virtually a payment in cash, though in form a payment by cheque.
Since payment in cash is one of the modes of payment recognised by the byelaw it satisfied the requirement of a valid payment.
[255 E F; 262 G H] Arsene A. Larocque vs Hyacinthia Beauckemin, (1897) A.C. 358, referred? to.
(ii)Where the Clearing House had accepted the cheque and credited it to the Association after ascertaining from the branch on which it was drawn, that the drawer of the cheque had enough funds at that branch for meeting of the cheque, the cheque need not be certified as good for payment.
The position with respect to such a cheque is the same as when the cheque is drawn on an account in the same branch, because the certificate of the banker that is referred to in the bye law is the certificate of a bank different from that into which the cheque is being paid.
In any event, when the staff of the Clearing 1 louse ascertained from the branch that the cheque was backed by sufficient funds to the credit of the customer in the branch on which it was drawn, it satisfied the requirements of a cheque certified as good for payment within the bye law.
[260 B; 262 A C; 263 G H] up./ 65 17 250
