In May 1941, the respondent had entered into a contract with the appellant company for the purchase of a plot of land in a Colony Scheme.
He had paid the earnest money and had undertaken to complete the transaction within on month from the date of completion of certain development work by the appellant.
Thereafter, the land in question was requisitioned by the Government under the Defence of India Rules and the company was therefore unable to undertake the development work during the continuance of the war.
On learning that the Government proposed to de requisition the lands taken over by them, in May 1946, the respondent approached the company to ascertain when it would complete development work after the de requisitioning of the land, so that he might complete the transaction within one month thereafter.
The company claimed that the contract stood cancelled since the respondent had failed to comply with the terms of a circular letter issued by it in December 1943, offering all purchasers an option between accepting refund of the earnest money or completing the transaction immediately by accepting the land in an undeveloped state.
The respondent denied having received the circular letter and filed a suit in August 1946, which was decreed by the trial court and the decree was upheld by the High Court in appeal.
In the Supreme Court it was contended on behalf of the company that the contract was discharged by reason of frustration because its performance was rendered unlawful as a result of the requisitioning orders made by the Government, and furthermore, that the suit for specific per formance was premature,, because, under the contract the respondent did not get the right to obtain a sale deed till after the development work was complete.
HELD : (i) It cannot be said that because of the requisitioning orders which had the effect of making the entry by or on behalf of the company on the land illegal, during the subsistence of the period of requisitioning, the contract stood discharged by frustration.
[637 H] If time is of the essence of the contract, or if the time for the performance is set out in the contract, the contract would stand discharged even though its performance may have been rendered unlawful for an indeterminate time, provided unlawfulness attached to the performance at the time when the contract ought to have been performed.
[637 A C] In the present case, it could not be said that time was of the essence of the contract or that the contract had been discharged because it had not been performed in a reasonable time within the meaning of section 46 of the Contract Act.
When the parties entered into the contract, they knew the prevailing circumstances and must have borne in mind the possibility of difficulties in obtaining the necessary material or the possibility of the land being requisitioned by the Government.
[637 E H] 631 Denny Mott & Dickson Ltd. vs James B. Frasser & Co. Ltd. ; and Satyabrata Ghose and Ors.
vs Mugneeram Bangur & Co. & Anr. ; referred to.
(ii) The contention that the suit was premature could not be accepted because the development work had been completed when the appeal was heard by the High Court.
In such a case the court would be justified in taking notice of subsequent events in moulding its relief accordingly.
[638 A B]
