An assessment list of house and conservancy taxes was prepared on the basis that a slab system of taxation would apply, and was published by the appellant under section 136 of the M.P. Municipalities Act, 1961.
The assessees filed objections to it under section 138(2).
The appellant later re voked the slab system and reverted to the old rate of assessment.
A sub committee appointed by the appellant, considered the objections filed to the list and completed its revision.
The final list was published after authentication.
when some complaints of partiality in its preparation were made, the list was suspended.
The appellant then decided to amend the list under section 141 and, after issuing notices to some assessees and after hearing their objections a new list was authenticated and published.
The respondents having preferred an appeal against the new assessment list under the Act, also challenged it in writ petition to the High Court.
The High Court allowed the petition.
On appeal to the Supreme Court.
HELD : The assessment list authenticated by the Chief Municipal Officer was not prepared according to law and therefore, the provisions of s.141 were not available to the appellant.
[660 E] (i) Article 265 of the Constitution, implies that the procedure for imposing the liability to pay a tax has to be strictly complied with.
Since in the instant case, the objections which the assessees had filed were in respect of the list compiled on the basis that the slab system would apply and not in pursuance of what the liability would be upon the reversion to the old rate of tax, it could not be said that the opportunity as contemplated by the Act was given to the assessees for lodging their objections as required by section 137 of the Act.
[659 E G] (ii) Assuming that under section 78, the appellant council could delegate the power to hear objections against a proposed list under section 138(2) to its vice president or certain other officers, this power could not be delegated to a sub committee.
[660 B C] (iii) Though an alternate remedy is open to an aggrieved party the High Court has jurisdiction under article 226 to give relief to such a party in appropriate cases.
[657 FF]
