The petitioner filed a suit in the court of the Sub Judge claiming a decree for Rs. 10,665 and any balance ascertained as due to him on taking account, being proceeds of sales made by the respondents as the petitioner 's agents.
The trial court passed a decree directing that an account be taken of the amount due and appointed a Commissioner for the purpose.
In appeal the High Court reversed the decree and dismissed the suit.
An application filed by the petitioner for a certificate under article 133 was rejected by the High Court.
Upon a petition for special leave to appeal tinder article 136, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner, that the judgment of the High Court involved a claim or question respecting property of a value exceeding Rs. 20,000 and the petitioner was entitled as a matter of right to a certificate from the High Court under article 133(1)(b).
HELD : Under cl.
(a) what is decisive is the amount or value of the subject matter in the court of first instance and "still in dispute" in appeal to the Supreme Court; under el.
(b) it is the amount or value of the property respecting which a claim or question is involved in the judgment sough, to be appealed from.
The expression "property" is not defined in the Code, but having regard to the use of the expression " amount" it would apparently include money.
The property respecting which the claim or question arises must be property in addition to or other than the subject matter of the dispute.
If in a proposed appeal there is no claim or question raised respecting property other than the subject matter, cl.
(a) will apply : if there is involved in the appeal a claim or question respecting property of an amount or value not less than Rs. 20,000 in addition to or other than the subject matter of the dispute el.
(b) will apply.
[754 B E] In, the present case, the claim in the court.
of first instance did not reach Rs. 20,000, and therefore a certificate could not be granted under article 133(1)(a).
[754 A] It could not be said that a judgment dealing with a claim to money alleged to be due from an agent for price of goods belonging to the principal, sold by the agent, involved a claim or question respecting the goods which had been sold.
Furthermore, although the petitioner 's claim on appeal including interest exceeded Rs. 20,000, this was still the subject matter in dispute; the judgment did.
not involve any claim or question respecting property in addition to or other than the subject matter of the suit.
Article 133(1)(b) was, therefore, also not applicable.
[754 G H; 755 A] 752
