The appellants were convicted by the Sessions Judge under section 302 with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Two of them were sentenced to death and two to imprisonment for life.
Their appeal before the High Court was heard by a Division Bench of two judges, one of whom was for allowing it, the other for dismissing it.
The third Judge to whom it was refer red dismissed the appeal.
The appellants applied for a certi ficate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court.
The certificate was granted mainly on the ground that the third Judge who heard the appeal had omitted to discuss at length the question of the genuineness of the first information report.
In the Supreme Court objection was taken on behalf of the State that the certificate of fitness granted by the High Court was incompetent in view of the previous decisions of this Court in Haripada Dey vs State of West Bengal & Anr.
; , Nar Singh & Anr.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , Sunder Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh, A.I.R. (1956) S.C. 411 and Khushalrai vs State of Bombay, ; The appellants urged that these cases be reconsidered.
A plea for the reduction of the death sentences was also made.
HELD: (i) Section 429 of the Criminal Procedure Code contemplates that it is for the third Judge to decide on what points he shall hear arguments, if any, and that postulates that he is completely free in resolving the difference as he thinks fit.
It was sufficient for the third Judge to have said on the question of the First Information Report that he did not consider it necessary to decide the point but if it was necessary he was in agreement with the Judge on the Division Bench who was for dismissing the appeal.
There was therefore a proper decision by the third Judge and the certificate could not be based on the omission to discuss the doubts about the First Information Report.
[771 F H] (ii) The Constitution does not contemplate acriminal Jurisdiction for this court except in these case covered by clauses (a) and (b) of article 134 which provide for appeals as of right.
The High Court before it certifies the case must be satisfied that it involves some substantial question of law or principle.
Only a case involving something more than mere appreciation of evidence is contemplated by the Constitution of the grant of a certificate.
What that may be will depend on the circumstances of the case but the High Court should be slow to certify cases.
The High Court should not overlook that there is a further remedy by way of special leave which may be invoked in cases where 772 the certificate is refused.
The present certificate did not comply with the requirements of article 134(1) (c) :is explained above.
[780 C F; 781 A] Case law considered.
(iii)That whenever two Judges in appeal differ on the question of sentence, death sentence should not be imposed without compelling reasons cannot be raised to the pedestal of a rule, for that would leave the sentence to the determination of one Judge to the exclusion of the other.
Each case must be decided on its own facts and a sentence of imprisonment for life can only be substituted if the facts justify that the extreme penalty of law should not be imposed.
[781 E F] Kalawati and Another vs State of Himachal Pradesh, and Pandurang, Tukia and Bhillia vs State of Hyderabad, ; , referred to.
