The appellant published in his paper, which had a circulation mainly in Aligarh, a statement to the effect that Public Prosecutors and Assistant Public Prosecutors had been receiving bribes.
The Public Prosecutor and the 11 Assistant Public Prosecutors at Aligarh obtained the sanction of the State Government as required under section 198B(c) of Code of Criminal Procedure to file a complaint under section 500 Indian Penal Code in a court of Sessions against the appellant for publishing defamatory remarks against the Assistant Public Prosecutor S, of District Aligarh and other police prosecuting staff of the Government in respect of their conduct in the discharge of public functions.
The Sessions Judge convicted the appellant and the High Court dismissed his appeal against the conviction.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, that the sanction granted under section 198B(c) was not the sanction contemplated by law because it was a general sanction and not with respect to the defamation of any particular Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor; for the purpose of an offence under section 500 Indian Penal Code the person defamed must be an individual or a particular group and there was no evidence that the remarks were defamatory of any particular group; that the prosecution did not lead any evidence to establish that the defamed group had any reputation which could be harmed; and that in any event the remarks were for public good.
HELD : (i) the sanction given by the Government was specifically with respect to the defamation of S, the Assistant Public Prosecutor, Aligarh, and the other prosecuting staff of the Government and as such it could not be considered a general sanction not contemplated by law.
[826 H] The sanction given, could be taken to be sanction in respect of the defamation of the entire Prosecution staff in the State; there was therefore no force in the contention that the Public Prosecutor Was not competent to restrict his complaint to the defamation of S, and other Public Prosecuting staff of the State Government at Aligarh.
Furthermore, although the impugned article did not contain any express reference to the prosecuting staff at Aligarh, the offending remarks could properly be taken to refer to the prosecuting staff at Aligarh in the context of the paper being a local weekly and the other circumstances of the case.
[827 C E] (ii) Explanation II to section 499 makes it clear that there can be a defamation of an individual person and also of a 'collection of persons '.
Such a collection of persons must be identifiable in the sense, that one could with cartainty say that the particular group had been defamed as dis tinguished from the rest of the community.
The prosecuting staff of Aligarh, and even the prosecuting staff in the State of U.P. would be such an identifiable group or 'collection of persons '.
[827 G H; 828 A C] Supp/. 65 6 824 (iii) The impugned remarks were per se defamatory of the group of persons referred to.
The tenor of the article did not indicate that the purpose of the appellant in publishing these remarks was "public good".
No enquiry could have been started by that Government on such a publication implying the acceptance of bribes by the prosecuting staff.
The impugned remarks could lead readers to believe or suspect that the Public Prosecutors were corrupt and thus affected the reputation of the prosecuting staff adversely.
Unless proved otherwise, the presumption is that every person has a good reputation.
[828 E H] The lower courts were therefore right in rejecting the contention that the impugned remarks were protected under Exceptions 3 and 9 to section 499 I.P.C. and in convicting the appellant.
[829 B D]
