The appellants, who had been elected members of the Municipal Committee, Batala, challenged the Notification issued under section 14(e) of the Punjab Municipalities Act (III of 1911) directing their removal and disqualifying them from election for a period of one year.
It was contended on their behalf that there were two provisions in the Act, i.e. section 14(e) and section 16(1) clauses (a) to (g) under which a member could be removed in the public interest; and whereas action could only be taken under section 16(1) after notice and an opportunity for a hearing to the member concerned there was no such requirement in the case of section 14(e).
This sec tion was therefore hit by Article 14 and consequently the Notifications were invalid.
HELD : (per Wanchoo, Hidayatullah, Shah and Sikri, JJ.) If the State Government intended to remove a person for any of the reasons given under section 16(1) cases (a) to (g) it could take action under section 14(e) and thus circumvent the provision in section 16(1) for a hearing.
The relevant part of section 14(e) entirely covered section 16(1) but was more drastic.
It was therefore obviously discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
[863 C E] Shri Radeshayam Khare vs The State of Madhya Pradesh , distinguished.
No assistance could be derived by the respondent State from the fact that under the proviso to section 24(3), the State Government had power to refuse to notify the election of a person elected on any of the grounds mentioned in section 16(1) and there was no provision in this connection for notice and hearing of the person elected.
Apart from the question of the constitutionality of this provision, there was no connection between the proviso to section 24(3) and the provision contained in section 14(e).
The proviso to section 24(3) was complete in itself and dealt with a situation where the State Government refused to notify the election of a person who had been elected.
Section 14(e) on the other hand provided for the vacation of the seat of a member after he had taken the oath of office.
Therefore the constitutionality or otherwise of section 14(e) would depend upon its contrast with section 16(1) which also provided for the removal of a member.
[864 A C Per Mudholkar, J. The power conferred by section 14 upon the State Government to require that the seat of any member shall be vacated "for any reason which it may deem to affect the public interest" is unconstitutional.
The expression 'public interest ' is of wide import and what would 859 be a matter which is in the public interest would necessarily depend upon the time and place and circumstances with reference to which the consideration of the question arises.
But it is not a vague or indefinite ground.
There is no guidance in the Act for determining what matters.
though not in public interest may yet be capable of being deemed to affect the public interest.
[866 E G; 867 A C]
