The appellant and respondent were the tenant and owner respectively of premises to which the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956, applied.
The respondent filed a suit, under section 13 of the Act, for the eviction of the appellant on various grounds.
The appellant denied the allegations and contested the suit.
Before the suit was filed, the appellant was depositing the rent for the premises with the Rent Controller under section 21 of the Act, because, the respondent was not prepared to accept the rent.
The appellant continued to deposit the rent with the Rent Controller even after the suit was filed and the summons was served.
Alleging that as soon as the suit was filed and a period of one month from the date of service of the summons on the appellant had expired, it was obligatory on the appellant under section 17(1), to pay the amount in court and not with the Rent Controller, the respondent filed an application for striking out the defence of the appellant in the suit.
The application was allowed by the trial court.
The appellant 's revision petition to the High Court was dismissed, following the decision of a Special Bench of the High Court in Siddheswar Paul vs Prakash Chandra Dutta, A.I.R. 1964, Cal. 105.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that the majority view in Siddheswar Paul 's case that section 22(3) does not apply to cases falling under section 17(1) was wrong, because, the deposit made by the appellant under section 21 with the Rent Controller constituted payment of rent by him to the landlord.
under section 22(3); and therefore, there was no scope for invoking section '17(3) against the appellant inasmuch as the basis of section 17(3) was that the tenant whose defence was sought to be struck out had committed a default in the payment of rent.
HELD: Section 17(1) is a complete scheme by itself and the legislature has intended that in suits or proceedings to which the section applies the payment of rent by the tenant to the landlord must be made in the manner prescribed by the section.
The legislature wanted the section to control the relationship between the landlord and the tenant as prescribed by it.
once a suit or proceeding for ejectment was instituted and a period of one month from the date of service of the writ or summons on the defendant had expired.
Even in cases where the tenant might have been depositing the rent with the Controller under section 21, he has to comply with section 17(1) before the period prescribed by the section had elapsed, because, as soon as a suit is filed against the tenant by the landlord for eviction, section 17 which is a special provision, comes into operation, and it is the provisions of that special section that must prevail in cases governed by it.
The object is.
when a suit or proceeding has commenced between the landlord and the tenant for ejectment and the tenant had received notice of it, the payment of rent should be made in court to avoid any disputes in that behalf.
The majority view in Siddheswar Paul 's case correctly represents the true scope and effect of section 17.
as distinguished from sections 21 and 22.
[42E; 431 F; 45G H] 35 Therefore, even the valid deposit made under section 21 could not be permitted to be pleaded by the tenant when the application was made against him under section 17(3).
