The Sales Tax Officer rejected the assessed 's claim that he was not liable to be assessed to sales tax in respect of certain .sales of cement imported from Pakistan because (i) he was not a. dealer within the meaning of s.2(f) of the Rajas than Act 29 of 1954, and (ii) the sales in question were in the course of the import within the meaning of article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution.
In the order of assessment, there was no discussion of the question of applicability of article 286(1) (b).
The assessee therefore filed a petition under article 226 challenging the assessment order on the grounds taken before the Sales Tax Officer and also claiming that the latter had failed to consider the impact and effect of article 286(1)(b)on the facts of the case.
The State objected to the maintainability of the petition on the ground that the petitioner should have availed of the alternative remedy of appeal provided under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, but the High Court overruled this objection for the reason, inter alia, that the petitioner had challenged the appellant 's jurisdiction to assess him to.
sales tax in view of the.
provisions of article 286(1) (b).
Upon dealing with the merits of the case, the High Court held that on the facts of the case it was clear that the sales in question took place when the goods were in the course of import and therefore, by virtue of article 286(1)(b) were not liable to sales tax.
The court therefore quashed the order of assessment.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the State that the High Court should have refused to entertain the petition as many of the crucial facts had not been brought on the record by the respondent, and further more, it was not established that the cement was sold in the course of import into India.
HELD: The High Court should not have decided the disputed questions of fact, but should merely have quashed the assessment order on the. ground that the Sales Tax Officer had not dealt with the question raised before him and remanded the case.
[77 B] OBITER: The High Court should have declined to entertain the petition, as in this case there were no exceptional circumstances to warrant the exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction under article 226.
It was not the object of article 226 to convert High Courts into original or appellate assessing authorities whenever the assessee chose to attack an assessment order on the ground that a sale was made in the course of import and was therefore exempt from tax.
The fact that an assessee might have to deposit sales tax when filing an appeal could not in every case justify his bypassing the remedies provided by the Sales Tax Act.
There must be something more in a case to warrant the entertainment of a petition under article 226, something going to the root of the jurisdiction of the Sales 72 Tax Officer, something to show that it would be a case of palpable injustice to the assessee to force him to adopt the remedies provided by the Act.
[75 G, H] A.V. Venkatesweran vs Ramchand Sobhraj Wadwani, A.I.R. , referred to.
