One C a tenant of a Chawl belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Bombay died, and his widow on whom the tenancy devolved, took in a boarder.
Proceedings by the Corporation under Chapter VI A of the Municipal Corporation Act for their ejectment were initiated by an officer to whom the commissioner had delegated his powers under section 68 of the Act.
After due enquiry the officer passed an order evicting C 's widow and her boarder.
In an appeal filed under section 105F of the Act before the Bombay City Civil Court it was held that the delegation of the Commissioner 's power was not proper inasmuch as the judicial functions of the Com missioner under sections 105B to 105E had been delegated to be exercised under the Commissioner 's control and subject to his revision, and consequently the order of ejectment was without jurisdiction.
The Corporation appealed, by special leave, to the Supreme Court.
No question as to the validity of the law was raised.
It was only contended that judicial power was delegated with administrative control over the delegates decision.
HELD :(i) Section 68 was originally intended to cover very different matters because Chapter VI A could not then have been in contemplation.
When Chapter VI A was added and a reference to sections 105B to 105E was included in section 68, the wording of that section became applicable to the powers exercisable under sections 105B to 105E, even though that wording, taken literally, is somewhat inapt to cover delegation of judicial power.
[932 D] (ii) To the delegation of judicial power as such there can be no objection when the law either expressly or by necessary implication permits it.
In the present case the amendment of section 68 by inclusion of the delegation of the function of the Commissioner under sections 105B to 105E does indicate the intention that the judicial and quasi judicial powers contained in Chapter VI A were expressly intended to be delegated.
The words "the Commissioner 's control" and "subject to his revision" in section 68, as well as in order of delegation, are really appropriate to a delegation of administrative functions.
They must be reasonably construed.
In respect of judicial or quasi judicial functions these words cannot bear the meaning which they bear in the delegation of administrative functions.
When the Commissioner stated that his functions were delegated subject to his control and revision it did not mean that he reserved to himself the right to intervene to impose his own decision upon his delegate.
The control envisaged was not control over the decision as such but over the administrative aspects of cases and their disposal and the delegation was valid.
[932 F 933 B] The order of the Bombay City Civil Court could not therefore be sustained.
