The appellant as a land holder held a hat or market on his land.
The respondent, the local board, within whose jurisdiction the market was held, issued notice to the appellant to take out a licence and pay a certain sum as licence fee for holding the market.
Inspire of the continued protests of the appellant against the levy, the amount was sought to be recovered by the issue of distress warrants and attachment of his property.
The appellant file.d a writ petition in the High Court challenging on a number of grounds, the constitutionality of the impost, which was dismissed.
In appeal by certificate the appellant contended that (i)the Assam Legislature had no legislative competence to tax markets, and (ii) the tax actually imposed on this market infringed article 14 of the Constitution, because the board fixed a higher rate for the appellant 's market as compared with other neighbouring markets.
HELD:(i) The tax in the present case being on land within the meaning of Entry 49 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, would clearly be within the competence of the State Legislature.
[49 E C] The Scheme of section 62 of the Assam Local Self Government Act, 1953 shows that the tax provided therein is a tax on land, though its incidence depends upon the use of the land as a market and the owner, occupier or farmer of that land .has to pay a certain tax for its use as such.
But there is no tax on the transaction that may take place within the market.
Further the amount of tax depends upon the area of the land on which the market is held and the importance of the market subject to a maximum fixed by the State Government.
Section 62(2) which used the words "impose an annual tax thereon" clearly shows that the word "thereon" refers to any land for which a licence is issued for use as a market and not to the word "market".
The use to which the land is put can be taken into account in imposing a tax on it within the meaning of entry 49 of the List II.
Ralla Ram vs The Province of East Punjab, , applied.
[51 C F] (ii) It was for the appellant to show that in fixing the tax on the other markets as it did, the board acted arbitrarily and did not take into account the size and importance of the markets.
As there was no material by which the relative size and importance of those markets, could be judged, it was not possible to hold that there was discrimination in taxing this market.
[52 F G]
