In payment of an amount due from them to the respondents, the appellants sent to the respondents on August 31, 1948 a cheque which had been drawn on the Sibsagar branch of a Tripura Bank in favour of the appellants by a third party and thereafter endorsed by the appellants to the respondents.
On September, 4, 1948, the respondents forwarded the cheque to their bankers, a Gauhati Bank who.
in turn, sent the cheque to the Tripura Bank at Sibsagar for encashment.
That bank debited the amount of the cheque to the account of the third party and sent to the respondent 's Gauhati Bank a draft which was payable at its own Head Office at Calcutta.
Thereafter the respondents ' Gauhati Bank forwarded the. draft to their Head Office at Calcutta for collection but the latter never presented the draft and made no attempt to collect the amount of the draft.
In the meantime, the respondents bank closed its business on September 17, 1948 and was ordered to be wound up.
About a month later, the Tripura Bank also closed its business and was compelled to enter into a scheme of arrangement with its creditors.
Upon the failure of their attempts to obtain payment of the draft amount from the Tripura Bank, the respondents instituted a suit against the appellants claiming payment of their dues on the ground that the cheque dated August 31, 1948 was received by the respondents as a conditional payment, and as the cheque had not been cashed, the respondents were entitled to enforce their original claim.
The sub Judge dismissed the suit but the High Court in appeal reversed the decision and decree the suit.
On appeal to the Supreme Court, HELD: (per Raghubar Dayal, Bachawat and Ramaswami, J J)Although the respondents originally received the cheque as a conditional payment of their dues, and if nothing else had happened, the original debt would have revived on non payment of the cheque, having regard to the laches of the respondents in the collection of the draft and the consequential prejudice to the appellants, the respondents must be deemed to have retained the draft as absolute payment of the cheque and on the payment of the cheque, the original debt stood discharged.
[105 E F] Chetty on Contracts, 22nd Edn. article 1079; Addison 's Treating on the Law of Contracts, 11th Edn.
p. 156; Hobkins vs Ware, ; Chamberlyn vs Delarive, ; , referred to.
(per Mudholkar.
J.): There was evidence to show that respondents ' bank, instead of collecting cash from the Tripura Bank at Sibsagar, sought, for reasons 0 their own, to collect the amount by draft.
Furthermore, after the respondent bank went into liquidation, the respondents wrote to the Tripura Bank stating that the 104 amount of the demand draft belonged to them and not to their bankers who were only acting as their agents for collection purposes and that accordingly the draft amount should be paid to them.
Thus, though the cheque endorsed by the appellants in favour of the respondents was only a conditional payment of the amount for which the cheque was drawn, the respondents, by accepting the demand draft drawn by the Tripura Bank must be deemed to have accepted the draft as a legal tender or as absolute payment of the amount payable under the cheque endorsed in their favour by the appellant.
Their rights thereafter would rest only upon the demand draft and not upon the original debt which the appellant owed to them.
The remedy of the respondents, therefore, could be against their own bank, or against the Tripura Bank, but not against the appellants.
[108 E, 109 C]
