The appellant was a company registered in the erstwhile Baroda State.
In connection with the assessment year 1942 43 the Income tax Officer Ahemdabad held that certain sale proceeds were received by the appellant in British India and the profit thereon was taxable under the Indian income tax Act, 1922.
One of the items in dispute related to the sale proceeds collected by collecting cheques on British India Shroffs and Merchants.
In respect of the said item the Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as the Appellate Tribunal decided against the appellant, and thereafter, reference was made to the High Court.
The High Court felt that it required further facts to decide the reference and twice remanded the case to the Tribunal for investigation of those facts.
The Tribunal after taking evidence submitted a supplementary Statement of Case on each occasion.
Finally the High Court decided the question against the appellant, but granted it a certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court had no jurisdiction to direct the Tribunal to collect additional material and make it a part of the supplementary Statement of Case under section 66(4) as had been decided by this Court in the cases of the Petlad Co. and the New Jahangir Mills.
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that these two cases required reconsideration.
The Court therefore had to consider whether it should review and revise its earlier view taken in the said two cases.
HELD : (i) The view contended for on behalf of the Revenue namely, that the High Court had power to ask the Tribunal to investigate further facts and submit a supplementary Statement of Case was a reasonably possible view.
But on the other hand the opposite view taken by this Court in the Petlad Co. case and the New jahangir Mills case was also reasonably possible.
The latter view had been followed by this Court on several occasions and it had regulated the procedure in reference proceedings in the High Courts ever since the decision in the New Jahangir Mills case was pronounced.
Besides, no reported decision had been cited at the bar where the question about the constitution of section 66(4) was considered and decided in favour of the view con tended for by the Revenue.
No case therefore was made out for a revision or review of the Court 's decisions in the Petlad Co. and New Jahangir Mills cases.
[928 C F] Case law discussed.
The New jahangir Vakil Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North; , and ' The Petlad Turkey Red Dye 909 Works Co. Ltd. Petland vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, Ahemdabad, [1963] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 871, affirmed.
(ii) The principle of stare decisis cannot be pressed into service in cases where the power of this Court to reconsider and revise its earlier decisions is invoked, because that power is inherent in this Court; but nevertheless the normal principle that judgments pronounced by this Court would be final cannot be ignored.
Unless considerations of a subs tantial and compelling character make it necessary to do so this Court should and would be reluctant to review and revise its earlier decisions.
[923 B D] Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs State of Bihar , distinguished.
(iii) If the Court is satisfied that its earlier decision was clearly erroneous, it should not hesitate to correct the error; but before a previous decision is pronounced to be plainly erroneous, the Court must be satis fied with a fair amount of unanimity amongst its members that a revision of the said view is fully justified.
It is not possible or desirable, and in any case it would be inexpedient to lay down any principles which should govern the approach of the Court in dealing with the question of reviewing and revising its earlier decisions.
It would always depend upon several relevant considerations What is the nature of the infirmity or error on which a plea for a review and revision of the earlier view is based ? On the earlier occasion, did some patent aspects of question remain unnoticed, or was the attention of the Court not drawn to any relevant and material statutory provision, or was any previous decision of this Court bearing on the point not noticed ? Is the Court hearing such plea fairly unanimous that there is such an error in the earlier view? What would be the impact of the error on the general administration of law or on public good ? Has the earlier decision been followed on subquent occasions either by this Court or by the High Courts ? And, would the reversal of the earlier decision lead to public inconvenience, hardship or mischief ? These considerations become still more significant when the earlier decision happens to be a unanimous decision of a Bench of five learned Judges of this Court [922 B F]
