The Sessions Judge in convicting the appellant of murder took into account an extra judicial confession alleged to have been made by him when shortly after the murder he was muttering to himself that he had finished the deceased.
The High Court confirmed the conviction.
In appeal before this Court it was contended that the muttering of the accused did not amount to a confession as it was implicit in the concept of confession whether judicial or extra judicial that it should be communicated to another.
A man can.
not confess to himself; he can only confess to another.
HELD: (i) Sections 24 to 30 of the Evidence Act deal with the admissibility of confessions, but the expression 'confession ' is not defined.
Shortly stated a confession is a statement made by an accused admitting his guilt.
[88 E] Pakala Narayana vs R.L.R. 66 I.A. 66, referred to.
(ii) It is not a necessary ingredient of the term confession that it shall be communicated to another.
The dictionary meaning of the term does not warrant any such extension, nor the reason of the rule underlying the doctrine of admission or confession demands it.
The probative nature of an admission or confession does not depend on its communication to another though just like any other piece of evidence can be admitted in evidence only on proof.
The following illustration pertaining to a written confession brings out the idea: A kills B; enters in his diary that he had killed him, puts it in his drawer and absconds.
When he places his act on record he does not communicate to another; indeed he does not have any intention of communicating it to a third party.
Even so at the trial the said state agent of the accused can certainly be proved as a confession made by him.
If that be so in the case of a statement in writing, there cannot be any difference in principle in the case of an oral statement, [88 H 89 C] Bhogilal Chunilal Pandya vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
1 S.C.R.310,reliedon.
(iii) But there is a clear distinction between the admissibility of an item.
of evidence and the weight to be attached to it.
A confessional soliloquy is a direct piece of evidence.
Generally such soliloquies are mutterings of a confused mind.
Before such evidence can be accepted it must be established by cogent evidence what were the exact words used by the accused.
Even if so much was established prudence and justice demand that such evidence cannot be made the sole ground of conviction.
It may be used only as a corroborative piece of evidence.
[90 B, D] In the present case the confession along with the other evidence of circumstances was sufficient to prove the guilt of the appellant.
