The first eleven respondents were Jagirdars in a former state which was merged with the State of Bombay in June 1948.
In August 1953, these respondents entered into an agreement with respondent No. 12, whereby, the latter could cut and remove all species of trees from forest lands in 39 villages over which the first eleven respondents claimed full proprietary rights.
On August, 1, 1954, the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagirs Abolition) Act, 1953 came into force whereby all Jagirs in the merged territories in Bombay State were abolished.
Under section 5 of the Act, the Jagirdars became 'occupants ' in the lands including forest areas which were then in their possession.
On July 6, 1956 the State Government issued a notification under section 34(A) of the Indian Forest Act, declaring all uncultivated lands in the 39 villages to be forests for the purposes of Ch.
5 of the Act.
Thereafter, in March and July 1958, the Divisional Forest Officer wrote to the respondents stating, inter alia, that all the rights of the Jagirdars having been abolished, the reserved species of trees on the lands belonged to the State Government and prohibiting them from cutting and removing the trees.
The respondents thereupon filed a writ petition, seeking a direction to the appellants to cancel, and to restrain from enforcing the orders contained in the letters of the Divisional Forest Officer.
The High Court allowed the petition, mainly on the ground that as the Jagirdars became occupants within the meaning of the Bombay Land Revenue Code of the forest lands under section 5(1)(b) of the Abolition Act, they, and not the State Government, were entitled to the trees standing on them.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court it was further contended on behalf of the respondents that as section 9 of the Act vested some of the rights to trees in forest areas in the State Government, by implication, all the remaining rights belonged to the Jagirdars.
HELD: Under section 5(1)(b) of the Abolition Act, the only rights conferred on the Jagirdars were the occupancy rights of the Forest lands; under section 40 of the Bombay Revenue Code the rights of occupants did not include the right to cut and remove trees from the forest lands except in the case of villages as which the original survey and settlement has been completed, whereupon the Government 's rights to the trees, unless expressly or otherwise reserved, are deemed to have been conceded to the occupant.
In the present case the villages in question had admittedly not been surveyed and 178 settled and therefore the rights of the State Government to the trees could not be deemed to have.
been conceded to the respondents as occupants.
[184 E 185 E] By section 3 of the Abolition Act all Jagirs and all the rights of a Jagirdar were extinguished unless there was any express provision in the Act saving any right.
It could not be said that because section 9 of the Act reserved certain rights to trees of the State Government and by implication the Jagirdars had all the other rights, there was an express provision saving the rights of the Jagirdars within the meaning of section 3.
[185 F H]
