The doctrine of frustration is really an aspect or part of the law of discharge of contract by reason of supervening impossibility or illegality of the act agreed to be done and hence comes within the purview of section 56 of the Indian Contract Act.
The view that section 56 applies only to cases of physical impossibility and that where this section is not applicable recourse can be had to the principles of English law on the subject of frustration is not correct.
English cases can have only a persuasive value, and are only helpful in showing how English courts decided cases under similar circumstances.
Section 56 of the Indian Contract Act lays down a rule of positive law and does not leave the matter to be determined according to the intention of the parties.
According to the Indian Contract Act.
a promise may be express or implied.
In cases, therefore, where the court gathers as a matter of construction that the contract itself contained impliedly or expressly a term, according to which it would stand discharged on the happening of certain circumstances, the dissolution of the contract would take place under the terms of the contract itself and such cases would be outside the purview of section 56 altogether.
Although in English law these cases are treated as cases of frustration, in India they would be dealt with under section 32 of the Indian Contract Act which deals with contingent contracts or similar other provisions contained in the Act.
In the large majority of cases however the doctrine of frustration.
is applied not on the ground that the parties themselves agreed to an implied term which operated to release 311 them from the performance of the contract.
The relief is given by the court on the ground of subsequent impossibility when it finds that the whole purpose or basis of a contract was frustrated by the intrusion or occurrence of an unexpected event or change of circumstances which was beyond what was contemplated by the parties at the time when they entered into the agreement.
Here there is no question of finding out an implied term agreed to by the parties embodying a provision for discharge, because the parties did not think about the matter at all nor could possibly have any intention regarding it.
When ' such an event or change of circumstance occurs which is so, fundamental as to be regarded by law as striking at the root of the contract as a whole, it is the court which can pronounce the contract to be frustrated and at an end.
The court undoubtedly has to examine the contract and the circumstances under which it was made.
The belief, knowledge and intention of the parties are evidence, but evidence only on which the court has to form its own conclusion whether the changed circum stances destroyed altogether the basis of the adventure and its underlying object.
This may be called a rule of construction by English Judges but it is certainly not a principle of giving effect to the intention of the parties which underlies all rules of construction.
This is really a rule of positive law and as such comes within the purview of section 56 of the Indian Contract Act.
The reason underlying the rule of English law that the doctrine of frustration does not apply to contracts for the sale of land.
is that under the English law, ,is soon as the agreement to sell is complete the buyer becomes the owner of the land in equity.
As a mere agreement to sell does not confer any rights of ownership on the buyer under the Indian law, the doctrine of frustration is as applicable in India to agreements for sale of land as in the case of other agreements.
In 1940 as an integral part of a development scheme of an extensive area of land started by the defendant company, it entered into a contract with the plaintiff 's predecessor for the sale of a Plot of land to the latter accepting a small sum of money as earnest.
It undertook to construct roads and drains and the conveyance was to be completed soon after the completion of tile roads on payment of the balance of the Price.
As a considerable portion of the area comporised in the scheme was requisitioned by the Government for military Purposes in 1941, the company wrote to the defendant that the road construction could not be taken up for an indefinite period and required him to treat the agreement as cancelled and receive back his earnest: Held.
that having regard to the nature and terms of the contracts the actual existence of war condition at the time when it was entered into the extent of the work involved in the scheme fixing no time limit in the agreement for the cons truction of the roads etc., and the fact that the order of requisition was in its very nature of a temporary character, the requisition did not affect the fundamental basis of the contract; nor 312 did the performance of the contract become illegal by reason of the requisition, and the contract had not therefore become impossible within the meaning of section 56 of the Indian Contract Act.
Joseph Constantine Steamship Co. vs Imperial Smelting Cor poration Ltd. ([1942] A.C. 154), Tamplin Steamship Co. Ltd. vs Anglo American Products Co. Ltd. ([1916] A.C. 397), Kesari Chand vs Governor General in Council (I.L.R. , Ganga Saran vs Ram Charan ([1952] S.C.R. 36), Taylor vs Caldwell (3 B. and section 826), Robinson vs Davison ; Denny Mott and Dickson Ltd. vs James B. Frazer & Co. Ltd. ; referred to.
