A Samaradhanai Fund was started for the purpose of feeding Brahmin pilgrims attending Sri Venkatachalapathiswami shrine at village Gunaseelam (in Madras State) on the occasion of Rathotsavam festival.
On the enactment of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act 19 of 1951 the Deputy Commissioner of Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments initiated proceedings under section 57(d) of the Act and held that the aforesaid fund was a religious charity ' within the meaning of section 6(13) of the Act.
His order was upheld by the Commissioner.
The Trustees of the Fund then filed a suit to set aside the order of the Commissioner contending that the Samaradhanai Fund was neither a public charity nor a religious charity '.
In section 6(13), 'religious charity ' is defined as a "public charity associated with a Hindu festival or observance a religious character, whether it be connected with a math or temple or not".
The trial court decided against the trustees but the High Court held in their favour.
According to the High Court feeding the Brahmins was a public charity but it was not a 'religious charity in as much as those who conducted the celebration of the Rathotsavam at the shrine had no control over the feeding of Brahmins out of the Samaradhanai Fund.
On appeal to the Supreme Court by the Commissioner, with special leave.
HELD: Feeding of Brahmins out of the Samaradhanai fund was associated with the celebration of the Rathotsavam at the Venkatachalapathiswami shrine.
The expression "associated" in section 13 of Act 19 of 1951 is used having regard to the history of the legislation the scheme and objects of the Act and the context in which it occurs, as meaning "being connected with" or "in relation to".
The expression does not import any control by the authorities who manage or administer the festival.
There are many Hindu festivals which are celebrated by the public generally without any connection with any temple or math.
The definition of "religious charities" includes such general festivals and observances.
It cannot be said that there must always be a set of persons who control the celebration of a festival or an observance.
F171 D G] Nor can it be contended that the expression "associated with a Hindu festival or observance of a religious character" in the definition of "religious charity" implies that the public charity must be an integral part of the Hindu religious festival or observance.
There is nothing in the Act which indicates any such intention on the part of the legislature.
[171 H]
