The appellant held a licence for the supply of electrical energy in Kerala which was granted for a period of 25 years, and was subject to continuation for ten year terms in the absence of a notice by the local authority or State Government of an election to purchase the undertaking.
The first 25 year term of the licence expired on December 2, 1960, and prior to that, on October 24 and again on October 29, 1959, the State Electricity Board gave notice to the appellant under s.6(1) of the , to purchase the under taking on the expiry of the licence.
On November 20, 1959,the State Government also served notice on the appellant of its election to purchase the undertaking on December 2, 1960.
In November 1960, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court seeking orders restraining the State Electricity Board and the respondent State Government from taking any action pursuant to the notices given by them.
In the course of the hearing the petition the State Electricity Board waived and abandoned all its rights of purchase of the Undertaking.
The writ petition thereafter dismissed and it was held that the State Government was entitled to take further steps under its notice dated November 20, 1959.
An appeal against this decision to a Division Bench of the High Court was dismissed.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, the appellant contended,inter alia, that the State Electricity Board having duly elected under 6(1) to purchase the undertaking on the expiry.
of the licence, the State Government acquired no option of purchase under section 6(2) the 1910 Act.
HELD: Any option of purchasing the undertaking on the expiry of the period of 25 years specified in the licence under section 6(1) vested in the State Electricity Board, and as the Board duly elected to purchase the undertaking by the notice served on the appellants, the State Government acquired no right or option of purchasing the undertaking under section 6.
[193 G H] As section 6 came into force less than eighteen months before December 2, 1960, it was impossible for the Board to have given notice to the State Government as required by section 6(4) of its intention to exercise the option.
On the principle of lex non cogit ad impossibil must therefore ' be construed as not being applicable in the that the Board could not be deemed circumstances of the case, so elected not to purchase the undertaking under section 6(4).[193 E F]
