The appellant, who was a Ruler of a former Indian State, had money dealings with the respondent.
They referred their disputes to an arbitrator who made his award directing the appellant to pay.
a certain sum of money, in installments.
The award also stated that the existing documents relating to debts on lands would remain as before and would remain as securities till the payment of debts The arbitrator filed the award into court and the court, after notice to the parties passed a decree in terms of a compromise modifying the award.
The respondent started execution proceedings and the court passed a prohibitory order under O.XXI, r. 46 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908, in respect of the sums payable to the appellant by the Central Government on account of the privy purse; but on the application of the appellant, that order was vacated.
The appellant and respondent filed appeals in the High COurt, against the various orders, and the High Court decided all the appeals against the appellant.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, it was contended that, (i) as the award affected immovable property of the value of more than Rs. 100, and was not registered, a decree could not be passed in terms the award, (ii) the proceedings under the Indian , were incompetent in the absence of the consent of the Central Government under sections 86(1) and 87B of the Code, and therefore the decree passed in those proceedings was without jurisdiction and void and (iii) the amount receivable by the appellant as his privy purse was a political pension within the meaning of section 60(1)(g) of the Code, and not liable to attachment or sale in execution of a decree.
HELD: (i)The award did not create or of its own force declare any interest in any immovable property and since it did not come within the purview of section 17 of the , was not required to be registered.
[(204 H] (ii) A proceeding under section 14 read with section 17 of the , for the passing of a judgment and decree on an award, does not commence with a plaint or a petition in the nature of a plaint, and cannot be regarded as a suit and the parties to whom the notice of the filing of the award is given under section 14(2) cannot be regarded as "sued in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit" within the meaning of section 86.(1) read with section 87B of the Code.
Neither are those provisions of the Code attracted by reason of section 41(a) of the or section 141 of the Code.
It follows that the COurt was competent to entertain the proceedings under section 14 of the and pass a decree in those proceedings though no consent to the institution of the proceedings had been given by the Central Government.
[205 G H; 206 B D] 202 (iii) The amounts of the privy purse of the appellant were not liable to attachment or sale in execution of the respondent 's decree.
[209 C D] The periodical payment of money by the Government to a Ruler of a former Indian State as privy purse on political considerations and under political sanctions and not under a right legally enforceable in any municipal court is strictly a political pension within the meaning of section 60(1)(g) of the Code.
The privy purse satisfies all the essential characteristics of a political pension, and as such is protected from execution under section 60(1) (g).
[209 A C]
