The appellants applied to the Rent Controller and Eviction Officer under section 3 of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, for permission to file a suit in ejectment against the predecessors in interest of the respondents who were the present tenants of certain premises in Agra.
After a series of proceedings before the Officer and the appellate authority, the latter eventually ordered that the permission applied for should be granted.
The respondent then moved the Commissioner of Agra in revision and the order granting permission was set aside by him; but upon an application made to it under section 7 F of the Act, the State Government directed the Commissioner to revise his order.
Accordingly the latter cancelled his previous order and confirmed the order granting permission passed by the appellate authority.
The appellants ' ejectment suit, in which one of the issues was whether the permission granted to sue the respondents was valid, was decreed in favour of the appellants and an appeal against this decree to the First Additional Civil Judge was dismissed.
However, on appeal to the High Court, the single Judge, differing from the view expressed in earlier decisions of the High Court that the revisional order which the State Government was authorised to pass under section 7 F is a purely administrative order, came to the conclusion that the permission granted was invalid because the State Government, vhen exercising its authority under section 7 F of the Act was required to decide the matter in a quasi judicial manner and by following principles of natural justice and should have given the respondents an opportunity of being heard.
On appeal to this Court: HELD ': The revisional proceedings which go before the State Government under section 7 F are, like the proceedings before the District Magistrate under section 3(2) as well as before the Commissioner under section 3(3), quasi judicial in character and all these three authorities must act according to the principles of natural justice.
[226 B, C].
The right conferred on the tenant not to be evicted.
except on the specified grounds enumerated in cls.
(a) to (g) of section 3(1) is a statutory right of great significance and it is this statutory right of which the tenant would be deprived when the landlord obtains ' the permission of the District Magistrate.
Therefore the Act must be taken to require that in exercising their respective powers to grant the permission, the appropriate authorities have to consider the matter in a quasi judicial manner and to follow the principles of natural justice before reaching their conclusion.
[226H 227B].
The Associated.
Cement Companies Ltd. vs Bhupendra Cement Works, Surajpur
P.N. Sharma; , and Ridge vs Baldwin & Ors. ; , referred to.
219 Narottam Saran vs State of U.P. A.I.R., 1954, All. 232 and Murlidhar vs State of U.P.
A.I.R. 1964 All. 148, disapproved.
Laxman Purshottam Paimputkar vs State of Bombay [1964] 1 S.C.R. 200, considered.
Obiter:Considerations of judicial propriety and decorum require that if a learned single Judge hearing a matter is inclined to take the view that the earlier decisions of the High Court, whether of a Division Bench or of a single Judge, need to be reconsidered, he should not embark upon that enquiry sitting as a single Judge, but should refer the matter to a Division Bench or, in a proper case, place the relevant papers before the Chief Justice to enable him to constitute a larger Bench to examine the question.
That is the proper and traditional way to deal with such matters and it is rounded on healthy principles of judicial decorum and propriety.
[228B D]
