The appellant was elected to the Orissa Legislative Assembly in 1961.
In 1964 respondent No. 2 made a complaint to the Governor alleging that the appellant had incurred a disqualification subsequent to his election as contemplated in article 191(1)(e) of the Constitution read with section 7 of the Representation of the People Act (Act 43 of 1951).
The Chief Secretary Orissa forwarded the said complaint ,to respondent No. 1, the Election Commission of India, under the instructions of the Governor, requesting it to make enquiry into the complaint and give its opinion.
Accordingly respondent No. 1 served notice on the appellant and called upon him to submit his reply.
The appellant challenged the jurisdiction of respondent No. 1 to conduct the enquiry and filed a writ petition in the High Court.
On its being dismissed he appealed to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that no question under article 192(1) had arisen in the case as a question relating to the disqualification of a member under article 191(1)(e) could not be raised by an ordinary citizen.
It was urged that considering the context of article 192 and the provisions of article 199 the question could only be raised on the floor of the House and thereafter referred to the Governor by the Speaker of the Assembly.
It was further contended that only the Governor who had to give the decision could hold the enquiry, and the Election Commission was only to give its opinion on the materials forwarded to it by the Governor.
HELD: (i) The argument t that no question had arisen under article 192(1) could not be accepted.
What Art 192(1) requires is that a question should arise; how it arises, by whom it is raised, in what circumstances it is raised are not relevant for the purpose of the application of this clause.
[59 H] The words in article 192(1) that "the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor" merely emphasise that any question of the type contemplated in the said clause shall be decided by the Governor and Governor alone; no other authority, including the courts, can decide it.
Ii the intention was that the question must b.e raised first in the legislative Assembly and after a prima facie examination by the Speaker it should be referred by him to the Governor, article 192(1) would have been worded in an entirely different manner.
[59 B C] The object of Art 192 is that no member who has incurred a disqualification under article 191(1) should b.e allowed to continue as a member.
The Constitution itself in Art 190(3) provides for the vacation of the seat of such a member.
Further it is in the interests of the member 's constituency that no longer being entitled to the status of a member.
he should be removed.
In view 54 of these considerationS a citizen is certainly entitled to make a complaint to the Governor about the disqualification incurred by a member under article 191(1).
E G] (ii) The enquiry for the purpose of the decision under article 192 has to be held by the Election Commission and not by the Governor.
When the Governor pronounces his decision under article 192(1) he is not required to consult his Council of Ministers; he has merely to forward 'the question to the Election Commission for its opinion, and as soon as the opinion is received, "he shall act according to such opinion".
It is the opinion of the Election Commission which is in substance decisive, and it is legitimate that the Commission should proceed to try the complaint before it gives its opinion.
[60 D H] [Legislation to vest Election Commission with powers of a Commission under the Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952, recommended.] [62 B]
