The respondents hired lockers in the safe deposit vaults from the appellant bank at Jullundur through its manager under different agreements on various dates during 1950.
In April 1951, the lockers were tampered with and the valuables of the respondents kept in them were removed by the Manager.
In due course the Manager was prosecuted and convicted for theft.
The respondents filed three suits against the bank for the recovery of different sums being the value of the contents of the lockers which had been removed.
The bank denied its liability on various grounds and also contended that the suits were, barred by limitation.
The trial court held that the Bank was liable to bear the loss incurred by the respondents and that the suits were not barred by limitation.
On appeal, the High Court accepted the findings of the trial court on both the questions and dismissed the appeals.
In the appeal before the Supreme Court, only the question of limitation was raised.
It was contended of behalf of the appellants on the facts found that the suit was barred by limitation as the theft of the valuables by the Manager was a tort committed by him dehors the contracts entered into by the appellant with the respondents and, therefore, Article 36 of the Limitation Act which required that a suit must be instituted within two years applied, and not article 115, which provided for a period of limitation of three years; that the suits were, not based on a breach of contract committed by the bank but only the theft committed by its agent dehors the terms of the contract.
HELD: The suit claims, being ex contractu, were clearly governed by Article 115 of the First Schedule to the Limitation Act and by Article 36.
[298F] There were clear allegations in the plaint that the appellant committed breach of contract in not complying with some of the contitions thereof and that the appellant understood those allegations in that light and traversed them.
[298 E] Even ii the respondents ' claim was solely based on the fraud committed by the manager during the course of his employment, such a claim could not fall under article 36.
To attract article 36, the misfeasance must be independent of contract.
The fraud of the manager committed in the course of his employment must be deemed to be a fraud of the principal, i.e. the Bank must be deemed to have permitted manager to commit theft in violation of the terms of the contracts.
While under the contracts the bank was under an obligation to provide good lockers and not to permit access to the safe except to persons mentioned in the contracts, in violation of these terms the bank gave defective lockers and gave access to the manager, thus facilitating the theft.
In either case the wrong committed was not independent of the contract but directly arose out of the breach of contract.
[298 G, H]
