The Government of Madras issued a licence to the respondentMunicipality, under s.3(1) of the , for the supply of electric energy within its municipal limits at rates not exceeding the maximum charges given in the licence.
The appellants, some consumers of the electric energy, entered into agreements with the Municipality for the supply and agreed to pay the "current official scale of rates".
The rates were increased by resolutions of the Municipality twice and on the second occasion the appellants filed a representative suit for a declaration that the later resolution was illegal, and for an injunction restraining the Municipality from collecting charges at the new rates.
The trial court dismissed the suit and the dismissal was confirmed on appeal by the High Court.
In appeal by special leave the appellants contended that (i) the rates agreed between the consumers and the Municipality could not be unilaterally altered and increased by the Municipality to the prejudice of the consumers and, therefore, the impugned resolution was invalid and unenforceable; and (ii) as the impugned resolution was passed without obtaining the previous sanction of the State Government under section 21(2) of the Act, it was void.
HELD: (i) The consumers were under a contractual liability to pay the enhanced rates covered by the impugned resolution.
Under sections 22 and 23 of the Act the Municipality cannot discriminate between consumers in the matter of rates chargeable for the energy supplied.
Unless the Municipality enters into agreement with the consumer enabling it to charge him at a rate fixed from time to time, it would be difficult for the Municipality to maintain equality of treatment between the consumers.
That difficulty can be avoided if there is a term in the agreement executed by every consumer that he will pay the official rate fixed by the Municipality from time to time subject to the maximum fixed by the licence.
Further, a public body in supplying electric energy to different consumers cannot run the risk of incurring loss by agreeing to fixed rates, for the Government may increase the licence fee as had been done in the instant case, or there may be a rise in the cost of distribution.
[280 A D] Therefore, having regard to the entire document and the surrounding circumstances, the words "current official scale of rates" in the agreement mean the official scale of rates current or prevalent from time to time during the currency of the agreement.
[281 C] (ii) No sanction of the State Government was necessary for enhancing the rates.
There was no alteration of any condition of the agreement within the meaning of section 21(2) of the Act.
The consumers had agreed to .pay the rates that would be fixed from time to time.
and if that term was a condition within the meaning of that section, there was no change at all in that condition, for the change in the rates was not in derogation of the condition but in terms of it.
[282 A B] 277
