The respondent obtained permits under the Iron and Steel (Control) Order, 1956 on the representation that he wanted to purchase iron goods for the purpose of building a temple and a dharamshala.
The permits were obtained from the authorities of District Deoria in U.P.
At the back of the permit a condition was printed tematerials required against the permit will be used only that "h.q for the purpose for which it was asked for and has been given".
The respondent was tried for the contravention of cl. ? of the aforesaid order on the allegation that he had not used the goods purchased under the permits for the purpose for which ,they were issued.
The trial Magistrate found him guilty.
In appeal, however, the Sessions Judge acquitted him on the ground that the possibility of his retaining the iron at some other place was not entirely excluded.
The High Court in appeal by the State confirmed the acquittal holding that it had not been proved that the respondent had "used" the iron which he had obtained on the basis of the permit.
The High court further held that it was not possible to look into the application in order to see for what purpose the applicant took the permit and no condition actually printed at the back of the permit had been broken.
By special leave the State appealed to the Supreme Court, On behalf of the appellant it was urged: (1) the word "use" in cl. 7 of the order includes "kept for eventual use for another purpose." (2) The High Court erred in holding that the application cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing the conditions appearing in the permit.
HELD: The respondent could not be held guilty of a contravention of cl. 7 of the order.
(i) No doubt the legislative intent of the Iron & Steel (Control) Order is that this essential commodity should be utilised in accordance with the conditions contained in the permit, but no clause in the Control Order in question evinces a legislative intent that a mere non user is also prohibited and made punishable.
[165 H] The word 'use ' must take its colour from the context in which is used.
In cl. ? the expression "use. in accordance with the conditions contained" suggests something done positively e.g. utilisation or disposal.
Mere "non use" is not included in the word "use".
165 D] (ii) The High Court was wrong in holding that it is not permissible to look at the application to determine the purpose for which permit is obtained.
However in the present case the applications did not disclose that the respondent wanted to build a temple or dharamshala at any particular place.
From the mere fact that the applications were made to the authorities in Deoria District, or the fact that in the applications it was mentioned that the goods were not available in Deoria District, it did not necessarily follow that the goods were intended to be used in that District.
[166 H] 162
