The respondent Bank was unable to carry on business after it was promoted, in view of section 277(1) of the Companies Act, 1913, because 'its subscribed capital was less than half the authorised capital.
In order to comply with the requirements of the section, the directors decided that they or their nominees would subscribe for a large number of shares.
The first appellant was a director of the Bank and the second appellant was the firm of the first appellant and his brother.
The first appellant, decided to subscribe for 2000 shaves in the names of 3 ladies of his family, and the allotments of shares were made at a meeting of directors at which the first appellant also voted.
At that meeting and subsequently various loans were advanced to the second appellant.
A sum of Rs. 100,000 which was shown as a loan to the brother was later on adjusted by crediting his account with that item and debiting the account of the first appellant with that amount.
The first appellant executed a promissory note and a letter of pledge for the amount, and the brother paid off the balance due from him after giving effect to the credit entry, and that loan account was closed.
Suits were filed by the respondent against the appellants for realization of the sums due from them.
The trial Court dismissed the suits but the High Court decreed them.
In their appeals to this Court the appellants contended inter alia that: (i) if the vote of the first appellant be not counted as required by section 91B(1) of the Act because of his interestedness in the allotment, there would be no quorum for the meeting and therefore the allotment of shares to the nominees of the first appellant would be invalid, and as the consideration for the shares was paid out of the loans, the appellants would not be liable to repay those loans; (ii) since no cash amount was paid and no loan advanced by the respondent to the first appellant the suit to recover the sum of Rs. 100,000 as a loan was not maintainable.
HELD: (i) The allotment of the shares at the meeting, to the nominees of the first appellant was not void.
In view of the fact that the first appellant was not entitled to vote on the allotment and after the exclusion of his vote there was no quorum, the allotment was irregular and the respondent was entitled to avoid it.
But, instead of avoiding the allotment the respondent has chosen to affirm it and so the allotment is valid and binding on the allottees.
[783 E] 778 Moreover, the first appellant was a party to the resolution allotting shares and dealt with the shares on the footing that the allottees were the holders with a clear knowledge of all circumstances, and therefore, was estopped from contending that the allotment was invalid.
[783 F G] (ii) To support a plea of payment, it is not necessary to show that cash passed.
Illustration (a) to section 50 of the , shows that payment may be made by means of transfer entries in books of account.
[784 E]
