The appellants were thika tenants under the respondent in respect of the suit land.
Under the Calcutta Improvement Trust Act, 1911, a scheme had been framed for improvement of an area within which the suit land was situate and the suit land was shown among the properties, in regard to which betterment fees were proposed to be levied.
The respondent accepted the betterment fee assessed and levied under section 78A of the Act.
Thereafter, he filed suits for the ejectment of the appellants.
The suits were dismissed as not maintainable because of section 5 of the Calcutta Thika Tenancy Act, 1949, under which an application for the ejectment of a thika tenant could be filed only before the Controller under that Act.
On appeal, it was held, that the suits were governed by the provisions of section 30(c) of the Thika Tenancy Act, under which, nothing in the Act applied to any land which was required for carrying out any of the provisions of the Improvement Trust Act, and therefore, the appeals were allowed.
In the appeal to this Court by the tenants on the question as to whether section 30(c) applied to the suits; HELD: Because the land was liable to pay betterment fee and the fee thus realised served the purpose of section 122 of the Improvement Trust Act by swelling the funds of the Improvement Trust Board and such fund could be utilised by the Board for the purposes of carrying out the scheme, it cannot be said that the land itself was required for carrying out the provisions of the improvement Trust Act.
The requirement of section 30(c) of the Thika Tenancy Act could not be said to be satisfied by such an indirect connection between the land and the general purpose of the Improvement Trust Act.
[378 A B] In construing the words of a statute the context in which the words occur, the object of the statute in which the provision is included and the policy underlying the statute assume relevance and become material.
[373 F] In the instant case, the object of the Thika Tenancy Act to help thika tenants is writ large in all the material provisions of the Act In construing section 30, which provides for an exception to the applicability of beneficent legislation, if two constructions are reasonably possible, the Court would be justified in preferring that construction which helps to carry out the beneficent purpose of the Act and does not unduly expand the area or the scope of the exception, that is, the exception must be strictly construed.
Under the section, it is the land which must be required and not any fee or charges that may be levied against it.
Further, there must be a direct connection between the land as such and the requirements of the provisions of the improvement Trust Act, and not with the policy of the provisions or the object which they are intended to achieve.
In order that section 30(c) should be applicable, the respondent must point 365 out a specific provision of the Improvement Trust Act for the carrying out of which the land as such was required.
Section of that Act would not help the respondent, because, it would not be possible to hold that for carrying out its provisions the land was directly required.
H 377 C, G; 378 H] Moreover, when section 78A of the Improvement Trust Act, expressly says that the land in respect of which betterment fee can be levied, is, not required for the scheme, the argument that such a land is, nevertheless, required for carrying out the provision of section 78A, cannot be accepted.
[377 H] Betterment fee is levied against a land, because its value is increased as a result of the improvement scheme and the Board is justified in recouping itself by such levy in respect of the unearned increment in the value of the land, and, if the landholder pays the fee, he may apply under section 25 of the Improvement Trust Act for an enhancement of the rent payable by the tenants; but there is no reason why such a landlord should get the additional benefit of exemption from the application of the provisions of the Thika Tenancy Act.
Clauses (a) and (b) of section 30 of that Act indicate that it is only lands vested in Government or other special bodies or authorities that are excepted from the application of the Act.
The words used in cl.
(c) do not justify the conclusion that a private landholder is intended to be equated with Government or with such other special bodies or authorities.
[378 C, D, F] Though lands acquired by the Board may be covered by section 30(b) (iv), on the assumption that the Board is a local authority, section 30(c) would not become redundant if it was held not to apply to the suit land, because, there may still be some other lands which are not acquired by the Board but which may.
nevertheless, be required for carrying out some provisions of the Improvement Trust Act, as for example under sections 35C and 42 of that Act.
Or, the legislature might have made, by way of abundant caution, a specific provision in respect of lands which are acquired by the Board as well as those which would be required for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Improvement Trust Act.
[379 D H]
