The 2nd respondent purchased on 24th December 1956, at a public auction sale held by the Divisional Forest Officer, the cut timber of a coupe and paid the first installment of the purchase price immediately.
The appellant stood surety for the payment of the remaining three instalments.
The coupe was divided into 4 sections according to the rules which were deemed to be part of the contract and the boundary certificates was furnished to the 2nd respondent on 5th February 1957.
He began operations in the 1st section on the last week of February, but defaulted in the payment of the 2nd instalment which was due on 1st March 1957, and so, on 25th April the appellant and 2nd respondent were informed by the forest authorities, that no further removal of the timber would be allowed, as the value of timber already removed exceeded the amount paid.
On 28th April a fire broke cut and the timber sold to the 2nd respondent ceased to exist.
On 3rd May 1957, the formal deed of con tract, which was signed by the 2nd respondent and the Divisional Forest Officer on 24th December, was signed by the Chief Conservator of Forests, as required by the rules.
Since the 2nd respondent had not paid the later instalments proceedings were commenced by the 1st respondent against the appellant, whereupon he filed a suit for restraining the 1st respondent from continuing the proceedings.
The suit was decreed by the trial court, but dismissed on appeal, by the High Court.
In his appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that the 2nd respondent had not been put in possession of the timber sold, except the portion in the 1st section of the coupe, that there was no transfer of property in the timber and therefore he was not liable to pay the amounts due on the other 3 instalments, the transfer of property in the timber being a condition precedent to his liability.
HELD: There was an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable state, the property in the timber passed to the 2nd respondent when the contract was made on 24th December 1956 under s 20 of the , and possession was also given on 5th February 1957.
Therefore, the appellant 's suit was rightly dismissed by the High Court [391 H] The timber was sufficiently identifiable and was therefore specified goods and there was nothing in the contract postponing possession till the other instalments have been paid.
The fact that the contract was signed by the Chief Conservator, after fire had broken out has no effect on the validity of the contract, or on the question of delivery of possession or on the passing of property in the timber.
The instructions in the Forest Manual about execution of contracts plainly take into consideration the lapse of time between the execu 382 tion by the lessee and by the competent forest authority, and therefore, the date on which the Chief Conservator signed had not any real effect on the actual date on which the sale of the timber took place.
It was also within the realm of possibility that the timber might be lost on account of fire or other risk, before the contract was formally signed.
The sale of the timber to the 2nd respondent was therefore final on 24th December, the date of sale, subject to the acceptance of his bid by the competent authority.
[387 E H; A B] Williams vs North China Insurance Co., L.R. (1876)1 C.P.D. 757, applied.
Rule 8 of the Forest Contract Rules empowers the Divisional Forest Officer to stop the removal of the timber on his finding that the value of the timber already removed exceeded the amount of instalments paid.
But, that would not amount to reserving a right of disposal in the State, because, the rules provide that though Ordinarily the timber should be sold for cash payment in full, payment in instalments could be considered as payment in full, if a right in accordance with r. 8 is reserved.
When a contractor is deemed to have paid in full the price, there could be no occasion for the Government to reserve a right of disposal.
The provision in r. 8 is only in pursuance of the statutory provision in section 83 of the Forest Act.
1927, which provides that when any money is payable for or in respect of any forest produce, the amount thereof shall be a first charge on such produce, and that such produce may be taken possession of by a Forest Officer, until such amount has been paid.
[390 H 391 D]
