A joint Hindu family consisting of two branches owned a sugar mill.
After partition, the two kartas entered into a partnership in 1943, to carry on the business of the sugar mill.
The two partners represented the respective joint families, and the partnership deed provided that the death of any of the parties shall not dissolve the partnership and either the legal heir or the nominee of the deceased partner should take his place.
One of the kartas died in 1945 leaving as members of his branch of the family, three widows and two minor sons.
The other partner continued the business of the sugar mill in the firm name.
For the assessment year 1950 51, the assessee (respondent firm) applied for registration on the basis of the partnership agreement of 1943.
The Income tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal held that there was no partnership between the members of the two families after the death of one of the kartas.
On a reference to the High Court, it was held that the partner ship business was carried on by the representatives of the two families after the dent), of one of the kartas.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question as , to whether during the assessment year 19 50 51, the assessee, was a firm within the meaning of section 16(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922, or an association of persons.
HELD: The High Court was wrong in its finding.
But, as a result ,of the concession by the appellant, that there was a partnership from 13th December 1949, when one of the minor sons had become a major, the status of the assessee was that of a firm for the assessment year 1950 51.
[498B] A joint Hindu family as such cannot be a partner of a firm, but it may through its karta enter into a partnership with the karta of another family.
[495H] Kshetra Mohan Sanyasi Charan Sadhukhan v, Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, [19541 S.C.R. 268.
followed.
A widow, though a member of a joint family, cannot become its manager.
[495B] Commissioner of Income tax, C.P. & Berar vs Seth Lakshmi Narayan Raghunathdas, and Pandurang Dakhe vs Pandurang Gorle.
I.L.R. overruled.
Therefore, in the instant case, when one of the kartas died, the partnership had come to an end.
There was no scope for applying section 42(c) of the Partnership Act, 1932, because, the section is applicable only to a partnership with more than two partners.
In such a case.
if one of them dies, the firm is dissolved, but if there is a contract to 488 489 the contrary, the surviving partners will continue the firm.
On the other hand, if there are only two partners and one of them dies, the firm automatically comes to an end and, thereafter, there is no partnership for a third party to be introduced.
Section 31, which deals with the validity of a contract between the partners to introduce a third party into the partnership without the consent of all the existing partners, presupposes the subsistence of a partnership and does not apply to a partnership of two partners, which is dissolved by the death of one of them.
[492E H] Hansraj Manot vs Messrs, Gorak Nath Pandey, , disapproved.
Further, there was no evidence that the representatives of the two families constituted a new partnership and carried on the business of the sugar mill before 13th December 1949, when, it was conceded a new partnership had come into existence.
