HELD: (i) The question whether a deed of dedication creates an abosulte or partial dedication must be settled by a conspectus of all the provisions of the deed.
If the property is wholly dedicated to the worship of the idol and no beneficial interest is reserved to the settlor, his descendants or other persons, the dedication is complete: if by the deed it is intended to create a charge in favour of the deity and the residue vests in the settlor, the dedication is partial.
(ii) A reasonable provision for remuneration maintenance and residence of the Shebaits does not make an endowment bad, for even when property is dedicated absolutely to an idol, and no beneficial interest is reserved to the settlor, the property is held by the deity in an ideal sense.
The possession and management of the property must, in the very nature of things, be entrusted to Sitebait or ' manager and nomination of the settlor himself and his heirs with reasonable remuneration out of the endowed property with right of residence in the property will not invalidate the endowment.
[556E G] (iii) A provision for the benefit of persons other than the Shebait may not be valid, if it infringes the rule against perpetuities or accumulations, or rules against impermissible restrictions, but that does not affect the validity of the endowment.
The beneficial interest in the provision found invalid reverts to the deity or the settlor according as the endowment is absolute or partial.
If the endowment absolute and a charge created in favour of other persons is invalid, the benefit will enure to the deity, and will not revert to the settlor or his heirs.
[556G H] (iv) There is no rule that when the income is expanding and the expenses are static, leaving a substantial residue, it must be presumed, notwithstanding the comprehensive and unrestricted nature of the disposition, that the settlor intended to create only a charge in favour of the deity.
The question is always one of intention of the settlor to be determined from a review of all the dispositions under the deed of settlement.
[560G] Surendrakeshav Roy vs Doorgasundari Dassee and Anr.
L.R. 19 I.A. 108, explained.
Sri Sri Iswari Bhubaneshwari Thakurani vs Brojonath Der and Ors.
L.R. 64 I.A. 203 and Sree Ishwar Sridhar Jew vs Sushila Bala Desi and Ors. ; , relied on.
551 Per Subba Rao and Shah, JJ.
When the guardian of the deities did not appeal against the finding of the trial court that there was a partial dedication, it was not open to a joint Shebait who was not a guardian, to appeal against the decree and contend that the dedication was absolute.
When a party allows a decree of the court of First Instance to become final, by not appealing against the decree, it would not be open to another party to the litigation, whose rights are otherwise not affected by the decree, to invoke the powers of the appellate court under o. 41 r. 33 to pass a decree in favour of the party not appealing so as to give the latter a benefit which he has not claimed.
[564D] Per Bachawat, J. (Partially dissenting) When the trial court decrees that the endowment in favour of the deities was not absolute, and the guardian ad litem of the deities does not appeal, it open to a joint shebait even when he is not a guardian to assail the decree in appeal.
[565A] Maharaja Jagadindra Nath Roy Bahadur vs Rani Hemanta Kumari Debi, (1904) L.R. 31 I.A. 203, relied on.
Sihebaiti right is a right to property.
This right is affected by a declaration that the dedication in favour of the deities is partial and not absolute.
The shebaiti right in an absolute debutter is different from the shebaiti right in a partial debutter.
The joint shebait is en titled to defend his right even when the guardian of the deities does not appeal.
[565E, H] The Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt; , , referred to.
