The appellant applied under section 33(21)(b) of the to the Industrial Tribunal for the Tribunal 's approval of the order passed by the appellant discharging its employee the respondent.
This application was made because certain industrial disputes were pending between the appellant and its employees, but when the matter came to be argued before the Tribunal, the pending disputes had been disposed of.
Hence, the appellant contended that the application made by it no longer survived '.
which the Tribunal rejected.
In appeal by Special Leave.
HELD:The Tribunal was right in overruling the appellant 's contention.
[419 E].
A proceeding validly commenced under section 33(2)(b) would not automatically come to an end merely because the main industrial dispute had in the meanwhile been finally determined.
[417 D E].
The application of the appellant can in a sense, be treated as an incidental proceeding; but it is a separate proceeding all the same, and in that sense it will be governed by the provisions of section 33(2)(b) as an independent proceeding.
It is not an interlocutory proceeding properly so called in its full sense and significance; it is a proceeding between the employer and his employee who was no doubt concerned with the main industrial dispute along with other employees; but it is nevertheless a proceeding between two parties in respect of a matter not covered by the main dispute.
[417 B D].
The order being incomplete and inchoate until the approval is obtained, cannot effectively terminate the relationship of the employer and the employee between the appellant and the respondent; and so even if the main industrial dispute was finally decided, the question about the validity of the order would still have to be tried and if the approval is not accorded by the Tribunal, the employer would be bound to treat the respondent as its employee and pay him full wages for the period even though the appellant may subsequently proceed to terminate the respondent 's service.
[418 C E].
Besides, if it were held that with the final determination of the main industrial dispute such application would automatically come to an end, it would mean that section 33 A under which a complaint by the employee is treated as an independent proceeding, would be rendered nugatory.
[419 A].
Alkali and Chemical Corporation of India Ltd. vs Seventh Industrial Tribunal, West Bengal and Ors.
(1964) II L.L.J. 568, Mettur Industries Ltd. vs Sundara Naidu and Anr.
(1963) II L.L.J. 303 and Shah (A.T.) vs State of Mysore and Ors (1964) I LL.J. 237, disapproved Kannan Devan Hill Produce Company Ltd. Munnar vs Miss Aleyamma Varughesa and Anr.
(1962) II L.L.J. 158, Om Prakash Sharma vs Industrial Tribunal, Punjab and Anr.
(1962) II L.L.J. 272 and Amrit Bazar Patrika (Private) Ltd. vs Uttar Pradesh State Industrial Tribunal and Ors.
(1964) II L.L.J. 53, approved.
