The workers of the respondent started a go slow in its sugar factory.
Therefore, the respondent issued a general notice to those workmen and individually to each workman notifying that unless he recorded his willingness to discharge his duties faithfully and diligently so as to give a certain minimum output, he will be no longer employed; and that he must record his willingness in the office by a certain time, failing which he shall stand discharged from the service of the respondent without any further notice.
Because the appellants, who were 119 of such workmen.
failed to record their willingness, the respondent issued a notice discharging their services.
The respondent held no enquiry as required by the Standing Orders before dispensing with the, services of the appellants.
A general strike followed resulting in a joint application by both the parties to the Government and the Government referred the question to the Tribunal, whether the discharge of the workmen was justified.
The Tribunal came to the conclusion that there was go slow during the period, and consequently held that the discharge of the workmen was fully justified.
In appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended that (i) all that the Tribunal was concerned with was to decide whether the discharge of the workmen for not giving an undertaking was justified or not, and that it was no part of the duty of the Tribunal to decide whether there was go slow which would justify the order of discharge; (ii) Since the respondent held no enquiry as required by the Standing Orders, it could not justify the discharge before the Tribunal and (iii) the finding of the Tribunal that go slow, had been proved was perverse and the Tribunal had ignored relevant evidence in coming to the conclusion.
HELD: The contentions must be rejected.
(i) Taking into account the wide terms of reference, the manner in which it was understood before the Tribunal, and the fact that it must b.e read alongwith the two notices, particularly because it was made soon thereafter at the joint application of the parties, the Tribunal was entitled to go into the real dispute between the parties, namely whether the discharge was justified on the ground that there was misconduct in the form of go slow by the workmen concerned.
[596D] (ii) No distinction can be made between cases when the domestic enquiry is invalid and those where no enquiry has in fact been held.
This Court has consistently held that if the domestic enquiry is irregular, invalid or improper, the Tribunal may give an opportunity 589 to the employer to prove his case and in doing so the Tribunal tries the merits itself.
[598A C] Case law referred to.
(iii) As the case involved the discharge of 119 workmen, this Court went into the evidence, and the evidence showed that the decision of the Tribunal was not wrong that there Was go slow and that the discharge was fully justified.
[598E]
