The respondent Association was a mutual insurance concern carrying on miscellaneous insurance business.
The objects of the Association included provision of help anywhere in the world in respect of expenses of accommodation and treatment in nursing homes for members and their dependents.
The members were required to pay a monthly premium.
In the assessments for the assessment years 1949 50 to 1953 54 the Income tax Officer taxed the reserves for payment of income tax which had been debited to the profit and loss account.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as the Appellate Tribunal upheld the Income tax Officer 's order.
The questions arising in the proceedings were; (1) whether the balance of profits of a mutual insurance concern were included in the definition of the word 'income ' and if so (2) whether reserves for income tax could be taxed.
At the instance of the respondent a reference was made to the High Court.
That Court held that the surplus, miscalled profit, arising to the company from the miscellaneous insurance transactions of mutual character was not assessable under the Indian Income tax Act and that in any event, the assessee was entitled to deduct the reserves.
The Revenue appealed to this Court with certificate.
HELD: (i) In section 2(6C), the Legislature has evinced a clear intention to include the balance of profits under r. 6 within the meaning of the word 'income ' in 6. 3 of the Indian Income Tax Act, and accordingly such balance of profits is taxable.
[639B C] Ayrshire Employers Mutual Insurance Association Ltd. vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, , distinguished.
"Profits." in r. 6 cannot be said to mean "taxable profits".
Rule 6 refers to 'balance of profits ' as disclosed in the accounts submitted to the.
Superintendent of Insurance.
The Superintendent of Insurance is not concerned with taxable profits.
What he is concerned with is the balance of profits under the Insurance Act.
[638E F] Nor can the term 'profits ' in r. 6 be interpreted in the narrow sense of including only profits from investments and other activities of a mutual insurance company.
Rule 6 deals with "balance of profits" as a composite thing.
It is impossible to dissect this composite thing.
[639A B] Bombay Mutual Life Assurance Society Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , affirmed.
(ii) The Insurance Act makes detailed provisions to ensure the true valuation of assets and the determination of the true "balance of profits" of an insurance business and r. 6 should be construed in the light of this background.
[639G H] 633 Pandyan Insurance Company Ltd. Madurai vs The Commissioner Income tax, Madras, ; , referred to.
Examining r. 6 in the light of this background.
the intention of the rule seems to be that the.
balance of profits as disclosed by the accounts submitted to.
the Superintendent of Insurance and accepted by him would be binding on the Income Tax Officer, except that the Income Tax Officer would be entitled to exclude expenditur.e other than expenditure permissible under the provisions of section 10 of the Act.
In the present case it was common ground between the parties that the reserves which were added to the balance of profits were not expenditure.
The High Court rightly held that the reserve for income tax could not be taxed.
[639H 640B]
