Pursuant to the directions of the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, the Income tax Officer, determined the assessee 's capital gains under section 12B of the Income tax Act, 1922.
He did not, however, make any order under section 23(3) of the Act, nor did he issue a notice of demand under section 29 of the Act.
The assessee filed an application before the Commissioner of Income tax, under section 33A(2) of the Act, for revising the computation made by the Income tax Officer drawing his attention to a decision of the Bombay High Court in Baijnath 's case, , as to how the capital gains should be ascertained.
That decision was based upon a consideration of the very documents which were the basis of the assessees ' claim.
The Commissioner dismissed the revision petition as not maintainable, as well as on merits, ignoring the Bombay decision.
Meanwhile, the assessee filed an application requesting the Income tax Officer to issue a notice of demand under section 29, to enable him to file an appeal, but the Officer declined to do so.
The assessee filed a writ application in the High Court for issuing appropriate writs to the Commissioner and the Income tax Officer, but the High Court dismissed it in limine.
In his appeal to this Court, the assessee contended that (i) the High Court erred in holding that the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition was not in accordance with law, and that even if there were any defects the High Court should have given him an opportunity to rectify them, and (ii) the High Court erred in distinguishing the Bombay decision and in holding that there was no force in the revision filed before the Commissioner, and that, the High Court should have directed the Commissioner to entertain the revision and dispose of it in accordance with law by giving suitable directions to the Income tax Officer.
The respondent raised a preliminary objection that as the order of the Commissioner was an administrative act, article 226 of the Constitution could not be invoked.
HELD:(i) As no appeal lay to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the calculations made by the Income tax Officer, the Commissioner had powers under section 33A(2) to revise the Income tax Officer 's order.
The jurisdiction conferred on the Commissioner by the section is a judicial one, The nature of the jurisdiction and the rights decided carry with them necessarily the duty to act judicially in disposing of the revision.
Further, the fact that a Division Bench of one of the High Courts in India had taken a view in favour of the assessee, indicated that the question raised was arguable and required serious consideration.
Therefore, a writ of certiorari quashing the order of the Commissioner dismissing the assessee 's revision petition, should be issued.
[544E G; 548D] 537 Sitalpore Colliery Concern Ltd. vs Union of India, , Additional Income tax Officer, Cuddapah vs Cuddapah Star Transport Co. Ltd. and Suganchand Saraogi vs Commissioner of Income tax, , overruled.
Even if the Commissioner only made an administrative order in refusing, to give any direction to the Income tax Officer, the assessee would still be entitled to approach the High Court under article 226, and a writ of mandamus directing the Income tax Officer to discharge his statutory duty of passing the order and issuing the notice of demand in accordance with law, should be issued.
[546C E] (ii)The affidavit filed on behalf of the assessee was complete and compiled with the rules made by the High Court.
The affidavit spoke only of matters which were within the deponent 's own knowledge, because, the phrase "deponent 's own knowledge" is wide enough to comprehend the knowledge derived from a perusal of relevant documents.
Even if the affidavit was defective in any manner, the High Court instead of dismissing the petition in limine should have given the assessee, a reasonable opportunity to file a better affidavit.
[547F G, H] (iii)The High Court was also in error in holding that the decision of the Bombay High Court was given on different facts, for the facts in both cases were the same and they arose out of the same transaction.
[548B C]
