The appellant owned certain lands in the State of Bihar in respect of which proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act were started.
Under section 11 of the Act the Collector fixed the area of the land to be acquired and the compensation payable, and also apportioned the compensation between the appellant and the members of the village community who had claimed compensation for some.
portions of the land.
The award was then filed under section 12.
The appellant and members of the village community being dissatisfied asked the Collector to make.
references under section 18 to the Court.
After the award was given but before possession under section 16 of the Act was taken the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 was passed and by the operation of s.3 of the Act the appellant 's land became vested in the State.
On behalf of the State an application was made to the Collector to make a reference to the Court under section 30 of the Act claiming that the compensation under the award was payable to it as it had acquired the appellant 's title to the land.
The District Court held that the compensation was not payable to the State but, on appeal, the High Court held in favour of the State.
The appellant came to this Court with certificate.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the Collector had no authority to refer the matter under section 30 after he had apportioned the amount of compensation under section 11; (2) since title to.
compensation is derived solely from and on the date of the award, the notification under section 3 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act did not deprive the appellant of his right to receive compensation; and (3) the State Government was not 'a person interested within the meaning of the Land Acquisition Act, and could not apply for a reference.
under section 30.
HELD: Per Shah and Bachawat, JJ. (i) There are two provisions in the Act under which the Collector can make a reference to the Court, namely, section 18 and section 30.
The powers under the two sections are distinct and may be invoked in contingencies which do not overlap.
A person shown in that part.
of the award which relates to apportionment of compensation who is present either personally or through a representative or on whom notice is issued under section 12(2), must, if he does not accept the award, apply to the Collector to refer the matter to the Court under section 18 within the time prescribed thereunder.
But a person who has not appeared in the acquisition proceedings before the Collector may, if he is not served with notice of filing, raise a dispute as to apportionment or as to the persons to whom it is payable and apply to the Court for a reference under section 30, for determination of his right to compensation which may have existed before the award, or which may have devolved upon him since the award.
For a reference under section 30 no period of limitation is prescribed.
[583E 584A] 577 (ii) It is not predicated of the exercise of the power to make a reference under section 30 that the Collector has not apportioned the compensation money by his award.
[584D] Boregowda and Anr.
vs Subbaramiah and Ors., A.I.R. , disapproved.
(iii.) The award made by the Collector under section 11 is not the source of the right to compensation.
An award is strictly speaking only an offer made by the Government to the person interested in the land notified for acquisition; the person interested is not bound to accept it and the Government can also withdraw the acquisition under section 48.
It is only when possession of the land has been taken by the Government under section 16 that the right of the owner of the land is extinguished.
Therefore the appellant 's contention that title to compensation is derived solely from and on the date of the award, could not be accepted.
[584H 585C] (iv), The liability of the Government under section 31 to pay compensation to the person entitled thereto under the award does not imply t.hat only the persons to whom compensation is directed to.
be paid under the award may raise a dispute under section 30.
The scheme of apportionment by the Collector under section 11 is conclusive only between the` Collector and the persons interested and not among the persons interested.
Payment of compensation under section 31 to the persons declared in the award to be entitled thereto discharges the State of its liability to pay compensation leaving it open to the claimant to compensation to agitate his right in a reference under section 30 or by a separate suit.
[586B F] (v) Under the Bihar Land Reforms Act the title of the appellant to the land notified for acquisition became vested in the.
State and therefore the right to compensation for the land acquired devolved upon the.
State.
A dispute then arose between the State Government and the appellant "as to the persons to whom" compensation was payable.
The State had no right to the compensation payable for the land under a title existing before the date of the award of the Collector and no application could be made by it as a person interested within the meaning of section 18.
But a dispute between the appellant and the State as to their conflicting claims to the compensation money was clearly a dispute which could be referred under section 30 of the Act to the.
Court.
There is nothing in section 30 which excludes a reference to the Court of a dispute raised by a person on whom the title of the owner of the land has since the award, devolved.
[584G; 586A, G, H] Promotha Nath Mitra vs Rakhal Das Addy, 11 Cal.
L.J. 420, referred to.
Per Subba Rao, J. (i) The Land Acquisition Officer cannot make a reference under section 30 of the Act in the matter of apportionment of compensation after the award has been made by him apportioning the compensation under section 11 and has been filed under section 12.
The Land Acquisition Act discloses a well knit scheme in the matter of making an award.
The Land acquisition Officer after issuing notice calling for objections decides on the three matters prescribed in section 11 i.e. the true area of the land, the amount of compensation and the apportionment of the compensation.
Before making the apportionment he can resort to any of the following three methods.
(i) to accept ' an agreed formula; (ii) to decide for himself; and 578 (iii) to refer to the Court if he.
thinks that the decision of the Court is necessary.
But once the award is made, it becomes final and it can be reopened only in the manner prescribed i.e. by way of a reference under section 18 of the Act.
It is not correct to say that on the above view a person who acquires a right after the award by transfer inter vivos or by devolution of interest will be without a remedy.
Such a person may ask for a reference under section 18.
He may apply to be brought on record after the reference is made to the.
Court.
He may proceed to the Civil Court to recover the compensation from the persons who received it on the basis of his title.
On the other hand the contrary view will lead to an incongruous position.
It enables the Land Acquisition Officer to reopen a final award in the teeth of the express provisions of section 12 of the Act.
It further enables him to make a reference without any period of limitation and thus to disturb the rights finally settled by the award.
[580B G]
