By section 2(1) of the Madras Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act 1949, the High Court of Madras was competent to issue an order against any person that no proceedings shall be instituted by him in any court (i) in the Presidency town without the leave of the High Court, and (ii) 'elsewhere without the leave of the District and Sessions Judge.
On the application of the Advocate General of Andhra Pradesh the High Court of Andhra Pradesh ordered that no proceeding should be instituted by the appellant in the City of Hyderabad without leave of the High Court, in the City of Secunderabad without leave of the Chief City Civil ;Judge and elsewhere, without leave of the concerned District and Sessions Judge.
In his appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that: (i) the High Court had no jurisdiction to take action under the Act as its provisions were not extended to the Telangana area of the State, which formed part of the former State of Hyderabad; and (ii) the Act was unconstitutional because it prevented some citizens from approaching the Court, which everyone is entitled to in a State governed by the rule of law.
HELD: (i) (Per K. Subba Rao, K.N. Wanchoo, M. Hidayatullah and S.M. Sikri, J5.) The High Court was in error in holding that the Act merely created a procedural jurisdiction to put persons who indulge habitually in vexatious litigation under a procedural restraint in the former High Court of Madras, which jurisdiction, on its division into the two High Courts of Madras and Andhra Pradesh inhered in both the High Courts and continued to inhere in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh even for the purposes of those areas to which the Act had not been extended.
[752 D F] The Act was passed by the Madras Provincial Legislature,and conferred jurisdiction upon the Madras High Court to deal with habitual litigants indulging in vexatious litigation.
It was not an inherent jurisdiction of the Madras High Court.
By sections 30 and 53 of the Andhra State Act, 1953, the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act continued to be in force in the Andhra State, and the Andhra High Court possessed the same jurisdiction as the former Madras High Court.
But the Act is unworkable in the State of Andhra Pradesh which is formed under the , by adding the Telangana area of the former Hyderabad State to the State of Andhra; and section 65 of the does not alter the position.
[753 H] 744 All laws are intended to operate territorially and no Provincial Legislature in India, possesses extra territorial jurisdiction.
What the Madras Legislature enacted was to operate in its own territory and it said so in the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act.
In its operative part also, the order under the Act was to be made with a territorial distinction between the Presidency town and the rest of the Presidency of Madras.
The Act vested a jurisdiction in the High Court to deal with a particular type of litigant, but the Act made the High Court deal with the matter territorially and if new territories we 're to be governed by it had to be extended to the new territories and till so extended, the Act can only operate within the old territories.
Under section 119 of the , no law of one of the amalgamating States is to be extended to the area of the other amalgamating States, except by a competent legislative or other competent authority, and further, the law shall be construed as restricted to the territories within each State immediately before the reorganisation.
Since the Act has not been extended to the Telangana area, the application of the Act in that area is made impossible by section 119, and it cannot be extended by judicial construction.
No doubt, the Court possesses a power, under section 121 of the , to construe laws by adapting them in such a manner as to facilitate their application to the newly formed State, but the power is of adaptation and not legislation.
An increase in the territories in which an Act is to apply is dependent on legislation such as is contemplated by section 119.
[753 F H; 754 A C] Moreover, there being no Presidency town in the State of Andhra Pradesh, section 2(1)(i) of the Act is inapplicable in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
The mention of the Presidency town in the sub section was not with a view to indicate the seat of the High Court, but because the Madras High Court, possessed original jurisdiction in the Presidency town.
Therefore, the distinction between the City of Hyderabad and other parts of Andhra Pradesh, drawn by the High Court as if the City of Hyderabad was a Presidency town, was an artificial distinction which should not have been drawn by the High Court.
Section 2(1)(ii) is also inapplicable because, the contention that the entire State may be taken to be governed by that sub clause would lead to the strange result that the District and Sessions Judge would decide whether a particular litigant should be allowed to move the High Court in, appeal, revision or in an original proceeding.
[754 E H] Per Shah, J. (Dissenting): Parliament having by the Andhra State Act invested the High Court of Andhra with authority to exercise all jurisdiction which the High Court of Madras possessed, within the territories of the State of Andhra, and thereafter, having by section 65(1)(a) of the extended the exercise of that authority over the entire territory of Andhra Pradesh, it would be impossible to accept the argument that in respect of the jurisdiction conferred by the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh was incompetent to pass the order which it did against the appellant.
[759 A C] The Andhra High Court was a successor of the Madras High Court and exercised all the powers and administered the same law which the latter exercised in the territories comprised in the Andhra State.
Since Parliament expressly provided by section 55 of the Andhra State Act, that a court may construe a law which it has to enforce, with such alterations not affecting the substance as may be necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court, the expression "Presidency town" must, in the context of the constitution of a separate Andhra High Court, mean the town of the State in which the 745 High Court was located.
If it be granted that the High Court of: Andhra had jurisdiction to pass orders under the Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, it would be difficult to hold that section 119 of the restricts the exercise of the power by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh to prevent a vexatious litigant from instituting proceedings in 'and from Certain areas of the Andhra Pradesh and not elsewhere.
Section 65(1) of the which must be read harmoniously with section 119 authoring the High Court of Andhra Pradesh to exercise all jurisdiction, which the High Court of Andhra could exercise, over all the territories transferred to the State of Andhra Pradesh from the existing State of Hyderabad.
The Vexatious Litigation (Prevention) Act, does not require that the person to be restrained must be residing in or have a domicile within the jurisdiction of the Court, nor has the order contemplated to be passed, any direct territorial operation.
It is a personal direction which imposes restrictions upon the person restrained.
Once the High Court pronounces an order, it may be removed in appropriate cases only by the High Court, where the proceeding is to be instituted in any court in the town in which the High Court is located, and elsewhere, by order of the District and Sessions Court; and so, there is no conflict of jurisdiction between the High Court and the District Court.
[756 D H] z (ii) (By Full Court): The Act is not unconstitutional.
The litigants who are prevented from approaching the court without proper sanction are persons who habitually file vexatious actions.
Even they are not deprived of their right to go to a court in genuine and bona fide actions, but the Act only creates a check.
The object of the Act is to promote public good, because, it cannot be claimed that it is an inviolable right of any citizen to bring vexatious actions without control.
