Managing Agency Compensation for termination of Circumstances in which such compensation is revenue.
The respondent, a private limited company, carried on business in tobacco and other commodities and also acted as managing agents for the N company and for two other companies.
It had three directors, all of whom were paid a fixed remuneration for attending to the business of the company.
On June, 21, 1951, the respondent company was appointed an agent of the Central Government for buying, checking, leaf drying, and retaining and reselling tobacco under, and in accordance with, directions issued from time to time.
On June 22 1951 the respondent passed a resolution placing one of the directors, A, in "special charge" of all the work under the contract with the Central Government and agreed to pay him 30 per cent of the net profits from the contract.
Under this arrangement, for the year ended 31st March 1952, commission at 30 per cent was calculated and paid to A and was claimed in the assessment year 1952 53 as a permissible deduction under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The Income tax Officer allowed only 10 per cent of the net profit for the services rendered by A and disallowed the balance :amount claimed by the respondent.
The managing agency agreement of the respondent with the N Company was terminated in September 1 '951, when the State Government acquired the undertaking of that company, and the respondent was paid Rs. 17,346 as compensation for premature termination of its agency.
This amount was taken into account by the Income tax Officer in computing the respondent 's income for the year ended March 31, 1952.
Appeals against the order of the Income tax Officer to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and to the Tribunal challenging the disallowance of part of the commission and inclusion of the compensation for termination of the managing agency were unsuccessful.
On a reference on both these points, the High Court decided them in the respondent 's favour.
HELD: (i) The contract with the Government was, for the respondent, an important contract requiring special attention by a person well acquainted with the practical details of the business.
If for such special services the management as prudent business men for advancing the interest of respondent bona fide regarded 30 per cent of the net profits as reasonable remuneration, the revenue authorities were not justified in reviewing that opinion and reducing the rate of remuneration.
[697B, C] 693 Where, on a consideration of the relevant materials the Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that a particular remuneration is not bona fide, or is unreasonable, the High Court, in exercising its advisory jurisdiction, has no power to interfere with that opinion; but in the present case, material circumstances relating to the nature of the contract and the special services to be performed were not at all taken into account by the revenue authorities.
[697C E] (ii) Ordinarily, compensation for loss of office or agency.
is regarded as a capital receipt; but this rule is subject to an exception that payment received even for termination of an agency agreement, where the agency is one of many which the assessee bolds, and the termination of the agency does not impair the profit making structure of the assessee, but is within the frame work of the business, it being a necessary incident of the business that existing agencies may be terminated and fresh agencies may be taken, is revenue and not capital.
However, in the absence of evidence as to what effect the determination of the managing agency of the N company had upon the business of the respondent, the mere circumstance that the respondent had managing agencies of two other companies without more would not bring the present case within the exception [698H; 699 A c] Kelsal Parsons & Co. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, 21T.C. and Kettlewell Bullen & Co.
C.I.T. Calcutta, explained and distinguished.
