The respondent was the owner of a building used as a cinematograph theatre.
By a registered deed dated December 23, 1960, the appellant obtained a lease of the theatre at a monthly rental of Rs. 1801/ .
He then applied under section 11 of the Saurashtra Rent Control Act 22 of 1951 for an order fixing the standard rent of the theatre.
The Court of First Instance taxed the standard rent of the whole theatre at Rs. 1030/12/ .
Against this order the respondent filed an appeal under section 28(1) of the Act to the District Court.
That court fixed the rental at Rs. 1150/ .
Against the order of the District Court second appeal under section 28(2) of the Act was preferred by the appellant to the High CouRT.
It was dismissed under 0.41, r. 11(1); of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Aggrieved, the appellant came to this Court.
It was contended, inter alia, that (i) a second appeal under section 28 of the Act was not governed by section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, (ii) that in calculating the cost of the building the courts below erred in taking into consideration the whole price paid by the respondent for the land as well as the buildings standing on it at the time of purchase, and that (iii) the District Court erred in taking 7% as an adequate return in respect of the property in question.
HELD: (i) The second appeal under section 28 of the Act may be entertained by the High Court within the limits provided by section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and it is not open to the parties to demand reappraisal of the evidence by the High Court on the ground that the District Court had erred in its view of the evidence.
The High Court was competent to dismiss the appeal under 0.41, r, 11(1) of the Code.
[184 G] The expression 'second appeal ' in the Code means an appeal to the High Court from the decision in a civil suit or proceeding of a first appellate court subordinate to the High Court.
[183 F] The disputes directed to be dealt with under the Act are essentially disputes of a civil nature and the courts invested with the power under section 27 of the Act have to adjudicate upon the disputed rights in the light of its special provisions.
The procedure in the trial of suits, applications and proceedings under the Act is the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure except when it is otherwise provided expressly or by clear implication.
[183 G] It is true that the proceedings under section 11 do not result in 2 decree and that certain orders under the Act are made appealable under section 28 though such orders are not appealable under the Code.
But the right of appeal On that account is not released from the restrictions which are attracted by its very nature.
[184 A B, F G] 181 Doshibai Khanna vs Sandhi Suleman Gulmamad, and Nagardas Harichand vs Modi Mohanlal, S.A. No. 381 of 1960 dt.
21 9 1964, disapproved.
Union of India vs Mohindra Supply Co. ; , distinguished.
(ii) The courts below did not commit any error in taking into consideration the whole price paid by the respondent for the land and building purchased by him.
A building when let out forms a composite unit with the land on which it stands and the rent received from the building cannot be wholly attributed to the building.
[185 F G] (iii) On a review of the reasons given it could not be said that the District Court committed any error of principle in coming to the conclusion that 7% gross return on the cost of construction should be regarded as an adequate return from the property in question.
[186 G]
