The appellant and respondent were contesting candidates for election to the State Legislative Assembly.
The respondent was declared elected, and the appellant filed an election petition challenging the election on the ground that the respondent was not duly qualified under article 173 of the Constitution as he was a citizen of Nepal and not a citizen of India.
The Tribunal held that the respondent was not a citizen of India, but the High Court in appeal set aside that order and upheld the election of the respondent.
On the question whether the respondent was a citizen of India under article 5 of the Constitution, 0n the material date, HELD: Assuming that the respondent was not born in the territory of India, on a consideration of all the events and circumstances of his life, he had acquired a domicile of choice in India long before the end of 1949 which is the material time under article 5 of the Constitution.
He had formed the deliberate intention of making India his home with the intention of permanently establishing himself and his family in India and therefore had the requisite animus manendi.
He was ordinarily resident in India for 5 years immediately preceding the time when article 5 came into force.
Since the requirements of article 5(c) were satisfied, the High Court rightly reached the conclusion, that he was a citizen of India at the relevant time.
[805 C D] The only intention required for a proof of a change of domicile is an intention of permanent residence.
What is required to be established is that the person who is alleged to have changed his domicile of origin has voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family in, the, new country, not for a mere special.
or temporary purpose, but with a present intention of making it his permanent home, On the question of domicile at a particular time the course of his conduct and the facts and.
circumstances before and after that time are relevant.
[801 F G; 803 F] Udny vs Udny,L.R. 1 H.L. Sc.
441 and, Doucet vs Geoghegan, 9Ch.
441, applied. 794
