Under the Standing Orders of the appellant company, its employees were entitled to five holidays with pay on specified dates during each year.
Furthermore, by an agreement with the respondents ' union, the company had agreed to grant an additional day 's holiday with pay, thus raising the total number of paid annual holidays to six.
In 1958 the Kerala Industrial Establishments (National and Festival Holidays) Act, 1958, was passed and section 3 of the Act required every employer to declare holidays on every 26th January, 15th August and 1st May, and to grant four additional festival holidays each year, on dates to be fixed by the Inspector after consulting the employer and the employees.
The number of paid holidays was thus statutorily fixed at 7.
In 1962, the company obtained the Inspector 's decision on the four festival holidays and declared the dates on which such holidays would be given.
At that time, while an industrial dispute between the company and its employees was pending.
the respondents filed applications under section 33A of the , before the Tribunal.
It was contended in these applications that the statutory provision in section 3 for 7 paid holidays did not override or abrogate the existing arrangement as to paid holidays and that the holidays to be given under section 3 would be in addition, to the holidays which the appellant was bound to give the respondents under existing arrangements; and that the appellant 's attempt to limit the nUmber of paid holidays to 7 during 1962 was contrary to the terms of employment evidenced by the existing arrangement and therefore violative of section 33.
This contention was upheld by the Tribunal.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: Under section 3 the statutory requirement is 7 paid holidays each year.
If under an existing arrangement the employees were entitled to more than 7 paid holidays, such more favourable right was protected by section 11.
The scheme of section 11 clearly shows that section 3 is not intended to prescribe a minimum number of paid holidays in addition to the existing ones and, in the present case, would operate only to raise the total number of holidays from 6 under the existing arrangements to 7 paid holidays in accordance with section 3.
[764 B E]
