Under the Madhya Pradesh Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act 1958 (1 of 1959) a cess was levied on sugarcane and for this purpose a sugarcane factory was treated as a 'local area '.In the Diamond ' Sugar Mills case it was held by this Court that such a levy was not valid.
Following this decision the Madhya Pradesh High Court struck down section 23, which was the charging section of the aforesaid Madhya Pradesh.
Act No. 1 of 1959.
There were Acts in several other States which suffered from the same infirmity and to meet the situation Parliament passed the (38 of 1961).
The Act made valid, by section 3, all the assessments and collections made before its commencement under the various State Arts and laid down that all the provisions.
of the State Acts as well as the relevant notifications, rules etc.
made under the State Acts would be treated as part of section 3; further.
the said section was to be deemed to have existed at all material times when the cess was imposed, assessed and collected under the State Acts.
The, appellant, a sugar factory, was asked to pay the cess for the years 1959 60 and 1960 61.
It however, challenged the levy in a writ petition before the High Court.
The High Court having dismissed the petition, the.
appellant came to this Court with certificate.
The contentions urged on behalf of the appellant were : (1) What the validation of the Act had done was to attempt to cure the legislative incompetence of the State Legislatures by validating State Acts which were invalid on the ground of absence of legislative competence in the respective State Legislatures; (2) Parliament had passed the Act in question not for the purpose of levying a cess of its own, but for the purpose of enabling the respective states to retain the amounts which they had illegally collected.
The Act was therefore a colourable piece of legislation; (3) The Act had not been passed for the purposes of the Union of India and the recoveries of cesses which were retrospectively authorised by it were not likely to go into the Consolidated Fund of India; (4) The sugarcane crushing season was between October 1, and June 30th. 'Me Cane Development Council which was constituted on August 26, 1960 was not in existence throughout the period covered by the demand for the year 1950 60. 'Me demand was a 'fee ' and it was illegal to recover such a wee for a period during which the council did not exist at all and could have rendered no service whatever.
HELD:(i) In view of the decision of this Court in Diamond Sugar Mills it was obvious that the cess in question was outside the legislative competence of the States.
This very conclusion led to the irresistible inference that Parliament would have legislative competence to deal with the subject matter in question, having regard to article 248 read with Entry 524 97 in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
Thus the legislative competence of Parliament to levy a cess such as was imposed by section 3 of the (Central Act 38 of 1961) was not in doubt.
Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs Slate of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. , referred to.
(ii)When an Act passed by a State Legislature is invalid on the ground that the State Legislature did not have legislative competence to deal with the topics covered by it, then even Parliament cannot validate such an Act, because the effect of such attempted validation, in substance, would be to confer legislative competence on the State legislature in regard to a field or topic which, by the relevant provisions of the schedules to the Constitution, is outside its jurisdiction.
Where a topic is not included within the relevant List dealing with the legislative competence of the Slate Legislatures, Parliament, by making a law cannot attempt to confer such legislative competence on the State Legislatures.
[531 G] But section 3 of the impugned Act does not purport to validate the invalid State Statutes.
What Parliament has done by enacting the said section is not to validate the invalid State statutes, but to make a law concerning the cess covered by the said Statutes and to provide that he said law shall come into operation retrospectively.
Parliament knew that the relevant State Acts were invalid because the State Legislatures were not competent to enact them.
Parliament also knew that it was fully competent to make an Act in respect of the subject matter covered by the said invalid State Statutes.
Parliament however decided that rather than make elaborate and long provisions in respect of the recovery of cess, it would be more convenient to make a compendious provision such as is contained in section 3.
The plain meaning of section 3 is that the material and relevant provisions of the State Act as well as the provisions of notifications, orders and rules issued or made thereunder are included in section 3 and shall be deemed to have been included at all material times in it.
In other words what section 3 provides is that by its order and force the respective cesses will be deemed to have been recovered, because the provisions in relation to the recovery of the said cesses have been incorporated in the Act itself.
The command under which the cesses would be deemed to have been recovered would, therefore, be the command of Parliament.
[532 C H] (iii)Where a challenge to the validity of a legal enactment is made on the ground that it is a colourable piece of legislation, what has to be proved to the satisfaction of the court is that though the Act ostensibly is within the legislative competence of the legislature in question, in substance and in reality it covers field which is outside its legislative competence.
In passing section 3 however Parliament exercised its undoubted legislative competence to provide for the recovery of the specific(] cesses and commissions in the respective State areas from the date and in the manner indicated by it.
The Act could not therefore be attacked on the ground of being a colourable piece of legislation.
[533 F H] K.C.
Gajatpati Narayan Dea & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, [1954] S.C.R.1 relied on.
(iv)The validity of an Act must be judged in the light of the legislative competence of the legislature which passes the Act and may have to be examined in certain cases by reference to the question as to Whether fundamental right of citizens have been improperly contravened, or to other considerations which may be relevant in that behalf.
But normally it would be inappropriate, indeed illegitimate, to hold an enquiry into the manner in which the funds raised by an Act would be dealt with when 525 the court is considering the question about the validity of the Act itself.
Therefore it was impermissible to contend that the Act was invalid because the funds in question would not go into the Consolidated Fund of India.
[535 E H] (v)If collections are made under statutory provisions which are invalid because they deal with a topic outside the legislative competence of the State Legislature, Parliament can in exercise of its undoubted legislative competence, pass a law retrospectively validating the said collections by converting their character from collections made tinder the State Statutes to that of collections made under its own statute operating retrospectively.
To hold otherwise would be to cut down the width and amplitude of the legislative competence conferred on Parliament by article 248 read with Entry 97 in List I of the Seventh Schedule.
[536 C E] (vi)The functions of the Cane Development Council as prescribed by section 6 of the Madhya Pradesh Act show that the Council is expected to render service to the mills like the appellant and so it can be safely assumed that the commission which was authorised to be recovered under section 21 of the Madha Pradesh Act is a 'fee '.
The imposition of a fee is generally supported on the basis of quid pro quo.
The Council was however constituted for the first time on August 26, 1960.
In other words the Council was not in existence throughout the periods covered by the demand relating to the year 1959 60.
It did not render any service at all during the said period.
On the special facts of the case no amount could therefore be validly claimed by way of commission for the year 1959 60.
[537 A B; 538 C D] H. H. Sudhindra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner of Hindu Religious and Chtartible Endowments, Mysore, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R., referred to.
