The appellant a public limited company sought exemption under section 5(2)(a)(ii) of the Bengal Finance (S.ales Tax) Act, 1941 in respect of certain sales.
However, it could not produce before the commercial tax officer the declaration forms from the purchasing dealers required to be produced under the proviso to that sub clause because the said forms were lost.
The appellant tried to set duplicate forms from the purchasing dealers but without success.
His application under section 21A to summon the dealers with the relevant documents was rejected by the Commercial Tax Officer and the higher authorities also refused to issue directions for the issue of duplicate declaration forms.
The Commercial Tax Officer thereafter passed an assessment order without allowing.
the said exemption.
Against that order the appellant filed a writ petition under article 226 and thereafter a Letters Patent appeal but failed to get redress.
It then appealed to this Court with certificate.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the exemption granted under the substantive sub clause (ii) could be claimed by the production of other relevant evidence if the declaration forms could not be produced; the proviso to that sub clause requiring the production of the said forms was only directory as was also proved by the use of the words "on demand" in section 27A. HELD: The exemption could be claimed only by the production the declaration forms as laid down in the proviso.
(i) The effect of an excepting proviso is to except from the main clause something.
which but for the proviso would be within it.
Craies on Statute Law quoted: If the intention of the Legislature was to give exemption if the terms of the substantive part of sub clause (ii) above are complied with, the proviso.
becomes redundant and otiose.
If the proviso is treated as merely directory it will lead to the position that if the declaration form is furnished well and good; but if not furnished other evidence can be produced.
That is to rewrite the clause and to omit the proviso.
That will defeat the express intention of the legislature.
[622H 630A] There is an understandable reason for the stringency of the provisions.
The object of section 5(2)(a)(ii) of the Act and the rules made thereunder is self evident.
While they are obviously intended to give exemption to a dealer in respect of sales to registered dealers of specified classes of goods, it seeks also to prevent fraud and collusion in an attempt to evade tax.
[630G] 627 State of Orissa vs
M.A. Tulloch & Co. Ltd. (1964) 15 S.T.C. 641, distinguished.
(ii) The words "on demand" in r. 27A only fix the time when the declaration forms are to be produced; they do not mean that their production is not obligatory.
[630A B] (iii) Section 21A only empowers the Commissioner or any person appointed by him to take evidence on oath etc.
It can be invoked only in a case where the authority concerned is empowered to take evidence in respect of a particular matter, but that does not enable him to ignore a statutory condition to claim exemption.
[630C D] (iv) Sub rules (3) and (4) of section 27A do not enable the selling dealer to either directly apply or to compel the purchasing dealers to apply for duplicate forms nor do they enjoin on the appropriate authority to give the selling dealer a duplicate form to replace the lost one.
This may cause hardship but the remedy lies with the Legislature only.
[630E, F]
