The appellant having been once convicted under the for keeping foodstuff for sale in a container without covering it, was for a second time convicted for selling foodstuff which had been coloured with a prohibited dye.
Treating the latter conviction as a "second offence" under section 16(1) of the Act the Trial Court sentenced the appellant to two years imprisonment.
Having failed to get redress in the High Court he appealed to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the "second offence" contemplated by section 16(1) was an offence of the same kind as the first and not any offence under the Act.
HELD: (i) The word second in the expression "second offence" in section 16(1) means second in time and not second of the same type.
The section does not say "second offence" of the same type; the latter words are not there.
On the other hand from the phrase 'subsequent offences ' used in the section in respect of offences subsequent to the third one, it is clear that the words 'first ', 'second ' and 'third ' were intended to indicate things happening one after another in point of time.
[808 B] The object of the sub section is clearly to prevent repetition of offences.
That is why for the offence subsequently committed a heavier sentence is provided.
No object could have been served by seeking to stop the repetition of the same type of conduct only.
[808 E F] (ii) There is no foundation in the Act for distinguishing between trivial and serious offences and then arguing that the Act could not have intended to impose a heavier punishment for a second offence which might be of a less serious nature than the first.
The Act provides the same punishment for each offence under it.
If the punishment is the same, it would follow that the statute considered them to be of the same seriousness.
[808 H] (iii) The second offence must be an offence under the Act although it is not specifically so stated.
Section 16(1) says that if any person does any of the acts mentioned in cls.
(a) to (g) in it, he shall be punishable for the first offence with a certain penalty, for the second offence with a higher penalty, and for the third a still higher penalty.
It is clear that the acts or omissions mentioned 807 in the different clauses constitute the offences for which the penalties are provided.
From this structure of the sub section the implication necessarily arises that the penalties were imposed for offences under the Act only.
[809 E F] City Board, Saharanpur vs Abdul Wahid, A.I.R. (1959) All.
695, Chuttan vs State, A.I.R. (1950) All.
629 and In re Authers, , referred to.
