The assessee leased out its tea estates for a period of ten years in consideration of a sum as and by way of premium and an annual rent to be paid by the lessor to the assessee.
As premium a part the sum was paid at the time of the execution of the lease and the balance was spread over in ten annual instalments; and the annual rent was payable in monthly instalments.
The annual instalment paid as premium was taxed by the Income Tax authorities as revenue receipt of the assessee.
On reference, the High Court held to be capital gains.
In appeal by certificate.
HELD: The annual instalment paid as premium was capital gains.
When the interest of the lessor is parted for a price the price paid is premium or salami.
But the periodical payments made for the continuous enjoyment of the benefits under the lease are in the nature of rent.
The former is a capital income and the latter a revenue receipt.
There may be circumstances where the parties may camouflage the real nature of the transaction by using clever phraseology.
In some cases, the so called premium is in fact advance rent and in others rent is a deferred price.
It is not the form but the substance of the transaction that matters.
The nomenclature used may not be decisive or conclusive but it helps the court, having regard to the other circumstances, to ascertain the intention of the parties.
Premium can be paid in a single payment or by instalments.
The real test is whether the said amount paid in a lump sum or in instalments is the consideration paid by the tenant for being let into possession. [813 H; 814 E G] Raja Bahadar Kamakshya Narain Singh of Ramgarb vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, , Member for the Board of Agriculture Income tax Assam vs Sindhurani Chaudhurani, , and Chintamani Saran Nath Sah Deo vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar and Orissa, (1961)41 I.T.R. 506, applied.
The parties, who were businessmen well versed in their trade, must be assumed to have ,known the difference between the two expressions "premium" and 'rent , and they had designedly used those two expressions to connote two different payments.
The annual rent fixed was a considerable sum of Rs. 54,500/ and the premium, when spread over 10 years would work out to Rs. 22,500/ a year.
There was no reason, therefore, to assume that the parties camouflaged their real intention and fixed a part of the rent in the shape of premium.
The L/P(D)5SCII 13 812 mere fact that the premium was made payable in instalments could not obviously be decisive of the question, for that might have been to accommodate the lessee.
[815 B, C] The construction based on the clause in the lease deed that on the de.fault in the payments of the instalments of the premium or rent, the lessor shall be entitled to recover the balance of the unpaid premium and not the entire balance of the premium, really ignores the main terms of the lease.
In the context of the other clauses, this clause could not be so construed as to override or come into conflict with the main terms of the lease deed.
[815 H, 816B]
