The appellant was the holder of a money decree against an evacuee whose property had vested in the Custodian.
Under section 17 of the , the property was not liable to be proceeded against in execution so long as it remained vested in the Custodian, and the appellant could not take steps to execute the decree.
He therefore applied to the Custodian under section 10(2)(n) of the Act, for satisfaction of his claim out of the assets of the evacuee.
The application was rejected on the ground that the Custodian had no power to grant the relief and the order was confirmed by the Custodian General, in revision.
In his appeal to this Court the appellant contended that the Custodian should have entertained his claim.
HELD : The orders passed by the Custodian and the Custodian General must be set aside and the proceeding remanded to the Custodian to determine the questions, whether in the opinion of the Custodian, the appellant was entitled to any sum of money out of the funds in the Custodian 's ion and whether, for the purpose of administration and management of the evacuee property or for enabling him satisfactorily to dis charge his duties under the Act the Custodian should pay the amount claimed.
[311 H; 312 A] Section 10(1) of the Act, sets out the powers of the Custodian generally, and the diverse clauses of section 10(2) illustrate the specific purposes for which the powers may be exercised, These clauses are not mutually exclusive.
Under cl.
(in), before its amendment by Act 91 of 1956, express power to entertain a claim for satisfaction of debts due by the evacuee was conferred upon the Custodian.
Clause (n) confers upon the Custodian power, coupled with a duty, to pay to the evacuee or to any member of his family or to any other person, who in the opinion of the Custodian is entitled, any sum of money out of the estate of the evacuee. 'Me words "any other person" are not restricted to persons who are members of the evacuee 's family, but include other persons as well who are entitled to receive money from the evacuee.
Thus, the power to pay the evacuee 's debts was derived both under cls.
(in) and (n) of section 10(2) Therefore, the deletion from cl.
(in) of the Custodian 's power to pay the debts, by the Amending Act of 1956, and the consequential deletion of r. 22 of the rules framed under the Act, by which a machinery was provided for exercising that power, did not affect the power which is conferred by section 10(2)(n) and by section 10(1).
The power to administer, under section 10(1), is not merely a power to manage on behalf of the evacuee so as to authorise the Custodian only to recover and collect the assets of the evacuee; it includes power to discharge his obligations as well, to pay such debts which, in the opinion of the Custodian, are binding upon the evacuee.
[307 C; 309 C D; 311 C E] 305 A decree of the civil court is not decisive of the question whether a Person making a claim is entitled to the money claimed by him; it is for the Custodian to determine whether he is so entitled.
The Custodian has to form his "opinion" on this question, and in forming his opinion, he must act judicially and not arbitrably.
[311 F G]
