The ancestors of the appellants created usufructuary mortgages in favour of the respondent.
The mortgaged property was a part of a larger holding.
The mortgagee respondent had agreed to pay a portion of the rent of the entire holding and the mortgagors agreed to pay The balance rent payable in respect of it.
The mortgagors defaulted for several years in payment of the rent.
The mortgagee paid almost the entire amount of the rent but defaulted in the payment of a trifling sum.
The landlord obtained a decree for arrears of rent, and at rent sales the mortgagee pur chased the lands.
The appellant s mortgagors filed a suit for redemption of the mortgage, which was decreed by the trial court.
The mortgagee appealed, which was allowed in part passing a decree for redemption of a small plot only on the ground that this portion of land was not sold at the rent sale.
The mortgagors ' appeal to the High Court was dismissed.
In appeal by special leave, the mortgagors contended that the purchases at the rent sale and the certificate sale were made by the mortgagee by availing himself of his position as such as having regard to section 90 of the and Illustration (c) to it.
the purchases enured for the benefit of the mortgaors and they were entitled to redeem the entire mortgaged lands.
HELD : The portion of the rent which the mortgagee failed to pay was so small that it was impossible to say that the property was brought to sale for it or that his default was in any real sense a contributory cause of the site of the property.
It was not shown that non payment of the titling sum by the mortgagee was made mala fide or with the ulterior object of the property being put up for sale and his becoming the purchaser of it.
The mortgagee did not gain any advantage by availing himself of his position as such or of a situation brought about by his default.
The real effective cause of the sale was the default of the mortgagor& alone.
L161 E G] In the circumstances, section 90 of the and Illustration (c) to it were not attracted, and the purchase by the mortgagee did not enure for the benefit of the mortgagors.
The rent sale and the certificate sale extinguished the right of redemption.
[161 G H] Basmat Devi vs Chamru Sao, ; , referred to.
