An election petition was filed by the appellant against the first respondent challenging his election on May 4, 1963 to the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
A number of allegations including those of corrupt practice were made against the first respondent in the petition.
The affidavit filed in support of the allegations of corrupt practice as required by Rule 94A of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, was sworn by the petitioner before the Clerk of Court in the District Court of Jabalpur.
The first respondent in his objections before the Election Tribunal raised the question whether the affidavit under Rule 94A was sworn before a proper authority.
The Election Tribunal accepted the objection but allowed the appellant to file a second affidavit sworn before a proper authority.
The orders of the Tribunal were challenged by the first respondent before the High Court under article 226 and article 227 of the Constitution and the High Court, holding that the fresh affidavit could not be called and that there was no proper affidavit, quashed the orders of the Tribunal and directed the Tribunal to pass an order according to law.
The appellant appealed to this Court on certificate of fitness granted by the High Court.
Although the appellant had conceded before the High Court that his first affidavit was not proper he was allowed to withdraw his concession in this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the clerk of Court before whom his first affidavit bad been sworn had been duly appointed ex officio Commissioner of Oaths under section 139(c) of the Code of Civil Procedure and an affidavit sworn before him complied with r. 94A.
The respondent however contended that a Commissioner of Oaths appointed under section 139(c) was for the purpose of affidavits under the Civil Procedure Code only, just as a Commissioner appointed under section 539 of the Criminal Procedure Code could swear affidavit under that Code only.
HELD : There is no analogy between an affidavit sworn under section 539 Cr. P. C. and the affidavit sworn here.
An affidavit sworn by a district Clerk of Court may not be good for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure and vice versa but that is because the restriction is to be formed in section 139 of the one Code and section 539 of the other.
Rule 94A makes no such condition and makes receivable an affidavit before a Commissioner of Oaths without specifying of what kind.
In this view of the matter the affidavit sworn before the District Clerk of Court who undoubtedly was a Commissioner of Oath could only be excluded by taking an extreme and technical view which was not justified.
[484 B D]
