In construing a document whether in English or in vernacular the fundamental rule is to ascertain the inten tion from the words used; the surrounding circumstances are to be considered but that is only for the purpose of finding out the intended meaning of the words which have actually been employed.
To convey an absolute estate to a Hindu female, no express power of alienation need be given; it is enough if words of such amplitude are used as would convey full rights of ownership.
The term 'Malik ' when used in a will or other document as descriptive of the position which a devisee or donee is intended to held, has been held apt to describe in owner possessed of full proprietory rights, including a full right of alienation, unless there is something in the context or in the surrounding circumstances to indicate that such full proprietory rights were not intended be conferred to 767 The mere fact that a gift of property is made for the support and maintenance of a female relation could not be taken to be a prima facie indication of the intention of the donor, that the donee was to enjoy the property only during her life time.
The extent of interest, which the donee is to take, depends upon the intention of the donor as ex pressed by the language used, and if the dispositive words employed in the document are clear and unambiguous and import absolute ownership, the purpose of the grant would not, by itself, restrict or cut down the interest.
The desire to provide maintenance or rcsidence of the donee would only show the motive which prompted the donor to make the gift, but it could not be read as a measure of the extent of the gift.
Where a Hindu died leaving two widows, a widowed daugh terin law and a daughter 's son, and a relative of the family acting as guardian of the daughter 's son 's son who was then the nearest reversioner got a relinquishment deed from the daughter in law renouncing all her claims to the estate and in return executed a deed of 'tamlikhama ' to her with re spect to certain properties which ran as follows: "I have therefore, of my own accord and free will, without any compulsion or coercion on the part of any one else while in my proper senses made a Tamlik of a double storied pucca built shop . . and a house and a kothri in Etawah . . worth Rs. 8,000 for purposes of residence of the Musammat (the daughter in law) owned by the minor aforesaid . . which present stands let out on out on rent to Sunder Lal, brother of Mst.
Meria aforesaid . . in favour of Mst.
Meria aforesaid, widow of Chhedi Lal and made her the owner (Malik) " ' Held, that there was nothing in the context of the document or in the surrounding circumstances which would displace the presumption of full proprietory rights which the use of the words 'Malik ' is apt ordinarily to convey and the daughter in law obtained under the gift deed a full heritable and transferable title to t, he properties con veyed thereby.
Rajendra Prasad vs Gopal Prasad (57 I.A. 296), Kollani Koer vs Luchmee Parsad , Tagore vs Tagore (I.A. Supp.
Sasiman Chaudhurain vs Shib Narayan (49 I.A. 25), Biswanath Prasad vs Chandrika (60 I.A. 56) relied on.
Baja Ram Baksh vs Arjun (60 I.A. 56), Woodayaditta Deb vs W.R. 229) distinguished.
