The appellant was elected President of the Bhusaval Borough Municipality in Bombay State in July 1964.
On the same day the Municipality passed a resolution to the effect that the term of office of the President would be "the residue of the term of office of the municipality".
The four years ' term of the municipality as provided in section 25 of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act 1925 (Bombay Act 18 of 1925) was due to expire on February 17, 1965.
However in the meanwhile the Maharashtra Municipalities (Postponement of General Elections Pending Unification of Municipal Laws Act, 1964 was passed, and under section 3 thereof the term of the councillors of the municipality was by fiction extended to December 31, 1965.
The Collector of the area on the assumption that the term of the President ending on February 17, 1965, issued notice for a fresh election in March 1965.
The appellant filed an application under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution and contended that as the term of office of the municipality had been extended up to December 31, 1965 he was entitled to be President till that date under the resolution passed by the Municipality.
The High Court ,. jetted the contention.
The appellant, with a certificate of fitness granted by the High Court, came to this Court.
The short question in the appeal was whether the expression "the residue of the municipality" in the resolution of the municipality meant the residue of the municipality that would have been if the Maharashtra Act had not been passed or whether it should be interpreted in the context of the extended term provided by the Maharashtra Act.
On behalf of the appellant it was argued that the appellant would get the extended term provided by the Maharashtra Act, because in effect it was an extension under the Act within the meaning of the second proviso to section 19 of the Act or in any event he got the benefit because the Maharashtra Act in effect amended section 25 of the Act with the result that 'residue ' of the 'term ' was extended to December 31, 1965.
HELD : (i) The impact of section 3 of the Maharashtra Act on the provisions of the Municipal Boroughs Act is that it not only extends the term prescribed under section 25 of the Act but also the term extended under section 25 or under any other section of the Act.
If that was the legal effect of the Maharahtra Act, the second proviso to section 19 was not attracted to the instant case as there was no order or notification issued under section 25 or any other relevant section of the Act extending the term of the Councillors fixed under section 25 of the Act.
Therefore for the present purpose the second proviso to section 19 had to be left out of consideration and the problem had 696 to be approached on the basis of the fiction that the term of the Councillors prescribed under section 25 of the Act was extended up to December 31, 1965.
[699 G 700 A] (ii) The intention of the municipality could be gathered only from the tances statutory or otherwise existing at the time when the resolution was passed and on the express terms of the said resolution.
The second proviso to section 19 contemplates the extension of the term of office of the Municipality under the Act.
It was therefore not possible to predicate that at the time the resolution was passed the municipality could not have contemplated a situation when the term of the Municipality would be extended under the provisions of the Act.
Moreover from the Statement of objects underlying the issuance of the Ordinance which culminated in the Maharashtra Act it appeared that the question of extension of the term of the municipalities in the State was under serious consideration even in July 1963.
Indeed on or about July 18, 1964 when the term of the President was extended, the municipality passed a resolution recommending that the term of the Municipality be extended beyond 4 years.
It was therefore clear that on the basis of the statutory and other circumstances obtaining at the time the extension was made, the councillors clearly expected that the term of the municipality would be or could be extended and with that knowledge they passed the resolution fixing the term of the President for the residue of the term of the Municipality; the intention appeared to be that the term of the President should syncbronise with the life of the municipality existing or extended as the case may be.
[700 B 701 D] The order of the High Court was therefore not correct and had to be set aside.
