In the village of Challayapalam, there were six inams, namely, the Challayapalam Shrotriem and five minor inams but there was no information as to when the inams were created and by whom.
In two suits, one filed by the shrotriemdars, against the tenants for a declaration that the tenants did not have occupancy rights in the lands in their occupation, and the other by the tenants for a declaration that they had occupancy rights, the question arose whether the shrotriem was an "estate" within the meaning of section 3 (2) (d) of the Madras Estates Land Act, 1908, as amended by Act 18 of 1936.
The trial court held, on a review of the evidence, that the grant was of the whole village within the meaning of the section and that the tenants had occupancy rights.
On appeal, the High Court held that the evidence on record was inconclusive, that the onus of proving that the ant was of an estate lay upon the tenants, and that, since the tenants had Failed to discharge the onus, the question should be decided against the tenants.
In the appeal to this Court by the tenants, the question was : if there was no evidence justifying an inference that the grant was of a whole village, whether explanation 1 to section 3(2)(d) (added by Act 2 of 1945) gave rise to a presumption in favour either of the shrotriemdars or the tenants.
HELD : The suit of the shrotriemdars must fail, because, the Explanation raises a presumption, where a grant is expressed to be of a named village, that the area which formed the subject matter of the grant shall be deemed to be an estate.
Raising of the presumption is not subject to any other condition.
The legislature has, by the non obstante clause in the Explanation, affirmed that such presumption shall be raised even if it appears that in the grant are not included certain lands in the village, which have, before the grant of the named village been granted on service or other tenure or have been reserved for communal purposes.
The party contending that the grant in question falls outside the definition in section 3(2) (d), has to prove that case, either by showing that the minor inams not comprised in the grant were created, contemporaneously with or subsequent to the grant of the village, by the grantor.
[857 D E; 861 C E] By enacting the Explanation the intention of the legislature was to declare occupancy rights of tenants in inam villages.
It would be attributing to the legislature gross ignorance of local conditions.
if it was held that the legislature intended to place upon the tenant the onus of establishing affirmatively that the minor inams were granted before the grant of the named village and that if he fails to do so his claim is liable to fail.
It is well nigh impossible to discharge such a burden in normal cases.
Nor was it intended that, when the evidence was inconclusive, the person who approached the Court for relief must fail, for, as in the present 842 843 case, if the inamdar as well as the tenant sue for relief, the application of the rule would require the court to adopt the anomalous course of dismissing both the actions.
In cases, which arose after the Amending Act of 1936, reference to the presumption in section 23 of the Act would be wholly out of place, the applicable presumption being the one prescribed by Explanation 1.
The presumption under section 23, that a grant in favour of an inamdar was of the melvaram only, applied only in cases which arose before the Amending Act of 1936.
[857 G; 858 B; 860 B; 862 F G] District Board of Tanjore vs M. K. Noor Mohammad Rowther, A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 446 and Varada Bhavanarayana Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , explained.
