The appellant Board passed a special resolution on September 28, 1956, imposing water tax in Hapur and a notification by the Uttar Pradesh Government was published in the Uttar Pradesh Gazette under section 135(2) of the U.P. Municipalities Act (2 of 1916) notifying the resolution.
Fifteen house owners of Hapur who received notices from the appellant Board for the payment of the tax petitioned to the High Court under article 226 ,of the Constitution and asked for a writ or order preventing the appellant Board from realising the tax.
The main objections were (a) that the resolution of the appellant Board framing the proposal was not pub lished in a local paper of Hapur published in Hindi and (b) that the rules framed for the imposition of the tax did not accompany the resolution which was affixed on the notice board at the office of the appellant Board in purported compliance with the requirements for publication.
The imposition was also challenged on the ground that articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution were violated.
A single judge of the High Court held that the tax was illegal inasmuch as the mandatory requirements of the Municipalities Act were not complied with by the appellant Board while imposing the tax and that section 135(3) of the Act (which cures all defects in the imposition of the tax by making the notification of Government conclusive evidence of the legality of the imposition) was ultra vires article 14 of the Constitution because it created a bar against proof and left no remedy to the tax payers thereby making a discrimination between them and other litigants.
He further held that the sub section by making Government the sole judge of compliance with the Act conferred judicial power on Government contrary to the intendment of the Constitution.
The appellant Board appealed under the Letters Patent.
The Divisional Bench upheld the order of the single judge.
The case was however certified as fit for appeal under article 133 and the Board appealed to this Court.
The contentions raised in appeal were: (i) s.135(3) shuts out all ,enquiry into the procedure by which a tax had been imposed and therefore suffered from excessive delegation of legislative function.
(ii) The tax had not been validly imposed a there had been non observance of mandatory provisions; (iii) section 135(3) was discriminatory; and (iv) the sub section was also bad because it conferred judicial functions on the State Government.
HELD : Per Gajendragadkar, C.J., Hidayatullah, Shah and Sikri.
JJ. (i) The rule of conclusive evidence in s.135(3) does not shut out all enquiry by courts.
There are certain matters which cannot be established by a notification under s.135(3).
For example no notification can issue unless there is a special resolution under section 134.
The special resolu 951 tion is a sine qua non for the notification.
Again the notification cannot authorise the imposition of a tax not included in section 128 of the Municipalities Act.
Neither the Municipal Board nor the State Government can exercise such power.
What the section does is to put beyond question the procedure by which the tax is imposed, that is to say the various steps taken to impose it.
A tax not authorised, can never be within the protection afforded to the procedure for imposing taxes.
Such a tax may be challenged, not with reference to the manner of imposition but as an illegal impost.
[958 A D] (ii) There can be no doubt that some of the provisions of sections 131 to 134 of the Act are mandatory.
But all of them are not of the same character.
In the present case, as in Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. and in Berar Swadeshi Vanaspati, the provisions not observed were of a directory character and therefore the imposition had the protection of section 135(3).
[958 H] Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Municipal Board, Rampur.
; and Berar Swadeshi Vanaspati vs Municipal Committe, Committee Sheogaon & Anr. , relied on.
(iii) Mandatory provisions must be fully complied with, and directory provisions should be substantially complied with.
In either case the agency for seeing to this compliance is the State Government.
It is hardly to be expected that the State Government would not do its duty or that it would allow breaches of the provisions to go unrectified.
In cases of minor departure from the letter of the law especially in matters not fundamental, it is for the Government to see whether there has been substantial or reasonable compliance.
Once Government condones the departure, the decision of the Government is rightly made final by making the notification conclusive evidence of the compliance with the requirements of the Act.
[959 H 960 D] (iv) The power to tax belongs to the State Legislature but is exercised by the local authority under the control of the State Government.
It is impossible for the State Legislature to impose taxes in local areas because local conditions and needs must very.
The power must be delegated.
The taxes however are predetermined and a procedure for consulting the wishes of the people is devised.
But the matter is not left entirely in the hands of the Municipal Boards.
As the State Legislature cannot supervise the due observance of its laws by the municipal Boards power is given to the State Government to check their actions.
The proceedings for the imposition of the tax must come to a conclusion at some stage after which it can be said that the tax has been imposed.
That stage is reached, not when the special resolution of the Municipal Board is passed but when the notification by Government is issued.
After the notification all enquiry must cease.
This is not a case of excessive delegation unless one starts with the notion that the State Government may collude with the Municipal Board to disregard deliberately the provisions for The imposition of the tax.
There is no warrant for such a supposition.
The provision making the notification conclusive evidence of the proper imposition of the tax is conceived in the best interest of compliance of the provisions by the Board and not to facilitate their breach.
[960 F 961 E] Excessive delegation is most often found when the legislature does not perform all the essential legislative functions and leaves them to some other agency.
The Legislature here performs all essential functions in the imposition of the tax.
The selection of the tax for imposition in a municipal area is by the legislative will expressed in section 128.
Neither the Municipal Board, nor the Government can go outside the list of taxes therein included.
The procedure for the imposition of the tax is also, laid down 952 by the Legislature for the Municipal Board to follow and the State Government is there to ensure due observance of that procedure.
in view of all this there was no excessive delegation or conferral or legislative functions on the appellant Board or the State Government.
[961 F 962 C] (v) There are numerous statutes including the Evidence Act, in which a fact is taken to be conclusively proved from the existence of some other fact.
The law is full of fictions and irrebuttable presumptions which also involve proof of facts.
The tax payers in the Municipality are allowed to object to the proposal for the tax and the rules and to, have their objections considered.
They cannot be allowed to keep on agitating.
Section 135(3) which only concludes objections against the procedure followed in the imposition of the tax cannot be said to be discriminatory and viola tive of article 14.
[962 D H] (vi) The objection that the impugned sub section involves the exercise of judicial functions not open to the legislature is wholly erroneous.
The subsection only shuts out further enquiry and makes the notification final.
[962 H] Per Wanchoo, J. (dissenting) (i) Section 135(3) bars enquiry by courts into all procedural provisions relating to imposition of taxes and therefore it bars enquiry into any matter covered by section 131 to section 135(1) of the Act.
It cannot be read down as barring enquiry only into some procedural provisions i.e. from section 131 to section 133 and not into the other procedural provisions i.e. section 134 and section 135(1).
[968 D] Section 135(3) is not a rule of evidence; it is a substantive provision which lays down in effect that once a notification under section 135(2) is issued it will be conclusively presumed that the tax is in accordance with all the procedural provisions with respect to the imposition thereof.
[969 E] Ishar Ahmad Khan vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 235, referred to.
The effect of section 135(3) is that the procedural provisions are given the go by in the matter of imposition of tax and as soon as a notification under section 135(2) is shown to the court, the court is helpless, in the matter even though none of the provisions of section 131 to section 135(1) may have been complied with.
[969 H] (ii) In the field of local taxation relating to municipal boards and district boards and similar other bodies there are reasons for delegating :fixation of rate to such bodies subject to proper safeguards.
This is exactly what has been done under the Act subject to the safeguards contained in sections 131 to section 135(1).
If those safeguards are followed the delegation would be proper delegation and could not be challenged as ultra vires on the ground of excessive delegation.
But if the legislature after laying down with great care safeguards as to the imposition of tax including its rate makes a blanket provision like section 135(3), which at one stroke does away with all those safeguards and this is what section 135(3) has done in the present case the position that results is that there is delegation of even the essential function of fixing the rate to the subordinate authority without any safeguard.
Such a delegation would be excessive delegation and would be ultra vires.
[972 D F] (iii) Section 135(3) inasmuch as it makes the delegation contained in sections 128 to 135(2) excessive must be severed from the rest of the sections which are otherwise a proper delegation of legislative authority and should be struck down on the ground of excessive delegation.
[973 B] 953
