The 1st respondent had gone to, the 2nd respondent after previous arrangement with him, with a large sum of money to purchase gold which was known to them to be smuggled and to have been imported into India against the restrictions imposed on the import of gold.
The police intervened.
recovered the gold and arrested them.
The gold was confiscated under section 167(8) of the .
The respondents were prosecuted for an offence under section 167(81) and they were convicted by the trial court.
On appeal the High Court acquitted the 1st respondent because it was of the view that as the 1st respondent merely attempted to purchase the gold it could not be said that he was concerned in dealing with the smuggled gold within the meaning of the section.
The High Court also acquitted the 2nd respondent because it held that before a person could be convicted under section 167(81), it must be shown that he was either a direct importer or concerned in some way in the import of the smuggled article,, and that the section did not include in its scope a person who subsequently obtained the smuggled goods and then dealt with them, though the smuggled goods themselves might be liable to confiscation.
In appeal to this Court, HELD, (per Wanchoo, Shah, Sikri and Ramaswami, JJ.) : (i) The High Court was in error in holding that simply because the purchase was not complete the 1st respondent was not concerned in dealing with the smuggled gold which was with the 2nd respondent.
[14 D] The words "in any way concerned or in any manner dealing with any goods" in the section, are of very wide import.
The words "concerned in" mean "interested in, involved in, mixed up with", while the words "deal with" mean "to have something to do with, to concern one self, to treat, to make arrangement, to negotiate with respect to some thing." Therefore, when a person enters, into some kind of transaction or attempts to enter into some kind of transaction with respect to prohibited goods, and it is clear that the act was done with some kind of prior arrangement or agreement, it must be held that such a person is concerned in dealing with prohibited goods.
[13 A B; H] (ii) On the language of the section, it applies not only to an actual smuggler or a person concerned in smuggling but also to all others who may be concerned with smuggled goods after the smuggling is over provided they know that the smuggled into the country in spite of a prohibition or restriction, or they knew that the duty thereon had not been paid.
It follows that the 1st respondent had the necessary knowledge and intent or evade the prohibition or the restriction even though he dealt 2 with the gold after the smuggling was over and was not in any way concerned with the actual smuggling.
He would therefore be guilty under the section.
The 2nd respondent wag also guilty under the section inasmuch as he was dealing with prohibited or restricted good sand had the necessary knowledge and intent as required under the section.[21 B, C, E] If the intention of the legislature was that the person guilty under s.167(81) could only be a person who was concerned in some way or other with the actual importation or exportation it would have been easy for it to use the same words as were used in the first part of section 167(8) but it has not done so,.
What section 167(81) requires is that the person who comes inter alia into possession of prohibited goods must know that there is some prohibition in force with respect thereto.
But before he is found guilty it has further to be shown that he intends to evade the prohibition.
Where the case is not of prohibition but of duty, the person accused under the section must be shown to know that the duty has not been paid and also to have the intention to, defraud the government of the duty payable on the goods.
long as the duty is payable and has not been paid or so long as the prohibition or restriction remains in force, any person acquiring possession of goods, on which duty has not been paid or with respect to which the restriction or prohibition has been evaded, would have the intent either to defraud the government of the duty payable, for he acquires goods at a lower price, or would have the intention to evade the restriction or prohibition because no one would take the risk of smuggling unless he can find a purchaser for the smuggled 'goods.
If this were not so, there would be a premium on successful smuggling and the purpose of the section to punish smuggling and stop it if possible, would be completely defeated, as there would be a serious lacuna in the provision.
[15 E G; 17 A D] Cases under the English Act referred to.
Per Subba Rao, J. (Dissenting) : it had not been establish ad that the respondents had dealt with the gold with an intention to evade any restriction or prohibition imposed on their import.
[7 F] It is not open to the court to strain the language of a statute in order to read a causes omissus and the court cannot fill up a lacuna.
Also, the court cannot construe the section with reference to the corresponding English Section and English decisions because, the Indian and English sections are not in pari materia.
Under section 167(81) the material ingredients constituting an offence are; (i) a person must have a knowledge that there is a prohibition or restriction against doing any of the enumerated acts with respect to goods imported or exported contrary to the restriction or prohibition imposed against their import or export, and (ii) he must have acted with an intention to evade such a restriction or prohibition.
That is, the two elements of mens rea, namely, knowledge and intention must be established, because, knowledge of an offence cannot be equated with an intention to commit the offence.
The crux of the offence is the import of goods with the requisite intent contrary to the prohibition.
The importer who smuggles the goods is certainly guilty under the section because he imports them in derogation of the prohibition or restriction.
Also, any person who deals with the goods in the context of the import in any of the connected ways set out in the section, with the requisite knowledge and intention would equally be guilty of the offence, because, the enumerated dealings with the goods prohibited or restricted may be necessary to complete the import vis a vis the importer, even though they cover a field beyond the point of import as normally understood, that is, when the goods cross the customs barrier.
But the intention to contravene the prohibition cannot be imputed to subsequent dealers in 3 the goods after the importer parts with them, though the good.% themselves can be confiscated in the hands of whomsoever they are found.
[4H; 5C, E F; 6B C, H]
