The appellant was a manufacturer of drugs, (including chloral hydrate) in Hyderabad.
In 1962, the State of Andhra Pradesh issued the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area).
Chloral Hydrate (Chloral) Rules with respect to manufacture, possession, sale import, export and transport of chloral hydrate under the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Intoxicating Drugs Act of 1333 Fasli, as amended by the Hyderabad Opium and Intoxicating Drugs (Amendment) Act of 1953.
The Rules provided that the manufacture of chloral hydrate shall be in accordance with the conditions of a licence granted by the Excise Commissioner on payment of the excise duty of Rs. 500 per annum.
The appellant refused to take licence and challenged the validity of the Rules by a writ petition, but the High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that (i) the 1333 F Act had been repealed in toto by the introduction into the State of the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 and the Drugs Act 1940, and therefore.
, there was no power in the Hyderabad legislature to amend the 1333 F Act by the 1953 Act, and in consequence; there was no law in force on the basis of which the Rules could be promulgated in 1962; and (ii) even if the Act was not repealed, the Rules were not within the powers conferred by the 1333 F Act as amended in 1953, as chloral hydrate was not a narcotic or narcotic drug within the meaning of item 51, List II of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution.
HELD: The 1333 F Act continued in existence in so far as it dealt with collection of duties of excise on substances covered by it and it could therefore be amended by the 1953 Act.
[117 F] The 1333 F Act was in the nature of an excise Act and provided for licences and collection of duties of excise and made provisions incidental thereto.
It applied to the intoxicating drugs mentioned therein and other intoxicating drugs which might be notified by the Government.
The Act continued in force in Hyderabad after 26th January 1950.
In 1950, the Dangerous Drugs Act was applied by Parliament, to Hyderabad, by Central Act 33 of 1950.
This Act however.
is not an Act imposing duties of excise.
Consequently., it could not affect that part of the 1333 F Act which dealt with the grant of licences, and collection of duties of excise.
Further, as a result of section 39(1) of the Dangerous Drugs Act dealing 'With the saving of local and special laws and entry 51 of List II, the introduction of the Act in Hyderabad did not result in complete effacement of the 1333 F, Act.
It remained alive with respect to substances which might be notified as intoxicating drugs under the 1333 F Act.
If there was any such notification before 1950, that notification would be valid and the Act would apply to it.
If there was no such notification, the Act would remain on the statute book as a conditional statute under which a notification could be issued.
, [114 G H; 115 E F; 116 A C] 111 The Drugs Act was extended to Hyderabad by Central Act 3 of 1951.
This Act is mainly concerned with the standard and quality of drugs manufactured and therefore controls the manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs.
It has also nothing to do with duties of excise and with their imposition on narcotics and narcotic drugs.
Therefore, the fact that this.
Act was introduced into Hyderabad in 1951 would not affect in any way that part of the 1333 F Act which dealt with collection of excise duties and provided for licences in that connection, as such duties can be imposed only by the State legislature under item 51 of List II.
Hence, the 1333 F Act in so far as it deals with the collection of duties of excise on any drugs which are narcotics or narcotic drugs would remain alive to that extent.
[116 D G; 117 D F] (ii) Narcotic is a substance which in small doses relieves pain and produces sleep and since it was admitted by the appellant that chloral hydrate is hypnotic and sedative, it would be a narcotic within the meaning of entry 51 of List II.
The statement in the respondents ' affidavit that it did not contain narcotic or a narcotic drug was only made in reply to the appellants allegation that chloral hydrate was a medicinal preparation.
All that was intended by the State by using those words was that chloral hydrate did not contain any narcotic drug or narcotic is defined in the .
Chloral hydrate has also an intoxicating effect when mixed with liquor and so is an intoxicating drug within the meaning of the Amendment Act.
[119 A F] The 1333 F Act after the amendment of 1953 is also an excise Act and defines intoxicating drugs to mean inter alia any intoxicating and narcotic substance which the Government may by notification declare to be an intoxicating drug.
[118 A B] Since chloral hydrate is an intoxicating and narcotic substance it could be notified under the Amendment Act.
It would be liable to excise duty and therefore the Rules could be framed with respect to its control, and the appellant could be asked to take out a licence and pay excise duty on the manufacture thereof.
[118 D F]
