The appellant was convicted of the offence under section 66(1) (b) of the Bombay Prohibition Act, 1949, for being in possession on September 21, 1960 of bottles of two different Ayurvedic medicinal preparations con training 52.3% and 54.5% alcohol respectively.
The appellant 's case that possession of the preparations by him was not in contravention of the Act, because the preparations were medicinal preparations containing alcohol which were unfit for use as intoxicating liquor within the meaning of section 24A of the Act, was rejected.
The trial court held that the offending articles were Ayurvedic preparations in which alcohol was generated by a process of fermentation and as alcohol exceeded 12 per cent by volume, the preparations did not correspond with the limitations prescribed by the provision to section 59A, and therefore the exemption prescribed by section 24A was inoperative.
The Court of Sessions and the High Court agreed with that view.
It was also contended on behalf of the respondents that even if the two medicinal preparations corresponded with the description and limitations under section 59A, they were still preparations fit for use as intoxicating liquor and therefore outside the exemption in section 24A.
HELD: The appellant was wrongly convicted and his conviction must he set aside.
(i) There was clear evidence on the record that the offending preparations were not preparations in which alcohol was generated by fermentation.
The proviso to section 59A Would therefore have no application.
[146 E F] (ii) On the date on which the two medicinal preparations were attached in September 1960, by vitrue of sub section (7) of section 6A they were deemed for the purpose of the Act to be unfit for use as intoxicating liquor and their possession was; not an offence.
A subsequent declaration by the State under section 6A(6) in October, 1960, that they were fit for use as intoxicating liquor, could not have retrospective operation, and possession which was innocent could not, by subsequent act of the State, be declared as offending the statute.
[150 A] The State of Bombay vs F. N. Balsara, ; , referred to.
The State of Bombay vs Narandas Mangild Agarwal & Anr.
[1962] Sup. 1 S.C.R. 15, distinguished.
