On 8th December 1956, the appellant served on the respondent three months ' notice in writing under section 14(1) (b) of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, terminating the tenancy on the ground of default in payment of rent.
On 24th June 1957 the appellant filed an application under section 29(2) for possession.
The Tahsildar allowed he application and the order was confirmed on appeal.
But in revision, the Revenue Tribunal set aside the order on the ground, that the application was barred by limitation, because, it was filed more than two years, after 20th May 1955, which was the date of default.
A petition ay the appellant under article 227, was rejected by the High Court.
In the appeal to the Supreme Court, on the question whether the application was filed within the two yea& period of limitation prescribed by section 29 (2).
HELD : Limitation for the application began to run from the date of the termination of the tenancy and not from the antecedent date of default in payment of rent and so, the application, filed within two years of the termination of the tenancy was not barred by limitation.
220 G] The legislature could not have intended that limitation would commence to run before the right to apply under section 29(2) accrues.
The right to apply accrues to the landlord when the tenancy is terminated by notice under section 14(1)(b).
But in spite of the termination of the tenancy the landlord has no right to obtain possession without an order under section 29(2).
On the termination of the tenancy, the right to obtain possession, though in reality not accrued to the landlord, is, by a legal fiction, deemed to have accrued to him.
Consequently, the date of termination of the tenancy is also the date when the right to obtain possession is deemed to have accrued to the landlord.
Since the limitation for, the application under section 29(2) commences to run from the date when the right to obtain possession is deemed to have accrued to the landlord, it would follow that limitation begins to run from the date when the tenancy is terminated by the notice under section 14(1) (b).
[218 A B, C D, F G] The history of the legislation also shows that both before and after the Amendment Act, 1951 which provided the two years ' period of limitation the date of the termination of the tenancy is the starting point of limitation.
[218 H] Ramachandra Anant vs Janardan, approved.
Chimanbai Rama vs Ganpat Jagannath, I.L.R. [1958] Dom. 917 (F.B.) overruled.
