On the application of two creditors (respondents in this appeal) the appellant was adjudged a bankrupt by the Subordinate Judge, Kakinada, and a receiving order was passed against him.
This adjudication was based on the one act of insolvency out of three alleged in the application which was accepted by the sub judge, i.e., the sale of some of his properties in execution of a money decree.
Appeals against the order to the District Judge, and later to the High Court, were dismissed.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the alleged act of insolvency was not established as he had deposited, within one month of the sale, the entire decretal amount, and the sale was set aside on a petition by him under Order 21, rule 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure; that in any event he was entitled to have the application dismissed under section 25 of the , which allows a creditor 's application to be dismissed on sufficient cause.
HELD: The adjudication of the appellant as an insolvent and the receiving order against him were properly made.
[214 E] An act of insolvency once committed cannot be explained or purged by subsequent events.
The insolvent cannot claim to wipe it off by paying some of his creditors; the same act of insolvency is available to all his creditors and is not erased unless all creditors are satisfied.
The act of insolvency which the appellant had committed had remained and was not purged by payment of the decretal amount after the sale in execution of the money decree; the respondents could therefore rely on it even though one or more creditors might have been paid in full.
1212 F H] (ii) Although section 25 of the is in wide terms, it cannot be given effect to so as to ignore an act of insolvency in cases such as the present one, where the debtor continues to be heavily indebted and there is no proof that he is able to pay his debts.
[213 A B] Venkatakrishnayya vs Malakondayya, A.I.R. 1942 Mad. 306; Pratapmall Rameshwar vs Chunnilal Jahuri, A.I.R. 1933 Cal. 417 and Lal Chand Changhuri vs Bogha Ram & Ors., A.I.R. 1938 Lah. 819, referred to.
