The respondent who had a "verified claim" applied for compensation under the .
He alleged that he was a co sharer along with his brothers in agricultural property in West Pakistan and claimed his share of the compensation.
The Assistant Settlement Officer held that the alleged co sharers were members of a joint Hindu family and that t.he agricultural property was joint property.
He then calculated the compensation on the joint property as per rr.
51 and 56 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Rules 1955.
The respondent thereupon filed a petition in the High Court under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution contending that on the finding that the respondent and his brothers constituted a joint family, the unit for assessment of compensation should first be determined according to r. 19, which makes special provision for payment of compensation to joint families, before compensation was calculated.
The High Court allowed the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that r. 19 was inapplicable as that rule does not apply to agricultural land.
HELD: The High Court was right in holding that the rule applied to the claim of the respondent in respect of the agricultural land.
Chapter IV of the Rules in which r.19 occurs contains some rules which apply to applications for compensation in respect of agricultural lands also.
Therefore it cannot be said that the Chapter does not deal with agricultural lands at all.
Each rule must be considered to see whether it has application to a claim for compensation in respect of agricultural land.
So considered, there is no principle of construction by which the scope of the general words in r. 19 could be limited, so as not to apply to agricultural land.
Chapter VIII of the Rules provides for compensation in respect of verified claims for agricultural lands in rural areas and only deals with how a unit that has been determined is to be compensated.
There is nothing in that Chapter which modifies or overrides r.19 which enables the authorities to determine the unit for assessment of compensation in the case of joint families.
[83 D E; 85 A F]
