In respect of the assessments made on the Nizam of Hyderabad for the assessment years 1950 51 and 1951 52 the following questions arose in the High Court in a reference under section 66(1) of the Income tax Act 1922 : (i) Whether having regard to the Covenant dated 25th January 1950 entered into by the assessee with the Government of India at the time of merger of the State of Hyderabad with the Dominion of India the assessee was not liable to tax under the Income tax Act; (ii) whether under International law, the assessee was immune from taxation in respect of the assessment ear 1950 51; (iii) Whether having regard to the provisions of Part B States (Taxation Concession) order 1950 the assessee 's income was totally 'exempt from tax; (iv) whether the interest received by the assessee in respect of certain income tax free loans issued by the State Government was exempt from tax; and (v) whether the income payable to the assessee under two trusts the Family Trust and the Miscel laneous Trust arising from Government securities settled by the assesses on the trusts, was exempt from payment of tax.
The High Court answered some of the questions in favour of the assessee and others against him.
The Commissioner of Income tax and the assessee appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) The privileges guaranteed by the relevant articles of the merger agreement were only personal privileges of the assessee as an Ex Ruler, and those privileges did not justify his claim to immunity from taxation.
[300 D] Sri Sudhansu Shekhar Singh Deo vs State of Orissa, ; , followed.
(ii) Hyderabad State never acquired international personality under the International Law and so its ruler could not rely upon International law for claiming immunity from taxation of his personal properties.
From 1858, Hyderabad was under the suzerainty of the British Crown till the.
Indian Independence Act of 1947 was passed, and thereafter, after negotiations it acceded to the Indian Dominion.
It was never recognised as an international personality by the family of nations.
The High Court, therefore, erred in holding that the income received by the assessee up to 26th January 1950, was not liable to tax under the Income tax Act [302 E; 303 B; 304 F G; 305 B] Further, the assessee 's right to exemption if any, under International Law, during the accounting year, was irrelevant to the question of taxation under the Act.
Under the Act, an individual is assessed to income tax on the income of the previous year at the rate or rates fixed for the year by the annual Finance Act.
If during the assessment yew an individual is assessable to tax, the fact that during the previous year 2 97 he was not liable to tax at all because there was no income tax in the area to which the Act was extended, or because, under an income tax Act in force therein during that year his income was exempted from tax, or because, of any other law including international law he was so exempt from tax, would not be of any relevance.
After the extension of the Indian Income tax Act to the Hyderabad State the charge was under the Act and not under the provisions of the previous law.
Thereafter, the charge as well as the manner of computation of income did not depend upon the preexisting law, but only upon the provisions of the Act.
After 26th January 1950, the assessee ceased to be a ruling Chief and he was, therefore, liable to assessment under the Act.
If he was assessable to tax, the statutory charge on his income during the previous year was only traceable to the Act, which was retroactive in operation to that extent.
[307 F H; 308 A C] (iii) The assessee was not entitled to any exemptions under the Part B State (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1950.
[309 G] If the assessee was not liable to pay tax under the State law, his non liability related only to the domain of exemption.
It would be incongruous to say that a person exempted from taxation was paying a nil rate and on that basis contend that no tax was payable by him.
The Order was only intended to provide a machinery for scaling down the rates of tax in relation to the rates prevailing in the Part B State.
If there was a State law prescribing rates, it would afford the criterion for scaling down the Indian rate of tax; if there was no State law prescribing the rate the schedule of rates annexed to the Order would govern the taxation.
[309 E G] (iv) The assessee was entitled to exemption from tax both under section 8, proviso (3) of the Income tax Act, as well as under item 8 of the Notification dated 21st March 1922.
[309 H; 311 F] In the case of the income from securities section 8 applies, and under the 3rd proviso thereto the, income tax payable on the interest receivable on any security of the State Government issued income tax free shall be payable by the State Government and no tax on interest on such securities was payable by the assessee.
The, proviso does not use the ex pression "Government securities" but only mentions "securities of a State Government".
Under cls.
58 and 60 of section 3 of the , the expression "State Government" takes in the Government of Hyderabad State.
If so, in terms of the proviso, the income tax payable on the interest receivable on the securities of the Hyderabad Government, issued income tax free, shall be payable by the State Government and the assessee was not liable.
Also, as the assessee held the securities as his private property, under the Notification, the exemption applied both for income tax and super tax B D, F] (v) In regard to the interest receivable by the assessee from the securities and loans of the two trusts, he was not liable to pay income tax, but he was not exempt from payment of super tax under item 8 of the Notification dated 21st March 1922.
[313 H] The question had to be decided on a construction of section 41 of the Act.
But it is only after ascertaining the income and after giving exemptions, that section 41 of the Act comes into play, and the income tax authority ha. .
the option under section 41, to assess the beneficiary directly or, in respect of the same income, the trustee on behalf of the beneficiary.
Under section 8 proviso (3) the assessee would not be liable to pay income tax on the interest from the income tax free securities.
Since the interest on securities in the hands of the trustees does not become an income 298 other than such interest in the hands of the beneficiary, it retains its character as such interest whether the assess ment is made on the trustee or the beneficiary.
Therefore the assessee would not be liable to pay income tax, but his liability to pay super tax is not transferred by the proviso to the State Government.
Nor could the assessee claim the benefit of the Notification for an exemption with respect to super tax, because, under the trust deeds the Government loans ceased to be the private property of the assessee and after the ,execution of the trust deeds they were held by the trustees not on behalf of the assessee as his private property but for the purpose of discharging the obligations imposed on them under the trust deeds.
[312 G; 313 E, F G, 314 A; 315 A D]
