The respondent concern had a rule in its packing and labelling department that if a woman employee got married her service would stand automatically terminated.
The appellant union raised an industrial dispute on this question and it was referred to the Industrial Tribunal, Maharashtra.
The Tribunal held that the rule was justified whereupon, the appellant came to this Court by special leave.
The justification given on behalf of the respondent for the said rule was that in the particular department where the rule operated team work was required for which regular attendance was necessary, and married women, for obvious reasons, could not be expected to be regular in attendance.
It was also contended for the respondent that industrial adjudication should not interfere with the employer 's right to impose any condition in the matter of employment when he employs new workmen.
Rule 5(3) of the Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1964, was referred to as carrying a similar condition.
HELD: (i) There was nothing to show that married women would by the more likely to be absent than unmarried women or widows.
The only difference was that married women would ask for maternity leave.
This could be provided for by having a few extra women as leave reserve.
So far as efficiency was concerned it could hardly be said that married women would be less efficient than unmarried ones or widows.
The economic interest of the concern was also not affected in any material way.
There was thus no good and convincing reason why such a rule should continue in one department of the pharmaceutical industry.
The fact that such a rule existed in other concerns also was no justification, if the rule could not be justified on its own merits.
The rule, therefore, had to be abrogated.
[495E, G H; 496A B, D] (ii) It is too late in the day to stress the absolute freedom of an employer to impose any condition which he likes on labour.
It is always open to industrial adjudication to consider the conditions of employment of labour and to vary them if it is found necessary.
[496 E F] (iii) Rule 5(3) of the Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) an unmarried woman marries subself the maintenance of the efficiency her to resign.
This rule does on marriage as a matter of course as the case of the respondent concern.
[497 B C]
