The appellant was a displaced person from West Pakistan.
In 1949 he was allotted 42 standard acres and 11 units of land which were later consolidated.
In 1958 claiming to be a small holder he made an application under section 14 A(1) of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act 1953 before the Assistant Collector for the ejectment of respondent No. 4 who was a tenant of the land.
The Assistant Collector rejected application on the ground that because of improvements the income from the lands had risen considerably and consequently the land had become equivalent to more than 50 standard acres, and therefore the applica tion was untenable under section 14 A.
In appeal the Collector held that since the appellant was allotted only 42 standard acres and 11 units he was entitled to be treated as a small land holder.
The Collector 's order was upheld by the Commissioner and by the Financial Commissioner.
The tenant thereupon filed a writ petition before the High Court.
According to the High Court the status of a landlord had to be ascertained as existing on the date of the application under section 14 A of the Act and not on the date of the allotment.
Farther according to the High Court what is 'permissible area ' available to a landlord under the Act had also to be determined as obtaining on the date of the application for eviction made by the landlord.
On this view the High Court allowed the tenant 's writ petition.
In appeal by special leave to this Court, HELD: Under the provisions of the Act the entire land held by the landowner in the State of Punjab on the date of the commencement of the Act must be evaluated as on that date and the status of the landowner and his surplus area must then be ascertained.
If he is then found to be 'a small landowner, he continues to be so for the purpose of the Act, until he acquires more land and on taking into account the value of the land in terms of standard acres on the date of the acquisition, he is found to be a big landowner.
The landowner is required to make the necessary reservations or selections and to give the necessary declarations so that his status and the surplus area, if any, held by him may be so determined.
If he is a small landowner at the commencement of the Act, his status is not altered by reason of improvements in the value of his land or re allotment of land on compulsory consolidation of holdings.
section 19 F(b) which was introduced into the Act during the pendency of the appeal clarified the position to the same effect.
[514 B D; 515 F] The appellant did not acquire any land after the commencement of the Act.
His status as a small landowner was not altered by reason of subsequent improvements or re allotments of land on compulsory consolidation of holdings.
On the date of the application, he therefore continued to be a small landowner.
The High Court was in error in holding that the status of the appellant should be determined by evaluating his 5 12 land in terms of standard acres on the dates of the application for eviction.
[515 H; 516 A B] Per Mudholkar J : Provisions relating to the valuation of lands under the Act are to be found in section 19 F(a) and 19F(b).
The former did not apply to the present case as it applies only to the ascertainment of ,surplus area ' held by a landowner at the commencement of the Act; the appellant held only 'permissible area ' and no 'surplus are at all.
Under section 19 F(b) fresh evaluation of land can take place "at any time" but the power under that section is exercisable only in the context of special circumstances, that is to say, where the landlord owns land after the commencement of the Act by inheritance, bequest or gift.
These special circumstances did not exist in the present case.
[519 H; 520 H; 521 B, D] When the provisions of section 19F are thus not attracted, the Revenue Assistant before whom an application under section 14 A for ejectment of a tenant is made by a landlord, is not entitled to evaluate the land of the landlord afresh for ascertaining whether he is in possession of land in excess of the permissible area.
[521 F] Elaborate rules have been framed under the Act and elaborate provisions are also contained in the Act with a view to extend its protection as far as possible to tenants cultivating land.
The omission, therefore, to make any provision as to what has to be done, if as a result of improvements made by the landlord or by reason of the rise in the yield of the land through other causes would point only to one conclusion and that is that this circumstance is not to be taken into account for evaluating the land afresh and recalculating the standard acreage.
[521 G H] It would follow that the High Court was in error and its order must be set aside.
