The respondent was appointed Treasurer of a Bank in respect of certain of its branches, sub agencies and pay offices.
In the previous year corresponding to the assessment year 1950 51, he suffered a loss in performing his duties as Treasurer.
But the Incometax Officer, in assessing the respondent to income tax, declared that the loss could not be carried forward to the next year under section 24(2) of the Income tax Act ' 1922, on the ground that it was not a business loss.
For the assessment year 1951 52, the Income tax Officer refused Lo allow the loss to be set off against the net profit for the year and brought that amount of profit to tax as remuneration received by the respondent as Treasurer of the Bank.
The order was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner,.
but the Appellate Tribunal held that the remuneration received by the respondent was income arising from the pursuit of a profession or vocation.
within the meaning of section 10 of the Act and therefore the loss suffered during the preceding year could be set off against his income in the subsequent year.
On a reference the High Court agreed with the Tribunal.
In appeal to this Court, HELD:(i) The decision recorded by the Income tax Officer, who. computed the loss in the previous year under a. 24(3), that the loss could.
not be set off against the income of the subsequent year was not binding on the respondent, as, under section 24(2), it is for the Income tax Officer dealing with the assessment in the subsequent year to determine whether the loss of the previous year may be set off against the profits of that year.
[534 A C (ii)The use of the expressions "serve the Bank" and "in the service of the Bank" in the contract appointing the respondent as Treasurer of the Bank have to be read in the setting of the other covenants and are not decisive of the question whether the respondent was a servant of the Bank.
Under the contract the respondent had to procure due performance of the duties of the cash department by employees under his supervision and he was to be responsible for all acts done by them and to make good the loss which might result from any embezzlements theft, fraud, misappropriation, mistake, misconduct, omission, negligent act or default of any such person.
in carrying out his duties under the contract he was not to be controlled or supervised by the Bank and the agreement was not liable to summary determination.
The contract was therefore for service and the respondent could not be called a servant of the Bank.
Therefore, the remuneration received by him was not "salaries" within, the meaning of section 7 of the Act.
[538 F 0; 540 E F; 543 B) Section 24(2) confers a statutory right upon the assessee who sustains a loss of profits in any year in any business, profession or vocation to carry forward so much of the loss as is not set off under sub section
(1) to the following year, and to set it off against his profits and gains, if 532 any, from the same business, profession or vocation for that year.
The occupation of a Treasurer is not a profession, nor does it partake of the character of a business or trade.
But taking into consideration the nature of the duties performed, and the obligati7on undertaken, together with the right to remuneration subject to compensation for loss arising to the Bank from his own acts and omissions or of the servants introduced by 'him into the business of the Bank, the respondent could be regarded as following a vocation.
His remuneration must therefore be computed under section 10 and loss of profit suffered in that location in any Vear could be carried forward to the next year and be set off against the profit of that year.
[543 B, C D, F G] Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. vs State of Saurashtra, ; , followed.
Shivnandan Sharma vs The Punjab National Bank Ltd. ; and Piyare Lal Adishwal Lal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi , distinguished.
