The petitioner was detained under rule 30 of the Defence of India Rules 1962, by an order of the District Magistrate and the necessary formalities were gone through.
He filed a petition under article 32 and contended : (1) The order of the District Magistrate was mala fide as he had not applied his mind to tile specific activities of the petitioner and there was complete absence of material before him to suggest that the conduct of the petitioner would be prejudicial to the defence of India etc.
(2) One of the grounds of detention mentioned in the order was that the petitioner was a member of the Leftist Communist Party of India and Secretary of one of its branches.
This consideration was not relevant as the said party had not been declared illegal or banned by the Government.
HELD : (i) It was open to the petitioner to challenge his detention on the ground of mala fide or on the ground that all or any of the grounds mentioned in the order of detention were irrelevant.
Such pleas were not covered by article 358 and were outside the purview of the Presidential Orders under article 359(1).
[576 D] Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs State of Punjab, referred to.
(ii) Taking into account the affidavit filed by the District Magistrate it could not be said that he did not apply his mind to the specific activities of the petitioner or that there was no material before him to justify the order.
[577 C] (iii) It was not correct to State that the activities of the Leftist wing of the Communist Party cannot in any circumstances be illegal and would necessarily be irrelevant merely because the Government of India has not declared the Party illegal or imposed a ban.
In the light of the reports received by the District Magistrate the political association of the petitioner and his membership of a particular political group was a relevant consideration in the matter of detention of the petitioner.
This ground had close and proximate connection with the security of State and maintenance of public order as contemplated by rule 30 of the Defence of India Rules.
[578 A C]
