The petitioner was a member of an All India Service serving in the State of Rajasthan.
The State Government ordered his trail before the Special Judge of Bharatpur under section 120B/161 of the Indian Penal Code and section 5(1) (a) (d) and section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
He moved the Supreme Court under section 527 of the Code of Criminal Procedure praying for the transfer of his case to another State, on various grounds.
On behalf of the State it was contended that the Supreme Court could not exercise its powers under section 527 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the matter because section 7(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act required the offences in question to be tried by a special judge only, and section 7(2) of the Act required the offence to be tried by a Special Judge for the area within which they were committed which condition could never be satisfied if there was a transfer.
HELD : (i) The condition in sub section (1) of section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act that the case must be tried by special judge is a sine qua non for the trial of offences in Section 6.
This condition can be satisfied by transferring the case from one special judge to another special Judge.
[684 B] Sub section (2) of section 7 merely distributes work between special judges appointed in a State with reference to territory.
This Provision is on a par with the section of the Code of Criminal Procedure which confer territorial jurisdiction on Sessions Judges and Magistrates.
An order of transfer by the very nature of things must sometimes result in taking the case out of the territory.
[685 D] (ii) The third sub section of section 8 of the Act preserves the application ,of any provision of the Code, of Criminal Procedure if it is not inconsistent with the Act save as provided in the first two sub sections of that section.
Section 527 of the Code therefore remains applicable; if it is not inconsistent with section 7(2) of the Act.
There is no inconsistency between section 527 of the Code and section 7(2) of the Act because the territorial jurisdiction created by the latter operates in a different Sphere and under different circumstances.
Inconsistency can only be found if two pro visions of law apply in identical circumstances, and create contradictions.
Such a situation does not arise when either this Court or the High Court exercises the power of transfer.
Therefore this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction and power under section 527 of the Code can transfer a case from a special judge subordinate to one High Court to another special judge subordinate to another High Court [685 E] Ramchandra Prasad vs State of Bihar, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 129, referred to, 679 (iii) On merits however the petition in the present case could not succeed.
There was nothing in it which would show that there was any interference direct or indirect with the investigation of the offences alleged against the petitioner or the trial of the case by the special judge.
A general feeling that some persons are hostile to the petitioner is not sufficient.
The Court has further to see whether the apprehension is reasonable.
[686 H]
