In accordance with the provisions of the , the appellant prepared draft standing orders in consultation with its employees and submitted the same to the Certifying Officer for certification.
Since the appellant 's workers had not formed any union, three.
representatives of the workmen were elected to represent them at the certification proceedings.
These representatives took no objection to the draft standing orders submitted by the appellant.
The Certifying Officer examined the reasonableness of the provisions contained in the draft Standing Orders made several changes in the draft and accordingly certified them.
The appellant 's appeal to the Appellate Authority was dismissed.
In appeal by special leave, HELD : (i) The contention that the procedure adopted by the certifying authorities in dealing with the question of the fairness or reason ableness of the draft Standing Orders is invalid, must fail.
Though, originally the jurisdiction of the certifying officer and the Appellate Authority was very limited., section 4 as amended by Act 56 of 1956 has imposed upon the certifying officer or the appellate authority the duty to adjudicate upon the fairness or the reasonableness of the provisions of any Standing Orders and thus the jurisdiction of these authorities and the scope of inquiry have become wider.
The Act contemplates that the Standing Orders must cover matters initially included in the Schedule as well as matters which may be added to the Schedule by the appropriate Government in exercise of the authority conferred on it by s.15.
[867 H; 868 F] It cannot be said that since an elaborate machinery has been established by the U.P. Industrial Disputes Act, 1948 any attempt by the certifying authorities to devise detailed provisions in respect of matters covered by the First and Second Schedules to the U.P. Act would trespass upon the provisions of that Act.
The scope of the provisions of the two Acts and the fields covered by them are not the same.
While the purports to secure to industrial employees clear and unambiguous conditions of their employment, the scheme of the U.P. Act is to deal with problems posed by Industrial Disputes which have actually arisen or are apprehended.
[869 G 870 C] (ii)Consent of the employees, though relevant cannot have a decisive significance in certification proceedings.
The authority has to deal with the matter according to its own judgment and must decide in appropriate cases, like the instant case where the employees are not organised or strong enough, whether or not a particular standing order is fair or reasonable.
[871 A C] 864 (iii) The draft Standing Orders cannot 'relate to matters outside the Schedule to the Act.
By section 3 (2) of the Act the employers have to frame draft Standing Orders and these must normally cover the items in the schedule to the Act.
If, however, it appears to the appropriate authorities that having regard to the relevant facts and circumstances it would be unfair and unreasonable to make provision for a particular item, it would be competent to the authorities not to frame draft Standing Orders in that behalf, but the employer cannot insist upon adding a condition to the Standing Order which relates to a matter which is not included in the Schedule.
E] (iv) The wording of section 3 (2) of the Act indicates that the appropriate authority may permit departure from the Model Standing Orders if it is satisfied that insistence upon such conformity may be impracticable.
[872 G] Associated Cement Co. Ltd. vs P. D. Vyas ; [1960] 1 L.L.J. 565, referred to.
(v)The object of the Act being to require the employers to define with sufficient precision the conditions of employment under them, it is open to the appropriate Government to add to the Schedule if the item added has relation to conditions of employment.
The enumeration of particular matters by section 15(2) will not control or limit the width of the power conferred on the appropriate Government by section 15(1).
Whether or not an addition should be made is a matter for such Government to decide in its discretion and the reasonableness of such addition cannot be questioned.
So, having regard to the development of industrial law in this country it cannot be said that gratuity, provident fund and the age of superannuation or retirement are not matters relating to conditions of employment.
[873 E H] (vi)The provision for pension which the certified Standing Order No. 54 purports to make must be regarded as invalid since it was neither extended by the employer nor agreed upon between the parties as required by item 11 C of the Schedule to the Act.
As such, it will not be fair or reasonable to retain the other part of Standing Order No. 54 dealing with retirement age without the provision as to payment of pension.
[874 E H] (vii)The two provisos to Standing Order 47 as well as Standing Orders 48(a)(1) & (2) which make elaborate provisions for appeals and the finality assigned to the decision of the Labour Commissioner under Standing Order 49 are outside the purview of the Act and therefore must be held to be bad in law.
Though the scheme of the Act, as modified in 1956, has widened the scope of the enquiry before the appropriate authorities, the Act does not authorise the introduction of Standing Orders which would result in appeals to outside authorities either by the workmen or the employer and thereby extend the scope of the provisions which can legitimately be made by Standing Orders.
The Standing Orders are intended to regulate the conditions of service of the employees and in that behalf may legitimately make provisions concerning the rights and liabilities of the parties and their enforcement by an internal arrangement between the employer and his employees.
[878 H 879 B] (viii)In an appeal under article 136 of the Constitution this Court would not be justified in examining the correctness of the conclusions reached by the appropriate authorities in dealing with the 'reasonableness or fairness of the Standing Orders.
That is a matter left to the discretion of the authorities.
[879 F]
