During the accounting period relevant for the assessment year 1950 51 the appellant company obtained a loan of 40 lakhs of rupees from the Industrial Finance Corporation of India.
The loan was secured by a charge on the fixed assets of the company.
A sum of Rs. 84,633 was shown in the Balance Sheet for the said accounting year as mortgage loan expenses; the sum was not charged as expenditure in the profit and loss account.
In the accounts for the accounting year ending March 31, 1953, this sum was written off by appropriation against profits of that year.
The Income tax Officer disallowed the deduction; he held that the expenditure was incurred in obtaining capital and should be distinguished from interest on borrowed capital which alone was admissible as a deduction under section 10(2)(iii).
In his view the expenditure was of a capital nature and therefore not admissible under section 10(2)(xv) either.
After intermediate proceedings the High Court in reference gave a finding upholding the view of the Income tax Officer.
The appellant by special leave, came to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that : (1) the expenditure in question was not incurred to acquire any asset or advantage of an enduring nature; (2) it was applied wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business; and (3) was admissible as a deduction under section 10 (2) (xv).
HELD : In the circumstances of the case the expenditure in question was revenue expenditure within section 10(2)(xv).
(i)When there is no express prohibition, an outgoing, by means of which an assessee procures the use of a thing by which it makes a profit, is deductible from the receipts of the business to ascertain taxable income.
On the facts of the instant case, the money secured by the loan was the thing for the use of which this expenditure was made.
In principle, apart from any statutory provisions, there is no distinction, as drawn by the Income tax Officer, between interest in respect of a loan and an expenditure incurred for obtaining the loan.
[950 G H] (ii)A loan obtained cannot be treated as an asset or advantage for the enduring benefit of the business of the assessee.
A loan is a liability and has to be repaid and it is erroneous to consider a liability as an asset or an advantage.
[955 C] (iii)The nature of the expenditure incurred in raising a loan cannot be made to depend on the nature and purpose of the loan.
A loan may be intended to be used for the purchase of raw material when it is negotiated but the company may after raising the lo an change its mind and spend it on securing capital assets, [955 11 956 B] 945 (iv)The loan was voluntarily entered into in order to facilitate the running of the business of the company and it could not be said that it was not laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business.
[958 B] Case law considered.
