The second appellant the Sub divisional Officer had been constituted as the licensing authority, under section 4 of the Punjab Cinemas (Regulation) Act, 1952, for the area concerned in the present case.
The respondent made an application to him for a licence to construct a permanent cinema hall.
Pending the application, instructions were issued by the first appellant the State Government that all such applications for licence shall be forwarded to the State Government for orders accompanied with certain particulars regarding the applicant.
The second appellant forwarded the respondent 's application with the relevant facts to the first appellant and the first appellant rejected the application.
The respondent 's appeal to the first appellant under section 5(3) of the Act was also rejected.
The respondent then moved the High Court under article 226 and the High Court held that the first appellant had no authority or power to require all applications for licences under the Act to be forwarded to it and to deal with them itself.
In appeal to this Court, the first appellant contended that it had jurisdiction to deal with the application because section 5(2) of the Act conferred very wide powers of control on it and that the power took within its sweep the directions issued by it.
HELD : The scheme of the Act indicates that there are two authorities which are expected to function under the Act the licensing authority as well as the State Government.
The basic fact in the scheme is that it is the licensing authority which is solely given the power to deal with the applications for licence in the first instance, and this basic position cannot be changed by the State Government by issuing any executive orders or by making rules under section 9 of the Act.
[989 G; 990 B C] The control of the State Government under section 5(2) subject to which the licensing authority has to function is very wide; but however wide this control may be, it cannot justify the State Government to completely oust the licensing authority and itself usurp its functions.
The licensing authority has to act under the control of the State Government, but it is the licensing authority which has to act and not the Government itself.
The said control can be exercised generally before applications are granted by issuing general instructions which are legitimate and reasonable for the purpose of the Act, or particularly by correcting individual orders granting licences if they are found to be erroneous, but in any case the State Government has to function either as an appellate authority under section 5(3) or as a revisional authority under section 5(2), but it cannot assume for itself the powers of the licensing authority.
[988 H 989 E] Karnati Rangaiah vs A. Sultan Mohiddin, A.I.R. 1957 A.P. 513, M/s.
Vishnu Talkies vs The State, Rai.
14 and Bharat Bhushan vs Cinema and City Magistrate, A.I.R. 1956 All.
99, overruled.
