A money suit against the appellant was dismissed by the trial court but the first appellate court passed an ex parte decree against him.
The appellant 's property was sold in execution and purchased by the decreeholder.
The appellant went to the High Court which set aside the exparte decree and remanded the suit.
The appellant then filed an appli cation for restitution under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
It was stayed pending proceedings in the main suit. 'Me suit was finally decided against the applicant, by the High Court.
Thereafter the trial court allowed the appellant 's application for restitution.
After intermediate proceedings the High Court decided in Letters Patent Appeal that the appellant was not entitled to restitution.
He appealed to this Court by special leave.
HELD: The application for restitution was filed by the appellant before the passing of a fresh decree by the High Court in second appeal.
At the time of the application therefore the appellant was entitled to restitution because on that date the decree in execution of which the properties were sold had been set aside.
The appellant was therefore entitled to restitution notwithstanding anything which happened subsequently.
[27 C E] The principle of the doctrine of restitution is that on the reverse of a decree the law imposes an obligation on the party to the suit who received the benefit of the erroneous decree to make restitution to the other party for what he has lost.
The Court in making restitution is bound to restore the parties so far as they can be restored to the same position they were in at the time when the Court by its erroneous action had displaced them from.
[27 E F] Zainal Abdin Khan vs Muhammad Asghar All Khan, I.L.R. 10 All 166, relied on.
Set Umedmal & Anr.
vs Srinath Ray & Anr.
I.L.R. 27 Cal.
810, Raghu Nandan Singh vs Jagdish Singh, , Abdul Rahaman vs Sarafat Ali, and Shivbai Kom Babya Swam vs Yesoo, I.L.R. , referred to.
Lal Bhagwant Singh vs Rai Sahib Lala Sri Kishen Das, , distinguished.
