The assessee sugar mill sold sugar to parties who carried on business inside the State of Uttar Pradesh, but the sugar was despatched to stations outside the State of Uttar Pradesh and delivered to another party in compliance with the instructions issued by the buyers.
Under the contract entered between the assessee and the buyer, the assessee was to deliver the sugar at places to be communicated by the buyer.
The assessee mill claimed rebate on these sales under section 5 of the Uttar Pradesh Sales Tax Act, 1948.
The Sales Tax authorities rejected the claim. 'Me High Court held that the rebate was not admissible under section 5 because the contract did not contain any condition requiring the assessee to deliver goods outside Uttar Pradesh and because the despatch instructions.were not a part of the contract when it was formed and did not get incorporated into it or become a part of it when given.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) In.
the context of section 5 of the Act the word 'delivery ' occurring therein means 'actual delivery '.
The object underlying section 5 is to encourage export of goods manufactured in Uttar Pradesh and notified under section 5.
The course of trade adopted by the buyers and the assessee shows that if the word 'delivery ' is interpreted to mean 'constructive delivery ' very few 'export sales ' would enjoy rebate under section 5.
As long as the contract evinces an intention to export and actual delivery is given to effectuate that intention the object of the legislature to ensure that only real 'export sales ' enjoy the rebate would be fulfilled.
[53 B D] Lord Krishna Sugar Mills vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. S.T. reference No. 263/54 dated March 19, 1963, disapproved.
India Coffee and Tea distributing Co. Ltd. vs The State of Madras 10 S.T.C. 359, approved.
(ii)The sales by the assessee were for actual delivery outside Uttar Pradesh.
The despatch instructions contemplated by the contract entered into by the assessee, were part of the contract.
The contract contemplated a destination in spite of constructive delivery having been contracted to be made at the station where the assessee mill was situated.
Further the contract was not to actually deliver at some place to be chosen or assented to by the assessee mill but at any place without restrictions.
The contract required nothing more for completion than a mention of the place.
when the despatch instructions were given, it was not a case of performing the contract but specifying a term of contract.
[53 EG] 4 6
