The appellant was a private limited company carrying on business mainly as building contractors in the State of Orissa.
It was assessed to sales tax under the provisions of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 and made payments towards the tax assessed.
Subsequently on the basis of the decision of this Court in State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. 119591 S.C.R. 379, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the said assessments.
The High Court quashed the assessments and directed refund of that portion of the tax which was not barred by limitation on the date of filing the application The appellant thereupon filed an application before the Sales Tax Officer for refund of the amount payable to him in view of the said decision.
The Sales Tax Officer rejected the, application on the ground that it was made by only one of the directors.
The Commissioner of Sales Tax in A revision filed against the said order set aside the order of the Sales Tax Officer and held that the appellant was entitled to the refund applied for and directed the said officer to issue refund payment orders as early as possible.
Subsequently the Commissioner issued a notice to the appellant under r. 83 of the Orissa Sales Tax Rules, 1947 calling upon it to show cause why the order earlier passed by him should not be reviewed.
The Commissioner then reviewed his.
previous orders and held that the appellant would be entitled to refund of the taxes paid subject to the disallowances made in his order.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave.
The question for consideration was whether the Commissioner 's Order in review was a proper order under r. 83.
HELD: Rule 83 provides a summary remedy within a narrow compass.
The jurisdiction of the Commissioner under this rule is a limited one and is confined only to the correction of arithmetical or clerical mistakes or 'errors apparent on the face of the 'record arising or occurring from accidental slip or.
omission in an order passed by him.
However widely the said expressions are construed they cannot countenance a reargument on merits on questions of fact or law, or permit a party to raise new arguments which he has not advanced in the first instance.
B] In the present case the Commissioner reversed his previous order which was passed on merits mainly on two grounds : (i) that the application for refund in respect of certain amounts was barred by limitation , and (ii) the assessee was not entitled to a refund of the amounts paid before the assessment orders were made on the grounds that the said amounts were not the subject matter of the appeals wherein the assessments were set aside.
Both the question of limitation as well as the question of construction of the appellate orders and the impact of those orders on the amounts paid towards tax before the assessments were arguable questions of fact and law.
The Department should have raised the said questions before the Commissioner at the time he first made the 100 order directing refund of the ammounts claimed by the assessee.
The wrong conclusion if any arrived at by the Commissioner in his earlier order, because of the fact that the said two arguments were not advanced before him, cannot be said to be error on the face of the record arising or accruing from an accidental slip or omission.
The errors if any arose because the Department did not raise those points before the Commissioner.
They were also errors not apparent on the face of the record for the decision depended upon consideration of arguable questions of limitation and construction of documents.
Indeed the Commissioner reheard the argument and came to a conclusion different from that which he arrived at on the earlier occasion.
That is not permissible under 83 of the Rules.
[104 E 105 A]
