The Income, tax Officer cancelled the certificate of renewal of registration of the appellant firm, under r. 6B of the Income tax Rules, on the ground that the firm was not a genuine one.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and the High Court on reference, held that no appeal lay against the order of the Income tax Officer to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under section 30(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
In appeal to this Court, HELD :The words "refusal to register a firm" in section 30 are wide enough to take in the orders made under rr.
6A and 6B refusing to renew registration and also cancelling the certificate so renewed, and such an order directly attracts the appellate jurisdiction conferred on the Appellate Assistant Commissioner under the section.
[196 E; 197 F] The fact that section 30 provides for an appeal separately against the orders under section 23 (4) either refusing to register a firm or cancelling the registration of a firm, but provides in the context of section 26A, for an appeal only against an order refusing to register the firm, does not affect this construction of section 30, because, when section 30 provides for an appeal against the orders under section 23(4), it has merely incorporated the two forms of orders embodied in section 23(4), and, when it provides for an appeal against the order under section 26A, it has used a general word, for the nature of the order under section 26A is not described but is left to be prescribed under the Rules.
The application under section 26A made to the Income tax Officer on behalf of a firm for registration for the purposes of the Act, will be disposed of in the manner prescribed by rr.
6A and 6B. Under these Rules, the Income tax Officer is authorised to make three kinds of orders, namely, (i) he can refuse to renew the registration; (ii) he can register; and (iii) he can cancel the renewal if he is satisfied that a renewal was obtained without there being a genuine firm in existence.
But the three kinds of orders, having regard to the circumstances of each case, will be made only on an application for renewal of registration, because, the Rules do not provide for independent proceedings to the cancellation of the renewed certificate.
When the Income tax Officer cancels a renewed certificate, he sets aside his earlier order and refuses a renewal, with the result that, an order of refusal to renew a certificate and the order cancelling the renewed certificate are given the same effect, namely, refusal of the application to register.
It follows that the order cancelling registration is nothing more than refusing to renew the certificate of registration.
[196 A E: 197 C E]
