The appellant purchased certain land from one A in 1946.
Although the land was valued at more than Rs. 100 no registered deed of sale was executed.
In 1949, A was declared an evacuee and the appellant was given notice by the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property to show cause why the land should not be declared evacuee property.
No appearance was put in by the appellant in answer to the notice and the land was declared evacuee property.
The appellant represented to the departmental authorities that he had become owner of the land before the Evacuee Property law came into force.
The Custodian did not accept the plea and observed that if the appellant was aggrieved by the decision he could obtain a declaration of his rights from a competent court.
The appellant therefore filed a suit which was contested by the department on the ground that section 46 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act was a bar.
The subordinate Judge held that the court had jurisdiction because of section 53A disagreed with the Subordinate Judge and reversed his decision.
The appellant then came to this Court by special leave.
HELD : The scheme of the Evacuee Property Act clearly is that when the property admittedly belongs to the evacuee any person claiming the property or any interest or right therein has, on receipt of a notice under section 7(1), to appear before the authorities entitled to deal with the matter under the Act.
Any person aggrieved by an order of such an authority made under 3. 7 has the right to appeal under section 24 and if necessary to go in revision under section 27.
The Act thus provides a complete machinery for a person interested in any property to put forward his claims before the competent authorities.
Having provided this machinery the Act by section 46 bars the jurisdiction of civil and revenue courts to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether any property or any right or interest in any property is or is not evacuee property.
Any transferee from an evacuee claiming the property or any right or interest therein has to avail of the remedies under the Act and cannot go to a civil court.
The fact that in the present case the Custodian in his order said that the appellant could go to a competent court could not confer jurisdiction on the Court.
Nor could it be said on the facts found that the appellant had become the owner of the property before 1947, for, admittedly the property was worth more than Rs. 100 and without a registered sale deed it was not possible for the title to pass.
It way be that if A tried to get back the property section 53 A of the Transfer of Property Act would come to the aid of the appellant in de 215 fence.
But the present suit had been filed to establish the right of the appellant as owner of the property and in such a suit the appellant could not take the benefit of section 53 A. [217 B 218 B]
