B, his wife, his two unmarried daughters and the appellant who was B 's adopted son, were members of a Hindu undivided family.
In respect of the income from dealings of the family, B was assessed during his life time in the status of a manager of the Hindu undivided family.
After his death for the assessment year 1951 52, the Income tax Officer the appellant on the basis that the income was that of a Hindu undivided family and rejected the latter 's contention that he should be assessed as an individual.
The order of assessment was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and on a reference, by the High Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the expression 'Hindu undivided family ' used in section 3 of the Income Tax Act, 1922, means a Hindu coparcenary and when on the death of one out of two co parceners the entire property devolves upon a single co parcener, asssesment cannot be made of the surviving co parcener, in the status of a Hindu undivided family.
Alternatively it was contended that even if the entity 'Hindu undivided family ' in section 3 is intended to mean a Hindu joint family.
a sole surviving male member of the family, even if there be widows in the family entitled to maintenance, may only be assessed as an indivi dual.
HELD : Property of a Joint family does not cease to belong to the family merely because the family is represented by a single co parcener who possesses rights similar to those of an owner of property.
In the present case the property which yielded the income originally belonged to a Hindu undivided family.
On the death of B although the family which included a widow and females born in the family was represented by the appellant alone, the property continued to belong to the undivided family and income received therefrom was taxable as income of the Hindu undivided family.
[234 D] Under section 3 of the Act, it is not a Hindu coparcenary but a Hindu undivided family which one of the assemble entities.
A Hindu joint family consists of all persons lineally descended from a common ancestor and includes their wives and unmarried daughters.
A Hindu coparcenary is a much narrower body and includes only those persons who acquire by birth a status in the joint or co parcenary property.
Therefore there may be a Joint Hindu family consisting of a, single male member and widows of deceased of co parceners.
[227 A] There was no force in the alternative plea that there must be at least two male members to form a Hindu undivided family as a taxable entity.
The expression 'Hindu undivided family ' in the Act is used in the sense in which a Hindu joint family is understood in Hindu law.
Under the 225 Hindu system of law a joint family consist of a single male member and widows of deceased male members and there is nothing in the Act to indicate that a Hindu undivided family as an assessable entity must consist of at least two male members.
[231 E] Kalyanji Vithaldas & Others vs C.I.T., Bengal, (64 I.A. 28) C.1.7 '.
, Bombay vs Gomedalli Lakshminarayan, ; ln re Moolji Sicka & others, ; C.I.T. vs A. P. Swamy Gomedalli, ; Attorney General of Ceylon vs A. R. Arunachalam Chettiar and others, ; 34 I.T.R. Supp. 42, discussed.
