The assessee was a limited company with its registered office at Bombay.
Its main business was the manufacture of locomotive boilers and locomotives, and for that purpose the assessee had to make purchases of plant and machinery, in various countries including the U.S.A. The assessee appointed M/s. Tata Inc., New York, as its purchasing agent in the U.S.A.
The assessee was also the selling agent of Baldwin Locomotive Works, U.S.A., for the sale of their products in India, and the commission payable to the assessee as their sole selling agent was made over to the assessee 's purchasing agent in Now York with the sanction of the Reserve Bank and for the purchase of capital goods.
This amount was taxed in the relevant assessment years on the accrual basis and the ix was paid.
On 16th September 1949, the pound sterling was devalued and the rate of exchange between rupee and dollar which was Rs. 3.33 per dollar before devaluation, became Rs. 4.775 per dollar thereafter, On 'hat date, there was in the assessee 's account with the purchasing agent a sum of $ 36,123.02 representing the commission received from Baldwin locomotive Works.
With the permission of the Reserve Bank this sum was repatriated to India in 1950 and the change in the exchange rate gave these to a surplus in rupees.
The Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assisant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal held that this surplus amount was liable to tax.
The High Court, on a reference, held that the sum was not taxable in the hands of the assessee.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that the assessee was liable 3 tax because; (i) if the commission bad been allowed to remain in the J.S.A. up to 16th September 1949 and had been repatriated on 17th September, the assessee would have been liable to tax and therefore the Permission of the Reserve Bank and the decision of the assessee to hold to buy capital goods did not make any difference; and (ii) the fact hat the assessee credited the rupee equivalent of the sum in his books and paid tax on the basis of accrual did not also make any difference to the ssessee 's liability.
HELD:The High Court was right in deciding in favour of the assessee.
The assessee 's liability to tax would depend on whether the 'act of seeping the money for capital purposes after obtaining the sanction of he Reserve Bank was part of or a trading transaction.
The amount no doubt, was a revenue receipt in the assessee 's business of commission agency.
But instead of repatriating it immediately, the assessee obtained the sanction of the Reserve Bank to utilize the commission for buying capital goods, and that was an independent transaction.
It was not a 236 trading transaction but was a transaction of accumulating dollars to pay for capital goods, the first step to the acquisition of capital goods.
if the assessee had repatriated the amount and then, after obtaining the sanc tion of the Reserve Bank, remitted it to the U.S.A. any profit made on devaluation would only be a capital profit.
therefore, the fact that the assessee kept the money b e n the U.S.A. did not make any difference under the circumstances.
[241 B P]
