The appellants were holders of shares in Inam villages.
on the, Inams being abolished by Bombay Personal In Abolition ACt, 1953 they claimed compensation for their Inam under section 17(1) of the Act.
By a. 17(5).
"Nothing is this section shall entitle any person to compensation on the ground that any inam village, or inam land which has (sic.) wholly or partially exempt from the payment of land revenue has been under the provision of this Act made subject to the payment of full assessment in accordance with the ;provisions of the Code ." section 5 of the Act provide, "(i) All inam villages or inam, lands are and shall be liable to the Payment of land revenue in accordance with the provisions of the Code and rules made thereunder and the provisions the Code and the rules relating to unalienated land shall apply to such lands.
(12) (a) An inamdar in respect of the inam land in his actual Possession or in possession of a person holding from him other than 'an inferior holder, referred to in clause (b) below or (b) an inferior holder holding inam land on payment of annual assessment only shall Primarily be liable to the State Government for the payment of land revenue, due in respect of such land held by him and shall be entitled to all the rights and shall be liable to all obligations in respect of such land as An ocupant under the Code or the rules made thereunder or, any other law for the time being in force.
" HELD (Per Sarkar J.) (1).
On a construction of the Sanad by which the inams were granted, the,grants were of villages and exemption from land revenue as mentioned, 14 section 17(5).
Mat the tenants paid to the Inamdars was not something which was due to the Government which, the Inamdars kept to themselves but was Tent due to the Inamdars.
[414 G;415 C] Even after the survey in the Inam villages in 1900 under the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879 the Inamdars remained the grantees of the soil exempt from payment of revenue and the tenants remained liable, as before, to pay rent to the Inamdars.
[415 E F] (2) Section 5 of the Act does not show that the Inamdars were claiming compensation for the loss of money that they used to collect from the inferior holders, the right to which collection was abolished by the Act and, therefore section 17(5) did not apply to them.
The fact that under a. 5 the Inamdar has not himself been made liable for 'the revenue in respect of the land held by the inferior holders, made no differentce.
By section 5 an 7 413 Inamdar has been deprived of his right to the assessment from the inferior holders and the inferior holders have been made liable to pay that assesment to the Government.
Therefore, in actual result, the Inamdar has been deprived of his right to the assessment because the land has, been made subject to the payment of land revenue and he was, therefore covered by section 17 (5.).
[416 E G] Per Mudholkar, J. : Section 5 (1) of the Bombay Personal Inams Abolition Act, 1953, creates liability to pay and revenue to the Government with respect to inam laads, in accordance with the provisions of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879.
Where lands were in possession inferior holders section 5(2) (b) places the liability, on the inferior holders.
The loss resulting to the inamdars is the.
direct consequence of the operation of these provisions.
Therefore section 17(5) of the Act bars the claim for compensation for loss of the right of the appellants to recover from the inferior holders land revenue, assessed 'on the lands in their posmsion.
[419 C E] Per Bachawat, I The grants of the villages,.
on the construction of the deeds were grants of villages Partial exetmption from payment of land revenue and were personal of the category specified in section 2(1) (e) (i).
The introduction of, the survey settlement made no difference in the character pi the inams.
After the Abolition .Act,; the lands no longer enjoyed either total or Spartial exemption from payment of land revenue.
By section 5 (.1) of the Act, all inam lands are now liable to payment of full land revenus By section 5 (2) (b), in respect of lands held by inferior holders the inferior holders now enjoy the status of occupants, and are liable to pay the land revenue directly to the State Government.
The appellants were not entitl ed to claim compensation in respect of the abolition of their right to recover assessment from the inferior hoders, because such a claim is really on the ground that the inam lands which were formerly exempt from payment of land I revenue have been subjected by the Act to payment of full assessment.
Such a claim is based by section 17(5).
A grant of village or land with total or partial exemption of land revenue is essentially different from a grant of land revenue and the distinction has been Preserved by the Act, On the extension of the, grant of land revenue, the "namdar lows all right in respect of the grant and he is therefore entitled to full compensation order section 17(1).
On the other hand, on.
abolition of the grant of an. in= village or land the inamdar is allowed to retain and enjoy various rights and benefits, but at the 6 ' .Me time the right to compensation under section 17(1) is subject to the bar of [420 H 421 H]
