The appellant (holder of an inam in Madhya Pradesh) served a notice an his tenant, the respondent, terminating to tenancy on the ground that he wanted the land for personal cultivation and filed a suit for ejectment.
The trial court decreed the suit.
During the pendency of the appeal in the District Court, article 32 of 1954 was enacted, and pursuant to its provisions the hearing of the appeal was stayed.
After the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code came into force in 1959, the District Court held that by virtue of section 185 of that Code the respondent acquired the rights, of an occupancy tenant and dismissed the suit.
The High Court confirmed the judgment of the District Court.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (i) the rights of an occupancy tenant arise in favour of a personl under section 185(1) (i) (a) only if there was between him and the landlord a subsisting tenancy at the date when the Code came into force and since under the law in force before the commencement of the Code, the respondent had ceased to be a tenant because of the notice terminating the contract of tenancy the respondent was not invested with the rights of an occupany tenant; and (ii) bi virtue of sections 261 and 262(2), the operation of section 185 is expressly excluded when a person, against whom ejectment proceedings have been instituted prior to the commencement of the Code in enforcement of a right then acquired, claims the status of an occupancy tenant.
HELD : (i) The respondent acquired the right of an occupancy tenant under the Code, because the expression "tenant" in section 185 (1) (ii) (a) includes a person whose tenancy was terminated before the commencement of the Code.
The definition of the expression "tenant" in the Code postulates a subsisting tenancy, but the position of a tenant prior to the date on which the Code was brought into force is not dealt with in the definition.
In the context in which the expression "tenant" occurs in section 185(1), that definition could not be intended to apply in deter ining the conditions which invest a holder of land with the status of an occupancy tenant at the commencement of, the Code.
Therefore having regard to the object of the enactment the expression should be ascribed the meaning it 'has in Act 32 of 1954.
Under sections 3 & 4 of that Act a person who was inducted into the land as a tenant and who continued 'to hold the land at the commencement of the Act was entitled to protection against eviction and continue as tenant, notwithstanding that under the law in force prior to the commencement of the Act.
the contractual relationship of landlord and tenant was determined.
[432 D; 432 14 433 C] 428 There is no reason to think that the Legislature sought to make a A distinction between tenants of Inam land in section 185 (1) (ii) (a) and ryotwari sub lessees of other lands in section 185(1)(ii)(b).
Therefore, if the expression "ryotwari sub lessee ' in section 185(1)(ii)(b) includes a sub lessee whose tenaure was terminated before the commencement of the Code, a tenant of inam land, whose tenancy has been terminated would also be included in the protection, provided at some time prior to the date on which the Code was brought into force, he was in possession of the land as a tenant, and he continued to hold the land till the date of the commencement of the Code.
[434 E H] (ii) The provisions of the Code appeal to tenants in proceedings for ejectment pending at the commencement of the Code.
The proviso to section 261 protects a right which had been acquired under a law repeated by the Code and the right could be enforced as if the code had not been passed.
But the right to evict a tenant was governed by the general law of landlord and tenant and was not acquired under any repealed law.
The proviso had no operation and a legal proceeding pending at the date of the commencement of the Code will be disposed of according to the law enacted in the Code.
Therefore, the tenant could not ' be evicted otherwise than in the manner and for reasons mentioned in a. 193 of the Code but, personal requirement for cultivation of land is not a ground on which a claim for ejectment could be maintained.
[435 G436 A] Section 262(2) is only procedural it provides that a civil court will continue to have jurisdiction to dispose of a civil suit pending before it at the commencement of the Code, Which, if it had been instituted after the Code was passed would have been tried by a revenue court; and in the disposal of such a suit, the civil court will be governed by the procedural law applicable there to prior to the commencement of the Code.
It does not nullify the statutory conferment of occupancy right upon persons in the position of tenants against whom proceedings were taken at the date when the Code was brought into force.
[436 B D]
