The Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co., Ltd., was incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913, with an authorised capital of Rs. 48 lakhs divided into 1590 fully paid up ordinary shares of Rs. 1,000 each, 20 fully paid up ordinary shares of Rs. 500 each and 32,000 partly paid up cumulative preference shares of Rs. 100 each, the paid up capital of the Company being Rs. 32 lakhs comprised of Rs. 16 lakhs fully ' paid up ordinary shares and Rs. 16 lakhs partly paid up preference shares, Rs. 50 being unpaid on each of the 32,000 cumulative preference shares.
The Company did good business and declared high dividends for some time ; 'but in the year 1949 there was accumulation of stocks and financial difficulties.
On the 27th July, 1949, the Directors gave notice of 675 their decision to close the Mills to the workers, and pursuant to this notice the Mills were closed.
This created a labour problem and to solve it the Government on he 5th October, 1949, appointed a Controller to supervise the affairs of the Mills under the Essential Supplies Emergency Powers Act, 1946.
On the 9th November, 1949, the Controller in order to resolve the deadlock decided to call in more capital and asked the Directors of the Company to make a call of Rs. 50 per share, on the preference shareholders, the amount remaining unpaid on each of the preference shares.
The Directors refused to comply with this requisition, as in their judgment, this was not in the interests of the Company.
Thereupon the Governor General on the 9th January, 1950, promulgated the impugned Ordinance, under which the Mills could be managed and run by the Directors appointed by the Central Government.
On the 9th January, 1950, the Central Government acting under section 15 of the Ordinance delegated all its powers to the Government of Bombay.
The Government of Bombay then appointed certain Directors who took over the assets and management of the Mills.
On the 7th February, 1950, they passed a resolution making a call of Rs. 50 on each of the preference shares payable at the time stated in the resolution.
Pursuant to this resolution a notice was addressed on the 22nd February, 1950, to the plaintiff in the suit who held preference shares, to pay Rs. 1,62,000 the amount of the said call on or before the 3rd April, 1950.
The plaintiff instead of meeting the demand, filed the present suit on the 28th March, 1950, in a representative capacity on behalf of himself and other preference shareholders against the Company and the Directors appointed by the Government of Bombay challenging the validity of the Ordinance and questioning the right of the Directors to make the call.
It was alleged in the suit that the Ordinance was illegal and ultra vires and invalid as it contravened the provisions of Section 299(2) of the Government of India Act, 1935, and the provisions of Part III of the Constitution and that the resolution of the Directors dated 7th February, 1950, making a call was illegal and ultra vires as the law under which they were appointed was itself invalid.
The suit was dismissed by the Trial Judge and his decision was affirmed on appeal by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court by the Judgment dated 29th August, 1950.
The plaintiff preferred the present appeal to the Supreme Court.
This appeal concerns the validity of the same Ordinance and the Act replacing it which were considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri ; There an ordinary shareholder of the defendant Company holding one fully paid up share challenged the validity of the Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co. (Emergency Provisions) Ordinance II of 1950 and Act XXVIII of 1950, seeking relief under Article 32 of the Constitution on the ground that the said.
Ordinance and the Act abridged his fundamental rights conferred on him under Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
The Supreme Court dismissed the petition by a majority of 676 3 to 2 holding that the presumption in regard to the Constitutionality of the Act had not been displaced by the petitioner and that it had not been proved that the impugned statute was a hostile or discriminatory piece of legislation as against him or that the State had taken possession of his share.
The minority held that impugned statute was void as it abridged the petitioner 's fundamental rights under Article 14 of the Constitution.
This decision was delivered on 4th December, 1950.
The suit giving rise to the present appeal was decided by the Bombay High Court during the pendency of Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri 's petition in the Supreme Court: Held, (pet ' PATANJALI SASTRI C.J., MAHAJAN, BOSE, and GHULAM HASAN JJ.) (i) that the impugned Ordinance and the Act replacing it authorise in effect a deprivation of the property of the Company within the meaning of Article 31 without compensation and are not covered by the exception in clause (5)(b)(ii)of that Article.
The Ordinance and the Act thus violate the fundamental rights of the Company under Article 31(2) of the Constitution and the appellant as a preference shareholder who is called upon to pay the moneys unpaid on his shares is entitled to impugn their constitutionality.
(ii) that the previous decision of the Supreme Court in Charanjit Lal Chowdhuri vs The Union of India and Others(1) is distinguishable and has no application to the present case.
Per MAHAJAN J. (i) Constitutional provisions for the security of person and property should be liberally construed.
A close and literal construction deprives them of half their efficacy and leads to gradual depreciation of the right, as if it consisted more in sound than in substance.
It is the duty of Courts to be watchful for the constitutional rights of the citizen and against any stealthy encroachments thereon.
Boyd vs United States (2) referred to.
By promulgating the Ordinance, the Government has not merely taken over the superintendence of the affairs of the Company but has in effect and substance taken over the undertaking itself.
In the situation ' the contention has no force that the effect of the Ordinance is that the Central Government has taken over the superintendence of the affairs of the Company and that the impugned legislation is merely regulative in character.
In the present case 'practically all incidents of ownership have been taken over by the Sate and nothing ' has been left with the Company but the mere husk of title and in the premises the impugned statute has overstepped the limits of legitimate Social Control Legislation and has infringed the fundamental right of the Company guaranteed to it under: Article 31(2) of the Constitution and is, therefore unconstitutional.
(1) ; (2) 677 (ii) It is significant that Article 31 deals with private property of persons residing in the Union of India, while Article 19 only deals with citizens defined in Article 5 of the Constitution.
It is obvious that the scope of these two Articles cannot be the same as they cover different fields.
The true approach to this question is that these two Articles really deal with two different subjects and one has no direct relation with the other amely.
Article 31 deals with the field of eminent domain and the whole boundary of that field is demarcated by this Article.
From the language employed in the different sub clauses of Article 31 it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the words "acquisition" and "taking possession" used in Article 31(2) have the same meaning as the word "deprivation" in Article 31(1).
(iii) Article 31 is a self contained provision delimiting the field of eminent and clauses (1) and (2) of Article 31 deal with the same topic of compulsory acquisition of property.
Article 31 gives complete protection to private property as against executive action, no matter by what process a person is deprived of possession of it.
It is a narrow view that "acquisition" necessarily means acquisition of title in whole or part of the property and cannot be accepted.
The word "acquisition" has quite a wide concept, meaning the procuring of property or the taking of it permanently or temporarily.
It does not necessarily imply acquisition of legal title by the State in the property taken possession of.
Minister of State for the Army vs Dalziel ; referred to.
Per Das J. (I) As the appellant as a preference shareholder is directly affected by the impugned statute, which circumstance distinguishes this case from Chiranjit Lal 's case, it must be held that the appellant is entitled to challenge the Ordinance which dismissed the Directors elected by the shareholders, authorised the appointment of Directors by the State and made it possible for the Directors so appointed to make the call and thereby impose a liability on all preference shareholders including the appellant.
(II) The provisions of the Ordinance and the Act are drastic in the extreme.
The Managing Agents and the elected Directors have been dismissed and new Directors have been appointed by the State.
So far as the Company is concerned it has been completely denuded of the possession of its property.
All that has been left to the Company is its bare legal title.
It is impossible to uphold this law as an instance of the exercise of the State 's police power as an emergency measure.
It has far overstepped the limits of police power and is, in substance, nothing short of expropriation by way of the exercise of the power of eminent domain and as the law has not provided for any compensation it must be held to offend the provisions of Article 31(2).
678 Per Bose J.
The words "taken possession of" or "acquired" in Article 31(2) have to be read along with the word "deprived" in clause (1).
The possession and acquisition referred to in clause (2) mean the sort of "possession" and "acquisition" that amount to "deprivation" within the meaning of clause (1).
No hard and fast rule can be laid down.
Each case must depend on its own facts.
But if there is substantial deprivation, then clause (2) is attracted.
Per GHULAM HASAN J.
The Act in substance robs the Company of every vestige of right, except what has been laconically called the husk of the title.
The impugned Act oversteps the constitutional limits of the power conferred upon ' the State and offends against the provisions of Article 31 and must therefore be held to be void.
The intention underlying Article 31 being the protection of property against invasion by the State, both parts (1) and (2) of Article 31 should be read together so as to harmonize that intention.
The two parts of the Article form an integral whole and cannot be dissociated from each other.
Article 31 is wider than Article 19(1)(f) which confers upon a citizen only the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property and is different in scope and content.
Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri vs The Union of India and Others ([1950] S.C.R. 869) distinguished, The State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose and Others ([1954] S.C.R. 587), Boyd vs United States ; , Pennsylvania Coal Co. vs Mahon , A.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras ([1950] S.C.R. 88), State of Bihar vs Maharajah Kameswar Singh and Others ([1952] S.C.R. 889), Minister of State for the Army vs Dalziel ; , Tan Bug Tain vs Collector of Bombay (I.L.R. , and Jupiter General Insurance Co. vs Rajagopalan (A.I.R. 1952 Punjab 9), referred to.
