The appellant company gave on lease a piece of land to the respondent in 1938.
On June 28, 1950 the company gave notice to the respondent terminating the tenancy.
The period mentioned in the notice, which was received by the respondent on June 29, 1950 was six months ending with the expiry of December 1950.
Later the company filed a suit for the eviction of the respondent.
The latter claimed benefit of section 9(1) (iii) of the Bengal Non Agricultural Tenancy Act.
The trial court decreed the suit and the first appellate Court upheld the decree, but the High Court set it aside and dismissed the suit.
By special leave, the company appealed to this Court contending that since the respondent 's tenancy was from month to month section 9 (1) (iii) did not apply.
It was urged: (i) the phrase "for a term of more than one year but less than twelve years" in the first part of the section contemplated tenancies in which the agreed duration under a contract was more than one year but less than 12 years; (ii) the phrase "six months ' notice expiring with the end of a year of the tenancy" in the latter part of the section meant that the notice in writing must expire with the end of the year of the tenancy when the tenancy was from year to year and with the end of the term when it was more than one year 's duration.
HELD:(i) The Act uses the word "term" both in the sense of a period of occupation and of a period agreed, upon in a contract.
The context must determine the sense in which it is to be understood.
In the opening words of section 9(1) (iii) it means that the land must be held, that is, occupied, for more than one year.
It does not signify that there should be an agreed term of more than one year.
[18 C D; 19C; 20E] (ii) The words "end of a year of tenancy" in the latter part of section 9(1) (iii) are no doubt indicative of a tenancy from year to year but they are not such as to be inapplicable to a tenancy from month to month.
What the section contemplates is occupation for more than one year and it says that a tenant who has held the, land for more than a year, albeit, on a tenancy from month to month.
shall only be evicted on the anniversary of the day on which his tenancy commences.
[20 F H].
(iii) The tenancy having commenced as held by the High Court on December 1, 1938 the notice given by the company in the present case fell short of the statutory six months and was therefore in valid.
[21 E G].
