The Delhi Improvement Trust (set up under the U.P. Town Improvement Act (8 of 1908) extended to the territory of Delhi) prepared and notified under the Act an industrial development scheme intended to secure the growth of an industrial area so as to induce a flow of population away from the crowded parts of Delhi.
Land in the area was to be developed by the Trust and a part of the land was to be allotted to industrial concerns for construction of industrial building and the rest for construction of residential and other buildings.
Under the scheme one particular company was to be allotted a certain acreage of land but the land covered by the scheme was found inadequate for this purpose.
A supplementary scheme was therefore notified modifying the original scheme and providing for the acquisition of an additional area of land, to be sold to the company.
Under the terms of sale this additional area was to be developed by the Company.
The appellants, whose lands were sought to be compulsorily acquired under the supplementary scheme, sued the Trust challenging the legality of the scheme and the award made in the acquisition proceedings.
The Subordinate Judge decreed the suit but on appeal the High Court reversed this decision.
In the appeal to this Court three questions fell for determination: (i) whether acquisition of I and of the appellants under the supplementary scheme was for the purposes of the Act; (ii) whether for executing the supplementary scheme the Trust had power to compulsorily acquire land; and (iii) whether land of the appellants could be acquired only in the manner provided by Part VII of the Land Acquisition Act 1894.
HELD:The High Court was right in refusing to decree the suit.
(i)The original and supplementary schemes had to be regarded as one composite scheme conceived in the interests of industrial development.
The original scheme was primarily a town expansion scheme within the meaning of the Act; and the supplementary scheme was framed for the further progress of and to effectuate the purpose of the original scheme Acquisition of land for industrial development and making provision for the residence of employees in the industries would clearly fall within the terms of s.24(h), read with section 32.
The provisions of the Act would not justify acquisition of land with a view to handing it over to an industrial concern for private gain.
But this was riot the position in the present case, as a scheme 28 which contemplated acquisition of land for effectuating the object of the original scheme was not a device to acquire land for the private gain of an industrialist.
The general supervision and control over the execution of the supplementary scheme, as over the original scheme, was retained by the Trust and the Compnay was to develop the land subject to control under the Town Planning Scheme.
[35 C, F, G, HI (ii)Power to acquire land compulsorily was conferred by s.23 (a) which in terms authorised acquisition by purchase, exchange or otherwise of any property necessary or affected by the execution of the scheme, and this provision could be incorporated in any of the improvement schemes of the type mentioned in s.24.
The power could also be exercised under ss.32, 55 and 56.
Under the provisions relating to other classes of schemes express provision with regard to acquisition of land was made and such express provision was absent in s.32 dealing with town expansion schemes.
But that would not justify the inference that the provisions of s.23(a) relating to acquisition of land necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme were not available in sanctioning a town expansion scheme.
Were it otherwise, s.23(a) would not have application to any scheme at all.
[36 B E] (iii)The provisions of Part VII of the Land Acquisition Act 1894, did not have to be followed, for, in this case, land was not to be acquired for the company; it was to be acquired for carrying out an industrial development scheme.
Mere inclusion of a provision for sale of land comprised in the scheme did not vitiate the scheme.
If the Act was valid and could be resorted to for compulsorily acquiring land, the awards made under the Act were not open to challenge on the ground that if another scheme of acquisition had been resorted to, more compensation could have been paid to the appellants.
[36 F, G; 37 B]
