The respondents (workmen of the appellant) raised on indus trial dispute and pleaded before the Labour Court that the appellant 's action in retrenching some of its employees was mala fide, as the appellant did not follow the "first come.
last go" rule.
The appellant justified its action on the ground that the appellant had recorded valid reasons for departing from the rule.
The reasons were that, one of the employees retained was the only person capable of looking after the appellant 's share work and court work, another was the only typist with the appellant, a third was the record keeper who alone knew where the different types of records were kept, and the other two were peons who were retained as chowkidars because, there was no other person who could do that work.
The Labour Court accepted the respondents ' contention, ordered the reinstatement of those employees who were affected by the departure from the rule, and directed that those employees who were properly retrenched should be paid in addition to the retrenchment compensation under section 25F of the , which had been paid by the appellant 50 % of their wages as compensation till the date when the award, became enforceable.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD:(i) The Labour Court was in error in inferring mala )ides merely because the management departed from the rule of "first come, last go.
" Where other things are equal, the ordinary industrial rule has to be followed by the employer, but the rule is not immutable.
It is for the management to ascertain who, on retrenchment, should be retained in the interests of the business, and the industrial tribunal will not interfere with the decision of the management, unless preferential treatment is actuated by mala fides.
Preference given to the retained employees on the ground of mere experience may justify an inference of mala fides; but in the present case, the employees retained had, beside experience, special skill, or aptitude in the Particular branch of the business of the appellant they were attending to, and the management had retained them because of that skill, or aptitude.
[76 E F 79B E].
Swadesamitran Ltd. V. Their Workmen, ; and J.K. Iron and Steel Company Ltd. vs its Workmen. , referred to.
(ii) Where retrenchment has been properly made and that order has not been set aside, there is no justification for directing payment of compensation to employees Properly retrenched in addition to the retrenchment compensation statutorily payable.
[8O E].
