The appellant firm held mining lease of a colliery on the condition to continue the work, without voluntary intermission, in a skillful and workman like manner.
The partners fell out amongst, themselves, the work of the colliery stopped, wages of the labourers were not paid, the essential services stopped working, and the colliery began to get flooded.
The State Government stepped in and made a promise to the essential workmen that their wages would be paid and this saved the colliery.
The State Government gave a notice asking the firm to remedy the defect within sixty days failing which it would take over the colliery.
As the firm did nothing to remove the defects and did not request for extension of time, the State Government took over the colliery and terminated the lease.
The firm filed a revision before the Central Government.
The Central Govern ment asked for the comments of the State Government and invited the firm to make its own comment upon the reply of the State Government.
Taking the entire matter into consideration, the Central Government rejected the revision.
In appeal to this Court, the firm contended that the action by the State Government was arbitrary and highhanded and that the Central Government did not give a hearing to the firm and also did not give any reasons in its order dismissing the revision.
HELD:The action of the State Government far from being arbi trary or capricious was not only right but proper.
This$ was hardly a case in which any act ion other than rejecting the application for revision was called for and a detailed order was really not required because after all the Central Government was merely approving the action taken in the case by the State Government, which stood completely vindicated.
[108 B C] The Mineral Concession Rules make it incumbent on the Central Government to obtain the comments of the State Government upon the application for revision and cast a duty on the Central Government to afford an opportunity to the applicant to make representations in respect of the comments of the State Government.
This procedure was correctly followed and the Central Government thus had a detailed discussion of the pros and cons of the case before it.
[107 G].
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunjhunwala, [ ; , Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd. vs Union of India.
[1966] J.S.C.R. 466 and Aluminium Corporation of India Ltd. vs Union of India and Ors., C.A. No. 635/64, dated 22 1965] referred to.
105 The firm did not fulfil its obligations under the lease and, whatever the reason, it was guilty of voluntary intermission in the working of the colliery and of endangering it by neglect.
This entitled the State Government to step in and determine the lease under the terms of the lease and the provisions of the Mineral Concession Rules.
[107 C D].
