The former State of Bharatpur sold some plots for establishing a Mandi, and the appellant was one of the purchasers.
Under the terms of the sale, a person trading in the Mandi would get a reduction of 25 % in the customs duty payable, if the commodities were imported into or exported out of the State through the Mandi.
The Government of Bharatpur and after its merger the Government of the United State of Matsya, and thereafter, the present Rajasthan State (respondent herein) allowed the reduction to the appellant, who was also a trader.
In 1951, the respondent revoked the concession.
The appellant filed a suit for the recovery of the excess amount of customs duty paid on the basis that there was a valid contractual liability to grant the concession.
The suit was dismissed by the High Court on appeal.
In appeal to this Court, HELD:(i) The appellant 's suit must fail because there was no recognition of the contractual right to the succeeding State of Rajasthan.
The contractual liability of a former State is binding on a succeeding sovereign State only if it recognises that contractual liability.
The enjoyment of the concession by the appellant after the formation of the Rajasthan State did not show any implied recognition of the contractual liability by the respondent, because, the concession is referable to section 33 of the Matsya Customs Ordinance of 1948 under which the concession could be granted and recognised.
[85B 88C D] Case law referred to.
(ii) Even upon the assumption that there was an implied re cognition by the respondent of the contractual liability, the suit must fail, for the contractual liability must be taken to have been super.
seded by the enactment of the Rajasthan (Regulation of Customs Duties) Ordinance No. 16 of 1949.
[88 E F].
Parliament and State Legislatures are, subject to any prohibition in the Constitution, competent to enact laws altering the terms and conditions of a previous contract or of a grant under which the liability of the Government of India or of the State Governments arises.
There is nothing in the provisions of the Ordinance which preserves the alleged contractual rights of the appellant, and in the absence of any express language in the Ordinance preserving such rights.
it must be held that the general law enacted in the Ordinance supersedes the previous contract of the appellant with the State of Bharatpur.
[90 D F] Maharaj Umeg Singh vs The State of Bombay.
[1955] 2 S.C.R. 164 and Maharaja Shree Umaid Mills Ltd. vs Union of lndia, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 515, followed.
82 (iii)The levy of Customs duty is in conformity with article 306 of the Constitution.
[91 D]
