The plaintiffs instituted a suit for partition of immovable property constituting two blocks and for rendition of accounts.
They claimed that the property was purchased with the capital of the partnership firm in which the plaintiffs and the defendant were Partners and that by two documents dated July 2, 1937 and July 16, 1937, the properties continued to remain in the ownership of the partnership firm, though the firm was dissolved in 1937.
The defendant contested the suit on various grounds and also alleged that he had invested Rs. 10,000/ for constructing a building on the land in one of the blocks.
The trial Court granted the plaintiffs a decree for most of the reliefs sought.
The High Court, in appeal, held that the plaintiffs were entitled to claim half share in the properties and that the defendant was liable to account for the income from the date of dissolution i.e. July 2, 1937 in the case of one block and from 1939 in the case of the other block and furthermore that the plaintiffs were liable to pay half the amount spent by the defendant in constructing the building on one of the blocks.
Upon a remand of the case to the trial Court a Commissioner was appointed to examine the accounts of rent realized by the defendant and on the basis of his report, the trial court granted the plaintiffs a decree for the amount payable to them as their half share, together with interest upto April 1957 and after deducting the plaintiffs ' share of the expenditure incurred by the defendant on the building.
In further appeals to the High Court by both the parties the decision of the trial court was substantially confirmed.
In the appeal to this Court by the defendant, it was contended, inter alia, on his behalf that the trial court and the High Court had erroneously decided that the defendant was liable to pay interest for the period prior to the institution of the suit on the half share of the rental income on the ground that the relationship between the par ties was in the nature of a trust under Section 90 of the Trusts Act, 1882.
On the other hand the contentions for the respondents were that interest prior to the date of institution of the suit could be paid to them under the Interest Act, 1839: that the defendant was in possession of the entire properties as as Owner after the dissolution of the partnership by the document dated July 16, 1937 and that as he 165 was realizing rents of the properties, he was in the position.
of a constructive trustee under section 95 of the Trusts Act and was liable therefore to pay interest on the plaintiffs ' share of rent under section 23 read with section 95 of the Act; and that he was in any event liable to pay interest under section 23(b) of the Trusts Act because there was unreason able delay in paying the trust money to the beneficiary.
HELD: Interest was only payable to the plaintiffs at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the final decree on the amount found due to the plaintiffs.
It is well established that interest may be awarded for the period prior to the date of the institution of the suit if there is an agreement for the payment of interest at fixed rate or if interest is payable by the usage of trade having the force of law, or under the provisions of any substantive law as for instance under section 80 of Negotiable Instruments Act or section 23 of the Trusts Act.
It was admitted in the present case that the two agreements between the parties dated July 2,1937 and July 16,1937 did not provide for payment of interest on the rental reilised by the, defendant on the joint properties.
Nor was interest payable under any provision of law governing the case.
Under the Interest Act, 1839, the court may allow interest if the amount claimed is a sum certain which is payable at a certain time by virtue of a written instrument but it was conceded that was not the position in the present case.
The provision in section 1 of the Interest Act that "interest shall be payable in all cases in which it is now payable by law," applied only to cases in which the Court of Equity exercised jurisdiction to allow interest.
[168 B D].
Bengal Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. vs Ruttanji Ramji 65 I.A. 66, Thawardas Pharumal vs Union of India, Union of India vs Rallia Ram, ; and Union of India vs Watkins Mayor & Co. A.I.R. 1966 section C. 275, referred to.
There was no force in the contention that section 90 of the Trusts Act applied to this case.
A co owner in possession of all the joint properties does not become a trustee by the mere fact of his collection of the full amount of rent from the tenants.
If the co owner is to be clothed with the status of a trustee, itmust be shown that he has gained some advance in derogation ofthe other co owners interested in the property and that he gained such advantage by availing himself of his position as co owner.
In the present case, there was no allegation or finding by the trial court that the defendant had gained any such advantage.
[17O E] Even assuming that the defendant was in the position of a constructive trustee, he would be liable to pay interest under section 23 only if he committed a breach of trust and in the present case there was no question of any such breach on his part.
Furthermore, he was not liable to pay interest under section 23(b) as that provision contemplates cases where there is an obligation on the part of the trustee to pay the trust money to the beneficiary at fixed intervals or on demand.
[170 F].
Blogg vs Johnson., [1867] 2 Ch.
A 225, Silkstone and Haigh Moor Coal Co. vs Edey, ; Malland V. Gray and Guildrey vs Stevens , referred to.
