The petitioner, the editor of a newspaper, was detained under r. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
He filed a petition under article 32 of the Constitution for a writ of habeas corpus challenging the legality of the detention order on various grounds.
Dismissing the petition, HELD:Rule 30 (1) (b) cannot be said to be ultra vires of section 3 (2) (15)(i) of the Defence of India Act for the reason that it does not state that the satisfaction of the authority making the order of detention has to be on grounds appearing to it to be reasonable.
The rule requires only that the detaining authority must be satisfied that the detention is necessary for the purposes mentioned and that is what the latter part of the section under which it was made also says.
This part does not contain any requirement as to satisfaction on reasonable grounds.
The rule has clearly been made in terms of the section authorising it.
[211 F] Article 352 of the Constitution does not require the proclamation to state the satisfaction of the President about the Emergency.
The Article requires only a declaration of emergency threatening the security of India by one of the causes mentioned.
The words "to that effect" can have no other meaning.
A proclamation ceases to have effect only by one of the events mentioned in cl. 2 of article 352 of the Constitution.[212 C] Section 3(2)(15)(iv) of the Defence of India Act and r. 30 A of the Defence of India Rules, does not give a right to make a representation.
Their effect is to provide a review of the detention order by the authorities and in the manner mentioned.
Rule 23 of the Defence of India (Delhi Detenus) Rules, 1964, states that a detente will be allowed to interview a legal practitioner for the Purpose of drafting his representation against his detention.
[213 C D].
The fact that newspapers and men connected with them may be dealt with under other provisions of the Art and Rules does not prevent detention of such persons under r. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules.
[213 H] The order need not mention the part of India which was to be Prejudicially affected by the acts of the detenue.
