The assessees carried on business in the State of Madras and were registered dealers under the .
In proceedings for assessment for central sales tax for the year 1957 58 the assessees claimed that they were liable to pay tax at the concessional rate of tax on the turnover under sec.
8(1) of the Act where sales were made by them to registered purchasing dealers who furnished declaration in Form 'C".
The common question considered in these appeals was: When a purchasing dealer in one State furnishes in Form 'C ' prescribed under the Central Sales Tax (Registration & Turnover) Rules, 1957, to the selling dealer in another State a declaration, certifying that the goods ordered, purchased or supplied are covered by the certificate of registration obtained by the purchasing dealer in Form 'B ' prescribed under r. 5(1) of the Central Sales Tax (Regis tration & Turnover) Rule. ,, 1957, and that the goods are intended for resale, or for use in manufacture of goods for sale, or for use in the execution of contracts, or for packing of goods for resale, and that declaration is produced by the selling dealer, is it open to the Sales Tax authority under the to deny to the selling dealer the benefit of concessional rates under section 8(1) of the , on the view that the certificate in Form 'C ' mentions more purposes than one for which the goods are intended to be used, or that the goods are incapable of being used for the purpose for which they are declared to be purchased, or that the goods are applied for some other purpose not mentioned in the certificate in Form 'C '? HELD: The Act and the Rules do not impose an obligation upon the purchasing dealer to declare that goods purchased by him are intended to be used for one purpose only, even though under his certificate of registration in Form 'B ' he is entitled to purchase goods of the classes mentioned in section 8(3) (b) for more purposes than one.
When the purchasing dealer furnishes a certificate in Form C without striking out any of the four alternatives, it is a representation that the goods purchased are intended to be usedfor all or any of the purposes, and the certificate complies with the requirements of the Act and the Rules.
The Sales Tax Officer may scrutinise the certificate to find out whether it is genuine and may also examine the registration certificate of the purchasing dealer.
to see if the goods are covered by it.
But it is not for him to hold an enquiry whether the goods specified in the certificate of registration of the purchaser can be used by the purchasing dealer for any of the purpose mentioned in Form 'C '.
or whether they should have been specified in the registration certificate or even that the goods purchased have in fact not been used for the purpose declared in the certificate.
[2O6 B D] 199 It is contemplated in sec.
7 and the Rules that the certificate of registration may only be issued after an objective satisfaction by the notified authority that the specified goods are likely to be needed for the purpose of business of the registered dealer, and that satisfaction is open to challenge in an appropriate proceeding before the High Court and even before this Court.
Correctness or propriety of satisfaction of the notified authority in issuing the certificate in Form 'E ' that the goods are likely to be required for the purpose of the business would not however be again open to challenge before another taxing authority in proceedings for assessment of tax.
[206 G 207 B].
Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Bihar & Others 16 S.T.C. 259 and J.K. Cotton Spinning Another 16 S.T.C. 563, referred to.
