The appellant society carried on business as public carriers on the Kanpur Delhi route.
By an agreement in 1954 they appointed the respondents as their Managing Agents for a period of 3 years.
But much before the expiry of that period they terminated the agreement.
Disputes arising between the parties were under the agreement, to be decided by arbitration as provided in the Co operative Societies Act II of 1912.
According to the relevant provisions of the said Act disputes were to be decided by the Registrar of Co operative Societies or by an arbitrator or arbitrators appointed by him.
The respondents however filed a suit against the Society asking for a declaration that the termination of the agreement by the society was illegal and for a mandatory injunction restraining the society from terminating the agreement.
The Society thereupon filed an application under section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act praying for a stay of the aforesaid suit on the ground that the respondents had agreed to arbitration as provided in the Co operative Societies Act.
The trial Court stayed the suit but the appellate Court set aside the trial Court 's order and dismissed the application under section 34.
The High Court upheld the appellate Court 's order whereupon, by special leave, the society appealed to this Court.
HELD:(i) The High Court rightly refused to stay the suit.
It rightly observed that it would be a difficult task for the arbitrator to investigate as to which of the rules made under the Co operative Societies Act are consistent with and which of those rules are not consistent with the provisions of the Indian Arbitration Act.
The suit, moreover, was filed as far back as 1954 and its stay would not be in the interests of its speedy disposal.
[219 G 220 B] (ii)It is, of course, the normal duty of the court to hold the parties to the contract and to make them present their disputes to the forum of their choice, but the strict principle of sanctity of contract is subject to the discretion of the Court under section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act.
A party may be released from the bargain if he can show that the selected arbitrator is likely to show bias or there is sufficient reason to suspect that he will act unfairly or that he has been guilty of unreasonable conduct.
[222 D] In the present case the respondent had alleged that the Registrar Co operative Societies had approved the termination of the contract of Managing Agency with the plaintiff and the Registrar was the Chairman of the Defendant Society.
In the circumstances the High Court Trust be held to have Properly exercised its discretion under section 34 of the Indian Arbitration Act in not granting a stay of the proceedings in the suit.
[222 E].
216 Bristol Corporation vs John Aird & Co. , referred to.
(iii)If it appears to the, appellate Court that in exercising its discretion the trial court has acted unreasonably or capriciously or has ignored relevant facts then it would certainly be open to the Appellate Court to interfere with the trial court 's exercise of discretion, [222 H] Charlies Osenton & Co. vs Johnston, , referred to.
