Under section 146(1) Criminal Procedure Code, a Magistrate referred to a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction the question as to which of the parties was, at the relevant point of time, in possession of the subject matter of dispute in a proceeding under section 145 Cr.
Under section 24, Civil Procedure Code, the District Judge transferred the reference to another Civil Court.
It was contended that the District Judge acted without jurisdiction because (i) the reference was to a persona designata, and (ii) the provisions of C.P.C. did not apply to the proceeding as it was not a proceeding in a court of Civil jurisdiction within the meaning of section 141, C.P.C. HELD: (i) Where a special or local statute refers to a constituted court as a court and does not refer to the presiding officer of the court, the reference cannot be said to be to a persona designata.
The power under.s. 146(1) is not to refer the matter to the presiding Judge of a Civil Court, but to a court.
[396A C].
(ii)The provisions of the Civil Procedure Code apply generally to a proceeding before a civil court arising out of a reference made by,,& Magistrate under section 146(1) Cr.
P.C. F399 E F] Adaikappa Chettiar vs Chandrasekhara Thevar, 74 I.A. 264, Mamg Ba Thaw vs Ma Pin, 61 I.A. 158 and South Asia Industries (P) Ltd. vs section B. Sarup Singh, [1965] 2 S.C.R. 756 applied.
Section 24 C.P.C. refers to "other proceeding in any court sub ordinate to it" and not to a civil proceeding pending before a subordinate court.
The term "proceeding" is comprehensive enough to include all matters coming up for judicial adjudication and is not confined to civil proceedings alone, and therefore, there is no need to invoke section 141, V.P.C. [399 F H] Obiter: The proceeding before the civil court is a civil proceeding as contemplated by section 141 C.P.C. [398 F H] A proceeding stemming from a criminal matter does not always bear the stamp of a criminal proceeding.
[397 D E] Sri Sheonath Prasad vs City Magistrate, Varanasi, A.I.R. 1959 All. 467, disapproved.
The Magistrate when he refers the question to a civil court, does not confer a part of his criminal jurisdiction upon the civil court.
Under section 146(1D), Cr.P.C., neither an appeal nor a revision lies against the finding of the civil court in the reference, because of the express provision and not because the Proceeding before the civil court is not a civil proceeding.
[398 A C] 394
