The respondents were arrested by the police for the offence of trespass and were released on bail.
They were tried and sentenced to pay a fine by the Nyaya Panchayat, a court established under the Madhya Bharat Panchayat Act, 1949, with powers to impose only a sentence of fine.
The conviction was set aside by the High Court on the ground that section 63 of the Act, which provides that no legal practi tioner shall appear on behalf of any party in a proceeding before the Nyaya Panchayat, violated article 22(1) of the Constitution and was therefore void.
HELD:(Per Sarkar C.J., and Mudholkar, J.): The High Court was in error in setting aside the conviction.
Under article 22(1) a person arrested has the constitutional right to consult a legal practitioner concerning his arrest; and, a person who has been arrested as well as one who though not arrested runs the risk of loss of personal liberty as a result of a trial, have the constitutional right to be defended by an advocate of their choice.
But in a trial under a law which does not provide for an order resulting in the loss of his personal liberty, he is not entitled to the constitutional right, because, the Article is concerned only with giving protection to personal liberty.
[241 H 242 C, 244 B C].
The Act does not give any power to deprive any one of his personal liberty either by way of arrest before the trial or by way of sentence of imprisonment as a result of the trial; nor does it deprive an arrested person of his constitutional right to take steps against the arrest or to defend himself at a trial which might occasion the loss of his personal liberty.
The fact that the respondents were arrested under another statute, namely, the Criminal Procedure Code cannot make either the section or the Act void.
[242 G H; 243 C D; 244 D E] State of Bombay vs Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya, [1951] S.C.R. 167. 204, followed.
QUAERE:.
Whether respondents were not entitled to the constitutional right because, at the trial they were on bail.
[244 E] Per Bachawat and Shelat JJ.
: Section 63 of the Act is violative of article 22(1) and is void to the extent that it denies any person who is arrested the right to be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice in any trial for the crime for which he is arrested.
but, the order of the High Court, quashing the conviction, should be set 240 aside, because, the respondents did not claim that they should be defended at the trial by counsel, and the circumstances of the case, the existence of section 63 on the statute book did not cause them any prejudice.
[257 G; 258 B C] As soon as the respondents were arrested without warrants issued by a court, they acquired the rights guaranteed by article 22(1), and they continued to have those rights though they were released on bail at the time of trial.
The rights include the right to be defended even in a trial in which they were in jeopardy of only being sentenced to a fine.
because, the pronoun "he" in the second part of article 22(1) refers to "any person who is arrested ' .
If in the exercise of the general powers under the Criminal Procedure Code, the police arrest a person on the accusation of a crime for which he is liable to be tried before a Special Criminal Court, the arrested person has the constitutional right to be defended by counsel at the trial before the Special Criminal Court in respect of the offence for which he was arrested.
Even if the word "he" means "any person" there is no warrant for giving a restricted interpretation and limiting the right to be defended by counsel to a trial in which the arrested person is in jeopardy of being sentenced to death or to a term of imprisonment.
[256 A D, F G; 257 A B] State of Punjab vs Ajaib Singh, ; , referred to.
QUAERE:Whether the tests of an arrest" laid down in Ajaib Singh 's case are exhaustive.
[257 C].
Per Hidayatullah J. (dissenting): The appeal should be dismissed.
Under article 22, a person who is arrested for whatever reason, gets three independent rights.
The first is the right to be told the reasons for the arrest as soon as an arrest is made, the second is the right to be produced before a Magistrate within 24 hours and the third is the right to be defended by an advocate of his choice.
When the Constitution lays down in absolute terms a right to be defended by one 's own counsel, it cannot be taken away by ordinary law, and.
it is not sufficient to say that the accused who was so deprived, of the right, did not stand in danger of losing his personal liberty.
The words "nor shall he be denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice," in article 22(1), refer to a person who is arrested.
Personal liberty is invaded by arrest and continues to be restrained during the, period a person is on bail and, it is not sufficient to say that the accused who was so deprived prisonment.
Before his release on bail he defends himself against his arrest and the charge for which he is arrested, and after his release on bail, against the charge he is to answer and for answering which, the bail requires him to be present.
Therefore.
section 63 of the Act, being inconsistent with the Article, is void.
Though the contention was raised for the first time in the High Court, since it is a question of fundamental right it must be upheld.
[248 H; 249 D F; 251 A B, F H; 252 B].
State of Punjab vs Aiaib Singh.
; and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Abdul Samad [1962].
S.C.R. 915.
referred to.
