The assessee was a partner in a registered firm.
In 1949 he entered into a partnership with persons who were strangers to the registered firm and a deed of partnership was executed between them.
It recited that the profits and losses for the share of the assessee in the registered firm should belong to the new firm and be divided and borne by the partners of the new firm in accordance with the shares specified in the deed.
On the question whether the income of the assessee from the registered firm for the years 1952 53, 1953 54 and 1955 56, should be included in his individual assessment, HELD: The income should be included in the assessment of the new firm and not in the personal assessment of the assessee, (i)The new partnership constituted a sub partnership in respect of the assessee 's share in the registered firm.
(In the case of a subpartnership, it creates a superior title and diverts the income before it becomes the income of the partner, that is, the partner in the main firm receives the income not only on his own behalf but on behalf of the partners in the sub partnership,.
The fact that a sub partner can have no direct claim to the profits vis a vis the other partners of the main firm and that it is the partner alone who is entitled to the profits vis a vis the other partners in the main firm, does not show that the changed character of the partner should not be taken into consideration for income tax purposes.
[461E F; 462C] (ii)The object of section 23(5)(a) is not to assess the firm itself but to apportion the income among the various partners.
After the income has been apportioned, the Income tax Officer has to find whether it is the partner who is assessable or whether the income should be taken to be the real income of some other person.
If it is the real income of another firm, it is that firm which is liable to be assessed under the section.
There is nothing in the section that prevents the income of the assessee from the registered firm being treated as the income of the sub partnership and the section being applied again.
[463C, F] Charandas Haridas vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; , and Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Sitaldas Tirathdas , followed.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab vs Laxmi Trading Co. and Ratilal B. Daftari vs Commissioner of Income Tax: , Bombay, , referred to.
Mahaliram Santhalia vs Commissioner of Income Tax 33 I.T.R. 261, overruled.
