The appellants and the respondent were collaterals and belonged to the same branch of a Hindu undivided family.
The said family had four branches.
Two branches filed in 1923 a joint suit for partition of the family estate impleading the other two branches as defendants.
In 1924 the court passed a preliminary decree in which not only tile shares of the branches but also the shares inter se of the members of the branches were separately shown.
The two branches to which the plaintiffs belonged were jointly allotted a share of eight annas while the other two branches to one of which the appellants and the respondent belonged were given four annas each.
The shares of the appellants and the respondent were mentioned as two annas each.
In 1936 the respondent came of age and in 1942 he filed a suit claiming partition of his share from that of the appellants.
He alleged that the appellants taking advantage of his minority had purchased properties out of family funds in their own names as well as benami, and that these properties were also liable to be partitioned.
The appellants denied that the said properties were purchased from family funds.
They further contended that the respondent was holding his share of the property separately and that the family property of the branch already stood partitioned as a result of specification of shares in the preliminary decree of 1924.
The trial court decreed the respondent 's suit.
The High Court confirmed the decree with some modifications.
The appellants came to this Court with certificate, The main contention on behalf of the appellants were : (i) that the specification of shares of the appellants and the respondent in the preliminary decree resulted in partition between them and (ii) that the suit in respect of alleged benami property was barred by section 66(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
HELD: Specification by the decree of the shares of the appellants on the one hand and of the respondent on the other did not by itself constitute severance of the appellants from the respondent.
[98 F G] Partition may ordinarily be effected by institution of a suit, by submitting the dispute as to division of the properties to arbitrators, by a demand for a share in the properties, or by conduct which evinces an intention to sever the joint family; it may also be effected by agreement to divide the property.
But in each case the conduct must evidence unequivocally intention to sever the joint family status.
Merely because one member of the family severs his relation, there is no presumption that there is severance between the other members : The question whether there is severance between the other members is one of fact to be determined on a review of all the attendant circumstances.
[98 B] 94 Palani Ammal vs Muthuvenkatacharla Moniagar & Ors.
L.R. 52 I.A. 83, relied on.
In the present case the partition suit of 1923 and the preliminary decree therein making three allotments of the property led to severance of status of the plaintiffs as well as the other two branches of the larger family.
But severance between the members of the branches inter se may not in the absence of expression of unequivocal intention be inferred.
There was no evidence of expression of any such intention either by the appellants or the respondent.
(ii) The respondent 's claim was that the properties belonged to the joint family, because they were purchased by the appellants with the aid of joint family funds benami in the name of a third party.
Such a claim does not fall within the terms of section 66(1).
[103 B] Addanki Venkatasubbaiah vs Chilakamerthi Kotaiah, C.A. No. 120 of 1964 dated 12 8 1965, relied on.
(iii) It was not necessary for the respondent to mention in his plaint that the recital in the preliminary decree showing severance of status between the appellants and the respondent was an interpolation.
The question whether evidence in support of a party 's case is reliable may be raised by the other party without incorporating the contention relating thereto in his pleading.
[101 B D] (iv) It is not the duty of the appellate court when it agrees with the view of the trial court on the evidence either to restate the effect of the evidence or to reiterate the reasons given by the trial court.
EXpression of general agreement with reasons given by the court decision of which is under appeal would ordinarily suffice.
[101 F G] (v) A claim for rendition of account is not a personal claim.
It is not extinguished because the party who claims an account or the party who is called upon to account dies.
The maxim "actio personal moritur cum persona" does not apply to such cases.
[103 G]
