The appellants and respondents 2 to 5 were owners of Jaggamapeta estate in the East Godavari District of Andhra Pradesh.
The Vantari Muttah ', a piece of land about 400 acres in area, was granted to their predecessor in interest in return for services as vantarlu ' or 'foot set,#ants ' long before the permanent settlement.
After the passing of the Madras Estates, (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act XXVI of 1948 dispute arose whether the land formed part of the Jaggampeta estate for if it did not, the Act would not apply to it.
After various stages of litigation a Division Bench of the High Court decided against the apellants.
They came to this Court with special leave.
it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the said Muttah was granted to their predecessor in interesi before the permanent settlement by the then Zamindar for public services subject to a payment of favourable rent, that, subsequently, the services were discontinued,but the grant was continued subject to the payment of favourable rent, that at the time of the permanent settlement the said Mutta was excluded from the assets of the Zamindari and that therefore the said Muttah.
was outside the scope of the notification issued by the Government under Madras Act XXVI of 1948.
On behalf of the respondent State it was urged that the grant was subject to the payment of the full asses men,, that the said assessment was paid partly in cash and partly by personal services to the, Zamindar, that at the time of the Permanent Settlement the said Muttah was included in the assets of the Zamindari and that as it was a part of the Zamindari the Government at the time of the Inam Settlement did not take any steps to enfranchise the same.
HELD:(i) Under section 4 of the Regulation XXV of 1802 the Government was empowered to exclude income from lakhiraj lands i.e. lands exempt from payment of public revenue and of all lands paying only favouable quit rents, from the assets of the Zamindari at the time of the Permanent Settlement.
If the lands fall squarely within the mid two categories, there is a presumption that they we re excluded from the assets of the Zamindari.
But if the grant of land was subject to performance of personal services to the Zamindar or subject to the payment of favourable rents and also performance of personal services to the Zamindar, there is no such presumption.
Indeed the presumption is that in such a case the income from the land was not excluded from the assets of the Zamindari.
The reason for the rule is that in one case the personal service are equated with the, full assessment and in the other 182 the favourable rent together with the personal services is equated with full assessment.
If the Zamindar in one shape or another was getting the full assessment on the lands there was no reason why the Government would have foregone its revenue by excluding such lands from the assets of the Zamindari.
[185 F] Mahaboob Sarafarajewant Sri Raja Parthasarathy Appa Rao Bahadur Zamindari Garu vs The Secretary of State, Mad. 620 and Secretary of State, vs Rejah Vasiredy, A.I.R. 1929 Mad. 676, referred to.
(ii) The grant in the present case was a pre settlement grant.
The land was granted to the Vantarlu subject to the payment of favourable rent and also subject to the performance of personal services to the Zamindar.
The Government either before the permanent settlement or subsequent thereto never claimed a right to resume the same.
Indeed it was the Zamindar who was giving remissions to the Vantarlu Whenever their services were not required.
There is a presumption that such I land was not excluded from the assets of the Zamindari and the evidence adduced in the case not only did not rebut that presumption but also to some extent supported it.
The Division Bench of the High Court was therefore right in holding that the Vantari Muttah was part of the estate of the appellants and respondents 2 to 5 and was therefore, covered by the notification issued by the Government under the Estates Abolition Act, 1948.
[189 D]
