At an auction held by the Divisional Forest Officer Hoshangabad Division for sale of 'felled trees ', one J was declared the highest bidder.
The amount of the bid was payable in four installments.
According to the contract the Forest Contract Rules were binding on the contractor, and the contractor could be prevented from removing the forest produce in case he made default in payment of the instalments due.
One K had stood surety for J along with another surety.
J paid the first instalment due under the contract but without making the subsequent payments was allowed to remove the whole forest produce contracted to be gold from the contract area.
The State of Madhya Pradesh thereafter took proceedings to recover from K as arrears of land revenue the amount due from J. K commenced an auction for a declaration that he was not liable to pay the dues recoverable from J and for an injunction against the State.
He contended that since the Forest Department had allowed J to remove the forest produce the security was lost and he stood discharged.
The trial Court and the High Court both held in K 's favour.
The State of Madhya Pradesh appealed to this, Court by special leave.
HELD : (i) The expression "security" in section 141 of the Indian Contract Act is not used in any technical sense : it includes all rights which the creditor has against the property at the date of the contract.
The Surety is entitled on payment of the debt or performance of all that he is liable for to the benefit of the rights of the creditor against the principal debtor which arise out of the transaction which given rise to the right or liability: be is therefore on payment of the amount due by the principal debtor entitled to be put in the same position in which the creditor stood in relation to the principal debtor.
If the creditor has lost or parted with the security without the consent of the surety, the latter is by the express provision contained in section 141, discharged to the extent of the value of the security lost or parted with.
[272 E G] Wulff and Billing vs Jay, , referred to.
(ii) The Forest Officer parted with the forest produce before receiving payment of the amount due by the contractor ' Thereby the charge in favour of the State was seriously impaired and the statutory power to sell the produce for nonpayment of the amount remaining due became, for all practical purposes, ineffective.
Again, under the terms of the contract the Forest authorities had the right to prevent removal of the produce sold until the price was paid : that right was also lost.
The right conferred by section 83 of the Forest Act and under the terms of the contract to prevent removal and right to sell the produce for non payment of the price, coupled with charge on the produce constituted the security of the State and that security was lost because the Forest Officers permitted removal of the produce by the contractor.
[273 G H] Accordingly the surety stood discharged from liability to pay the amount undertaken by him under the terms of the surety bond.
