The trustees of a tempter filed a suit for rendition of accounts 'against ,the ex trustees, in respect of their management of the temple.
The trial court and the first appellate court, in their discretion and having regard to the circumstances of the case, directed the defendants to render accounts for about six years prior to the plaintiffs taking possession of the temple.
The High Court held that the defendants were not obliged to render accounts in the absence of allegations of acts of negligence or willful default, and that, section 93 of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1951, was a bar to the maintainability of the suit.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) No trustee can get a discharge unless he renders account of his management irrespective of any question of negligence or wilful default.
The defendants, therefore, were liable to render accounts of their management to the plaintiffs.
As regards the period for which they should be made liable to render accounts, it would depend upon the facts of each case, and there was no Justification for interfering with the discretion of the lower courts in that regard.
[284 D E; 286 C] Case law referred to.
(ii) Section 93 is not a bar to the maintainability of the suit.
[292 A] The section only imposes a restriction on suits or other legal proceedings in respect of matters for which a provision has been made in the Act.
The legislative history of the section shows that even in regard to suits or other legal proceedings relating to administration or management of religious institutions, restriction is imposed only in respect of matters for which a provision is made in the Act.
It does not bar suits under the general law which do not fall within the scope of any of the sections of the Act.
Chapter VII of the Act, on which reliance was placed by the defendants as providing a complete machinery for deciding disputes in regard to accounts, has no bearing on the question of the liability of an ex trustee to render account of his management to the present trustee and does not provide for determining or deciding a dispute in respect of such rendition of accounts.
C; 291 H; 292 A] Case law referred to.
