The respondents were Elementary School teachers appointed under the Assam Basic Education Act, 1954.
The Act was repealed by the A, %am Elementary Education Act, 1962, which came into force on 5th October, 1962.
Under the 1962 Act a State Board was to be constituted, and in the place of the School Boards functioning under the 1954 Act, the Deputy Inspectors of Schools were made Assistant Secretaries of the State Board within their respective jurisdictions.
Section 34(2) provide,% that all the Elementary School teachers appointed under the 1954 Act would be taken over by the State Board and section 38 provides that the school teachers shall be deemed to have been employed by the State Board.
In November 1962, the State Advisory Board, which was cons tituted under the 1954 Act and which continued to function even after 5th October 1962 (because the State Board under the latter Act was not yet constituted) passed a resolution that all teachers who were not matriculates or who had not passed the Teachers ' test should be discharged with effect from 31st March 1963.
In December 1962, the Secretary of the Advisory Board communicated the resolution to the Assistant Secretaries and requested them to submit a statement, before 20th April 1963, showing the names of teachers, who were non matries or who had not passed the test and who were retained after 31st March 1963, stating the reasons for their retention.
Between April 1963 and September 1963, the Assistant Secretaries issued letters intimating the respondents that their services were terminated.
The respondents thereupon filed writ petitions in the High Court which were allowed.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) The Assistant Secretaries had no power to terminate the services of the respondents.
Under s.14(3)(iii) of the 1962 Act, the power of appointment of an elementary school teacher is in the Assistant Secretary though the power has to be exercised on the advice of the Committee constituted under section 16.
Even if the word "advice" is equated to "recommendation", the Committee only recommends and it is the Assistant Secretary who is the appointing authority.
Therefore, if be was the appointing authority he could dismiss those appointed by him with the aid of section 18 of the Assam General Clauses Act, 1915, under which, unless a different intention appears, the power to appoint includes the power to dismiss; and it cannot be said that a different intention appears from the fact that the appointment has to be made on the recommendation or advice of the Committee.
But the respondents, in fact had been appointed before the 1962 Act came into force and could not possibly have been appointed by the Assistance Secretaries, for there were no such authorities in the earlier enactment repealed by the 1962 Act.
Nor, can the appellant rely on section 500 55(2) of the 1962 Act, under which all appointments made under the 1954 Act shall be deemed to have been made under the 1962 Act, because,, the specific provisions contained in sections 34(2) and 38 lay down that the teachers would be taken over and deemed to have been employed by the State Board.
[506 E H; 507 B D; E H] (ii) The services of the respondents could have been terminated by the.
State Board, but the orders terminating the services in the present case were not those of the State Board but of the Assistant Secretaries and were therefore invalid.
The resolution of the State Advisory Board of November, 1962, and the letter of its Secretary, addressed to the Assistant Secretaries in December, 1962, were not orders terminating the services of any of the respondents because : (i) when the resolution was passed there was no list of teachers who were non matrics or who had not passed the Teachers ' test and legally, such a resolution could not be read as an order dismissing persons whose names were not even known to the authority passing the resolution; (ii) if it really amounted to an order of discharge it should have been communicated to the respondents for without such communication it was of no use; (iii) the services of not a single teacher were in fact terminated on 31st March 1963; (iv) the fact that the resolution was communicated to the Assistant Secretaries and not to any teacher shows that it merely laid down principles to be followed for the termination of services of certain teachers; (v) the letter permitted the Assistant Secretaries to retain, if necessary, teachers who were not matrics or who had not passed the test; and (vi) the letters terminating the services of the respondents were in fact issued after 31st March 1963.
[508 E H; 509 C, E, F] (iii) The resolution could not be taken to amount to a delegation to the Assistant Secretaries, by the State Board.
, of its authority to terminate the services of teachers after laying down principles for such termination.
The resolution ha , not a word to show that it was so delegating assuming that such a delegation was possible.
The fact that a copy of the resolution was addressed by the Secretary to the Assistant Secretaries could not mean that the authority was so delegated.
If delegation was possible, it could only be made by the State Board itself by a resolution and not by its Secretary.
[510 C E] (iv) It could not also be said that the Assistant Secretaries were only carrying out the instructions of the State Board contained in the letter of December 1962.
Either the services had to be terminated by the State Board itself, which was not done; or the services had to be terminated by the Assistant Secretaries to whom the authority was delegated (if such a ,delegation was possible), but that also was not done.
There was no third way in which the resolution of November 1962 could be implemented by the Assistant Secretaries unless they themselves bad the power to terminate the services; but in the instant case, they had no such authority.
15 1 0 F H]
