Three brothers and J entered into a partnership business.
The firm owned both movable and immovable properties.
Later, the three brothers created a Trust, with themselves as the first three trustees.
They also executed an unregistered deed of relinquishment by which they relinquished their rights in and claims to all the properties and assets of the firm, in favour of J. and of themselves in the capacity of trustees.
A new partnership firm was constituted between J. and the Trust by means of a partnership deed which specified the shares of the two partners in the profits and losses.
The Trust introduced a sum.
of Rs. 50,000 as its capital in the new firm.
For the assessment year 1943 44 the new firm applied for registration under section 26A of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 but the Income tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner 'and the Appellate Tribunal rejected the application.
The Tribunal relied mainly on the ground that the deed of relinquishment being unregistered could not legally transfer the rights and the title to the immovable properties owned by the original firm, to the Trust and that as the immovable properties were not separable from the other business assets there was no legal transfer of any portion of the business assets of the original firm in favour of the Trust.
On a reference to the High Court, as to whether the new partnership legally came into existence and, as such, should be registered, it was contended on behalf of the Commissioner that the Tribunal had recorded a finding of fact that the firm seeking registration was not a genuine one and had never come into existence.
The High Court, after calling for further statements, held that the Tribunal had not recorded any such finding of fact, that the firm did in fact come into existence, and that there was no impediment to its registration.
in appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) The existence of a firm could be challenged on two alternative grounds; (a) that a firm had not come into existence at all, and (b) that though it came into existence in fact, its existence was not valid in law.
In the present case it was only the second question that was referred to the High Court.
The first could not at all be referred to the High Court as it would be a pure question of fact; and if the Appellate Tribunal had in fact recorded a finding of fact that the firm had not come into existence, the question of law referred to the High Court, would not arise at all.
Therefore, the new firm did in fact come into existence.
[788 E H] (ii)The new partnership between the Trust and J. was constituted under a deed which was property executed, was valid in law, and so the firm should be registered.
[791 C D] 785 The deed of relinquishment was in respect of the individual interests of the three brothers in the assets of the original firm, in favour of the Trust, and consequently, did not require registration, even though the assets of that firm included immovable property.
The deed was therefore valid without registration.
[790 F] Addanki Narayanappa vs Bhakara Krishnappa, ; followed.
Even if the deed of relinquishment required registration, it could only be invalid insofar as it affected immovable properties, but to the extent that it purported to transfer movable assets of the original firm, it would be valid.
A deed of relinquishment is in the nature of a deed of gift where the various properties dealt with are separable.
In the present case, therefore, the deed of relinquishment was valid at least in respect of movable properties, and the partnership seeking registration thus became owner of all the movable assets of the first partnership in addition to the Rs. 50,000 contributed as a capital investment by the Trust.
[790 G; 791 A, C]
