The respondent Company was assessed to wealth tax for the assessment year 1957 58 and the respondent claimed deduction of an amount laid out for setting up a new unit.
The licence for setting up the new unit was granted in 1955; the construction of the factory building was completed by December 1957; the erection of the machinery and plant was completed in several stages commencing from June 1957; the licence for working the factory was obtained in June 1958; and time given to complete the project also was extended by Government up to March 17, 1959.
The Wealth Tax Officer disallowed the claim on the ground that the unit was, set up prior to the date on which the Wealth Tax Act came into force, ie., April 1, 1957.
This order was upheld in appeals.
But in reference, the High Court answered the question in favour of the assessee, for, it proceeded on the basis that the unit was completed and became ready to go into business after the Act had come into force.
HELD : The assessee was entitled to the claim as it satisfied the condition laid down in cl.
(xxi) of section 5(1) of the Act.
The criterion for determining the period of exemption is based on the commencement of the operations for establishment of the unit.
These operations for establishment of the unit cannot be simultaneous with the setting up of the unit, but must precede the actual setting up of the unit.
[1764 G H] The word "set up" in clause (xxi) of section 5(1) of the Act, is equivalent to the word "established" but operations for establishment cannot be equated with the establishment of the unit itself or its setting up.
The applicability of the, proviso has, therefore, to be decided by finding out when the company commenced operations for establishment of the unit, which operations must be antecedent to the actual date on which the company is held to have been set up for purposes of the principal clause.[1764 D E] Western India Vegetable Products, Limited vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, referred to.
In the present case, the Tribunal proceeded on the basis that whatever be the exact date of commencement of the operations for establishment of Ibis unit,, it was certainly before April 1, 1957 and that fact by itself is sufficient to entitle the assessee to claim the exemption.
The Commissioner cannot be allowed to raise a new question and ask this Court to decide that the date of commencement of the operation for establishment of the unit by the respondent was different from that accepted by the Tribunal.
That question was not raised and dealt with by the Tribunal, [766 E] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co., Ltd., ; relied on.
