In computing the total earned income of the appellant company for the calendar year 1959, the Income Tax Officer disallowed a claim for deduction of Rs. 80,255 in respect of liability for payment of tax under the Wealth Tax Act, 27 of 1957 incurred by the company.
The order of the Income Tax Officer was confirmed in appeal by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and, on a reference, by the High Court.
It was contended by the appellant company that since the company held the assets on which tax was levied for the purpose of its business and profits were earned by the use of those assets, tax paid in respect of those assets was expenditure laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business and on that account was a permissible allowance under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922, HELD:The amount of tax paid on the net wealth of an assesses under Wealth Tax Act is not a permissible deduction under section 10(2) (xv) of the Income tax Act, for tax is imposed under the Wealth Tax Act on the owner of the assets and not on any commercial activity.
The charge of tax is the same, whether the asset are part of or used in the trading organization of the owner or are merely owned by him.
[326 G H] For expenditure to be regarded as being for the purpose of the assessee 's business within the meaning of section 10 (2) (xv), the nature of the expenditure of outgoing must be adjudged in the light of accepted commercial practice and trading principles.
The expenditure must be incidental to the business and must be necessitated or justified by commercial expediency.
It must be directly and intimately connected with the business and be laid out by the tax payer in his character as a trader.
To be a permissible deduction, there must be a direct and intimate connection between the expenditure and the business i.e. between the expenditure and the character of the assessee as a trader, and not as owner of assets, even if they are assets of the business.
[326 F] Case law discussed.
