The appellant entered into a contract with the, Union of India for the construction of certain railway bridges.
On disputes arising the matter went to arbitration and then to an umpire.
After the umpire had made his award the appellant filed an application under section 14 of the Indian , praying that the umpire be directed to file the award or a signed Copy thereof in the terms of section 14(2).
The umpire filed in the Court a copy at the top of which he wrote : "now I hereby reproduce a true copy of the said award which is as follows.
" At the end of the copy of the award he wrote : "Certified as correct copy of the award dated 27th May 1961.
" Under this the umpire 's signature appeared.
It was objected by the Union of India before the court that the copy of the award so filed was not a "signed copy" of the award as required by section 14(2) but only a "certified copy".
The objection was upheld by the court and the appellants application for passing a judgment in terms of the award was dismissed.
A revision petition before the High Court failed.
The appellant then came to this Court by special leave.
HELD : When a document is an accurate or true, and full reproduction of the original it would be a copy.
In the present case what was produced by the umpire was a true accurate and full reproduction of the original.
It was therefore a copy of the original.
[845 H] It was also a signed copy because it bore the signature of the umpire.
A document must be signed in such a way as to make it appear that the person signing it is the author of it, and if that appears it does not matter what the form of an instrument is, or in what part of it the signature occurs.
The fact that the umpire wrote the words "certified as correct copy of the award dated the 27th May 1961" above his signature did not make any difference and the document was still a signed copy of the award.
If anything these words showed that the document filed was a true copy of the award.
[846 D, H; 847 A B] Mohesh Lal vs Busunt Kumaree, I.L.R. (1881) VI Cal.
340, relied on.
