The appellant owned a cardamom plantation.
For the assessment year 1957 58, he submitted a return under the Madras Plantations Agricultural Income tax Act, 1955.
The Agricultural Income tax Officer did not accept the return, and 'added to the income the value of stocks of cardamom sold in the accounting year.
The High Court in revision, confirmed the assessment made by the Department.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) the agricultural produce itself was income and became charged to tax under the Act when it was received and not when it was sold, used or consumed, and therefore, the High Court ought to have directed determination of the produce which was actually derived from agriculture in the year of account and ought to have brought to tax only that quantity and excluded the value of the rest of the produce received in earlier years, from taxation; and (2) from the fact that the appellant applied to compound the tax for the earlier years, it must be inferred that the produce which was sold by him in the year of account had already suffered tax in the earlier years.
HELD : (1) Merely because the produce of the plantation was received in the earlier years, income derived from sale of that produce in the year of account was not exempt from tax under the Act in that year.
[953 B] Section 3 of the Act read with the definition of "agricultural income" charges to tax the monetary return either as rent or revenue or agricultural produce from the plantation.
The expression "income" in its normal con notation does not mean mere production or receipt of a commodity which may be converted into money.
Income arises when the commodity is disposed of by sale, consumption or use in the manufacture or other processes carried on by the assessee qua that commodity.
It is not necessary, however, for income to accrue that there must be a sale of a commodity : consumption or use of a commodity in the business of the assessee from which the assessee obtains benefit of the commodity may be deemed to give rise to income.
[952 G H; 953 A B] Dooars Tea Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax, West Bengal; , , referred to.
(2) It had to be proved by evidence that the crop sold related to the years in respect of which the assessee had applied to compound the tax, but there was no such evidence.
[954 F]
