By a notification in June 1949, the State Government, in exercise of a power under section 2(1)(a) of the Madras Commerical Crops Market Act, 1933, declared coconuts and copra to be 'commercial crops ' within the meaning of the Act.
The respondent Market Committee IL vied in respect of the declared commerical crops, a fee on the goods 'bought and sold ' within the notified area under section 11(1) of the Act, read with Rule 28(1) of the Rules made under the Act.
The appellants filed various suits contesting the levy on the ground that they sold coconuts and copra to customers outside the notified area and in some cases outside the State; consequently, they sought refund of the fees collected by the respondent committee.
The suits filed were tried together and the trial Judge held that the levy, though called a "fee", was really a "tax", and that the Committee was only empowered to impose such tax when the goods were bought and sold within the notified area.
He therefore passed decrees in all the suits .for refund of the fees collected.
The first appeal by the respondent Committee was dismissed by the Sub Judge who further held that the fee in substance being a tax, such tax on sales completed outside the State would also offend article 286 of the Constitution.
However, a second appeal to the High Court was allowed on the view that the transactions which were the subject matter of the levy under Section 11(1) were transactions consisting of the purchase of the goods by the appellants and the corresponding sales to them by the producers and not the subsequent sales effected by the appellants to their cus tomers outside the notified area or the States; therefore the transactions on which the said fee was levied were effected and completed inside the notified area and fell within the expression "bought and sold" in section 11(1).
In the appeal before this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the transactions effected by them consisted in their purchasing the goods and stopped at the stage of goods "bought" so that no fee could be levied in the absence of the other ingredient, i.e., sale within the notified area.
HELD : The construction placed on section II (1) by the High Court was correct and the respondent Committee had therefore rightly charged the fee.
[983 B] 975 The words "bought and sold" used in section 11(1) aim at those transactions where under a dealer buys from a producer who brings to the market his goods for sale.
The transaction aimed at must be viewed in the sense in which the legislature intended it to be viewed, that is, as one transaction resulting in buying on the one hand and selling on the other.
Such a construction is commendable because it is not only in consonance with the words used in section 11 (1) but is consistent with the object of the Act as expressed through its various provisions,, i.e., to prevent the mischief of exploitation of producers of commercial crops such as coconuts and copra and to see that such producers got a fair price for their goods.
[982 A B, E F] Kutti Koya vs State of Madras A.I.R. 1954 Mad. 621; Satyanarayana and Venkataraju Firm vs Godavari Market Committee A.I.R. 1959 Andh.
Pra. 398; M.C.V.S. Arunachala Nadar vs The State of Madras [1959] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 92; Louis Drevfus & Co. vs South Arcot Groundnut Market Committee ; referred to.
