The appellant was a tenant of the 3rd respondent since 1950 in respect of 49 bighas of land situated in the Punjab.
He applied for the purchase of those lands under section 18 of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953, and rule 23 of the Rules made thereunder.
The Assistant Collector allowed his application and on appeal the Collector confirmed the order.
The Additional Commissioner and the Financial Commissioner however took the view that the 3rd respondent had not 'reserved ' the land under section 5(1) of the Act but had 'selected ' it under section 5 B and therefore the appellant had no right to purchase the land under section 18.
The appellant 's writ petition against the Financial Commissioner 's order was dismissed in limine and he came to this Court by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the Financial Commissioner had committed an error of law in holding that the 3rd respondent had not reserved the land under section 5(1) when in fact he bad not done so; and (ii) a landlord who did not 'reserve ' any area under section 5(1) of the Act but 'selected ' the area under section 5 B of the Act could not evict the tenant under section 9(1) of the Act and therefore the tenant had the right under section 18 to purchase the said land in his possession for the prescribed period.
HELD : (i) A valid reservation can only be made by the landowner under section 5(1) of the Act, read with the rules made thereunder, when the particulars contained in the application sent by him to the Patwari were verified by the latter.
In the present case the landowner sent an applica tion to the Patwari in the prescribed form, but there was nothing on the record to show that the Patwari verified the correctness of the said particulars.
In view of this it could not be said that the Financial Commissioner 's finding that there was no reservation under section 5(1) was vitiated by an error of law.
[929 E] (ii) The purpose of the Act must be borne in mind in Construing the relevant provisions of the Act.
The two concepts on which the entire Act revolves are the 'permissible area ' and the 'surplus area '.
Out of the permissible area the landowner is empowered to reserve land not exceeding the said area and the balance is defined as surplus area.
This reservation is to enable the land owner to sustain himself by self cultivation.
The object of the surplus area is to confer rights in respect thereof on the tenants.
This twofold object of the Act cannot be achieved unless the landlord has reserved some land in the manner prescribed by section 5 of the Act.
But for one reason or another, if the reservation has not been made by the land owner, section 5 B gives him another opportunity to do so.
[932 C D] Though 'reserved area ' has been defined there is no definition of 'selected area '.
This indicates that the Legislature did not introduce a new concept of 'selected area ' in the Act.
Even a comparison of sections 5 and 5 B 927 shows that the process of reservation and selection are almost the same.
Under section 5(1) reservation is made by selection of the land and under section 5 B the landowner selects his reserved area.
The expressions 'reservation ' and 'selection ' involve the same process and indeed to some extent they are convertible for one can reserve land by selection and select land by reservation.
[932 E.G] It is true that under section 9(1) (1) a tenant of the area reserved under the Act can be evicted and there is no other clause enabling the landowner to evict a tenant from the selected area.
But under section 9(1)(1) the expression used is 'the area reserved under the Act, and not 'reserved area '.
The land selected by the landowner out 'of the permissible area can legitimately be described as the area reserved under the Act.
If that be the interpretation of section 5(1), section 5 B and section 9(1), it follows that under section 18 the tenants cannot claim to purchase the land from the landowner for it is included in the reserved area of the landowner.
[932 H; 933 A] Karam Singh vs Angrez Singh, and Angrej Singh vs Financial Commissioner, Punjab, Chandigarh, , approved.
