The Food Inspectorof the appellant Municipality took a sample of curd from the respondent 's shop for the purpose of testing whether there was any adulteration.
The sample was divided into three equal parts, put in separate bottles and sealed.
One bottle was handed over to the respondent and one was sent to the Public Analyst who analysed it and sent his report.
On the basis of that report a complaint was filed, seven months after receipt of the report, against the respondent, for an offence under sections 7 and 16 of the .
During the trail, the respondent applied to have the sample given to him analysed by the Director of the Central Food Laboratory in accordance with section 13(2) of the Act.
The Director reported that the sample had become highly decomposed and could not be analysed.
The trial Court acquitted the respondent accepting his contention that he could not be convicted after having been denied his right of obtaining the Director 's certificate by the delay in launching the prosecution.
On the question whether he should have been convicted on the basis of the Public Analyst 's report.
HELD : A right is conferred by section 13 (2) on the accused vendor to have the sample, given to him by the Food Inspector, analysed by the Director after the prosecution was launched against him.
It is a valuable right, because, he could for his proper defence, have that sample analysed by a more competent expert, whose certificate supersedes the report of the Public Analyst under section 13(3), and is to be accepted by the Court as conclusive evidence of its contents under the proviso to section 13(5).
However, if for any reason, no certificate is issued by the Director, the report of the Public Analyst does not cease to be evidence of the facts contained in it.
But, in a case where there is denial of this right on account of the deliberate conduct of the prosecution, the accused vendor would be seriously prejudiced in his trial, and could not be convicted on 'the report of the Public Analyst, even though that report may be evidence in the case, of the facts stated therein.
In the present case, the prosecution should have anticipated that there would be some delay, in the analysis by the Public Analyst and in the sending of his report, and consequently, the elementary precaution of adding a preservative to the sample given to the respondent should have been taken by the Food Inspector.
If such a precaution had been taken, the sample given to the respondent would have been available for analysis by the Director, for a period of 'four months; and the prosecution could have been launched, after receiving the Public Analyst 's report, well within time to enable the respondent to exercise his right under section 13(2).
The respondent was therefore denied a valuable right in defending himself, due to the inordinate delay in launching the prosecution, ad was prejudiced in his defence.
[119 H; 120 A B, F H; 121 A] 117
