The appellant was a firm in Madhya Pradesh and was registered as a dealer ' under the Central Provinces and Berar Sales Tax Act, 1947 as amended by the Madhya Pradesh Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1953.
During 1951 and 1955 the firm imported tobacco from the State of Bombay on the declaration that it would be used as raw material in the manufacture of goods for sale by actual delivery in Madhya Pradesh for consumption in that State.
Tobacco was mentioned as one of the raw materials in the firm 's registration certificate issued under section 8 of the Act.
However the goods manufactured by the firm were utilised for a different purposes i.e. for export outside the State.
Under section 4(6) of the Act when goods were used for a different purpose other than the one declared and mentioned in the registration certificate the price paid by the dealer for such goods would be included in his taxable turnover.
However in a writ petition before the High Court the appellant firm contended that the goods exempt as interstate sales were exempted from levy of sales ,,tax under section 27A of the Act which incorporated the bans in article 286 of ,the Constitution.
The writ petition was allowed in September 1955.
However in '1956 the Sales tax Validation Ordinance and thereafter the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act were passed.
Accordingly the Sales Tax ,Authorities issued notices to the appellant firm proposing to levy purchase ,tax on the tobacco purchased by it from non resident dealers during the period November 7, 1953 to September 5, 1955.
The appellant thereupon filed another writ petition before the High Court challenging the levy but it was dismissed.
With certificate the appellant came to this "court.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant that (i) before advantage could be taken of the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act.
1956 there had to be in existence a State Act imposing tax on inter State.sales and section 27A of the Act imposed no such tax, (ii) section 4(6) had no application because tobacco was not specified in the certificate of registration granted to the appellant as intended for use by it as raw material in the manufacture of any goods for sale by actual delivery in Madhya Pradesh for the purpose of consumption in that State.
" HELD : (i) Read with the third explanation to section 2(g)of the Act section 27 A had a positive and not merely a negative content.
It gave power to the State of Madhya Pradesh, to impose a tax on a transaction falling 'Within its purview.
It was therefore a pre existing law validated by the Sales Tax Laws Validation Act, 1956 and the appellant could be taxed under it in respect,of inter State sales only during the relevant period.
[95 H; 96 G H] 89 M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co. vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , relied on.
(ii)The declaration made by the appellant to the Bombay dealers was for the purpose of obtaining exemption from purchase tax.
The same was the purpose of the mention of tobacco in the registration certificate under section 8.
If the language of the certificate were construed in the context of the section 8.
of the Act (as amended) and along with the declaration of the appellant, it was manifest that the appellant was liable to pay tax on tobacco imported from Bombay dealers and that the requirements of a. 4(6) were satisfied.
The technical omission of the Sales Tax Officer to make a specific entry in the certificate would not confer any benefit on the appellant when there was other incontrovertible evidence to show that the appellant did purchase the goods specified in the certificate as raw materials in the manufacture of any goods for the purpose of sale by actual delivery in Madhya Pradesh for the purpose of consumption in that State.
[98 F H; 99 A] Modi Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Punjab & Anr.
16 S.T.C. 310, relied on.
