The appellant State of West Bengal was carrying on trade as owner and occupier of a market at Calcutta without obtaining a licence as required under section 218 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951.
The respondent Corporation of Calcutta filed a complaint against the State for contravention thereof.
The trial Magistrate, accepting the State 's contention that the State was not bound by the provisions of the Act acquitted the State.
on appeal, theHigh Court convicted the State and sentenced it to a fine, holding thatthe State was as much bound as a private citizen to take out a licence.
In appeal to this Court the appellant, relying on this Court 's decision inDirector of Rationing vs Corporation of Calcutta, ; ,contended that the State was not bound by the provisions of a statute unless it was expressly named or brought in by necessary implication and this common law rule of construction, accepted as the law in India was "law in force" within the meaning of article 372 of the Constitution and that in any event by necessary implication the State was excluded from the operation of section 218 of the Act.
Held:Per Subba Rao C.J., Wanchoo, Sikri, Bachawat, Ramaswami, Shelat, Bhargava and Vaidialingam, JJ.
(Shah, J. dissenting) : The State was not exempt from the operation of section 218 of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1951 and was rightly convicted.
Per Subba Rao C. J. Wanchoo, Sikri, Ramaswami.
Shelat, Bhargava and Vaidialingam, JJ.
(i) The Common Law rule of construction that the Crown is not, unless expressly named or clearly intended, bound by a statute,, was not accepted as a rule of construction throughout India and even in the Presidency Towns, it was not regarded as an inflexible rule of construction.
It was not statutorily recognized either by incorporating it in different Acts or in any General Clauses Act; at the most, it was relied upon as a rule of general guidance in some parts of the country.
The legislative practice establishes that the various legislatures of country provided specifically, exemptions in favour of the Crown 171 whenever they intended to do so indicating thereby that they did not rely upon any presumption but only on express exemptions.
Even those courts that accepted it considered it only as a simple canon of construction and not as a rule of substantive law.
In the City of Calcutta there was no universal recognition of the rule of construction in favour of the Crown.
The Privy Council, in Province of Bombay vs Corporation of the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 27 gave its approval to the rule mainly on concession made by counsel.
[180 D G; 183 H; 184 E F; 186 D G] The archaic rule based on the prerogative and perfection of the Crown has no 'relevance to a democratic republic it is inconsistent with the rule of law based on the, doctrine of equality and introduces conflicts and anomalies.
The normal construction, namely, that an enactment applies to citizens as well as to State unless it expressly or by necessary implication exempts the State from its operation, steers clear of all the anomalies and is consistent with the philosophy of equality enshrined in the Constitution.
B] If a rule of construction accepted by this Court is inconsistent with the legal philosophy of the Constitution it is the duty of this Court to correct its self and lay down the right rule.
This Court must more readily do so in constitutional matters than in other branches of law.
[176 B C] Director of Rationing vs Corporation of Calcutta, ; ,, reversed.
Province of Bombay vs Corporation of the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 271, held inapplicable.
Bengal Immunity Co. vs State of Bihar, , referred to.
Case law discussed.
(ii)Even assuming that the common law rule of construction was accepted as a canon of interpretation throughout India the rule is not "law in force" within the meaning of Article 372 of the Constitution.
There is an essential distinction between a law and a rule of construction.
A rule of construction adopted to ascertain the intention of the legislature is not a rule of law.
[187 D] (iii)The State is not excluded from the operation of section 218 of the Act by necessary implication.
The State is not the payer as well as the receiver of the fine, or the fine, when levied goes to the municipal fund.
Though the expression fine ' is used, in effect and substance, section 541 is a mode of realization of the, fee payable in respect of the licence.
The provision for imprisonment in default of fine is only an enabling provision and the court is not bound to direct the imprisonment of the defaulter.
[189 D H; 190 A B] Per Bachawat, J : (i) This Court should have in Director of Rationing and Distribution vs Corporation of Calcutta, , refused to recognise the rule that the Crown is not bound by a statute save by express words or by necessary implication.
In India the Crown never enjoyed the general prerogative of overriding a statute and 'standing outside it.
The doctrine of the general immunity of the Crown from the operation of statutes so far as it is based upon the 'royal prerogative was never imported into India.
Nor is there any compelling reason why the courts in India should not give full effect to the general words of a statute on the basis of some artificial rule of construction prevailing in England.
The bulk of the Indian legislation proceeds upon the assumption that the Government will be bound unless the contrary is stated.
The 172 rule,as rule of construction, never gained a firm foothold in untilthe Privy Council decision in Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation for the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 271, in 1946, till which time there was no settled course of decisions of the Indian courts necessitating or justifying the application of this rule to the construction of Indian statutes; and even in this decision the propriety of applying the rule to Indian legislation was not considered.
The imposition of this strict rule of construction by the Privy Council was received very unfavourably in India till this Court 's decision in the Director of Rationing case wherein Province of Bombay was held to have laid down the correct law.
But subsequent decisions of this Court disclosed a tendency to relax and soften the rigour of the rule.
Further, in a country having a federal system of government it is difficult to apply the rule of Crown exemption from statutes.
This rule was not in force in India and therefore was not "law in force" within the meaning of article 372 of the Constitution.
[201 D E; 202 C; 210 A B, C D; C, H; 210 H; 211 F] This Court has power to reconsider its previous decisions and this is a fit case where this power should be exercised.
[211 E] Director of Rationing vs Corporation of Calcutta, ; , reversed.
Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation for the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 271, held inapplicable.
Shivenkata Seetararnanjaneya Rice & Oil Mills vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; and Bengal Immunity Co. vs State of Bihar, , referred to.
Case law discussed.
(ii)On a question of construction of a statute no rational distinction can be made between the trading and non trading activities of the State.
[210 G] (iii)There is nothing in the Act to indicate that the State should be excluded from the purview of section 218(1) 'requiring the taking out of a licence on payment of the prescribed fee and section 5441(1) providing the remedy for the recovery of fee in face of default.
If the State is to be exempt from the application of section 541(1)(b) it would lead to the anomaly that the State is liable to pay the licence fee but the Municipality will have no remedy for the recovery of the fee.
Also, the fact that under section 547(A) the court is competent to direct imprisonment in default of fine is no reason why section 5411 1) (b) should not be applied to the State.
The special provisions of section 541(2) indicate that the fine realizable under section 541 is receivable by the Municipality.
It follows that the State Government is the payer but is not the receiver of the fine.
The fine, when levied, is taken by the Municipality in full satisfaction of the demand on account of the licence fee.
[212 H; 213B] State of Bihar vs Rani Sonavati Kumari ; , relied on.
Shah, J. (Dissenting); (i) The English Common Law rule that the Crown is not, unless expressly named or clearly intended, bound by a statute, is a rule of construction and was settled law in India before the Constitution.
[197 F; 198 D] The Common Law of England was adopted in this country subject to local variations and the personal law of the parties and the courts which functioned in the former British India territory were enjoined to cases not governed by any specific statutory rules according to equity and good conscience,, which meant rules of English Common Law 173 in so far as they were applicable to Indian society.
Them was practically a consistent course of decisions of the High Courts in India, prior to the Constitution, in support of the view, affirmed by the Judicial Committee in Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay, (1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 271, that the rule that the Crown is not unless expressly named or clearly intended bound by a statute applied to India.
It was accepted as a rule of interpretation ofstatutes applicable to all statutes governing state action, authority or property.
A difference may have prevailed in Parts of the territories now comprising theIndian Union.
But this is not peculiar to this rule of interpretation adoptedby the Courts in British India.
Where uniform statutes do not apply differences do arise and must be determined according to the law and jurisdiction inherited by the courts administering justice.
The present case concerns the administration of law in the town of Calcutta which has for more than two centuries been governed by the English Common Law as adopted by the various Acts, Regulations and finally by the Letters Patent.
[191 A D; 192 D E; D F] Director of Rationing and Distribution vs The Corporation of Calcutta, ; , followed.
Province of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bom.
bay, L.R. 73 I.A. 271, applied.
State of West Bengal vs Union, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 371 Srivenkata Seetaramanjaneya Rice & Oil Mills vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , Builders Supply Corporation vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Case law referred to.
There is no reason to hold that the rule which previously applied to the interpretation of a statute ceased to apply.
on the date on which the Constitution came into force.
The Constitution has not so fundamentally altered our concept of 'State ' as to abandon the traditional view about State privileges, immunities and rights because they had a foreign origin and on the supposed theory of equality between the State and its citizens.
The guarantee of equal protection clause of the Constitution does not extend to any differential treatment which may result in the application of a special rule of interpretation between the State and the citizens nor has the Constitution predicated in all respects equality in matters of interpretation between the State and its citizens.
A State can, in the interest of public good, select itself for special treatment.
This being so, there is no reason to suppose that a Statute which was framed on the basis of a well settled rule of pre Constitution days which accorded the State a special treatment in the matter of interpretation.
of statutes must be deemed to have a different meaning on the supposition that the Constitution has sought to impose equality between the State and the citizens.
[198 H 199 F] The fact that in the Indian federal set up sovereignty is divided between the Union and the States, and in the application of the rule that the State is not bound by a Statute, unless expressly named or clearly implied, conflict between the State enacting a law and the Union,, or another State, may arise, does not give rise to any insuperable difficulty which renders the rule inapplicable to the changed circumstances, for, it is the State which enacts a legislation in terms general which alone may claim benefit of the rule of interpretation and not any other State.
[199 G] (ii)The rule of interpretation being a settled rule is "law in force" within Me meaning of article 372 of the Constitution.
A rule is not any 174 the less a rule of law because it is a rule for determination of the intention of the legislature and for its application requires determination of facts and circumstances outside the statute.
Acceptance of the proposition that a decision of the highest judicial tribunal before the Constitution, is law, does not involve the view that it is immutable.
A statue may be repealed, ' and even retrospectively, it would then cease to be in ,operation; a decision which in the view of this Court is erroneous may be overruled and may cease to be regarded as law, but till then it was law in force.
[198 D G] (iii)The application of the rule cannot be restricted to cases where an action of the State in its sovereign capacity is in issue.
In the context of modem notions of the functions of a welfare State, it is difficult to regard any particular activity of the State as exclusively trading.
[200 A B] (iv)The State of West Bengal was not bound by the provisions relating to the issue of licences for occupation or conduct of a market.
[200 F] There is no, express reference to the State, nor is there anything peculiar in the nature purpose and object or in the language used in the enactment relating to the issue of licences, which may suggest that the State must by necessary implication be bound by its provision.
[200 E]
