A dispute regarding amendment of rules relating to privilege leave etc.
arose between the Ahmedabad Millowners ' Association and the union of workmen employed in the textile industry.
After conceliation proceedings were declared by the Conciliator to have failed, the union referred the dispute to the Industrial Court under section 73A of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946.
The Industrial Court decided against the Millowners who filed a writ petition in the ' High Court and thereafter appealed to this Court.
It was urged on behalf of the appellants that (i) section 73A was violative of article 14 of the Constitution since it gave a right to the workers union to make a reference but not to the employer (ii) the Act had not been made applicable to the cotton industry at Ahmedabad under section 2(4) and it was not applicable under section 2(3) because the Bombay Industrial Disputes Act, 1938 was repugnant to Central) and must be deemed to have been repealed.
HELD:(i) Section 73A was not violative of article 14.
Whenever any industrial dispute arises the employer can always ensure arbitration of that dispute by making an offer to the union under section 66 of the Act whereupon a registered and approved union is compelled to agree to submission of the dispute to arbitration.
Clearly therefore there was no need to make any Provision empowering the employer to make a reference of the dispute for arbitration to the Industrial Court.
On the other hand if a Union wants a dispute to be settled and even offers that the dispute be submitted to arbitration under section 66 of the Act, the employer can refuse, whereupon the union would be left without any remedy.
It is obvious that section 73A was enacted to fill this gap and place the union on with the employer so as to enable the union to have any dispute = by arbitration even when the employer does not agree to arbitration.
This section, in these circumstances did not at all require that the right granted to the union should also be granted to the employer.
[441 G H] There was no difference in the procedure to be followed by the Industrial Court in a reference under section 73A and that to be followed when the reference is under section 66.
In both the procedure under section 92 had to be followed.
[443 E F] (ii)Chapter V of the Bombay Industrial Disputes Act 1938 was not repugnant to the Central Act of 1947 and therefore continued to be in force, and consequently under section 2(3) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act 1947 the latter Act became applicable to the industry of the appellants and did not require a notification under section 2(4) to make it applicable [446 G H; 447 A B] 438 Ex Parte McLean, ; Victoria and Others vs The Commonwealth of Australia and Others, ; , Zaverbhai Amaidas vs The State of Bombay, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 799, Ch.
Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., and Deep Chand vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and Others, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 8.
