A Hindu died after making a will in respect of certain joint family properties and appointed his son as the executor.
The son obtained pro.
bate of the will, provided for the legacies indicated therein and came into possession of the residue of the property.
Thereafter, he adopted the plaintiff.
The adoptive father died after the Hindu Succession Act came into force and the plaintiff filed the suit claiming two thirds share of the properties left by his father.
The defendants (viz., the widow and mother Of the plaintiffs adoptive father) contended that the conduct of the plaintiff 's adoptive father in obtaining the probate of the will and carrying out its terms amounted to an election and therefore the father became absolute owner of the residue of the properties bequeathed to him by the will, and as the election to take under the will, would bind the plaintiff also he could not claim half the property on the ground that it was joint family property of himself and his father.
The trial Court decreed the suit, which in appeal was upheld by the High Court.
The defendants appealed to this Court.
HELD:The appeal must be dismissed.
The character of the property did not change because of the will and it would still be joint family property in the hands of the plaintiff 's father as far as his male issue was concerned.
Further, as soon as the plaintiff was adopted he acquired interest in the joint family property in the hands of his adoptive father and this interest of his was independent of that of his father.
In such circumstances even if his father could be said to have made an election there could be no question of the plaintiff being bound by that election, for he was not claiming through his father.
[453 C, E F] Election under section 180 of the Indian Succession Act, would only arise where the legate derives some benefit from the will to which he would not be entitled except for the will.
In such a case he has to elect whether to confirm the will or dissent from it.
But where there is no question of the legate deriving any benefit from the will to which he would not be entitled except for the will the fact at he confirms the will and accepts what the will provides would not account to election, for he would have in any case got what the will gave him.
Thus election only arises where the legate has to choose between his own property which might have been testator and which the testator has given to the legate by the will.
[451 H 452 C]
