The second appellant was a workman in the workshop of the first respondent dent company any in its Bangalore branch in the Mysore State.
The head,office of the Company at Krishnagiri, in the Madras State, transferred him to Krishnagiri, contrary to the agreement that he would not be transferred .from
Bangalore for ten years.
On the workman raising objections, the Company removed him from service.
The Krishnagiri Motor Workers ' Union, a majority of whose members numbering more than one hundred were employees of the Company, took up the workman 's grievance, and the Government of Mysore referred the industrial dispute to the Labour Court under section 10(1) (c) of the .
One of the questions referred was : whether the order of transfer was illegal and if so" Whether the workman was entitled to "reinstatement in the Bangalore branch with benefits of back wages".
The Labour Court ordered the reinstatement of the workman in the Bangalore branch.
The Company challenged the award by a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court while holding that the Mysore Government was the appropriate Government to make the reference, quashed the award on the grounds : (1) that the legality of the removal of the workman was not the subject matter of reference, and (2) that the reference to the Labour Court could not be justified under section 10(1)(c), because the dispute fell within the Third and not the Second Schedule to the Act; nor under the first proviso to section 10(1)(d), because, the Government did not act under that proviso, and because, more than one hundred persons were interested in and therefore likely to be affected by the dispute.
In appeal to this Court, the Company sought to support the judgment of the High Court also on the ground that the Mysore Government was not the appropriate Government to make the reference.
HELD : (1) The legality of the termination of the service of the workman wag included in the order of reference.
[532 D E] The words "with benefit of back wages" coupled with the word "reinstatement" are appropriate only to a case of removal.
On the facts of the case, the transfer of the workman was illegal and so, his removal from service should be set aside and be should be reinstated with benefits of 'back wages.
[532 F G] (2) The reference to the Labour Court was valid under the first proviso to section 10(1) (d).
[533 H] (a) High Court misinterpreted the proviso by equating the two ,words interested and affected.
The members of the Union which sponsored the cause of the workman were interested in the dispute, but they would not necessarily be affected by the dispute.
[533 F G] 529 (b) It is not necessary that the order of reference should expressly state that it was because of the proviso that the reference was being made to the Labour Court.
If it could be justified on the facts, there is nothing in the Act which makes such a reference invalid.
[533 E F] (3) The Mysore Government was the appropriate Government to make the reference, because, the subject matter of the, dispute substantially arose within the jurisdiction of the Mysore Government.
[534 H] The proper question to raise is : where did the dispute arise and not where was the dispute sponsored : that is, whether there is a nexus between the dispute and the territory of the State making the reference.
Ordinarily if there is a separate establishment and the workman is working in that establishment, the dispute would arise at that place.
[534 A E] Indian Cable Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 589,followed.
