The award of the Industrial Tribunal in an industrial dispute between the appellant company (manufacturing products of non ferrous metals and alloys) and its workmen, was challenged in appeal to this Court on the following grounds: (1) There was no change of circumstances justifying a revision of Wages, pay scales and dearness allowance, (2) while making such revision by its award, many of the matters stated in the judgment of this Court in Novex Dry Cleaners vs Its Workmen, were not considered by the Tribunal; ' (3) the Tribunal 'had com.
pared dissimilar concerns and not compared similar ones; (4) the Tribunal took into account an irrelevant factor, namely, the yield from incentive bonus; (51 no case was made out for adjustment of the workmen in the new time scale after granting them one additional increment after every 3 years service and two additional increments, after 5 years ' service (6) the Tribunal was in error in making the award retrospective from 1st October 1962, when the reference was made to it only on 14th December 1962; (7) the Tribunal had gone beyond the reference inasmuch as the reference was in respect of special categories of monthly rated employees by designation, whereas the Tribunal had fixed the new scales of pay not only for those workmen but for all clerical and other workmen who were classified as Grades A, B, C, and D; and (8) the linking of dearness allowance, after the consumer price index 321, to wages, has made a departure from the fixation of dearness allowance fixed in another concern, where the percentage was that of the dearness allowance and not of the basic salary.
HELD : In an appeal brought by special leave against the award, before a party can claim redress, it must be shown that the award was defective by reason of an excess of jurisdiction, or of a substantial error in applying the law or some settled principle, or of some gross and palpable error occasioning substantial injustice.
[471 A C] (1) There was no revision of wages or dearness allowance in the last 20 years,, even though commodity prices level of wages had gone up, and there had in some industries, while in some revise or fix wages.
There a revision was justified.
[466 F 14] (2) In order to make the fair wage meet the increase in the cost of living dearness allowance is paid to make up the disparity to a certain extent.
When, in course of time, it is found that it is not sufficient, because of a further increase in the cost of living, a revision of wages and dearness allowance becomes necessary.
This Court in its decisions has merely laid down the principal guide lines to be followed in industrial adjudica 464 tion.
The various observations are not intended to operate with the rigidity of a statutory enactment.
Each case must be considered on its own facts and only relevant circumstances should enter into the determination of the wage structure.
The fundamental principles to be considered are: (a) how the wages of the workers concerned compare with those paid, to workers of similar grade an( skill by other employers in similar or other industries in the 'region, and b) what wages the establishment or industry can afford to pay.
In the present case, taking into account the increase in its net profits and the fact that the burden of the increased wage bill would not be more than 1/10th of the net profits, the Tribunal was right in holding that the appellant had the capacity to pay the increased wage bill.
[467 B C, H; 468 A B, G H; 469 A D] (3) The Tribunal compared the appellant company with four engineering concerns.
One of them belonged to the same group of industries as the appellant.
There were common awards in respect of both of them.
Further, there was an award given at the same time by the same Tribunal in the connected concern also, the charter of demands being the same as in the appellant company and based on several common exhibits.
Since the number of industries in the region was small, it was open to the Tribunal to take into consideration the conditions existing in the engineering concerns in the region, particularly those in a concern where there is affinity, even though the appellant company could not be described as a general engineering industry.
Smaller concerns,.
where the scale of pay is considerably lower, do not furnish a just basis for comparison.
[470 A, B, D. F G] Greaves Colton & Co. vs The Workmen, ; , followed.
(4) The Tribunal fixed lower wages in the reference relating to the connected concern, because, a substantial ment by way of incentive bonus.
But in the case of the appellant company, finding the yield from incentive bonus, low, the Tribunal fixed the wages at the proper level without considering the yield from incentive bonus, that is, without being influenced by it in any way.
[471 E, G H; 472 A B] (5) In the present case the fixation of scales of pay has been very cautious, the starting wage and the annual increment were not high, and therefore, it cannot be said that the Tribunal was in error in departing from point to point adjustment in granting increments based on the length of service.
[472 G H] Observations in Hindustan Times V. Their Workmen, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 234 at p. 249, followed.
(6) In view of the facts that the workmen demanded retrospective revision from 1st July 1961, and that the matter was referred to the Conciliation Board in 'September 1962, the choice of 1st October 1962 by the Tribunal cannot be characterised 'as either illegal or unfair.
[473 C] (7)The monthly paid employees mentioned by name in the order of reference belong to one category or another in the Grades A to D.
The intention was to have a general revision of the scale of payment to all workers paid monthly; otherwise, it would have been invidious for some persons in the same Grade to receive more pay than others.
The Tribunal was therefore right in treating the, reference 'as referring to all the four Grades and not reading it as restricted only to a few classes.
[473 F H] (8) There have been a number of awards in which dearness allowance was fixed in the same manner as by the present award.
The award in the connected concern could not be used as a precedent.
, because of the special 'facts ' obtaining in that concern.
[475 C, E] 465
