By section 408 of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act, 1948 the State Government may, after giving an opportunity to the Corporation to show cause, pass an order superseding the Corporation, if it is of opinion that the Corporation is not competent or persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the Act.
After the requisite show cause notice the State Government passed the impugned Order superseding the Nagpur Municipal Corporation.
The High Court, in a writ petition, quashed the Order holding that the State Government exercised its power ' under section 408 on grounds which were not reasonably related to its Legitimate exercise and that the finding upon which the Order was passed was rationally impossible on the materials before the State Government.
On appeal to this Court: HELD:The Order of supersession was valid and could not be set aside.
(i)Of the two grounds on which the opinion of the State Government was based the first ground could not be sustained, firstly because the Corporation had no opportunity to show cause against the charge, and secondly, because no reasonable person on the materials before the State Government could possibly form the opinion that the charge was proved.
Regarding the second ground there were materials before the State Government upon which it could find that the Corporation was not competent to perform the duties imposed upon it.
[588H; 592D] In a writ application the court will not review the facts as an appellate body.
But the Order of supersession is liable to be set aside, as in excess of the, statutory power under section 408, if no reasonable person on a proper consideration of the materials before the State Government will form the opinion that the Corporation is not competent to perform or persistently defaults in the performance of the duties imposed on it. 'Me Order is also liable to be set aside if it was passed in bid faith or due opportunity to show cause was not given.
[585H] (ii)The Order cannot be set aside for the reason that one of the grounds is found to be non existent or irrelevant.
The Order, read with the show cause notice shows that in the opinion of the State Government the second ground by itself was serious enough to warrant action under s.408.
[595 A B] An administrative or quasi judicial Order based on several grounds, all taken together, cannot be sustained if it be found that some of the grounds are non existent or irrelevant and there is nothing to show that the authority would have passed the Order on the basis of the other relevant and 584 existing grounds.
But, an Order based on several grounds some of which are found to be non existent or irrelevant can be sustained if the Court is satisfied that the authority would have passed the Order on the basis of other relevant and existing grounds and the exclusion of the irrelevant or non existent grounds could not have affected the ultimate 'opinion or decision.
[594 E G] Dwarka Das Bhatia vs State of Jammu and Kashmir, [19651 S.C.R, 948.
Dhirajilal Girdharilal vs Commissioner of Income tax, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 271, State of Orissa vs Bidyabhushan Mahapatra, [1963] Supp.
I S.CR.
648 and Naursinha vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. [1958] M.P. 397.
referred to.
