Upon a warrant issued under section 105 of the , the appellants ' shop was searched and a number of watches, clocks, etc., were seized.
As he could not prove that the goods had borne the necessary customs duty, the appellant was prosecuted on two counts under sections 135(a) and 13 5 (b) of the .
The appellant did not lead any evidence in his own behalf.
He filed a written statement in which he claimed, inter alia, that no offence had been disclosed against him as under section 123 of the Act the burden would have been on him to prove that the goods had be en customed provided the goods had been seized under the Act in the reasonable belief that they were smuggled goods but no witness had deposed to such belief.
The day after this statement was filed, the prosecution applied for the examination of the Customs Officer who was in charge of the search as a court witness in the interest of justice.
Although this application was opposed by the appellant, the Magistrate ordered the examination of the officer under section 540 of the Code in the course of which he stated that he had seized the watches in the reasonable belief that they were smuggled.
The appellant was thereafter examined again and was given an opportunity to lead defence evidence but he stated that he had nothing further to add and no evidence to lead.
The, trial court then convinced the appellant under Sections 135(a) and 135(b).
An appeal to the High Court against this conviction was dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave, the question for determination was whether the evidence of the officer was improperly received by the Magistrate and whether if excluded the conviction of the appellant could be supported.
It was contended an behalf of the appellant that the. powers under section 540, however wide, must be reconciled with the mandatory requirements of Chapter 21 laying down the procedure of trial of warrant cases by Magistrates and that as the trial bad gone through the various stages and had reached the stages of section 258, the court could either acquit or convict him; it was therefore submitted that the Magistrate had really allowed the prosecution to fill a gap in the. case which had the effect of dispensing with the burden which was on the prosecution to prove the case under sections 135(a) and (b) of the Custom Act and of placing the burden upon the appellant to rebut the presumption that the goods were smuggled; HELD : Dismissing the appeal, The contention that Chapter 21 must limit the powers under Section 540 must be rejected.
Offences under the Code of Criminal Procedure are 416 tried in different ways according to their gravity.
The trials in the Magistrate 's courts the High Courts and Courts of Session as well as summary trials have their procedure laid down from one step to another till the state is reached for acquittal or conviction.
If the argument advanced on the basis of the procedure laid down in Chapter 21 was to be accepted, there would be no room for the exercises of the power under section 540 because it would always be impossible to fit it into any chapter without doing violence to the sequence established there.
[419H 420B] In the present case the trial Judge appeared to have exercised power conferred on him under the second part of section 540 i.e., to admit the evidence of the officer as essential to the just decision of the case.
As die Section stands, there is no limitation on the power of the court arising from the stage to which the trial may have reached provided the court is bona fide of the opinion that for the just decision of the case steps authorised by the Section may be taken.
[420D E] It was obvious that a just decision in the present case required finding whether the watches, etc., seized were smuggled or not.
The circumstances already on record clearly established that some one must have seized the watches entertaining a belief that they were smuggled and this belief obviously was entertained by the Officer in charge of the search.
This was not a case in which the prosecution was trying to fill a gap in its case.
The court was right in thinking that a just decision of the case required that the nature and the plea underlying seizure should be before it on oath of the person making the seizure so that the appellant might be required, as the policy of the requires, to prove his innocent possession.
[423F H] Case law discussed.
