Under the Rajasthan Civil Services (Unification of Pay Scales) Rules & Schedules, 1950, a person serving in the Rajasthan Secretariat, on appointment as Deputy Secretary, was placed in a specified pay scale and was, in addition, entitled to a Special Pay.
Under the same Rules a member of the Rajasthan Administrative Service, on appointment as Deputy Secretary, was also entitled to draw salary in the same pay scale and a similar Special Pay.
The 1950 Rules were superseded by the Rajasthan Secretariat Service (Rationalisation of Pay Scales) Rules & Schedules, 1956, by which it was provided that for Assistant Secretaries in the Secretariat Service there would be a number of selection posts of Deputy Secretaries on an increased pay scale without any Special pay Furthermore, the scales applicable to the members of Administrative Service on appointment as Deputy Secretary were also 'revised upwards though not to the same extent as for those in the Secretariat Service and in their case the principle of Special Pay on such appointment was continued.
The rules were revised again in 1961 and 1966 whereby higher pay scales were introduced to apply to members of each service on appointment to the post of a Deputy Secretary but the system of a special pay on such appointment, was continued only for members of the Administrative Service.
The appellant, who was an Assistant Secretary in the Secretariat Service and had been promoted as a Deputy Secretary, filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution claiming that the words "without special pay" in the 1956 Rules, applicable in respect of his Service may be declared invalid and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the Petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended, inter alia that Articles 14 and 16 were violated because, (i) the Rules, on the fare of them, showed that in the case of members of the Secretariat Service appointed as Deputy Secretaries, no special pay was admissible, while such pay was admissible to members of the Administrative Service when holding similar posts; and (ii) the definition of "Special Pay" in Rule 3(31) of the Rajasthan Civil Service Rule,,, 1951, showed that it was meant to be additional pay in consideration, inter alia, of the specially arduous nature of duties and that if the post of Deputy Secretary was considered as involving such duties for members of the Administrative Service, there was no reason to hold that the same post was not equally arduous for members of the Secretariat Service.
HELD : There was no discrimination under Article 14 or any denial 4 3 1 of equality of opportunity under Article 16.
(1) The Rules, as applicable from time to time to members of the Secretariat Service on appointment to the posts of Deputy Secretaries, were, at no stage made less favourable than the Rules previously applicable to them and could not be held to be vitiated in any manner, if considered by themselves in the light of rights which the members of the Secretariat Service possessed from time to time.
[435C D; 438E F] The appellant came to the post of a Deputy Secretary from the Secretariat Service which is a service distinct and separate from the Administrative Service.
The methods of recruitment qualification, etc., of the two Services are not identical.
In their ordinary time scale, the two Services do not carry the same grades.
Even the posts, for which recruitment in the two Services is made, are to a major "tent, different.
The members of the Secretariat Service are meant to be employed in the Secretariat only, while members of the Administrative Service are mostly meant for posts which are outside the Secretariat though some posts in the Secretariat can be filled by members of that service.
In such a case, where appointment is made to the posts of Deputy Secretaries of government servants belonging to two different and separate Services, there can arise no question of a claim that all of them, when working as Deputy.
Secretaries, must receive identical salaries, or must necessarily both be given special pay.
It is entirely wrong to think that every one, appointed to the same post, is entitled to claim that he must be paid identical emoluments as any other person appointed to the same post, disregarding the method of recruitment, or the source from which the Officer is drawn for appointment to that post.
No such equality is required either by article 14 or article 16 of the Constitution.
[435F 436B] All India Station Masters ' and Assistant Station Masters ' Association & Others vs General Manager, Central Railways and Others,, ; ; Mohanlal Bakshi vs Union of India A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1139, relied on.
Furthermore, under the various Service Rules themselves a member of the Secretariat Service on appointment as Deputy Secretary was allowed a special higher grade, while a member of the Administrative Service continued on his old scale and only got an extra salary of Rs. 1501 per month by way of Special Pay.
In such a case, no question can arise of holding that a member of the Secretariat Service must also be granted a special pay in addition to being placed in the higher grade. 'Special Pay ' does not arise out of any inherent quality of being arduous in the nature of the post itself.
Thus, when special pay was granted to a member of the Administrative Service on appointment as Deputy Secretary, the reason might be that the post was considered more arduous in nature than the post which would beheld by him, if he had continued on a regular post borne on the cadre of his Service.
In the case of an Assistant Secretary in the Secretariat Service, the post of a Deputy Secretary was already designated as a selection post for him on a grade, and there could be no question of his being granted a on the basis that the post Deputy Secretary is more arduous in nature than the post of Assistant Secretary [437D F; 438C E]
