On 26th September, 1964, the Governor of Assam notified under r. 126AA(1) a large number of employments as he was of opinion that they were essential for securing the public safety and for maintaining Supplies and services necessary to the life of the community, and under In (4) ordered payment of rupees ten per mensem as ad hoc cost of living allowance to certain workers in the notified employments.
On 4th November, 1964, he issued another notification under sub r. (4) by which he ordered payment of 38.46 paise as ad hoc cost of living allowance per day to persons engaged on daily wages in the notified employments.
The two notifications under sub.
r. (4) were issued to see that there was a contented labour force during emergency.
Though the second notification was dated November 4, 1964, the Labour Department of the State Government advised one of the respondents to pay the amount retrospectively from September 26, 1964.
The respondents challenged the validity of the three notifications by writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court held that : (i) The notification under r. 126AA(1) was mala fide in law and should be struck down, because, the conditions precedent to the exercise of the power conferred by the rule, namely, that the Governor should form the necessary opinion had not been satisfied since; (a) both the purposes, namely public safety and maintenance of supplies and services, were mentioned as the basis of the notification without indicating which of the two purposes led the State Government to issue the notification; (b) a large number of employments were included in one notification; and (c) the counter affidavit of the State Government stated that the notification was issued for purposes of "defence" also though.
the notification itself did not mention "defence", thus showing that the Governor had not applied his mind.
(ii) The two notifications under r. 126AA(4) were also mala fide in law and should be struck down because; (a) it was not stated in the notifications nor was it shown how the fixation of wages in the employments was necessary for the purpose of securing public safety and for maintaining supplies and services necessary to the life of the community and (b) the notifications replaced proceedings under the Minimum Wages Act which were taken in respect of some of the notified employments.
491 In appeal to this Court, HELD: (i) The notification under r. 126AA(1) should be upheld with respect to all employments except veneer mills.
[501 G] A notification under r. 126AA(1) could be issued on the subjective satisfaction of the Central or State Government as to the various purposes mentioned in the sub :rule, which include securing public safety and maintenance of supplies and services necessary to the life of the community.
That opinion could not be challenged in Court unless it was shown to be mala fide, or that no reasonable person could come to that conclusion with respect to the employments specified in the notification.
[499 D, F] (a) The fact that the notification gave both purposes for its issue did not show that the Governor did not apply his mind to the conditions.
When the Governor said that the employments were included in the notification for two purposes, he obviously held the opinion that the employments were essential far both purposes, and, it was not necessary for him to specify which of the employments were essential for one purpose and which were essential for the other purpose.
Where certain employments are essential for the maintenance of supplies and services necessary to the life of the community, the Governor may very well come to the conclusion that those employments are also necessary for securing public safety, for, if supplies and services necessary to the life of the community are not maintained, there may be danger to public safety.
[498 C E; 500 E F] (b) There is nothing in r. 126AA(1) which prevents a notification from being issued with respect to any number of employments, and the mere fact that a notification included within it a large number of employments is no ground for holding that the Governor did not apply his mind to the conditions.
[498 B C] (c) As regards the word "defence", it crept into the counter affidavit mechanically in reply to the petitioners ' contention using that word in some of the writ petitions.
But that should not have led the High Court to the conclusion that the Government had no clear conception of its powers, for, the High Court had only to see whether the conditions were complied with at the time of the issue of the notification.
[499 B C] As regards veneer mills which carried on the process of having finer wood on inferior wood for purposes of beautifying furniture, it cannot be said by any 'reasonable person to be essential for the maintenance of supplies and services necessary to the life of the community and for securing public safety.
This Court could therefore strike down the notification with respect to veneer mills treating the notification as so many single notifications each relating to.
an employment, rolled into one.
[501 A C] (ii) The reasons given by the High Court for striking down the two notifications under sub r.
(4) were erroneous, because : (a) It was not necessary to recite in the notification under sub r.
(4) that action was being taken for the purpose of securing public safety and for main taining supplies and services necessary to the life of the community.
Nor does the sub rule require that the notification should show that the two purposes would in fact be achieved by the provision made thereunder.
[502 D E] (b) The power under the sub rule is not for fixation of minimum wages, but to regulate wages and is analogous to the power of industrial tribunals.
Therefore, the fact that there is provision in the Minimum Wages Act for fixation of minimum wages was no ground for holding that the power exercised under sub r.
(4) was colourable.
The two notifications should however be struck down, because, before the Government exercises the power under sub rule (4), it should consult the interests concerned, as the order is not to be passed merely on the subjective satisfaction of the Government, even when there was an emer gency.
[506 A B] Whether the power under a particular provision has to be exercised purely on the subjective satisfaction of Government or other authority or has to be exercised subject to some objective tests depends upon a number of factors.
The language of the Provisions the nature of the power conferred and the purpose for which it has been conferred, the circumstances and the manner of the exercise of power, what things are affected by such exercise and how, and other relevant factors in the context of the particular provision may have to be considered in this behalf.
The intention of the legislature is primarily to be gathered from the language used and where the language used is plain and unambiguous, effect must be given to it and there is nothing more to be said.
But when the language is not clear all these factors must be weighed to arrive at the final con clusion.
[504 E H] The power under sub r.
(4) is of a far reaching nature and not only deals with wages but also with other conditions of service, and, in an emergency may practically supersede all industrial adjudication.
It is unlikely that such wide powers were conferred on the Government to be exercised purely on its subjective satisfaction without even consulting the interests concerned, specially, when the language of the sub rule is not plain and unambiguous indicating that the power could be so exercised.
The power, no doubt, was intended to be exercised in an emergency and decisions may have to be taken quickly and delay should be avoided; even so, the Government should evolve some procedure by which there would be some kind of collection of data with the help of the interests concerned and some kind of hearing or conference.
The consultation should be employment by employment, for, it may be that the needs of every employment may not be the same.
In the present case, there was some indication that the notifications were not issued arbitrarily but on the basis of a report submitted by a sub committee consisting of Government officials and representatives of the employers and employees; but it was not a consultation employment by employment, and therefore, the consultation fell short of the legal requirements.
[505 D H; 506 D H; 507 F] Kumaon Motor Owners ' Union Ltd. vs The State of U.P. ; , distinguished.
Further, as regards the second notification under r. 126AA(4) the Government could not and did not make it with retrospective effect; and the Labour Department was in error in writing to one of the respondent mills to make the payments retrospectively.
[502A B]
