Under the Assam Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1936, no motor vehicle could be used in the Assam Province unless the owner thereof had paid in respect of it a tax at the appropriate rate specified in the Schedule to the Act.
The Schedule was amended from time to time by the substitution of new Schedules and as a result of such amendments in 1963 and 1966, the tax on stage carriage motor vehicles was gradually raised.
In a writ petition, filed by the respondent, challenging the validity of the Amending Acts of 1963 and 1966, the High Court held that the Amending, Acts were made in respect of the matter contained in Entry 35 of the Concurrent List, namely principles of taxation of motor vehicles, and, as the provisions of the Amending Acts were inconsistent with those of the existing law, namely, the 1936 Act, the Amending Acts were ,void, because, the assent of the President as required by article 254 was not received.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) Taxes on vehicles connote the liability to pay taxes at &he rates at which the taxes are to be levied, while, the expression "principles of taxation" denotes rules of guidance in the matter of taxation.
The Amending Acts do not come into conflict with the existing law in respect of any principles of taxation within the meaning of Entry 35 of the Concurrent List, but only deal with a subject matter , namely, taxes on vehicles within the meaning of Entry 57 of the State List, which is exclusively within the legislative competence of the State Legislature; and as such.
there is no scope for invoking article 254.
[615A C] (ii) It is only a comparatively small proportion of the general expenditure incurred on new roads and the maintenance of the ,)Id roads that was realised through the impugned taxation.
Therefore, the Amending Acts are only regulatory measures imposing compensatory taxes for faci litating trade, commerce and intercourse.
The Acts are, hence, not hit by article 301 of the Constitution.
[616C] The Automobile Transport (Raiasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491, followed.
