On the question whether a magistrate could direct the police to submit a charge sheet, when the police, after investigation into a cognizable offence, had submitted a report of the action taken under section 169, Cr. P.C., that there was no case made out for sending up the accused for trial, HELD : There was no such power conferred on a magistrate either expressly or by implication.
When a cognizable offence is reported to the police they may after investigation take action under section 169 or section 170 Cr.
If the police :think there is not sufficient evidence against the accused, they may, under section 169 release the accused from custody on his executing a bond to appear before a competent magistrate if and when so required; or, if the police think there is sufficient evidence, they may, under section 170, forward the accused under custody to a competent magistrate or release the accused on bail in cases where the offences are bailable.
In either case the police should submit a report of the action taken, under section 173, to the competent magistrate who considers it judicially under section 190 and takes the following action : (1) If the report is a charge sheet under section 170 it is open to the magistrate to agree with it and take cognizance of the offence under section 190(1) (b); or to take the view that the facts disclosed do not make out an offence and decline to take cognizance.
But he cannot call upon the police to submit a report that the accused need not be proceeded against on the ground that there was not sufficient evidence.
(2) If the report is of the action taken under section 169, then the magistrate may agree with the report and close the proceeding.
If he disagrees with the report he can give directions to the police under section 156(3) to make a further investigation.
If the police, after further investigation submit a charge sheet, the magistrate may follow the procedure where the charge sheet under section 170 is filed; but if the police are still of the opinion that there was not sufficient evidence against the accused, the magistrate may agree or disagree with it.
Where he agrees, the case against the accused is closed.
Where the magistrate disagrees and forms the opinion that the facts set out in the report constitute an offence, he .can take cognizance under section 190(1)(c).
The provision in section 169 enabling the Police to take a bond for the appearance of the accused before a magistrate if so required, is to meet such a contingency of the magistrate taking cognizance of the offence notwithstanding the contrary opinion of the police.
The power under section 190(1)(c) was intended to Secure that 66 9 offences may not go unpunished and justice may be invoked even where persons individually aggrieved are unwilling or unable to prosecute, or he police either wantonly or through a bona, fide error do not submit a charge sheet.
But the magistrate cannot direct the Police to submit a charge sheet, because the submission of the report depends entirely upon the opinion formed by the police and not on the opinion of the magistrate.
The magistrate, if he disagrees with the report of the police, can.
himself take cognizance of the offence under section 19O(1)(a) or (c), but, be cannot compel the police to form a particular opinion on investigation and submit a report according to such opinion.
[672F H; 673B; 676H; 677B H; 678 A H; 679A C. E H] State of Gujarat vs Shah Lakhamshi, A.I.R. 1966 Gujarat 283 (F.B.); Venkatusubha vs Anjanayulu, A.I.R. 1932 Mad. 673; Abdul Rahim vs Abdul Muktadin, A.I.R. 1953 Assam 112; Amar Premanand vs State, A.I.R. 1960 M.P. 12 and A. K. Roy vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1962 Cal.
135 (F.B.), approved.
State vs Murlidhar Govardhan, A.I.R. 1960 Bom.
240 and Ram Wandan vs State, A.I.R. 1966 Pat.
438, disapproved.
