A widow, whose husband had died before the Hindu Succession Act came into force, adopted respondent 2 after the enforcement of the Act.
On the widow 's death, the appellant the nearest reversioner of her husband, filed a suit challenging the adoption.
The trial court dismissed the suit, which, in appeal, the High Court upheld.
In appeal, to this Court the appellant contended that (i) the adoption was invalid under (ii) of section 6 read with section 9 (2) of the as the son was given in adoption by his mother, even though his father was alive; and (ii) under the , an independent right of adoption is given to Hindu female and if a widow adopts a son, he becomes the adopted son of the widow only and was not deemed to be the son of her deceased husband.
HELD : The appeal must be dismissed.
(i) The evidence on record established that the son was given in adoption by both the parents.
The deed of adoption mentions that the had been given in adoption by his "Parents which necessarily includes the father.
The following sentence stating that the mother of the boy had 'put her thumb mark hereunder in token of her consent, ' was put in the deed, because section 9(2) of the Adoptions and Maintenance Act mentions that the father is not to exercise his right of giving his child in adoption, save with the consent of the mother.
"The consent of the, mother" having been used in the Act which was applicable, the draftsmen of the deed included in it the fact that the boy 's mother had actually given her consent and obtained her thumb impression in token thereof.
689D H] (ii) The provision in section 12 of the Act, makes it clear that, on adoption by a Hindu female who has been married, the adopted son will, in effect, be the adopted son of her husband also.
Under the Shastric Law if a child was adopted by a widow, he was treated as a natural born child and, consequently, he could divest other members of the family of rights vested in them prior to his adoption.
It was only with the limited object of avoiding any such consequence on the adoption of a child by a Hindu widow that the provisions in clause (c) of the proviso to section 12, and section 13 of the Act were incorporated.
In that respect, the rights of the adopted child were restricted.
It is to be noted that this restriction was placed on the rights of a child adopted by either a male Hindu or a female Hindu and not merely in a case of adoption by a female Hindu.
This restriction on the rights of the adopted child cannot, therefore, lead to any inference that a child adopted by a widow will not be deemed to be the adopted son of her deceased husband.
[694B C,F H] Nara Hanumantha Rao vs Nara Hanumayya and another, [1964] 1 Andhra Weekly Reporter, 156, discussed.
