A partnership of two partners was dissolved on the death of one of them on August 24, 1957 and the business was taken over by the surviving partner on his own account.
The services of the employees were not interrupted and there was no alteration in their terms of employment.
In proceedings for assessment to income tax for the assessment year 1958 59 it was urged on behalf of the firm that an amount of Rs. 1,41,506 taken into account under the head "gratuity payable to workers of the business" in settling the accounts of the firm till August 24, 1957 was a permissible outgoing.
The Income tax Officer rejected the claim and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed his order.
However, the Tribunal, in appeal, held that on the dissolution of the firm, the workmen became entitled to retrenchment compensation under section 25FF of the and the firm was therefore entitled to the deduction.
The High Court, upon a reference, confirmed this view.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The amount claimed by the assessee as a permissible allowance in his profit and loss account could not be regarded as properly admissible either under section 10(1) or under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
[735 B] Under the proviso to section 25FF the liability.to pay retrenchment compensation arose for the first time after the closure of the business and not before.
It arose not in the carrying on of the business, but on account of the transfer of the business.
It was not therefore a liability of a revenue nature and could not be treated as a permissible deduction under section 10(1).
[733 H] Alex A. Apcar (Jr.) & Company vs M. V. Gan and Others, A.I.R, , referred to.
Anakpalia Cooperative Agricultural and Industrial Society vs Its, Workmen & Others, , Calcutta Company Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, and Owen (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) vs Southern Railway of Peru Ltd., , distinguished.
Where accounts are maintained on the mercantile system, if liability to make a payment has arisen during the time the business is carried on.
and the expenditure is for the purpose of carrying on the business, it may be deductible under Section 10(2)(xv) but where the liability is during the whole of the period that the business is carried on wholly contingent and does not raise any definite obligation during that time it cannot fall L9Sup.
CI/67 3 728 within the expression "expenditure laid out or expended wholly or exclusively" for the purpose of the business.
[734 D E) Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Indian Metal and Metallurgical Corporation, and Standard Mills Company Ltd. vs Commissioner of Wealth tax, Bombay, , relied on.
