The Income tax Officer issued a notice to the assessee for reopening the assessment for the year 1956 57 on the ground that "excessive relief" within the meaning of section 34(1)(b) of the Income tax Act, 1922 had been granted to the assessee.
Rejecting the contention of the assessee that the income had not been the subject of "excessive relief" and therefore the proceedings were unauthorised and that the amount deemed to have been distributed under orders under section 23A could not be taken into consideration for the purpose of reducing the rebate of super tax admissible under proviso 2 to paragraph D of the Finance Act, 1956, the Income tax Officer ordered that the rebate of super tax granted be reduced.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that only a part of the amount of dividend deemed to have been declared by the assessee could be taken into consideration in withdrawing the rebate of super tax.
On appeal by the Commissioner, the Tribunal held that the case of the assessee did not fall within any of the situations contemplated by section 34(1) (b), but confirmed the order of the Appellant Assistant Commissioner.
On the question "whether the setting aside of the assessment under section 34(1) (b) was correct in law" the High Court was of the opinion that the claim of the department to initiate proceedings under section 34(1)(b) on the ground that excessive relief was allowed could not be sustained, but held that the proceedings under the section could be initiated on the ground that the income profits and gains of the asses see were " assessed at too low a rate".
The High Court did not 'record its decision on the plea of the assessee that in a proceeding to re assess income initiated on a notice that income had been subject to "excessive relief", the Income tax Officer was incompetent to re assess income on the footing that income was assessed at too low a rate.
In appeal to this Court the assessee contended that (i) the High Court was in error in enlarging the scope of the enquiry and entering upon a question never mooted before the Tribunal and (ii) by the use of the expression "assessed at too low a rate" it was intended that the jurisdiction of the Income tax Officer would be attracted only when the wrong fraction had been applied in the determination of super tax and not when the computation of tax depended on other factors.
HELD : (i) The case must be remanded to the High Court to determine whether the proceedings were validly initiated on the notice issued against the asscssee.
[807B] 799 The scope of the enquiry arising out of the arguments before the Tribunal was not whether the assessment was proper, but, whether the Income tax Officer was in the circumstances of the case competent to initiate the proceeding under section 34(1) (b) of the Income tax Act for bringing to tax the excessive rebate granted to the assessee.
The question referred to the High Court had to be reframed accordingly The question, as framed by the Tribunal, though defective, included that enquiry.
The High Court was, therefore, bound to decide all aspects of that question and it was wrong in making the assumption that because a particular aspect of the question of law raised was not specifically argued before the Tribunal the High Court could not deal with it.
[S02D E; 806F H; 807A B] P. section Sutbramanyan, Income tax Officer, Companies Circle I (1) and Anr.
vs Simplex Mills Ltd. , referred to.
(ii) The High Court was right in holding that the rebate of tax and the reduction of such rebate were essentially matters of measure or Standards of rate.
The expression rate in section 34(1) does not mean a fraction of total income; it is often used in the sense of standard or measure.
Provided the tax is computable by the application of a prescribed standard or measure, though not directly related to taxable income, it may be said that the tax is computed at a certain rate.
The aim and object of the Finance Act, 1956, is to prescribe the standard or measure of income tax or super tax, and an assessee escaping some of its provisions and failing to pay the full measure of tax is "assessed at too low a rate".
[806B C]
