The respondent was one of the partners in a partnership firm registered under section 26A of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The Incometax Officer in making assessments for the assessment years 1944 45, 1945 46, and 1946 47 and 1947 48 determined the shares of each of the partners and taxed them according to the provisions of section 25 (3) (a) of the Indian Income tax Act,.
One of the partners defaulted in the payment of tax and the Income tax Officer sought to recover the unpaid tax attributable to the share of the defaulting partner in the firm from the respondent.
The respondent 's petition tinder article 226 challenging the attempted recover was allowed by the single Judge whose order was confirmed by the Division Bench.
The Revenue by special came to this Court.
It was urged on behalf of the Revenue that even though by section 23 (5) (a) the total income of each member of a registered firm is taxed it is the firm which is assessed to tax so that the tax attributable to the share of one partner can be recovered from another, the responsibility of all being joint and several.
Reliance was also placed on section 44 of the Act.
HELD : (i) Undoubtedly contractual obligations of a firm are enforceable jointly and severally against the partners.
But the liability to pay income tax is statutory" it does not arise out of any contract, and its incidence must be determined by the statute.
If the statute which imposes the liability has not made it enforceable jointly and severally against the partners, no such implication can arise merely because contractual liabilities (if a firm may be jointly and severally imposed against the partners.[825E F] (ii) There is nothing in section 44 of the Act which supports the contention that for payment of tax assessed against a partner of a registered firm individually under section 23(5)(a) of the Act, another partner becomes liable jointly and severally with the first partner to pay tax.
[825C] The entire scheme of taxing the income of a registered firm in the hands of the individual partner is inconsistent with any assumption that for payment of tax assessed against a partner, other partners are liable.
The tax assessed against a partner of a registered firm is assessed on his total income inclusive of the share in the firm 's income and the rate applicable is determined by the quantum of the total income of the partners[1825D E] Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs section V. Angidi Chettiar, , Commissioner of Income tax, Bomaby vs Amritlal Bhogilal & Company, and Shivram Poddar vs lncometax Officer, Central Circle II, Calcutta, , distinguished.
