The District of Bellary originally belonged to the Part 'A ' State of Madras in British India.
On October 1. 1953 it merged in the Part 'B ' '.State of Mysore.
The Excess Profits Act, 1940 applied only to British India.
When Bellary District went to the Part 'B ' State of Mysore the Act ceased to apply to it.
After the , Mysore also became a Part 'A ' State.
But according to section 1(2) of the Adaptation of Laws (No. 3) Order dated December 31, 1956.
the aforesaid Excess Profits Tax Act was to extend "to the whole of India ,except the territories which immediately before November 1, 1956 were comprised in a Part 'B ' State.
" In 1960 the Excess Profits Tax Officer, Bellary gave a notice to the appellants under section 15 of the Act in respect of the period October 30, 1943 to October 30, 1944.
The appellants objected that the Act did not apply to Bellary district as immediately before November 1, 1956 it was in a Part 'B ' State.
The plea was rejected by the departmental authorities as well as by the High Court in a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
In appeal.
by special leave, to this Court it was contended that so far as Bellary District was concerned it was not a case of repeal but only of non application of the Act, and thus section 6 of the General Clauses Act was not attracted.
It was further urged that even if section 6 applied no liability bad accrued or been incurred in terms of cl.
(e) of the section as there was no assessment of escaped profits before November 1, 1956 when the adaptation was made.
HELD : (i) The result of the Adaptation of Laws Order 1956 so far as the Act was concerned, was that the provisions of the Act were no longer applicable or in force in Bellary district.
To put it differently, the Act was repealed so far as the area of Bellary district was concerned.
Repeal of the Act means revocation or abrogation of the Act and section 6 of the General Clauses Act applies even in the case of a partial repeal, or repeal of part of an Act.
[866H; 867A] (ii)The case was covered by section 6(e) of the General Clauses Act.
The liability of an assessee to tax arises immediately at the end of the chargeable accounting period and not merely at the time when it is quantified.
by assessment proceedings.
It followed therefore that the 865 notice issued under section 15 of the Act was legally valid and the appellants representing the original partners of the firm continued to be liable to be proceeded against under that section for the profits which had escaped taxation.
[867 E F] Wallace Brothers & Co. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Chatturam Horilram Ltd. vs C.I.T., ; Kalwa Devaduttam vs Union of India, and State of Kerala V. N. Same lyer, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1415, relied on.
