After the death of the Mahant of Sri Swami Hathiramji Math, Tirumalai, Tirupati, in 1947, an agreement was arrived at on October 29, 1947 resolving certain disputes regarding the succession to the office of Mahant and laying down a procedure for choosing a successor when a vacancy arose.
Furthermore, the Akada Panchayat was constituted the supreme authority in such matters.
One C.D. became the Mahant in 1958.
The respondent challenged the succession by a declaratory suit but eventually there was a compromise and in an agreement dated .July 15, 1961, it was agreed that C.D. was entitled to continue as Mahant, and that after his death the respondent would succeed him.
On the death of C.D. on March 18, 1962, the respondent claimed to have succeeded as Mahant in his own right and the Akada Panchayat approved the succession by a resolution on the same date.
However, the Commissioner Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Andhra pradesh, having received a telegram disputing the respondent 's claim, took action under section 53 of the Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act XIX of 1959 and assumed charge of the Math and its property on March 24, 1964.
The respondent thereafter filed a suit for a declaration that he was the rightful successor.
He also filed a revision before the Government challenging the action taken under section 53 whereupon the Government stayed further proceedings and the respondent therefore withdrew his suit.
On June 5, 1962 the Government issued an order stating that as there were disputes about who was the rightful successor, until the Civil Court decided this question, it was necessary to make suitable arrangements for the proper administration of the Math and its endowments; it therefore appointed the respondent as interim Mahant subject to various conditions laid down in the order.
in view of the respondent 's attitude in the discharge of certain of his duties, on August 22, 1964, the Government passed an order directing him to show cause why the previous order of June 5, 1962, should not he cancelled.
The respondent filed a Writ Petition against this order claiming that he had succeeded to the office of Mahant in his own right and that no action could be taken by the Government under section 53 other appointing him as interim Mahant or cancelling such appointment , the High Court thereupon stayed further proceedings in pursuance of the notice pending the disposal of the writ petition.
The State Government then passed a further order on September 9, 1965, framing certain charge , against the respondent, calling for his explanations to them '.Ind.
at the same time, placing him under suspension.
The respondent filed a second writ petition challenging this new order whereupon the earlier writ petition was dismissed as infructious.
The High Court allowed the second writ petition.
892 It was condendcd on behalf of the appellant that (i) on the death of C D. on March 18,1962, a vacancy occurred in the of]fire of Mahant and there was a dispute between the respondent and two other persons each of whom claimed the right of succession; suits had been filed by each of those two persons to establish their claims and ,tithough these had been dismissed, an appeal was pending in respect of one of them; view of this the necessary conditions existed for invoking the power under section 53 for the proper management of the Math; furthermore, that inasmuch as the respondent had been appointed to manage the institution by the department under section 53 of the Act, and, as he, was continuing in such management by virtue of that appointment, the State had ample jurisdiction to pass orders either of suspending or even dismissing the respondent.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal; The High Court had rightly held that 'there was no jurisdiction for the exercise of the power under section 53 of the Act.
(i) Before section 53 can be invoked.
two conditions are necessary viz., (a) a vacancy must have occurred in the office of the trustee of a Math; and (b) there must be a dispute respecting the right of succession to such office.
In the present case although it. was possible to say that there was a dispute resperting the right of succession to the office of Mahant, the further condition that there must be a vacancy could not be said to have existed and the High Court had rightly accepted the claim of the respondent that by virtue of the Panchayat agreement of October 29, 1947, the compromise agreement of Julv 15, 1961, and the approval given to his succeession by the Akada Panchayat.
he had succeeded as Mahant March 18, 1962, on the death of C.D. 1898 B D. H] (ii) If the respondent had succeeded as Mahant on the death of C.D., in his own right.
the mere circumsta 'nce that the Government also passed an order appointing him as interim Mahant, later would not take away the right of the respondent to function as Mahant.
Once it is held that he was not holding the office exclusively on the basis of the order of the Government of June 5, 1962.
it follows that the appellant had no jurisdiction to.
pass an order, placing the respondent under suspension, as that virtually amounted 10.
a removal of the trustee of a Math which could only be done in accordance with the provisions of section 52 of the Act.
[899 G 900 A]
