In a suit for rendition of accounts, the defendant pleaded that accounts, had been settled and he was to get certain money from the plaintiff; that there could be no rendition of accounts; and that if the court concluded that rendition of account was necessary, a decree for the amount which may be found due to the defendant with costs and interest may be passed in favour of the defendant after necessary court fee was realised from the defendant.
While no preliminary decree for rendition of accounts had 'been passed, and, in fact, the defendant was .still contending that there could be no rendition of accounts in the suit.
the plaintiff applied for withdrawal of the suit.
The defendant opposed the withdraw claiming that in a suit of this nature, his position became that of a plaintiff and he became entitled to have the accounting done and to obtain a decree, and the withdrawal after protracted duration was to defeat this right of the defendant.
The trial Court allowed the withdrawal, which was upheld by the High Court.
In appeal by the defendant, this Court HELD : At the stage of withdrawal of the suit, no vested right in favour of the defendant had come into existence and there was no ground on which the Court could refuse to allow withdrawal of the suit.
There is no provision in the Code of Civil Procedure which requires the Court to refuse permission to withdraw the suit in such circumstances and to compel the plaintiff to proceed with it.
It is, of course, possible that different considerations may arise where a set off may have been claimed under 0.8, C.P.C., or a counter claim may have been filed,, if permissible by the procedural law applicable to proceedings governing the suit.
In the present case, the pleadings did not amount to a claim for set off.
Even if it be assumed that the defendant could have claimed a decree for the amount found due to him after rendition of accounts, no such right can possibly be held to exist before the Court passed a preliminary decree for rendition of accounts.
In the case of a suit between principal and agent, it is the principal alone who has normally the right to claim rendition of accounts from the agent.
The agent cannot ordinarily claim a decree for rendition of accounts from the principal and, in fact, in the suit, the defendant, who was the agent of the respondent, did not claim any rendition of accounts from the plaintiff.
[888F H] 889B D] Seethai Achi vs Meyappa Chettiar and Others, A.I.R. 1934 Mad, 337.
refered to
