J executed a trust deed whereby he created a charitable trust.
The 4iced was registered with the Charity Commissioner under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950.
For the year 1958 59 the Income tax Officer held that since the settlor had reserved to himself wide powers for own benefit and had also utilised those powers to his benefit, the case was coveted by section 16(1)(c) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
Accordingly the Income tax Officer taxed the income of the trust in the hands of the 'settlor.
A similar order was passed for the year 1959 60.
In his appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner the settlor relied on section 35 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 to .show that he was thereby precluded from utilising the funds for his own benefit but his plea was not accepted.
The Appellate Tribunal, however, relying on the terms .of the deed itself decided in favour of the settlor and.
the High Court in reference did the same.
The revenue appealed.
HELD: (i) There was no doubt ' that under the Trust Deed the settlor had very wide powers and could direct ' the Trustees to.
grant loan him.
The Trustees could even grant a loan to a firm in which he was interested.
But this would be contrary to the provisions of section 35 the Bombay Trust Act.
The said Act to the extent it operates must override provisions in the Trust Deed.
[953E 954A B] The Legislature in proviso 1 to section 16(1)(c) is thinking of powers lawfully given and powers lawfully exercised.
Any person can commit breach of trust and assume power over income or assets but for that reason the income of the trust cannot be treated as the income of the settlor under the proviso.
Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal vs Sir S.M. Bose, 21 ].T.R. 135 and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North vs Mathuradas Mangaldas Parekh, I.T. Ref.
No. 4/54, Judgment by Bombay High Court dated August 26, 1954, referred to.
(ii) The words 're assume power ' give indication to the correct meaning of section 16(1)(c) proviso 1.
The latter part of the proviso contemplates that the settlor should be able by virtue of something contained in the Trust Deed, to take back the power he had over the assets or income previous to the execution of the Trust Deed.
A provision enabling the settlor to give directions to.
trustees to employ the assets or funds of the trust in a particular manner or for a particular charitable object contemplated by the trust cannot be said to confer a right to re assume power within the first proviso.
Otherwise a settlor could never name himself a sole trustee.
The mere fact that the settlor can derive some direct or indirect benefit under a trust deed would not ' bring the deed within the first proviso.
[955G H; 966A B] 947 Chamberlain vs Inland Revenue Commissioner , Tulsidar Kalichand vs Commissioner of Income tax, 42 I.T.R. 1, WoIfson vs Commissoners Inland Reventte, , Saunders vs Commissioners Inland Revenue, , referred to.
Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab vs
section Raghbir Singh, 57/.T.R., followed.
On an examination of terms of the Trust Deed the Court held none of its clauses came within the purview of Proviso 1.
[956C F]
