The assessee firm consisted of two partners who were managers of their respective Hindu Undivided Families.
The firm sold its goods to the aforesaid families and the families again sold the goods on their own account.
In income tax proceedings for the years 1959 60, 1960 61 and 1961 62 the firm and the Hindu Undivided Families were separately assessed in respect of their incomes.
Subsequently the Income tax Authorities took view that the sale of goods by the firm to the families was only a device to divert the profits of the firm and on this view issued notices under section 147 of the Incometax Act, 1961 requiring the assessee to show cause why the assessments for the years 1959 60, 1960 61 and 1961 62 should not be reopened.
The High Court of Gujarat in a petition for a writ under article 226 of the Constitution quashed those notices and restrained the Income tax Officer from taking proceedings in pursuance thereof.
With special leave granted by this Court, the Revenue appealed.
Held:(i) The High Court may issue a high prerogative writ prohibiting the Income tax Officer from proceeding with reassessment when it appears that the Income tax Officer had no jurisdiction to commence proceedings because the conditions precedent do not exist.
[12G H; 13B C] Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. vs Income tax Officer, Companies District 1, Calcutta, & Anr. , followed.
It is however not open to the High Court exercising powers under article 226 to set aside or vacate the notice for reassessment by itself re appraising the evidence.
[15B] (ii)The condition which invests the Income tax Officer with jurisdiction has two branches: (i) that the Income tax Officer has reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment; and (ii) that it is in consequence of information which he has in his possession and that he has reason so to believe.
The expression 'information ' in the context of which it occurs must mean instruction or knowledge derived from an external source concerning facts or particulars, or as to law relating to a matter bearing on the assessment.
If he has such information the Income tax Officer may commence proceedings under section 147(1)(b).
But to commence such a proceeding it is not necessary that on the materials which came to the notice of the Income tax Officer, the previous order of assessment was vitiated by some error of fact or law.
[13C G] (iii)In the present case however the pre conditions for the issue of a notice of re assessment did not exist.
The law does not oblige a trader to make the maximum profit that he can out of his 11 trading transactions.
Income which accrues to a trader is taxable in his hands: income which he could have, but has not earned is not made taxable as income accrued to him.
Avoidance of tax liability by so arranging commercial affairs that charge of tax is distributed is not prohibited.
[15D G]
