The Income tax Act, 1922, as originally enacted did not give to a cooperative society any exemption from payment of tax in respect of income from its business activities.
By departmental instructions issued under section 60 of the Act, exemption from payment of tax in respect of certain receipts of a co operative society were given.
The notification provided inter alia that as regards interest received by it from government securities, an amount which bears the same proportion to the total interest paid on debentures etc.
as the capital invested in government securities bears to the total working capital, shall be deducted from the interest on government securities as being exempt from tax.
The departmental instructions were later withdrawn and sub section
(3) was added to section 14 of the Act, by which, with effect from April 1, 1955, a cooperative society was not liable to pay tax in respect of the profits and.
gains of business carried on by it.
In 1956, an Explanation, applicable to banking companies, was added to section 8.
Clause (a) of the Explanation provided for the allocation of business ex penditure between different sources of income of banking companies; and cl.
(b) provided for allocation of outgoings in respect of " money borrowed" including money deposited with the bank [33BH; 34C F] Thus, in spite of section 14(3), for the assessment year 1956 57, there were no departmental instructions governing the apportionment of income from government securities between business and non business sources of income; and, in the case of a cooperative society which did not carry on the business of a banking company.
there was no statutory rule for such apportionment, the Explanation to section 8 not being applicable.
Therefore, in the case of a cooperative society which was not carrying on the business of a banking company a rule of apportionment consistent with commercial accounting for determining the income from government securities attributable to the business activity of the society had to be evolved.
[35H; 35A B] The appellant was a cooperative society not carrying on business of banking and for the assessment year 1956 57; it claimed that out of its gross income from securities, only Rs. 13,578 was chargeable to tax on the principle of the departmental instruction.
The Appellate Tribunal applied the principle of the Explanation to section 8 and computed the taxable income at Rs. 59,498.
The High Court held that the benefit of the departmental notification was not available to the appellant, because it must be deemed to have been withdrawn and that, the Explanation to section 8 did not in terms apply to the appellant.
31 In appeal to this Court, Held:In the absence of a statutory rule and departmental in structions, a rule of appointment which dismembers income in pro"portion to the business and non business components of the source from which it arises would be more consistent with principles of commercial accounting.
The proportion of income from securities which is exempt from taxation under section 14(3) will be that proportion which the capital of the Society used for the purposes of the business bears to the total working capital, and according to this rule, the gross income from securities which would be liable to tax was only Rs. 13,578.
It was not open to the appellant to contend that even this amount was not taxable.
Such a question was never raised either before the department or the Tribunal.
[33C D; 36F H] The principles laid down in cls.
(a) and (b) of the Explanation to s, 8 are not Applicable.
The rule in cl.
(a) is not a rule of apportionment for the purpose of taxation of composite income which is partly taxable and partly not.
It is an artificial rule, specially evolved for determining the appropriate outgoings for the purpose of realising interest .,from securities held by a banking company in computing income chargeable to tax.
Clause (b) deals with the proportion in which the outgoings are allocable.
The problem arising under section 14(3) is not one relating to allocation of outgoings to deter.
mine taxable income, but of apportionment of income under the taxable and non taxable heads.
[36C E]
