The respondent was a limited company incorporated in the State of Indore where it had a textile mill.
During the years from 1941 to 1946, it effected sales in British India through canvassing by its own representatives,.
through brokers or through the purchasers ' brokers or representatives visiting Indore.
The sales in British India in all categories were made F.O.R, Indore; the Railway Receipts were made out in the name of 'self ' and were endorsed in favour of the customer concerned and handed over to the Bank for delivery to the customer against payment of the sale price which was received at Indore through the Bank 's local branch.
In the course of its assessment to Indian Income tax for some of the years during the period 1942 43 to 1947 48, the Income tax Officer, apart from taxing the income actually received in India, also held that the profits apportionable to all the other sales made in British India accrued or arose in the taxable territories and were therefore liable to Indian Income tax.
He accordingly taxed the same on accrual basis.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner in appeal held that taking into account the fact of the case, it would be fair.
on the analogy of Rule 33 of the Indian Income tax Rules 1922 to attribute 331 per cent of the profits to the activities in British India and to assess them to Indian Income Tax.
The Tribunal confirmed this order but the High Court, on a reference under section 66 of the Indian Income tax Act, held in favour of the respondent.
In the appeal to Supreme Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that on the procedure adopted for the sales, the property in the goods passed in British India in all the categories of sales and that the fact that the goods were sold F.O.R. at Indore did not make any difference to that position.
The High Court had therefore wrongly taken the view that the sales were not taxable in India.
HELD: Allowing the appeal: the income accrued within British India and a proportionate part of it was assessable to Indian Incometax.
[52G H] Pushanlal Mansingka (P) Ltd.
The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi, Civil Appeal Nos.
557 558 of 1966, decided on May 5, 1967; followed.
Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi vs P.M. Rathod & Co. , 150: Commissioner of Income tax vs Bhopal Textiles Ltd., , referred to. 48
