The All India Services Act, 1951, empowers the Central Government to make rules for the regulation of recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to an All India Service.
In exercise of this power the Central Government framed the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954.
Rule 6 of the said Rules requires that a Gradation List of all Police Officers in a State should be maintained to ascertain their respective seniority.
Accordingly, a Gradation List wag prepared by the respondent State in which the petitioner was shown as senior to respondents 3 and 4.
In 1955, the petitioner was superseded by respondents 3 and 4 who were confirmed in the rank of Deputy Inspector General of Police, and in 1966, the third respondent was promoted as Inspector General of Police and respondent 4 was appointed as Additional Inspector General of Police, superseding the petitioner.
The petitioner filed a writ petition in this Court under article 32, contending that: (1) he was entitled as a matter of right to big appointed as Deputy Inspector General of Police in 1955 and as Inspector General of Police, in 1966, as he was shown as the senior most officer in the Gradation List; (2) in the absence of, any statutory rules governing promotions to selection grade posts the Government could not issue administrative instructions imposing restrict ions not found in the Rules already framed such as that merit and not seniority should be considered; (3) the introduction of the idea of merit into the procedure of promotion is violative of articles 14 and 16, because, it brings in an element of per sonal evaluation with the consequent abuses of nepotism and favouritism; and (4) if the Government is held to have the power to make appointments without making rules in that behalf under the proviso to Art, 309, then the appointments of respondents 3 and 4 would be arbitrary, capricious and in violation of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, because, the claims of the petitioner were not considered either in 1955 or in 1966.
HELD:(1) A perusal of rr. 3 and 8 of the Indian Police Service (Pay) Rules, 1954, read with Part B of Schedule III of those Rules shows that the three posts of Deputy Inspector General of Police.
Additional Inspector General of Police and Inspector General of Po ' lice in the respondent State, are selection posts outside the junior ' and senior time scales of Pay.
Promotion to selection grade or selection posts is to be based primarily on merit and not on seniority alone and therefore, the respondent State was not bound to promote the petitioner merely because he was senior in the Gradation List.
[118D F].
(2)While Government cannot amend or supersede statutory rules by administrative instructions, if rules are silent on any particular point, Government can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed.
112 The State Government has executive power in respect of State Public Services mentioned in Entry 41, List II of Schedule VII of the Constitution, and, there is nothing in the terms of article 309 which abridges the power of the executive to act under article 162 without a law.
[119 F G, H].
T. Cajee vs U. Jormanik Siem, ; and B. N. Na. garajanv.
State of Mysore, , followed.
(3) To ensure a reasonable prospect of advancement to all officials and at the same time to protect the public interest in having posts filled by the most able men, it is necessary to evolve a proper promotion policy in which is found a correct balance between seniority and merit.
As a matter of long administrative practice promotion to selection grade or selection posts in the Indian Police Ser vice had been based on merit, and seniority was taken into consideration only when merit of the candidates is otherwise equal and no other criterion is available.
Such a procedure does not, in any way, violate the guarantee under articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution [112E; 123C D].
(4)The respondent State had considered the case of the petitioner and taken into account the record, experience and merit of the petitioner and of every other officer entitled to be considered at the time of the promotion before promotion of respondents 3 and 4 to selection posts was made, and therefore, there was no breach of the provisions of articles 14 and 16.
[121D E].
