On August 19, 1964, officers belonging to the Department of the appellant raided and searched the premises of a company and foreibly removed certain accounts and goods.
The respondents challenged the department 's action by writ petitions filed in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution praying that the articles seized should be returned.
It was contended by the petitioners that on a proper construction of section 41 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act, No. 1 of 1959, the officers of the Department had no authority to search the premises and seize any account books or goods found there; that if section 41(4) authorised seizure and confiscation of goods, it was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature, for it was not covered by item 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution relating to "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods"; and that if various provisions in section 41 were capable of being construed as authorising search and seizure, they were violative of article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution.
The High Court allowed the Petitions holding, inter alia, that section 41 (2) did not permit a search being made and only provided for inspection; the power of seizure or confiscation in section 41(4) was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature; and that subsections (2), (3) and (4) of section 41 contained unreasonable res trictions and were violative of article 19(1) (f) and (g).
The High Court also found with respect to one of the petitions that the search warrant had been issued without the application of Mind by the magistrate and was bad.
On appeal to this Court; Held: dismissing the appeal, (i)Anything recovered during the search must be returned to the petitioners for the safeguards provided by section 165 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were not followed and in one case the finding of the High Court that the search warrant issued by the magistrate was bad on various grounds was not challenged; furthermore anything confiscated must also be returned as sub section (4) of section 41 must fall.[163 B D].
Clause (a) of the second proviso to sub section (4) gives power to the officer ordering confiscation to give the person affected an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, in cases where the goods are taxable under the Act, the tax recoverable and an additional amount and thus provides for recovery of tax even before the first sale in 149 the State which is the point of time in a large majority of cases for recovery of tax.
As such it was repugnant to the entire scheme of the Act and sub section (4) must therefore be struck down.
As Clause (a) compels the officer to give the option and thus compels recovery of tax before the first point of sale, which cannot have occurred in cases of goods seized from the dealer himself, it is clearly intended by the legislature to go together with the main part of the Section and is not therefore severable.
[159F 16OD].
(ii) Although generally speaking the power to inspect does not give power to search, where, as in the case of section 41 (2) the power has been given to inspect not merely accounts registers, records, goods, etc., but also to inspect the offices, shops etc.
, these two powers together amount to giving the concerned officer the power to enter and search the offices etc.
and if he finds any accounts or goods in the offices, shops, etc., to respect them.
The High Court was therefore wrong in holding that there was no power of search whatsoever under sub section (2).
[154H 155E].
The proviso to sub section (2) in providing that all searches under "this sub section" shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, bears out the construction that the main part of sub section (2) contemplates searches.
Similarly it is clear from sub section (3) which gives power to seize accounts etc., in certain circumstances, that sub section (2) must include the power of search for a seizure under sub section (3) is not possible unless there is a search.
[156D E. 158B C].
The contention that as the main part of sub section (2) does not provide for search of a purely residential accommodation and therefore the proviso is otiose must be rejected.
Although generally a provision is an exception to the main part of the section, it Is recognised that in exceptional cases, as in the present case, the provision may be a substantive provision itself.
[156D F].
Bhonda Urban District Council vs Taff Vale Railway Co., L. R. Commissioner of Income tax vs Nandlal Bhandari & Sons , and State of Rajasthan vs Leela Jain.
; , referred to.
(ii)Sub sections (2) and (3) of section 41 are not violative of article 19 as they are protected by clauses (5) and (6) of article 19 of the Constitution.
[162F G].
The High Court had wrongly assumed that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code did not apply to a search under section 41(2).
In view of the safeguards provided in section 165 Cr.
P.C. and in Chapter VII of that Code, it cannot be said that the power to search provided in sub section (2) is not a reasonable restriction keeping in View the object of the search, namely, prevention of evasion of tax.
[161EG].
The mere fact that the Act gives power to Government to em power any officer to conduct the search is no reason to strike down the provision for it cannot be assumed that Government will not empower officers of proper status to make searches.
[160 H], To, exercise the power of seizure under sub section (3) the officer concerned has to record his reasons in writing, has to give a receipt for the accounts seized, and can only retain the items seized beyond a period of 30 days with the permission of the next higher officer.
These are sufficient safeguards and the restriction, if any, on 150 the right to hold property and the right to carry on trade by sub section (3) must therefore be held to be a reasonable restriction.
[162 D G].
While the court held that the Legislature has power to provide for search and seizure in connection with taxation law in order that evasion may be checked, it did not decide the general question whether a power to confiscate goods which are found on search and which are not entered in account books of the dealer is an ancillary power necessary for the purpose of stopping evasion of tax.
[159C D].
K.S. Papanna and another vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Gunkakal, (1967) XIX S.T.C. 506; referred to.
