Vacancies in grade 'D ' of Train Examinations were filled by (a) direct recruits i.e., apprentice train examiners who had completed the prescribed period of training, and (b) promotees from skilled artisans.
Promotion from Grade 'D ' to 'C ' was on the basis of seniority cum suitability.
In October 1965 the Railway Board issued a notification by which it was provided that eighty per cent of the vacancies in Grade 'C ' were to be filled up from apprentice train examiners recruited on and after April 1, 1966 and the remaining twenty per cent by train examiners from Grade 'D '.
The notification further provided that apprentice train examiners who had already been absorbed in Grade D before April 1966 should en bloc be accommodated in Grade 'C ' in the eighty per cent of the vacancies without undergoing any selection and with regard to twenty per cent of the vacancies, reserved for the other class promotion was to be on selection basis and not on the basis of seniority cum suitability.
The petitioner who entered Railway service in 1954 as a skilled artisan and was selected and confirmed in Grade 'D ' filed a Writ Petition in this Court challenging that part of the notification which gave favourable treatment to apprentice train examiners who had already been absorbed in Grade 14 'D ' as arbitrary and discriminatory and violative of Articles t4 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was also contended that the earlier order laying down that promotion to grade 'C ' was to be based on seniority cum suitability had become a contractual condition of service and could not be altered to the prejudice of the petitioner.
HELD: (i) The impugned part of the notification violated the guarantee under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Once the direct recruits and promotees were absorbed in one cadre, they formed one class and they could not be discriminated against for the purpose of further promotion to the higher grade 'C '.
Before the impugned notification was issued there was only one rule of promotion applicable to both direct recruits and promotees.
By the impugned notification a discriminatory treatment was made in favour of the existing apprentice Train Examiners who had already been absorbed in grade 'D ' because, the notification provided that this group of apprentice train examiners should first be accommodated en bloc in grade 'C ' up to eighty per cent of the vacancies reserved for them without undergoing any selection; whereas in the twenty per cent of the vacancies available to the category of Train Examiners to which the petitioner belonged the basis of recruitment was selection on merit and the previous test of seniority cum suitability was abandoned.
[192 D G].
186 Mervyn vs Collector, ; relied on.
(ii) The petitioner had no vested contractual right in regard to the terms of his service.
The legal position of a Government servant is more one of status than of contract.
Once appointed to his post or office a Government servant acquires a status and his rights and obligations are no longer determined by consent of parties, but by statute or statutory rules which may be framed and altered unilaterally by the Government.
[195 B C].
