Election for the office of Pramukh of a block was held under the provision of the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Samitis and Zilla Parishads Adhinayam, 1961.
On one of the ballot papers, the second respondent had a third preference recorded in his favour and a second preference in favour of another candidate who was eliminated at one stage.
The Returning Officer did not count the third preference in favour of the second respondent and found at the final counting that the appellant and the second respondent had secured an equal number of votes.
He therefore drew a lot as per the Instructions in Schedule II and declared the second respondent duly elected.
The appellant then filed an election petition on various grounds before the District Judge who dismissed it, holding that the Returning Officer erred in not crediting the second respondent with the third preference and that if that was done there was no necessity for drawing lots at all and that the second respondent should have been declared elected as a result of the counting itself.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging the District Judge 's order was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court he contended that: (1) under rr. 37 and 39 the trial of an election petition takes place in two parts; first, to judge whether the returned candidate 's election is void and then to decide whether any other candidate should be declared to be duly elected, that it was only in the latter case the returned candidate had the right to claim that ballot papers not already counted in his favour should be so counted, and that therefore, the District Judge had no jurisdiction to count the ballot paper containing the third preference in favour of the second respondent; and (2) the ballot paper was an 'exhausted paper ' within Instruction 1(5) of Schedule II to the Rules, and that therefore the District Judge erred in law in counting it in favour of the second respondent.
Held: (1) The District Judge was entitled, to go into the question whether the uncounted ' ballot paper should have been counted in favour of the second respondent.
[249G] According to r. 37(a) read with r, 40 which generally applies the procedure in the Civil Procedure Code to the trial of election petitions under the Act, and r. 43 which deals with the findings of the trial Judge, the returned candidate can take any defence to show that he has been validly elected.
He could therefore allege and prove that certain votes should have been counted in his favour.
[249E G] Jabar Singh vs Genda Lal, ; , explained.243 244 (2) The fact that the Candidate with the second preference in the uncounted ballot Paper *as eliminated at one stage, did not make the ballot paper an 'exhausted paper ' within the definition in the Rules.
The second respondent was a continuing candidate, as per the Rules, and,there was a preference recorded for him on the ballot paper arid the District fudge was right in holding that it should have been counted in his favour, by the Returning Officer.
[250A C]
