After holding a domestic enquiry the Managing Director of the appellant Bank dismissed the respondent employee with immediate effect.
The employee was informed that he might appeal against this order to the working committee of the Directors within certain days.
The respondent filed the appeal which the working committee dismissed.
Subsequent to the filing of the appeal but prior to its dismissal, the Central Government referred to an Industrial Tribunal the question as to whether action, by the appellant Bank, in discontinuing pigmy collection and payment thereof to the workmen, was justified.
The respondent filed a complaint to the Industrial Tribunal alleging that the appellant contravened section 33 of the Industrial Dispute Act as the order of dismissal had been passed during the pendency of an Industrial Dispute, the management should have asked the Industrial Tribunal for approval of their action, and they should have paid him one month 's wages.
The Industrial Tribunal held that the dismissal of the respondent became effective only after the.
working committee disposed of the appeal, and as during this period an Industrial Dispute was pending the management was bound to comply with the proviso to section 33 (2) (b) of the Act.
In appeal to this Court.
Held:There was no contravention of section 33.
An order of discharge or dismissal, can be passed only once; and, in thus case, the order of dismissal was the original or very first passed by the Managing Director, on which date the Industrial Dispute had not even been referred, for adjudication.
No doubt, either by virtue of the Standing Orders, or by virtue of a contract, of service, a right of appeal may be given to a workman concerned, to challenge an order of dismissal.
But the appellate authority only considers whether the order of dismissal has to be sustained or whether it requires modification.
Further, the proviso to section 33(2) (b) when it refers to payment of wages for one month, also indicates that it relates to an order of discharge or dismissal which comer, into effect immediately.
The payment of one month 's salary or wages, is to soften the rigour of unemployment that will face the workman, against whom an order of discharge or dismissal, has been passed.
If the management has to wait for the minimum period prescribed for filing an appeal, also await the termination of the appeal when one is filed, considerable time would have elapsed from the date of the original order, during which period the workman would not have received any salary.
[333F 334B] Equitable Coal Ltd. vs Tlgu Singh The Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs Its Workmen [1960] 1 S.C.R. 806, and Straw.
board Manufacturing Co. vs Gobind [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 618 relied 328 The Management of Hotel Imperial vs Hotel Workers ' Union ; , and Collector of Customs, Calcutta vs East India Commercial Co. Ltd. held inapplicable.
