Respondent No. 1 acquired tenancy rights in five plots in the villages of Biknaur and Samahuta situated in the area known as Lower Murli Hill in District Shahabad, Bihar.
In 1949 he filed a plaint in the Court of the Subordinate Judge Sasaram, against the State of Bihar and others, claiming inter alia that as a tenant he had a customary right to quarry limestone for trade purposes from the Lower Murli Hill.
The claim was based mainly on certain entries in the Custom sheets prepared at the time of the Cadastral Survey in 1913 under section 102 of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885.
The trial court rejected the claim but the High Court held the custom to be established by the evidence of the Customs sheets.
The defendants appealed.
Held The High Court was in error in holding that the plain tiff had established the custom pleaded by him or that it was reasonable.
(i) There was nothing to show that the practices and privileges recorded in the Custom Sheets were exercised as a matter of right.
The record has presumptive value.
But the revenue authorities were concerned to ascertain the existing state of affairs and not to determine whether the practices and privileges were ancient, certain, reasonable and continuous.
As evidence of local custom, the custom sheets had therefore not much value.
On the other hand there were indications that the exercise of the privileges recorded therein was permissive.
Even on the most liberal interpretation they did not provide evidence of the exercise of the privilege of commercial exploitation of limestone from the area in question.
[317D; 319G] (ii) Even granting that the Custom sheets recorded a local custom that the tenants in the villages of Baknaur and Samahuta excavated stones from the hills near the villages for purposes of trade, a claim of right founded on that custom must be held unreasonable and incapable of enforcement by the sanction of a court 's verdict, [320B] A claim in the nature of a profit a prendre operating in favour of an indeterminate class of persons and arising out of a local custom may be held enforceable only if it satisfies the tests of a valid custom.
A custom is a usage by virtue of which a class of persons belonging to a defined section in a locality are entitled to exercise specific rights against certain other persons or property in the same locality.
To the extent to which it is inconsistent with the general law undoubtedly the custom prevails.
But to be valid a custom must be ancient, certain and reasonable, and being in derogation of the general rules of law must be construed strictly.
A right in the nature of a profit a prendre in the exercise of which the residents of a locality are entitled to excavate stone for trade purposes would ex facie 313 314 be unreasonable, because the exercise of such a right ordinarily tends to the complete destruction of the subject matter of the profit.
The custom, if exercised in its amplitude as claimed, may also lead to breaches of the peace, for it would be open to all tenants to work any quarry simultaneously for trade purposes.
[321B D; 324D] Lord Rivers vs Adams, L.R.3 exhibit Div. 361, Harris & Anr.
vs Earl of Chesterfield and Anr.
, , Alfred F. Beckett Ltd. vs Lyons , referred to Lutchhmeeput Singh vs Sadaulla Nushyo & Ors., I.L.R. 9 Cal.
698 and Arjun Kaibarta vs Manoranjan De Bhoumick, I.L.R. , approved.
Henry Goodman vs The Mayor and Free Burgesses of the Borough of Saltash.
7 A.C. 633 and Mercer vs Denne, , 557 distinguished.
