By an election petition filed on May 10, 1966, the appellant challenged the election of the first respondent held on March 28.
1966 to the Rajya Sabha by members of the Punjab Vidhan Sabha and sought a declaration that he be declared duly elected as a member of the Rajya Sabha instead.
On July 1, 1966 the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the Tribunal and answer the claims made in the petition, the respondent filed a written statement in reply to the election petition and gave a notice under the proviso to section 97(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, of his intention to give evidence to prove that, the election of the appellant would have been void if he had been the returned candidate and if a petition challenging his election had been presented.
The notice under section 917(1) was accompanied by the prescribed statement and particulars and a treasury receipt evidencing the deposit of Rs. 1,000 as security under section 117 of the Act.
An objection was taken on behalf of the appellant that the amount of security deposited by the respondent was insufficient in that he should have deposited Rs. 2,000 and consequently the notice under the proviso to section 97(1) was invalid.
On October 7, 1966, the date fixed for argument on the preliminary issues, the respondent deposited a further sum of Rs. 1,000 as security and produced the relevant treasury receipt before the Tribunal, but the Tribunal upheld the appellant 's objection on the view that as the production of a receipt showing the deposit of Rs. 2,000 as security along with the notice was the condition precedent to the right of the respondent under section 97(1) to lead evidence in view of his failure to comply with this requirement, this right was lost to him and the subsequent deposit of Rs. 1,000 by him did not entitle him to lead in evidence under section 97(1).
The respondent thereupon filed a petition in the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution challenging the decision of the Tribunal and the High Court allowed the petition holding that it is only in cases in which the provisions of sections 117 and 118 with regard to deposit of security were not complied with before the date fixed for recording evidence under section 97(1) that the Tribunal could refuse to admit the evidence, and where, as in the present case, the entire amount of the security had been deposited before such date, the Tribunal must admit the evidence.
On appeal to this Court, HELD:Allowing the appeal: the Tribunal had rightly held that the respondent was required to produce with the notice under the proviso to section 97(1) a Government Treasury Receipt showing a deposit of Rs. 2,000 as security for costs of the recrimination and the High Court was in error in quashing this order.
[110 F G].
105 The notice of recrimination under section 97 is in substance a counter petition calling in question the claim that the other candidate has been duly elected.
Looking at the object and scheme of section 97 it is manifest that the provisions of sections 117 and 118 be applied mutatis mutandis to a proceeding under section 97.
The recriminator must produce a Government Treasury Receipt showing that a deposit of Rs. 2,000 has been made by him in favour of the Election Commissioner as cost of the recrimination.
As the notice of recrimination cannot be sent by post, it must be filed before the Tribunal, and reading s.117 with consequential adaptations for the purposes of the proviso to, S.97(1), it will appear that the Treasury Receipt showing the deposit of the security must be produced before the Tribunal along, with the notice of recrimination.
If the recriminator fails to give the requisite security under section 117 at the time of giving the notice of recrimination, he loses the right to lead evidence under s.97 and the notice of recrimination stands virtually rejected.
[18E H; 109A B.] N.R. Shikshak vs R. P. Dikshit, 1965 [A.L.J] 25, 4142, disapproved.
Kumaranand vs Brij Mohan, ; , distinguished.
There was no force in the contention that the proviso to section 97(1) having enacted that the forfeiture of the right to lead evidence would be penalty for failure to give the further security under section 118, the legislature could not have intended that the rejection of the notice of recrimination would be an additional penalty for this default, An order recording that the recriminator has no right to give evidence under section 97 is tantamount to an order rejecting the notice of recrimination and there is no substantial difference between the two.
[110 D F].
