The driver of the delivery van of the appellant company, was entrusted with some tyres for delivery at various addresses and he failed to account for two of the tyres.
After investigation, a domestic enquiry was held and the minutes of the enquiry were submitted to the Manager who gave notice to the driver to show cause why he should not be dismissed.
The driver showed cause but the Manager ordered his dismissal.
The respondent union of the workers then raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal set aside the dismissal holding that the enquiry was opposed to principles of natural justice and that the conclusion was perverse.
In appeal by the Company to this Court, Held: Ordinarily in all cases in which the facts are in con troversy the procedure to be followed is, that before a delinquent is asked anything, all the evidence against him must be led.
The situation may be different when the accusation is based on a matter of record or, the facts are admitted, in which case, it may be permissible to draw his attention to the evidence on record and ask for his explanation.
Even in such a case, the delinquent should be asked whether he would like to make a statement first or wait till the evidence is over, but failure to do so does not ipso facto vitiate the enquiry unless prejudice is caused or he had objected to the particular course that was followed.
Ultimately, it is a question of justice and fair play depending on the facts of each case.
[311A D] In the present case the minutes showed that the driver had every opportunity to controvert the case against him, and to prove his case, and that he was never at a disadvantage.
All that the Tribunal could do was to see that the domestic enquiry was properly conducted, and, since it was so conducted, the Tribunal was in error in exercising appellate powers by coming to a different conclusion.
[310E; 312G] Tata Oil Mills Co. vs The Workmen.
[1963] 2 L.L.J.78; Sur Enamel & Stamping Works vs The Workmen.
; ; ; Meenglas Tea Estate vs Its Workmen. ; ; ; Associated Cement Companies vs Their Workmen.
[1964] 3 S.C.R. 632; and The Central Bank of India vs Karunamoy Banerjee ; ; referred to.
