The Mysore Recruitment of Gazetted Probationers ' Rules 1959, make provision for direct recruitment to several cadres in the State Services on the basis of the result of a competitive examination.
Under the first part of r. 9(2), the candidates are required to indicate in their applications their preferences for the cadres they wished to join.
After the examination, the list of successful cardi dates in order of merit is published.
and, subject to certain reservations for Scheduled castes and tribes and Backward classes, the successful candidates have preferential claim in the order of merit to appointment in the cadres for which they indicated their preference.
The latter part of r. 9(2), however, reserves to the Government the right of appointing to any particular cadre any candi date whom it considers more suitable for such cadre.
In the present case an open competitive examination was '.held for recruitment to the posts of Assist ant Commissioners in the Mysore Administrative Service and of Assistant Controllers in the Mysore State Accounts Service.
Though both are Class I cadres the post of Assistant Commissioner had better prospects.
There were 20 vacancies in the posts of Assistant Commissioners.
The respondent indicated his preference for the post of Assistant Com missioner.
Though his rank was fourth, the Public Service Commission recommended that he and some others should be appointed as Assistant Controllers while those who ranked after the respondent were recommended for appointment as Assistant Commissioners.
The State Government accepted the recommendation.
The respondent thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court asking for an order directing the State to appoint him as Assistant Commissioner.
The High Court held that the Government had under the latter part of r. 9(2) the power to decide to which post or cadre the respondent should be appointed.
but that the Government should itself make up its mind without consulting the Public Service Commission, and directed the Government to decide accordingly.
The State appealed to this Court Held: The latter part of r. 9(2) was violative of articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution and therefore the State Government had no power to withhold the post of Assistant Commissioner from the respondent who bad a right to be appointed to that post having regard to his rank in order of merit.
The High Court should, therefore, have directed the Government to appoint the respondent to the post.
[354B C] L/S5SCI 350 The Rules are silent on the question as to how the Government was to find out the suitability of a candidate for a particular cadre, nor do the Rules give the Public Service Commission the power to test the suitability of a candidate for a particular cadre or to recommend that he is more suitable for it.
Further, there is no provision in the Rules under which the Government can test the suitability of a candidate for any cadre after the result of the examination is published.
Therefore, the latter part of r. 9(2) gives the,Government an arbitrary power of ignoring the just claims of successful candidates, for recruitment to offices under the State, and thus, subvert '$ the basic objectives of ensuring equality of opportunity in the matter of employment by open competition.
[352H: 353B C; 354A B]
