The appellant was an Overseer in the Public Works Department of the Central Provinces and Berar Government.
In 1947 he was suspended from service and prosecuted under section 161 I.P.C. Ultimately, on orders from the High Court, the prosecution was dropped.
In a departmental enquiry also the appellant was exonerated, By an order dated December 1960, the Government held that the suspension of the appellant and the ' departmental enquiry against him "were not wholly unjustified".
The order then directed that the appellant should be reinstated in service with effect from the date of the order and retired from the date, he, having already attained superannuation age on September 5, 1952 and that the entire period of absence from duty should be treated as period spent on duty under F.R. 54(5) for purposes of pension only, but that he should not be allowed any pay beyond what he had actually received or what was allowed to him, by way of subsistence allowance during the period of his suspension.
The appellant filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution contending that F. Rule 54(2) governed his case and not F. Rule 54(5).
The High Court decided against him but granted him certificate to appeal to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that before deciding which rule applied to his case the Government should have given him an opportunity to be heard.
The respondent urged that in passing a consequential order a hearing is not necessary.
Held: An order passed under F R. 54 is not always a consequential order nor is such order necessarily a continuation of the departmental proceeding taken against the employee.
[359E F] Consideration under F.R. 54 depending as it does on facts and circumstances in their entirety, passing an order on the basis of factual finding arrived at from such facts and circumstances and such an order resulting in pecuniary loss to the Government servant must be held to be an objective rather than a subjective function.
The very nature of the function implies the duty to act judicially.
In such a case if an opportunity to show cause against the action proposed is not afforded, as admittedly it was not done in the pre sent case, the order is liable to be struck down as invalid on the ground that it was one in breach of the principles of natural justice.
State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Devi and Ors. ; , relied on.
[359H; 360A B] V. R. Gokhale vs State of Maharashtra, I.L.R. [1963] Bom.
537, approved.
