The land of the appellant was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 and the compensation was apportioned between the appellant and his lessee.
The appellant claimed that be was entitled to the whole of the compensation while his, lessee claimed a larger share.
At their instance, references were made to the Civil Court under section 18 of the Land Acquisition Act, But, before the references were made, the respondent, who was a decree holder against the lessee, attached the lessee 's share of the compensation amount in execution of his decree.
Subsequently the respondent withdrew the lessee 's share of the compensation amount in execution of his decree.
The appellant and his lessee, filed a compromise petition before the Civil Judge and the respondent also applied to be impleaded as party to the References.
The Civil Judge dismissed the respondent 's applications.
The respondent thereupon, filed revision petitions in the High Court.
The High Court, held: (1) that the respondent was a person interested in the compensation within the meaning of section 3 (b) of the Land Acquisition Act and was therefore entitled to claim that he should be allowed to join as a party; and (ii) that the revision petitions were competent.
In appeal, this Court, Held: (i) The respondent was a 'person interested ' within section 3(b) of the Act, because, he was claiming an interest in the compensation.
He was also interested in the objections which were pending before the Court in the references made to it and was a person whose interest would be affected by the objections.
within section 21 of the Act.
Accordingly, he was entitled to be made a party.
[367H; 371C D] The definition of 'Person interested ' in section 3 (b) is an inclusive definition and in order to fall within it it is not necessary that a person should claim an interest in the acquired land.
It is sufficient if he claims an interest in the compensation to be awarded.
A person claiming art interest in the compensation would be a person interested in the objections to be determined under section 20 of the Act, if the objection is to the amount of compensation or the appor tionment of compensation, and if his claim is likely to be affected by the decision on the objection.
Under section 21 the interest , of a person who is not affected by the objection are not to be considered but if he is affected, there is no restriction on the grounds which can be raised by him to protect his interest.
Therefore, a person claiming an interest in the compensation is entitled to be heard under Ss. 20 and 21.
The sections do not prescribe that his claim to an interest in compensation should be as 'compensation '.
A person who has no interest in land can never claim compensation qua compensation, for what he claims is an interest in the compensation, to be.
363 awarded.
That is not to say that a person claiming an interest in the compensation may not claim that the compensation awarded for the acquired land is low, if it affects his interests.
[367G H; 368D H] Grant vs State of Bihar ; , followed.
Golap Khan vs Bholanath Marick, , Siva Prasad Bhattadu vs A.E.L. Mission, A.I.R. 1926 Mad.
307 approved.
Manjoor Ahmed vs Rajlaxmi Dasi, A.I.R. 1956 Cal.
263 Abu Bakar vs Peary Mohan Mukherjee, I.L.R. , Gobinda Kumar Roy vs Debendra Kumar Roy Mahammad Safi vs Haran Chandra and Karuna Sindhu Dhar vs Panna Lai Paramanik , distinguished.
(ii) The High Court was right in holding that the orders of the Civil Judge were not awards within the meaning of section 54 of the Land Acquisition Act; and as they were not awards and no appeals lay, the revisions were competent and the High Court was justified in interfering as the Civil Judge refused to exercise a jurisdiction vested in him.
[371F]
