The Deputy Chief Controller of Imports & Exports New Delhi filed a complaint against the appellant under section 5 read with section 6 of the Imports & Exports (Control) Act, 1947 before the Magistrate First Class Delhi.
In the witness box the complainant admitted that when he filed the complaint he had not seen any of the documents referred to in the report of the Special Police Establishment in connection with the case and had not verified personally all the detail* mentioned in the report.
The appellant filed an application requesting the Magistrate not to take cognizance of the case as the complaint did not satisfy the requirements of section 6 of the Act.
The plea was rejected by the Magistrate, the Sessions Judge and the High Court.
An appeal to this Court was filed by special leave.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that as in the case of sanction for prosecution of certain offences, before a court can take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 5 on the basis of a complaint under section 6, the prosecution will have to establish that the facts constituting the offence, were placed before the complainant, and that the latter on a proper consideration of these facts has filed the complaint.
Held: (i) The principles applicable to cases requiring sanc tion have no application to filing of complaints under section 6 of the Act.
Section 6 only insists that the complaint is to be in writing and that it must be made by an officer authorised in that behalf.
The limitation contained in s.6, is only regarding the particular officer who could file a complaint and, when once he satisfies those requirements, the bar is removed to the taking of cognizance by a court, on a complaint made in accordance with section 6.
[398F G] In the present case the complaint had been made by an autho rised officer in writing.
The requirements of section 6 were therefore satisfied and the Magistrate rightly took cognizance of the offence.
[399B C] Gokulchand Dwarkadas Morarka vs The King, L.R. 75 I.A. 30; Madan Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 637, 641 and Jaswant Singh vs State of Punjab, ; , 765, referred to.
S.A. Venkataraman vs The State, , 1041, applied.
Feroz Din vs The State of West Bengal, ; , 330,distinguished.
