The respondent was employed as a Tracer in the Engineering Department in the erstwhile Hyderabad State where the cadre of Tracers consisted of both matriculates as well as non matriculates and no distinction was made between them.
As a result of the reorganisation of States in 1956 he was allotted to the appellant Mysore State where the cadre of Tracers was reorganised into two, ,one consisting of matriculate Tracers in a higher scale of pay and the other of non matriculates in a lower scale.
The respondent was given the option either to remain in his old Hyderabad scale of pay or to accept the new scale applicable to non matriculates.
He refused to exercise the option and claimed that the cadre of Tracers should not have been divided into two grades and that no distinction should have been made between matriculates and non matriculates.
His claim was rejected by the Superintending Engineer on March 19, 1958 and he filed a writ petition in the High Court praying that the order of the Superintending Engineer be quashed and for the issue of writ in the nature, of mandamus to fix his pay in the scale prescribed for matriculate Tracers.
The High Court allowed the petition, holding that there was no valid reason for making a distinction as both matriculate and non matriculate Tracers were doing the same kind of work and the distinction made was in violation of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
On appeal to this Court, Held: Allowing the appeal.
Higher educational qualifications are relevant considerations for fixing a higher pay scale and the classification of two grades of Tracers in the new Mysore State was not violative of articles 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
Articles 14 and 16 form part of the same constitutional code Of guarantees and supplement each other.
In other words article 16 is only an instance of the application of the general rule of equality laid down in article 14 and it should be construed as such.
Hence there is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are alleged to have been favoured.
[411E F] 408 The provisions of article 14 or article 16 do not exclude the laying down of selective tests, nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
Such qualifications need not be only technical and it is open to the Government to consider the general educational attainments of the candidates and to give preference to candidates who have better educational qualifications besides the technical proficiency of a Tracer.
[411G412B] General Manager, Southern Railway vs Rangachari, ; , 596, referred to.
There was no force in the respondent 's contention that because of his having been in one grade with matriculate Tracers in the old State and, on his being made to work in a separate non matriculate grade in the new State his conditions of service were adversely affected in violation of section 116(7) of the .
Furthermore the basis of promotion was merit and seniority based on the interstate seniority list prepared under the provisions of the Act; thus the respondent 's seniority had not been affected and he was not deprived of any accrued benefits.
[412F G; 414C D]
