The services of respondent No. 3 a permanent employee of appellant corporation, were placed at the disposal of appellant 's subsidiary company.
The subsidiary company by an order appointed respondent No. 3.
on probation and stated that he would be confirmed after the end of probation period.
After respondent No. 3 had worked with the subsidiary company for more than the probationary period, his services were terminated and he was paid retrenchment compensation.
Respondent No. 3 asserted continuance of his employment under the appellant, which was declined, There upon he demanded retrenchment compensation from the appellant also, which, too, was refused.
The matter was referred for adjudication by the State Government, and the Tribunal directed reinstatement of respondent No. 3 with back wages.
In appeal to this Court,the appellant Corporation contended that (i) respondent No. 3 having been given permanent appointment in the subsidiary company, and having obtained retrenchment compensation from that company, could not claim that he was still holding a post in the appellant corporation and could not, therefore, claim reinstatement; and (ii) the dispute that was raised was confined to compensation.for retrenchment and did not relate to the validity of the retrenchment or reinstatement, so that the State Government had no jurisdiction to refer the dispute to the Industrial Tribunal.
HELD: (i) Respondent No. 3 could not claim reinstatement in the appellant corporation.
Though he did not cease to be an employee of the appellant when his services were first placed at the disposal of the subsidiary company by the appellant, he ceased to be an employee of the appellant later when he was confirmed in the subsidiary company.
He also accepted the retrenchment compensation at the time of termination of the employment in the subsidiary company.
In case he had continued to be in the service of the appellant, he would.
not have been entitled to retrenchment compensation from the subsidiary company and, even if the subsidiary company had any legal liability to contribute towards his retrenchment compen sation which might have become ultimately payable to him on his retrenchment from the appellant corporation, that amount would have been paid by the subsidiary company to the appellant and not to respondent No. 3 himself.
Further he was not entitled to any retrenchment compensation when he left the service of the appellant willingly for there was no compulsion on him to go to the subsidiary company.
[519C F] Nokes vs Doncaster Amalagamated Collieries Ltd., [1940] A.C. 1014 held inapplicable.
(ii) The respondents.
in their claims Put forward before the management of the appellant requested for payment of retrenchment compensation and did not raise any dispute for reinstatement.
516 Since no such dispute about reinstatement was raised by the respondents before the management of the appellant, the State Government was not competent to refer a question of reinstatement as an industrial dispute for adjudication by the Tribunal .
The dispute that the State Government could have referred competently was the dispute relating to payment of retrenchment compensation by the appellant to respondent No. 3 which had been refused.
A mere "demand to a Government without a dispute being raised by the workmen, with their employee cannot become an industrial dispute.
[522H 523D].
