The Assam Acquisition of Land for Flood Control and Prevention of Erosion Act, 1955, was passed before the Constitution was amended by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act.
As the Act did not apply to the lands which were taken possession of before it came into force, the Assam Acquisition of Land for Flood Control and Prevention of Erosion (Validation) Act, 1959, Act XXI of 1960 was pass ed, validating the acquisition of lands of which such possession had been taken.
Under section 2 of the 1960 Act any land taken over for the construction of embankments before the 1955 Act came into force unless the acquisition was validly made under any other law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been validity acquired under the 1955 Act and is deemed to have vested in the State Government from the date the land was actually taken possession of; and compensation was payable in accordance with the principles in section 6 of the 1955 Act.
Under section 6(1) of the 1955 Act the owner of the land shall get compensation for land including standing crops and trees, if any, but excluding buildings or structures, a sum not.
exceeding 40 times the annual land revenue in case of periodic patta land and 15 times the annual land revenue in case of annual patta land.
Under section 6(2) the owner shall get compensation for the building or structure, if any, a sum equivalent to the sale proceeds of the materials plus fifteen per cent thereof.
In 1954.
the Assam Government took possession of the lands of the respondent for the construction of an embankment and the respondent was asked to submit his claim for compensation under the 1955 and 1960 Acts after the 1960 Act was passed.
He then filed a writ petition challenging the validity of both the Acts and prayed for a direction prohibiting the State Government from taking action under those Acts as the compensation payable was illusory and in adequate.
The High Court held that the 1955 Act was violative of article 31(2), as it stood before the Fourth Amendment Act, that it was not protected by article 31A, and that, the 1960 Act was not independent of the 1955 Act and fell with it.
In appeal by the State Government to this Court the appellant submitted that the two Acts were not violative of articles 14 and 31(2) and were in any event protected by articles 31A and 31 (5) (b) (ii).
HELD: (1) The constitutional validity of the 1955 Act must be judged by article 31(2) as it stood before the Fourth Amendment Act.
Since the assessment of land.
revenue in Assam many years ago.
the market value of the lands has increased by leaps and bounds.
Under s, 6(1) of the Act, the Collector, in determining the compensation, L/J(N)6SCI 10 562 should take into account the value of the land as at the date of the acquisition and other factors, but this is meaningless because under the first part of section 6(1) the compensation cannot exceed a fixed multiple of the annual land revenue.
The State made no attempt to show that a multiple of land revenue payable for the land is a just equivalent of or has any relation to the market value of the land ,on the date of the acquisition.
The sale proceeds under section 6(2) can not be regarded as a just equivalent of the value of the building and it stood at the time of the acquisition.
The Act, therefore, does not ensure payment of just equivalent of the land appropriated and is violative of article 31(2) as it stood before the Fourth Amendment.
[576H; 577F H , 578A C] State of West Bengal vs Bela Banerjee, ; and State of Madras vs D. Namasivaya Mudaliar, [1964] 6 S.C.R. 936, followed.
(2) The Act is a purely expropriatory measure.
It provides for acquisition of lands both urban and agricultural for executing works in connection with flood control or prevention of erosion.
A piece of land acquired under the Act need not be an estate or part of an estate.
The Act is not a law concerning agrarian reform and hence is not protected by article 31A of the Constitution.
[568G H] Kochuni vs State of Madras, ; Ranjit Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and P. V. Mudaliar vs Special Deputy Collector, Madras, followed.
(3) The Act is a law for the acquisition of property and not a law for preventing danger to life or property, and so, it is not protected by article 31 (5) (b) (ii).
Article 31 (5) (b) (ii); provides that nothing in article 31(2) would affect the provisions of any law which the State might make after the commencement of the Constitution for the promotion of public health or the prevention of danger to life or pro perty.
A law for promotion of public health or for prevention of danger to life or property sometimes has to provide for destruction and impairment of the value of private property and the taking of temporary possession of the property by the State.
Any substantial abridgment of the right of ownership of property including its destruction or injuriously affecting it or taking away its possession and enjoyment from the owner, amounted to a taking of property within the purview of article 31(2), before it was amended by the Fourth Amendment Act.
But for article 31(5)(b)(ii) a law authorising such a taking of property would have been invalid unless it provided for compensation.
The clause saved such laws from the operation of cl.
(2) and these laws were not invalid because they authorised such a taking without payment of compensation.
A law authorising the abatement of a public menace by destroying or taking temporary possession of private properties, if the peril cannot be abated in some other way, can be regarded as a law for promotion of public health or prevention of danger to life or property within the purview of cl.
5(b)(ii).
But it is not possible to say that a law for permanent acquisition of property is such a law.
The object of the acquisition may be the opening of a public park for the improvement of public health or the erection of an embankment to prevent danger to life or property from flood.
As the acquired property belongs to the State, the State is free to deal with it as it chooses after the acquisition.
It may close the public park and use the property for other purposes, or the river may recede or change its course so that it may no longer be necessary to keep the embankment.
The State may then sell the property and appropriate the sale proceeds to its own use.
Acquistions of property for the opening of a public park or for the erection of dams and embankments were always made under the 563 Land Acquisition Act and it could not have been intended that such acquisition could be made under laws coming within the Purview of el.
(5)(b)(ii) without payment of compensation.
5(b)(11) did not protect laws for acquisition of property from the operation of article 31(2) as it stood before the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act.
[574C H; 575A D] State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose, [1954] S.C.R. 587, and Dwarkadas Shriniwas of Bombay vs Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. ; , referred to.
(4) The effect of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act is that a deprivation of property, short of the transfer of the ownership or the right to possession of any property to the State, is not within the purview of article 31(2).
A law, made after the Fourth Amendment Act providing for destruction of property or impairment of its value, is not invalid on the ground that it does not provide for payment of compensation, because, it is no longer within the purview of article 31(2), and, it is not necessary to invoke cl.
(5) (b) (ii) to save it.
It cannot therefore be contended that laws for permanent acquisition of property for the promotion of public health or prevention of danger to life or property, should be held to be saved by article 31 (5) (b) (ii) and that otherwise the clause would be otiose.
Even now the clause will protect laws providing for requisitioning or temporary occupation of property strictly necessary for promotion of public health or prevention of danger to life or property.
But as the Fourth Amendment did not amend cl.
(5)(b)(ii) and did not change its original meaning, the clause will not save laws for the Permanent acquisition of property, from the operation of article 31(2).
[575G H; 576A C] (5) There is unjust discrimination between owners of land similarly situated by the mere accident of some land being required the purposes mentioned in the 1955 Act and some land being required or other purposes, and therefore, the Act is violative of article 14.
In the State of Assam, some land may be taken under the 1955 Act for the purpose of works and other measure in connection with flood control and prevention of erosion on payment of nominal compensation while, an adjoining land may be taken for other public purposes under the Land Acquisition Act on payment of adequate compensation.
Article 14 permits reasonable classification and differential treatment based on substantial differences having reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved.
It is not possible to hold that the differential treatment of the land acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, and those acquired under the Assam Act of 1955 has any reasonable relation to the object of the acquisition by the State.
[578E G; 579C E] P. Vajravelu Mudaliar vs Dy.
Collector, [1965] 1 S.C.R. 614, followed.
[Whether the Act is ultra vires on the ground that the State may acquire lands at its option either under the 1955 Act or under the Land Acquisition Act, left open.] [579H] (6) The core of the 1960 Act is the deeming provision of s, 2, under which, certain lands are deemed to be acquired under the earlier Act.
The 1960 Act is entirely dependent upon the continuing existence and validity of the earlier Act of 1955.
As the earlier Act is unconstitutional and has no legal existence the deemed acquisition tinder the 1960 Act is equally invalid.
As this deeming provision is invalid all the ancillary provisions fall to the ground along with it and the provisions of the 1960 Act are incapable of enforcement and are invalid.
The State Legislature has no power to enact that an acquisition made under a constitutionally invalid Act is valid.
[580D F H] 564
