The Standing Orders of the appellant 's establishment, duly certified under the , dealt, inter alia, with provisions relating to leave to be granted to the workmen.
In I.C. 11 of 1955 the Industrial Tribunal by its award modified the said standing orders and made provisions for certain kinds of leave.
The award came into operation on November 18, 1956 under section 19(3) read with section 17A(7) of the .
On further disputes arising the parties entered on September 19, 1958 into a settlement under section 12(3) of the whereby in return for the revision of the scales of pay, the workmen agreed that for a period of three years commencing from January 1, 1958, they would not raise any dispute on certain matters including leave.
This settlement was terminated by the workmen by notice dated August 14, 1961 under section 19(2) of the .
In 1963 the State Government again referred to the Industrial Tribunal an industrial dispute between the appellant and the workmen.
This dispute was registered as I.D. No. 8 of 1963 and the questions referred related to privilege leave, casual leave and sick leave.
The appellant urged before the Tribunal that it was not competent to hear the reference because (i) the earlier award in I.C. 11 of 1955 which dealt with matters relating to leave had not been terminated by a notice under section 19(6) of the ; (ii) the Standing Orders in question could be modified only by the procedure under the Standing Orders, Act and not under the because the former Act was self sufficient in regard to the matters covered by it.
The Tribunal and the High Court both rejected the appellant 's objections, whereupon, by special leave, appeal was filed in this Court.
On behalf of the workmen it was stated that notice of termination of the earlier award under section 19(6) of the Industrial disputes Act had been given by them in a letter dated June 26, 1961.
HELD:(i) When there is a subsisting award binding on the parties the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to consider the same points in a fresh reference.
In the present case the earlier award had not been terminated and the reference was therefore incompetent.
[588D] The letter of June 26, 1961 could not be treated as a notice under s.19(6) of the terminating the earlier award in I.C. 11 of 1955 because it did not convey any such intention.
Moreover it was written while the settlement of September 19, 1958 by which the workmen had bound themselves not to raise any dispute regarding leave facilities for three years was still in force, for the notice of.
termination of the settlement under section 19(2) was given by the workmen only on August 14, 1961.
Until the said settlement was terminated the union of workmen had no right to make demands about leave facilities as it purported to do on June 26, 1961.
[587G 588C] 582 The Workmen of Western India Match Co. Ltd. vs The Western India Match Co. Ltd., ; , referred to.
(ii) The Standing Orders Act which has for its object, the defining with sufficient precision.
the conditions of employment, under the industrial establishments and to make the said conditions known to the workmen, has provided more or less a speedy remedy to the workmen, for the purpose of having a standing order modified or for having any question relating to the application, or interpretation of a standing order.
referred to a labour court.
But there is no warrant for holding that merely because the Standing Orders Act is a selfcontained statute with regard to the matters mentioned therein, the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal under the Act.
to adjudicate upon the matters covered by the standing orders, has been in any manner abridged or taken away, It will always be open in a proper case, for the union or workmen to raise an 'industrial dispute ' as that expression is defined in section 2(k) of the , and if such a dispute is referred by the Government concerned for adjudication the Industrial Tribunal or Labour Court as the case may be will have jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the same.
[595B D] Guest, Keen, Williams., Private Ltd. vs P. J. Sterling, ; , The Baualkot Cement Co. Ltd. vs R. K. Pathan, [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 697 and Salem Electricity vs Employees. , distinguished.
