On October 1, 1963, the State Government issued a notification under section 3(c), authorising one M who was then the Special Land Acquisition Officer, Baroda, to perform the functions of a Collector and also directed him to hold an enquiry under the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules on the application of the third respondent company requesting the government to acquire the appellant 's land.
In supersession of that notification, the Government issued another notification on October 11, 1963 authorising all Special Land Acquisition Officers to perform the functions of the Collector under the Act within the area of their respective jurisdiction.
After M had made an enquiry under Rule 4, the respondent State Government issued a notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, on August 28.
1964 in respect of the appellant 's land which was stated to be required for the establishment of a factory by the third respondent company.
Objections filed by the appellants in an enquiry under section 5A were rejected and the State Government thereafter issued a notification under section 6 on October 18, 1965.
The appellants challenged the notification by writ petitions but these were, dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants, inter alia.
(i) that M was only a Special Land Acquisition Officer and not the Collector within the meaning of Rule 4; in any event the notification of October 11, 1963 did not "specially" appoint him but was a general notification authorising all the Special Land Acquisition Officers in the State appointed not only before the date of section 4 notification but also those who would be appointed in future,.
furthermore, the notification did not "appoint" but simply authorised him to perform the functions of the Collector, the State Goverrunent had not given any direction to him to make a report as required by .Rule 4; therefore the enquiry held by him under that Rule and the ,report made was invailed and consequently no notification either under section 4 or section 6 could be validly issued; (ii) that the section 6 notification was issued without complying with Part VII of the Act and without the valid consent of the State Government as required by section 39; (iii) that the acquisition was made mala fide and without application of mind to the relevant facts: (iv) that the acquisition did not involve any public purpose: and (v) that the State Government was bound to give an opportunity of being heard to the appellants before taking a decision under section 5A particularly when the report made by M was against the acquisition, 598 HELD: Dismissing the appeal.
(i) No objection to the appointment of M to perform the functions of the Collector under section 3(c) or to his competence to make the enquiry and the report under Rule 4 or their legality can be validly made.
It follows that the consent given by the State Government in initiating acquisition proceedings was validly given and was in comp liance with the provisions of Part VII of the Act and the State Government could validly issue the impugned notifications.
[604G] There being nothing repugnant in the subject or context, the word "Collector" must, by virtue of section 20 of the , have the same meaning in the Rules as in section 3(c) of the Act which includes an officer specially appointed to perform the functions of the Collector.
[602H] The words "specially appointed" simply mean that as a Sp.
L.A. Officer is not a Collector and cannot perform the functions of a Collector under the Act.
he has to be "specially appointed", i.e. appointed for the specific purpose of performing those functions.
The word "specially" has therefore reference to the special purpose of appointing and is not used to convey the sense of a special as against a general appointment.
Furthermore, section 15 of the General Clauses Act provides that where a Central Act empowers an authority to appoint a Person to Perform a certain function such power can be exercised either by name or by virtue of office.
[603C F] In the context of section 3(c) when an officer is authorised to perform the functions of the Collector, it means that he is appointed to perform those functions.
The distinction between the two is without a difference.
[604B] There is no force in the contention that the enquiry under rule 4 has to be held after the notification under section 4 and not before.
There is nothing in rule 4 or any other rule to warrant such a proposition.
(ii) On the facts, the appellants had failed to establish their allegation either as to mala fides or the non application of mind by the State Government.
(iii) There is no force in the contention that when the appellant 's lands were already being used for the manufacture of a building, material and that was also a public purpose, the legislature could not have intended to empower the Government to destroy that purpose and substitute in its place another Public purpose.
[606D] Arora Case, [1962] Supp, 2 'S.C.R. 149: referred to.
(iv) It is not disputed that during the section 5A enquiry the appellants were heard and their objections were taken on record.
The record of the enquiry is required under section 5A to be sent to the Government so as to enable the Government to decide whether the acquisition is necessary for a public purpose or for a company.
The Government thus had before it not only the opinion of M but also all that the appellants had to say by way of objections against the proposed acquisition.
The appellants therefore had an opportunity, of being heard.
Neither section 5A nor any other provision of the Act lays down that a second opportunity has to be given before the issuance of the Section 6 notification.
[606F 607A]
