The respondents purchased the land in dispute from the bhumidhars thereof, but 'P ' (predecessor in interest of the appellants) claimed to be in possession of the land and a dispute was raised under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The Magistrate attached the land and relegated the parties to a suit.
The respondents filed a plaint seeking a declaration of their rights and removal of 'P 's name from the record of rights.
The trial court after getting a finding from the Revenue Court granted a decree to the respondents.
The first Appellate Court however decided in favour of 'P ' and on the basis of that finding 'P ' got possession from the criminal court.
The respondents went in second appeal to the High Court which decided in their favour and gave them a decree for possession of the land after allowing them to amend their plaint by adding a prayer for possession.
The appellants came to this Court and urged: (i) 'P ' was recorded as an occupant ' in the khasra of 1356 Fasli and therefore under section 20(b) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act 1 of 1951 he was an adhivasi, (ii) 'P ' was recorded as in 'cultivatory pos session ' of the land in 1359 Fasli and on that ground also he was an adhivasi; (iii) the High Court was bound by the findings of the first Appellate Court that the appellant was an 'occupant ' in 1356 Fasli and in cultivatory possession in 1359 Fasli: (iv) A suit for possession even against a trespasser could lie only in the 'Revenue Court and not in the Civil Court, and the High Court by allowing amendment of the plaint in the second appeal could net assume to itself jurisdiction which civil courts do not possess.
HELD: (i) The entry in the Khasra of 1356 Fasli on which the appellants relied did not fulfil the requirements of s 20(b) of Act 1 of 1951.
'P ' was not shown in the entry as 'Kahiz ' or 'Snihi ' etc.
There was also strong evidence which was relied on by the Revenue Court but not considered by the first Appellate Court that the name of 'P ' was surreptitiously entered in the Khasra of 1356 P.
The appellant 's case under section 20(b) of the Abolition Act therefore failed.
[621A F] Amba Prasad vs Abdul Noor Khan & Ors., ; , referred to.
618 (ii) The appellants ' case under section 3 of U.P. Act 31 of 1952 also could not be sustained.
To get the benefit of the section it had to be.
established that P was in actual cultivatory possession of the land in 1359 F and that fact had not been established by direct evidence of possession, nor was it established by the entry relied on by him.
A person who has no right to occupy land may rely upon his occupation against a third person who has no better title, but he cannot set up that right against the owner of the land.
Section 3 conferred rights upon persons in possession of land against the tenure holders, it was not intended to put a premium upon forcible occupation of land by landless citizens.
Possession of a person in wrongful occupation could not be deemed to be 'cultivatory possession ' within the meaning of the section.
[622F 623F] Ram Krishna vs Bhagwan Baksh Singh, , ap proved.
Nanhoo Mal V. Muloo and Ors., I.L.R. [1963] All. 751, disapproved.
(iii) The High Court was not bound in the present case by the, findings of the first Appellate Court as the latter had ignored important evidence on record which proved that the entries relied on by 'P ' were not genuine.
[623G] (iv) The High Court rightly granted to the respondents a decree for possession after allowing the respondents to add a prayer for possession to their plaint.
When the High Court held in favour of the plaintiffs respondents and rejected the claim made by 'P ' it was justified and indeed bound, to avoid giving a fresh lease of life to the litigation and to make an order consistently with the rights declared by it, since 'P ' had during the pendency of the suit managed to obtain possession of the land from the Court Officer who was in possession of the land.
A party who is defeated on the merits of the dispute! may not by securing an order from another court during the pendency of the suit be permitted to displace the jurisdiction of the civil court to try the suit which was within its competence when the suit was filed.
[625D E]
