On reference of an industrial dispute, the Labour Court took, the view that the services of the workmen concerned had been terminated, under instructions of the Receiver of the Company appointed in a suit long before the first respondent became owner of the company; that the Receiver in possession was the only party impleaded and the new management, viz., the first respondent had not been brought on record, nor was it a party to the reference, made by the State Government; that the purchase of the company, by the first respondent, did not show that the latter had taken over any liabilities of the previous management, with regard to the claim of the workmen; and that there had been no purchase of the goodwill of the company.
On these grounds, the Labour Court held that no relief could be granted, as against the first respondent, and that the reference itself had become infructuous.
In appeal to this Court, the workmen appellants contended that (i) the view of the Labour Court that the first respondent was not liable for the claims of workmen was erroneous; and (ii) even if it be held that the first respondent was not liable, the Labour Court, which had ample jurisdiction, in this regard, should have issued notice, either to the Receiver appointed in the suit, or the Official Liquidator, or to both of them an proceeded to investigate and adjudicate upon the claims of the work men.
HELD: (i) The first respondent was not liable to answer any the claims of the workmen.
He was not in the picture when the order terminating their service was made, nor when the order referring the dispute to the Labour Court was made.
Having due regard to the various recitals in the sale deed and considered in the light of the principles laid down by this Court, in Anakapalla Cooperative Agricultural & Industrial Society Ltd. vs Workmen, the first respondent was not the successor in interest of, the Company.
What was, purchased, by the first respondent, was only the equity of redemption in a part of the assets of the Tea Company, with respect to whit the Official Liquidator was still functioning.
Even on the basis that the first respondent was considered to be a person, to whom the ownership of the undertaking has been transferred, the claims of the workmen had to be considered, as against the Company, in accordance with section 25 FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, when its pro viso could not be invoked.
Section 25F was in force when the se vices of the workmen were terminated and section 25FF had come in effect long before the purchase by the first respondent.
[632G 633F] 627 Anakapalla Co operative Agricultural and Industrial Society Ltd. V. Its Workmen, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 730, followed.
(ii) Even after negativing the claims of the workmen, as against the first respondent, the Labour Court should not have merely closed the proceedings, by holding that the reference had lapsed.
On the other hand, the Labour Court should have issued notices to the Receiver, or the Liquidator or to both, and, in their presence, should have considered the question as to whether the workmen were en titled to claim relief.
In fact, the order of reference also clearly showed that the Labour Court had full jurisdiction to consider as to whether the termination of the services of the workmen, was justified, and whether they were entitled to either reinstatement, or any other relief, in lieu thereof.
[634B D]
