The appellant obtained a decree against two persons who, along with their wives, migrated to Pakistan.
Before the decree was passed, the two judgment debtors had executed two deeds releasing their property, which was a building in favour of the wives.
The property was declared evacuee property under the and on the appellant 's application, his claim based on the decree was registered by the Custodian.
Later, the Custodian held that the evacuee property belonged to the wives of the judgment debtors.
The appellant filed a suit for setting aside the release deeds on the ground that they were of no effect as being in fraud of the creditors.
But, before the suit was filed, the Central Government, in pursuance of a notification issued under section 12 of the , acquired the property.
As a result of the notification, the property which was in law the property of the evacuees though it was under the administration of and vested in, the Custodian under the 1950 Act became the pro perty of the Central Government free from all encumbrances.
So, in addition to the main plea in the suit the appellant also contended that section 12 of the 1954 Act and the notification issued thereunder violated articles 19(1)(f) and 14 of the Constitution.
He further contended that the amendment by Act 91 of 1956 of section 10(2)(m) of the 1950 Act, as a result of which the Custodian 's power to pay the eva cuee 's debts was deleted from the clause, was ultra vires.
On an application under article 228, the High Court tried the two constitutional issues and decided them against the appellant and remanded the suit to the trial court.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1)(a) Section 12 of 1954 Act did not interfere with the appellant 's right to acquire, hold and dispose of his property, namely, the decree against the evacuees.
At no time did the appellant have any right whatsoever in the property which vested in the Central Government on the issue of the notification.
Its only effect was that the appellant could not proceed against the property in execution of his decree.
Therefore the appellant could not claim the protection under article 19(1)(f).
[501A: 502A D] (b) It could not be said that there was violation of article 14 on the ground that decree holders against non evacuee property could execute their decrees while decree holders against evacuee property could not.
There is a reasonable classification between evacuee property and non evacuee property, and there is a clear nexus between the object to be achieved by the 1954 Act, namely, rehabilitation of evacuees from Pakistan, and the provision in section 12, by which 498 the property of evacuees in India is to be utilized for such rehabilitation.
[502E G] (c) The appellant cannot also be heard to say that section 12 impairs the obligation of the judgment debtors under contract between them and himself because, there is no prohibition against such a law in the Indian Constitution.
[501F] (2) The amendment of section 10(2)(m) made no difference to the legal position, for the power of the Custodian to pay the debts of the evacuee still remained unimpaired under section 10(2)(n) read with 10(1).
Therefore, it was unnecessary to consider the invalidity of the amendment of section 10(2)(m).
[500F H] Raja Bhanupratap, Singh vs Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property, U.P. ; , followed.
(3) Though the appellant could not claim to proceed against the property in suit or its income, after the date on which it became vested in the Central Government by virtue of the notification under section 12, he could ask the Custodian to pay him out of the moneys lying with him on the date of such vesting if he can satisfy him in the manner provided in section 10(2)(n) read with section 10(1) of the 1950 Act. 'The trial court would therefore have to decide the issue whether the release deeds were fictitious and fraudulent, and, if it found in favour of the appellant it would then be open to him to approach the Custodian for such orders as the Custodian thinks fit to pass with respect to the moneys, if any, lying with him on the date of vesting.
[503F H]
