In view of article 286 (1) (a) of the Constitution, as it stood at the relevant time, the sales by the appellants (registered dealers) outside the State of Bombay were not exigible to tax.
The appellants.were directed to refund amounts collected by them from their purchasers in respect of these sales by way of tax, failing which the amounts would be forfeited under section 12A(4) of the Bombay Sales Tax Act.
The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court to restrain the respondents from taking action against them under section 12A(4), The High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal, this Court, Held: section 12A(4) of the Bombay Sales Tax Act was void being violative of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Prima facie the appellants were entitled to get the amount ordered.
to be refunded to them.
It was for the respondents to establish that the same was liable to be forfeited.
Even according to the respondents that amount could be forfeited only as a measure of penalty.
Under our jurisprudence no one can be penalised without a proper enquiry.
[740 E F].
The impugned provision which provided forfeiture of the amount in the hands of the dealers, did not lay down any procedure for ascertaining whether in fact the dealer concerned hid collected any amount by way of tax from his purchasers outside the State and if so what that amount was.
Neither section 12A(4) nor any rule framed under the Act contemplated any enquiry,, much less a reasonable enquiry in which the person complained of could plead and prove his case or satisfy authorities that their assumptions were either wholly or wholly wrong.
This section did not contemplate adjudication nor provide for making any order.
Hence, it was doubtful whether any appeal could be filed against a demand made under that section under section 21 (740 G H; 741 E].
Abdul Quadar and Co. vs Sales Tax Officer, Hyderabad , Dr. N. B. Khare vs State of 'Delhi. ; State of Madras vs V. G. Rao, (19521 S.C.R. 597 followed.
Ram Gopal vs Sales Tax Officer, Surat and another, 16 S.T.C. 1005 disapproved,
