The respondent municipal Corporation increased the rateable value of a building assessed the actual rent recovered by Appellant owner, by adding the income derived by the owner under an agreement entitling a Company to display an advertisement on the roof of the building.
The owner successfully filed a complaint against the increase which was upheld by the Small Cause Court to the High Court, and its confirmed the enhancement In appeal, this Court: HELD: The High Court was right in confirming the enhancement of the annual rent.
If a building or a part of it yields an extra income over and above the actual rent derived from it, such income on the terms of, section 154 (i) of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, can legitimately be taken into consideration by the assessing authority while determining the annual rent on the ground that a hypothetical tenant would take such extra income into account while considering what rent he can afford to offer for such building.
[553B] The hypothetical tenant includes all persons who might possibly take the property including the persons actually in occupation, even though he happens to be the owner of the property.
The rent is that which he will pay in the "higgling of the market", taking into account all existing circumstances and any relevant future trends.
Therefore, the mere fact that the income from the agreement is not rent but licence fee does not justify on any principle of rating ,or any construction of section 154 of the Act, disregard of it, while estimating the rent which the property would be expected to fetch.
[549B; C; 550G H] Though the owner of the building could not charge rent over and above that which was permissible under the provisions of the Rent Act, there was nothing in that Act which prohibited him from charging an amount from an advertiser in consideration of displaying his advertisement.
[551D] Mahad Municipality vs Bombay S.R.T. Corporation, LXIII Bom bay Law Reporter, 174; Cartwright vs Sculoates Union, ; Robinson Bros. vs Houghton and Chester le Street Assessment Committee, , Taylore vs Overseers of Pandleton, , Wilson vs Tavender , Corporation of Calcutta vs Anil Prakash Basu A.I.R. 1958 Cal. 423, referred to.
