Section 2(22) of the , defines 'wages '.
Under its first part all remuneration paid or payable in cash to an employee.
if the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled.
would be wages.
The Explanation to section 41 lays down that, for purposes of sections 40 and 41, wages shall be deemed to include payment to an employee in respect of any period of authorised leave, lock out or legal strike.
Under the original terms of the contract of employment between the appellant and its employees, the employees were expected to work for certain periods at agreed rates of wages and there was no offer of any reward or prize or inam to be paid for any work done by the employees.
An inam Scheme was introduced later by the appellant under which, there was an offer to make incentive payments, if certain specified conditions were fulfilled by the employees.
The appellant, however, reserved the right to withdraw the Scheme altogether without assigning any reason, or to revise its conditions at its sole discretion, even if the production target was not achieved for reasons for which the employees were not to be blamed.
The appellant had also laid down that, if any deterioration of workmanship was noticed on the part of the employees in order to achieve the targets prescribed for earning the inam, the Scheme could be abandoned forthwith.
It was also made clear to the workmen that this payment of reward was in no way connected with or part of wages.
The last paragraph of the Scheme stated that the appellant also reserved the right to discontinue the Scheme at the end of any period, if the Scheme was found to be in any respect unworkable or to be a source of labour discontent or for any other reason.
The appellant filed an application before the Employees ' Insurance Court constituted under the Act for a declaration that the inam paid or to be paid to its workmen was not wages as defined in the Act and for other reliefs.
The application was allowed.
On appeal, the High Court held that the inam was wages, because: (1) it was covered by the first part of the definition of wages; (2) even if the terms of the contract of employment were not in fact fulfilled but were only deemed to have been fulfilled.
the remuneration paid would be wages by, virtue of the Explanation to section 41; and (3) the Scheme contained an offer by the employer of payments to the employees for services rendered by them and as that offer was accepted by the employees impliedly, by having L, P(N)7SCI 10 672 worked on the terms of the Scheme and having received payments on that basis, the payment became a part of the contract of employment.
In appeal to this Court, the respondent sought 'co support the judgment of the High Court, also on the ground that, the fact that the Scheme could only be discontinued at the end of a prescribed period as laid down in the last paragraph of the Scheme and not in the midst of a period, showed that the inam was payable as one of the conditions of the contract of employment.
HELD: (1) A remuneration paid to an employee can only be covered by the definition of wages if it is payable under a clause of the contract of employment.
[778 H].
Bala Subrahmanya Rajaram vs B. C. Patil & Ors., ; , followed.
In this case there was a payment to the employees and since that payment depended on their achieving certain targets, A is remuneration, but this payment of inam cannot be held to have become a term of the contract of employment.
There was no express clause in the contract of employment for the payment of inam to the employees, and the Scheme, when brought into force, expressly excluded it from the contract of employment.
The terms in the Scheme were also not consistent with the Scheme having become a part of the contract of employment.
The fact that the appellant could withdraw the payment at its discretion and on grounds for which the employees could not be blamed, showed that the payment was not enforceable as one of the terms of the contract of employment.
[777 A C; 778 H; 779 A].
(2) A legal fiction is adopted in law for a limited and definite purpose only and there is no justification for extending it beyond the purpose for which the legislature adopted it.
The fiction in the Explanation to & 41 is a limited one and Is not to be utilised for interpreting the general definition of wages given in the Act, as it did not Iav down that payments made to an employee under other circumstances were also deemed to be wages.
The fiction is to be taken into account only when the word 'wages ' requires interpretation for purposes of sections 40 and 41 ' It cannot, therefore, be held that the remuneration payable under the Scheme is covered by the word wages if the terms of the contract are taken to have been fulfilled.
What is really required by the definition is that the terms of the contract of employment must actually be fulfilled.
[777 E G; 778 AB].
Beneaal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar and Ors. , followed.
(3) In this case, when the Scheme was introduced, there was no offer of any reward by the appellant which was accepted by the employees as a condition of their service.
The employees were already working in accordance with the terms of their contract of employment when the employer decided to make the extra payment if the employees did successfully what they were already expected to do under that contract.
The mere fact that the reward for good work was received by the employee after he had successfully satisfied the requirement laid down by the employer for earning the reward could not mean that the payment became a part of the contract of employment.
[778 C E].
(4) The term contained in the last paragraph of the Scheme was a one sided promise on behalf of the appellant not to deny the payment of inam during a period for which the Scheme had already 773 been notified by the appellant but such an assurance on behalf of the appellant does not indicate that the employees could claim that a right to receive the inam had accrued to them as an implied condition of the contract of employment.
[779 D E].
