By an office memorandum of the Central Government issued on the 4th January 1957, in respect of posts filled by promotion through competitive examinations limited to departmental candidates, reservations at 12 1/2% and 5 1/2% of vacancies were provided for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively.
By an earlier office memorandum of the 7th May 1955, in regard to promotions on the basis of seniority subject to fitness and those by selection, no reservations were provided but certain concessions were allowed to members of the backward classes.
After the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of the General Manager, Southern Railway vs Rangachari, ; , the matter was reviewed by the Central Government and it was advised that there was no consti tutional compulsion to make reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in posts filled by promotion and the question whether the reservation should be continued or withdrawn was entirely a matter of public policy.
Subsequent to the review, by a further office memorandum issued on the 8th November 1963 the Government notified its decision inter alia, that there would be no reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in appointments made by promotions to Class I and II services as these required a higher degree of efficiency and responsibility; but that such reservations would continue in certain grades and services in Class III and Class IV.
The petitioner was a class III employee of the Railway Board Secretariat Service and claimed promotion to the post of a Section Officer in Class II on the basis of the provision for reservations made in the Government 's Memorandum of January 4, 1957.
By a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution he challenged the latest office memorandum of November 8, 1963 and prayed for a restoration with retrospective effect of the office memoranda issued on May 7, 1955 and January 4, 1957.
It was contended on his behalf, inter alia (i) that the impugned order violated the guarantee given to the backward classes under article 16(4) of the Constitution; article 16(4) was not an exception engrafted on article 16 but was in itself a fundamental right granted to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
(ii) that the order was discriminatory,, because (a) it made a discrimination by making Provision for reservation in certain types of Class III and Class IV services only and not in Class II and I Services, (b) reservation was kept within Class III and Class IV for appointments for which there was direct recruitment and for promotions made by (1) selection, or (2) on the 722 result of a competitive examination limited to departmental candidates, but no reservation was provided for in respect of appointments made by promotion on the basis of seniority cum fitness; and (c) there was discrimination between the employees belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Railway Service and similar employees in the Central Secretariat Service on the ground that a competitive departmental examination for promotion to the grade of Section Officers was not held by the Railway Board for the years 1955 63 but such an examination was held for the Central Secretariat Service and 74 employees belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes secured the benefit of the provisions for reservation.
Held: (i) Article 16(4) does not confer any right on the petitioner and there is no constitutional duty imposed on the Government to make a reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, either at the initial stage of recruitment or at the stage of promotion.
Article 16(4) is an enabling provision and confers a discretionary power on the State to make a reservation of appointments in favour of a backward class of citizens which, in its opinion, is not adequately represented in the Services of the State [734 B D].
General Manager, Southern Railway vs Rangachari, ; , referred.
(ii) The impugned order was not discriminatory.
(a) In view of the requirement of efficiency in the higher echelons of service it is obvious that the classification made in the impugned order between Classes I and II where no reservation was made and Classes III and IV where reservation was provided for, was reasonable.
[735 B, C].
(b) It is well established that there can be a reasonable classification of employees for the purpose of appointment by promotion and the classification as between direct recruits and promotees is reasonable [734 H 735 A].
Mervyn Coutindo vs Collector of Customs, Bombay, ; and section G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India, ; referred to.
(c) The petitioner being an employee of the Railway Board was governed by the rules applicable to the officers in the Service to Which he belonged.
The employees of the Central Secretariat Service belonged to a different class and it could not be said that there was any discrimination against the petitioner in violation of article 14.
[734 F G].
