The respondent is a non proprietary members ' club.
It is organised on a vast scale with multifarious activities providing a venue for sports and games, and facilities for recreation, entertainment and for catering of food and refreshment.
Guests are admitted but on the invitation of members.
It has 194 employees with a wage bill between one lakh and two lakh rupees.
For the year 1962, the employees claimed bonus but the Industrial Tribunal held that the club was not an 'industry ' within the meaning of the , and rejected the claim of the employees% In appeal to this Court.
Held: (1) The definitions of industrial dispute 'employer ' and 'workman ' show that an industrial dispute can only arise in relation to an 'industry '.
The definition of 'industry ' is in two parts, the first, from the point of view of employers and the second, from the angle of employees.
In its first part it means any 'trade, business, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers '.
This part determines an industry by reference to occupation of employers in respect of those activities specified by the five words and they determine what an 'industry ' is, and what the cognate expression 'industrial ' is intended to convey.
But the second part standing alone cannot define 'industry '.
If the existence of an industry viewed from the angle of what the employer is doing is established, all who render service and fall within the definition of 'workman ' come within the fold of industry ' irrespective of what they do.
Thus, the cardinal test is to find out whether there is an industry according to the denotation of the word in the first part.
[753 A 754 H].
Taking the words in the definition of 'industry ' the word 'trade ' means exchange of goods for goods or goods for money, or, any business carried on with a view to profit, whether manual or mercantile as distinguished from the liberal arts or learned professions and from agriculture.
The word 'business ' means an enterprise which is an occupation as distinguished from pleasure.
and 'manufacture ' is a kind of productive industry in which the making of articles or material, often on a large scale, is by physical labour or mechanical power.
The word 'calling ' denotes the following of a profession or trade.
[756 F H].
The word 'undertaking ' has figured in the cases of this Court.
In D. N. Banerjee vs P. R. Mukherjee, [1953] S.C.R. 302 it was observed that the word is not to be interpreted by association with the words that precede or follow it in the definition of 'industry '.
But the settled view of this Court is: that primarily industrial disputes occur, when the operation undertaken rests upon cooperation between employers and employees with a view to production and dis tribution of material goods, in other words, wealth, but they may 743 arise also in cages where the cooperation is to produce material services.
For an 'undertaking ' to be an industry, it is not necessary that it must be carried on with capital by private enterprise or that it must be commercial or result in profit but there must be systematic activity and it must be analogous to the carrying on of a trade or business involving co operation between employers and em ployees.
But every human activity in which the relationship of employers and employees enters, is not necessarily creative of an industry.
Personal services rendered by domestic and other servants, administrative services of public officials .
services in aid of occupations of professional men such as doctors and lawyers etc.
, employ ment of teachers and so on, may result in relationships in which there are employers on the one side and employees on the other, but they have been excluded because they do not come within the connotation of the term 'industry ' as the service rendered is not a material service.
Therefore, the word 'undertaking ', though elastic, must take its colour from other expressions used in the definition of 'industry ', and must be defined as any business or any work or project resulting in material goods or material services and which one engages in or attempts as an enterprise analogous to business or trade.
L740 D; 756 D F; 758 D E; 757 B C; 758 B C].
In the present case, the activity of the club is conducted with the aid of employees who follow callings or avocations.
But taking the first part of the definition and the essential character of the club, the activity of the club cannot be described as a 'trade ' business or manufacture ' and the running of clubs is not the 'calling ' of the respon dent club or its managing committee.
Also, the club has no existence apart from its members.
It exists for its members though occasionally strangers also take benefit from its services.
Even with the admission of guests, the club remains a members ' self serving institution.
Though the material needs or wants of a section of the community is catered for it is not done as part of trade or business or as an undertaking analogous to trade or business.
Therefore, the Tribunal was right in holding that the respondent club was not an industry.
[760 A H].
Baroda Borough Municipality vs Workmen , referred to Observations contra in Bengal Club Ltd. vs Shantiranjan Som maddar & Anr.
A.I.R. 1956 Cal.
545 and Royal Calcutta Golf Mazdoor Union vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1956 Cal.
550, disapproved.
(2) The case of State of Bombay vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; so far as it relied on the test, namely; could the activity be carried on by a private individual or group of individuals for the purpose of holding that running a Government hospital was an industry must be held.
to have taken an extreme view of what is an industry.
This test is not enlightening because, there is hardly any activity which private enterprise cannot carry on.
[751 D E; 761 A; 750 E F].
(3) In Corporation of City of Nagpur vs Employees. ; this Court relied upon the same test with an unfortunate result.
The Court held that the municipal functions of the Corporation, including running a primary school, were covered by the words 'trade and business ' in C.P. & Berar Industrial Disputer.
Settlement Act, 1947, since those functions were not regal, the activity was organised, service was rendered, and the functions could not be performed by an individual or firm for remuneration, while, in University of Delhi vs Ramnath [1964] 2 S.C.R. 703, this Court held that educational institutions were not 'industry '.
[750 B G; 758 A B].
744 (4) The fresh test laid down in Ahmedabad Textile Industry Research Association vs State of Bombay, ; that, to be an 'industry ', the employees therein must not share in the product of their labour cannot be regarded as universal, because, there are occasions when the workmen receive a share of the produce as part of their wages or as bonus or as a benefit.
[759 C].
(5) The additional test laid down in National Union of Commercial Employees vs Meher (The Solicitor case) [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 157, that, to be an 'industry ' the association of capital and labour must be direct and essential cannot also be regarded as universal because, what partnership can exist between the Board of Directors of a Company on the one hand and the menial staff employed to sweep floors on the other? [753 A].
(6) In Harinagar Cane Farm vs State of Bihar, ; and in the University case this Court observed that it must refrain from laying down unduly broad or categorical propositions.
But the attempt to avoid generalizations his one disadvantage, because, taking each operation by itself and determining on the basis of facts whether it is an industry without attempting to pin point whether it is a 'business, or a trade, or an undertaking or manufacture, or calling of employers ' is to ignore the guidance afforded by the sta tute through its dictionary and to rely upon decisions dealing with the problem without a definition.
[755 H; 756 A C].
