One of the Judges of the High Court of Assam was nominated to be the Vacation Judge for hearing urgent civil and criminal applications when the High Court was closed for vacation from 17th September 1966 to 19th November 1966.
Certain days were fixed as the vacation court days, and if there was an extremely urgent matter the Vacation Judge could hear it on any other day by appointment.
At that time, the same Judge was heading a Commission of Enquiry under the Commission of Inquiry Act, and in connection with that work, on 2nd November 1966, the Vacation Judge went from Gauhati the seat of the High Court, to Sibsagar.
The appellant was a student of a college at Gauhati.
He was expelled from the college on 26th October 1966.
He tendered an.
unconditional apology the next day and attended classes till the end of the month; but, on 2nd November, when he wanted.
to pay the fee for an examination to be held on 4th November, the fee was not received as the Principal of the College had not accepted the apology.
As the Vacation Judge was not available at Gauhati, the appellant went to Sibsagar and presented a writ petition to the Vacation Judge.
The Judge entertained the petition and passed an interim order.
A copy of the interim order was prepared at Sibsagar and given to the appellant to be taken to Gauhati where it.
was sealed and served on the University.
The appellant was then allowed to sit for the examination subject to the result of the writ petition.
Thereafter, the papers relating to the writ petition were sent to the High Court at Gauhati and after the vacation was over, certain miscellaneous orders were passed on the writ petition.
Eventually, it came up for hearing and was dismissed by a Bench consisting of the Chief Justice of the High Court and another Judge.
The Chief Justice held that: (1) the Vacation Judge, while performing the duties of a Commission of Enquiry, could not also Perform the duties of a Judge of the High Court (2) a Judge of the High Court could not hold a,sitting anywhere else except at the seat of the, High Court ' and (3) the Vacation Judge exhibited 'unholy haste and hurry ' and his I action disclosed 'an unnecessary zeal ' on his part to assist the appellant.
The other Judge agreed with the order of dismissal only on the.
second ground.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) Judges of the High Court are of appointed under the Commission of inquiry act to head commission for various head purposes.
These Commissions are temporary affairs and usually their 814 sittings are not continuous.
A Judge of the High Court when lie is appointed to head such a Commission does not demit his office as a Judge nor does the appointment deprive him of his rights and privileges as a Judge of the High Court.
Therefore, there was nothing objectionable on the part of the Vacation Judge working as a Judge of the High Court while he was heading the Commission, for, when the Commission was not actually sitting; he was entitled to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court.
[817 G H; 818 C].
(2) Assuming that a Judge of the High Court could not pass orders as a Judge anywhere else except at the seat of the High Court, the effect of such an assumption in the present case is,.
that the presentation of the writ petition at Sibsagar was irregular and the interim order passed thereon was also irregular.
But, as the petition was sent to Gauhati later and dealt with by the High Court there, the petition must be deemed to have been represented to the High Court, and the irregularity in presentation must be held to have been cured.
It was open to the High Court to consider whether the irregular interim order should be regularised or to deal with the petition on merits.
But it was not open to the High Court to throw out the petition merely on the ground that the original presentation was irregular.
[818 H; 819 A E].
(3) Assuming that the Vacation Judge wrongly took the view that he could entertain the petition and pass the interim order at Sibsagar, he could only act in the way he did in the view that he took, and, in the circumstances, the observations of the Chief Justice were entirely uncalled for.
There was no justification at all for such justification for criticism, the language should be dignified and rejustification for criticism, the language should be dignified and restrained.
[820 B D, G; 821 A].
Principal, Patna College vs K. section Raman, [1966], 1 S.C.R. 974, distinguished.
