Upon an application filed by a cultivating tenant M under section 11 of the Himachal Pradesh Abolition of Big Landed Estates and Land Reforms Act, 1953, the Compensation Officer held that as such tenant he was entitled to acquire "the right, title and interest" of the owner of the land in question.
After payment by the tenant of a specified amount of compensation, a certificate of ownership was granted to him and, after his death, the land was mutated in favour of his wife and daughter, respondents in this appeal.
The respondents applied to the Divisional Forest Officer for permission to sell the trees of their land and although that Officer granted permission for the sale, he failed to give the necessary orders for felling the trees and taking out the converted timber from the land.
The respondents filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the Divisional Forest Officer to issue or get issued the necessary permission for felling the trees and moving the timber.
The Judicial Commissioner, following Vijay Kumari Thakur vs
H.P. Administration.
A.I.R. 1961 H.P. 32, held that the appellants were estopped from contending that the respondents had no interest in the trees and allowed the petition.
In appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that under section 11 of the Act the trees did not vest in the deceased tenant but only the 'land ' as defend in section 2(5) of the Act, and that the Compensation Officer was not competent to grant and, in fact, did not grant proprietary rights in the trees to the deceased tenant.
HELD : dismissing the appeal: Under sub section
(6) of section 11, the tenant becomes the owner of the land comprised in the tenancy on and from the date of gram of the certificate, and it is expressly provided that the right, title and interest of the landowner in the said land shall determine.
In the context the word 'owner ' is very comprehensive and implies that all rights, title and interest of the land owner passed to the tenant.
[116E F] Furthermore, the expression "right, title and interest of the landowner in the land" is wide enough to include trees standing on the land.
Under section 8 of the Transfer of Property Act, unless a different intention is expressed or implied, transfer of land would include trees standing on it; and section 11 of the Himachal Pradesh Act should be construed in the same manner.
[115 E] Achhru Mal vs Maula Bakhsh, and Nasib Singh vs Amin Chand, A,I.R. , distinguished.
Kaju Mal vs Salig Ram, [1919] Punj.
Rec. 237, referred to. 113
