Under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the State Government issued a declaration with respect to the land of the 1st respondent after considering the report under section 5A of the Act.
The declaration used the words 'as it appears to the Governor that the land is required to be taken for a.public purpose ' instead of the words 'the Governor is satisfied that the land is needed for a public purpose '.
A suit filed by the 1st respondent against the State Government and others challenging the declaration was decreed in second appeal by the High Court.
on the ground that: (1) the satisfaction of the Government as to the purpose of and the need for acquiring the suit land must appear in the declaration itself; and (2) as the declaration used the words 'it appears to the Governor etc., ' instead of the words 'the Governor is satisfied etc. ' it did not show such satisfaction and therefore was.
not in proper form and could not form the legal basis for the acquisition.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: There being no statutory form and section 6 not requiring the declaration to be made in any particular form.
the mere fact that the declaration does not ex facie show the Government 's satisfaction.
assuming that the words 'it appears ' used in the declaration do not mean satisfaction.
would not make the declaration invalid or not in conformity with section 6.
[123 E] Satisfaction of the Government after consideration of the report, any.
made under section 5A is undoubtedly a condition precedent to a valid declaration.
But there is nothing in section 6(1) which requires that the satisfaction should be stated in the declaration, the only declaration required by the sub section being, that the land to be acquired is needed for a public purpose or for a company.
[122G H] Observations in Ezra ' vs Secretary of State, I.L.R. 30 Cal.
36, at p. 81.
approved Further, it is immaterial whether or not such satisfaction is stated in the declaration.
even if it was so stated a person interested in the land can always challenge.
as a matter of fact, that the Government was not actually satisfied, and in such a case, the Government would ' have to satisfy the court by leading evidence that it was so satisfied.
In the present case, the fact that the Government was satisfied was never challenged, the only contention raised being.
that as the declaration dissatisfied was never not state such satisfaction it did not establish such satisfaction.
Therefore, it was not necessary for the Government to lead any evidence prove its satisfaction.
[123F H].
[Whether the words 'it appears to the Governor that the land is required to be taken for a public purpose ' and the words 'the Governor is satisfied that the land is needed for a public purpose ' are synonymous,.
not decided.
[122F G] 118.
