As a result of the Presidential election held in May, 1967, respondent No. 1 was declared elected.
The petitioners challenged the election on the following two grounds, namely (i) article 58(1)(c) required that a person to be eligible for election as President must be qualified for election as a member of the House of People.
After the Sixteenth Amendment, under article 84(a), it was necessary for a person standing for election to either House of Parliament to take an oath in the form prescribed in the Third Schedule.
Therefore, a person standing for election as President had also to take a similar oath; since the respondent had not taken the oath he was not eligible for election.
(ii) As (a) the Prime Minister addressed a letter to all electors commending respondent No. 1 and requesting them to vote for him; '(b) the, Prime.
Minister deputed Ministers 1 various State Capitals to make doubly certain that respondent No. 1 was elected; (c) a Minister who was also the chief whip of the Congress party wrote two letters to all members of his party in Parliament and signed them as Chief Whip, explaining the situation with respect to the election and requesting them to come to Delhi and contact him and also requesting them to give the first preference to respondent No. 1 and not to mark the second or any other preference in favour of the candidates; and (d) the Chief Minister of Maharashtra had briefed members of the Legislative Assembly as to how and for whom to vote, the result of the election has materially been affected by undue influence.
HELD: The petition must be dismissed.
(i) The candidate standing for election to the office of the President had not to take any oath before becoming eligible for election as President.
A comparison of article 58 with article 84 as it stood before the amendment shows that el.
(a) of article 84, corresponded to el.
(a) of article 58(1), as both provided that the respective candidates should be citizens of India.
It was therefore, not necessary to go to cl.
(a) of article 84 for the purpose of finding out whether a person woks eligible for election as President for the purpose of citizenship for that part of el.
(a) of article 84 was specifically provided for in el.
(a) of article 58(1).
Similarly, el.
(b) of article 84 corresponded to el.
(b) of article 58(1).
with this difference that it provided a special qualification as to age and therefore 134 one would not have to go to cl.
(b) of article 84 for the purpose of finding out the qualification as to age.
Clause (c) of article 58(1) clearly corresponded to el.
(c) of article 84 and reading them together it would follow that a person standing for election as President would require such qualifications as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
Further as el.
(c) of article 58(1) lays down that a person standing for Presidential election has to be qualified for membership of the House of the People, article 102 (which lays down disqualifications for members of Parliament) would also be attracted except in so far as there is a special provision contained in article 58(2), Thus cI. (c) or article 58(1) would bring in such qualifications for members of the House of the People as may as prescribed by law by Parliament, as required by article 84(c).
It will by its own force bring in article 102 of the Constitution, for that Article lays down certain disqualifications which a presidential candidate must not have for he has to be eligible for election as a member of the House of the People.
But it clear that what is provided in cl.
(a) and (b) of article 58(1) must be taken from there and it is not necessary travel to cls.
(a) and (b) of article 84 in the matter of citizenship and of age of the presidential candidate.
Clauses (a)and (b) of article 58(1) having made a specific provision in that behalf exclude cls.
(a) and (b) of article 84.
There is nothing in the Amendment Act which makes any difference to that position, for.
if the intention of Parliament was that an oath similar in form to the oath for membership of Parliament had to be taken by persons standing for election to the office of the President there is no reason why a similar amendment was not made in article 58(1) (a) and why the form: of oath not also prescribed either in the Third Schedule or by amendment of article 60.
which provides for oath by a person elected as President before he takes his office.
[140H 141E; 142B C] The particular oath which a person standing for election as a member of Parliament has to take has been prescribed in the Third Schedule to the Constitution, and it is only that oath which such a person has to take.
However, no form of oath is prescribed for a person standing for election as President anywhere in the Constitution and in the absence of such form.
it is impossible to hold that taking of oath before standing for election as President is a necessary ingredient of eligibility for such election.
The Amendment Act having not made any such provision with respect to those standing for election to the office of the President, it cannot be open to the Election Commission to prescribe a form of oath for such persons by changing form III A mutatis mutandis.
Such power cannot be spelt out of article 324 under which the Election Commission is conferred power to superintend direct, and control the preparation of the Electoral Rolls and the conduct of elections.
[143G 144B] Further.
a comparison of the form of oath under article 60 for the President with form III B of the Third Schedule which prescribes the oath for a member of Parliament before he takes his seat.
shows that even after election the President is not required to swear that he will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.
The oath he takes is to preserve.
protect and! defend the Constitution and that he will devote himself to the service and well being of the people of India.
the form of oath introduced by the sixteenth amendment for persons standing for election to Parliament and even after election was not considered suitable for a person standing for election as President or elected as President and that is why no form is prescribed by Parliament.
[143A C] (ii) Any voluntary action which interferes with or attempts to interfere with the free exercise of electoral right would amount to undue 135 influence.
It cannot take in mere canvassing in favour of a candidate at an election.
If that were so, it would be impossible to run democratic elections.
It is difficult to lay down in general terms where mere canvassing ends and interference or attempt at interference to with the tree exercise of any electoral right begins.
That is a matter to be determined in each case; but there can be no doubt that if what is done is merely canvassing it would not be undue influence.
[145G 146C] (a) There was nothing in the fetter of the Prime Minister which even remotely amounted to undue influence.
As a leader of the party she was entitled to ask the electors to vote for respondent No. 1 and the fact that she is the Prime Minister makes no difference to her right make an appeal of this nature.
It is.
said that the office of the President is a no party office and therefore an appeal of this nature should not have been made and must amount to undue influence.
It is true that the office of the President is not a party office meaning thereby that after his election the President is no longer a party man.
But that cannot take away the fact that in a democratic system, persons who stand for election are candidates sponsored by parties for without such support no fine would have a chance of being elected.
for the electors are mostly members of one party or other.
[149G 1SOB] (b) Mere canvassing of support for a candidate can never amount to undue influence.
There was no interference with the free exercise of electoral right by the electors, even if the Ministers were sent to the various Sate capitals to canvass support for respondent, No 1.
[148H] (c) The fact that the Minister signed the letters as Chief Whip was of no consequence; even if he had not done so all members of the Congress party in Parliament must be knowing that he was the Chief Whip.
Just as a Minister has a right to canvass for support, so has the Chief Whip.
The fact that he asked the members to contact him after reaching Delhi could only be to know who had come and who had not and could not give rise to any inference of undue influence from the fact alone.
There was nothing in the second letter also to show that undue influence was being exercised thereby.
The two letters read together merely show that the Chief Whip of the Congress party was canvassing in favour of respondent No. 1.
There was nothing improper in members of the party being told in the course of canvassing that it would be better if they only marked their first preference and no other preference in a system where voting is by single transferable vote.
Such a request of advice does not interfere with the free exercise of their electoral for the electors still would be free to do what they desired inspite of the advice.
[150B 151D] (d) There can be no objection if the leader of the party indicates to the members of his party how to vote in order to ensure that votes may not become invalid for, want of knowledge of the procedure of voting.
Further if the leader of the party indicates to members of his party for whom to vote he is merely canvassing with his own party men to support the candidate of the party.
The mere fact that the person who canvasses is a Chief Minister does not mean that he is exercising undue influence in the sense of interfering with the free exercise of the electoral right.
Once canvassing is permissible, and in a democratic set up where parties put up candidates for election it is not only permissible but necessary.
it follows that if a leader of the party asks members of his party for whom to vote he is merely canvassing.
The voting is after all secret and every elector is free to vote for whomsoever he likes, even though he may have been asked by the leader to vote for a particular candidate.
[152C F] 136 It is open to Ministers to canvass for candidates of their party standing for election.
Such canvassing does not amount to undue influence but is proper use of the Minister 's right to ask the public to support candidates belonging to the Minister 's party.
It is only where a Minister abuses his position as such and goes beyond merely asking for support for candidates belonging to his party that a question of undue influence may arise.
But so long as the Minister only asks the electors to vote for a particular candidate belonging to his party and puts forward before the public the merit of his candidate it cannot be said that by merely making such request to the electorate the Minister exercises undue influence.
The fact that the Minister 's request was addressed in the form of what it called a whip is also immaterial so long as it is clear that there is no compulsion on the electorate to vote in the manner indicated [ 149A C] R.B. Surendra Narayan Sinha vs Amulyadhone Ray & 43 Ors. 1940 Indian Election Cases by Sen and Poddar, Case No. XXX at p. 188.
Linge Gowda vs Shivananjappa.
(1953) VI E.L.R. 288, Amirchand vs Surendra Lal Jha, (1954) X E.L.R. 57, Mast Ram vs
section lqbal Singh, (1955) XII E.L.R. 34, Radhakrishna Shukla vs Tara Chand Maheshwar, (1956) XII E.L.R. 378, N. Sankara Reddi vs Yashoda Reddi (1957) XIII E.L.R. 34, Dr. Y.S. Parmar vs Hira Singh Pal.
(1958) XVI E.L.R. 45.
Triloki Singh vs Shtvrajwati Nehru, (1958) XVI E.L.R. 234 and Jayalakshmi Devamma vs Janardhan Reddi, (1959) XVII E.L.R. 302, referred to
