On 13th November 1951, the respondent agreed to sell to the appellants a stock of 415 tons of newsprint in sheets then lying in the respondent 's godown.
On 26th November, the parties varied the contract by agreeing that the appellants would buy only 300 tons out of the.
stock of 415 tons.
After taking delivery of a part of the newsprint, the appellants refused to take delivery of the balance and repudiated the contract on 29th March 1952.
On 21st April the respondent, after notice to the appellants.
resold the balance at a lesser rate.
The suit flied by the respondent claiming from the appellants the deficiency on resale was decreed.
In appeal to this Court, Held: (1) The claim was unsustainable.
(a) As the respondent was not a pledge of the newsprint, the respondent had no right to sell the goods under section 176 of the .
[242H] (b) A seller can claim as damages the difference between the contract price and the amount realised on resale of the goods where he has the right of resale under section 54 (2) of the Indian .
But this statutory power of resale arises only if the property in the goods has passed to the buyer subject to the lien of the unpaid seller.
Under section 18 of the Sale of Goods Act.
it is a condition precedent to the passing of property under a contract of sale that the goods are ascertained.
In the present case, when the contract was originally entered into for the sale of 415 tons there was an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable state and the property in those goods then passed to the appellants.
But the effect of the variation was not to make the appellants and respondent joint owners of the stock of 415 tons.
Nor was it merely to relieve the appellants from their liability to take 115 tons.
The effect was to annul the passing of the property.
so that.
as from 26th November the property in the entire stock of 415 tons belonged to the respondent.
The result was that in place of the original contract for sale of specific goods a contract for sale of unascertained goods was substituted.
No portion of the stock of 415 tons was appropriated to the contract by the respondent with the appellants ' consent before the resale.
Therefore, on the date of resale.
the property in the goods had not passed to the buyer (appellants) and the respondent had no right to resell.1243A. E. F H; 244A B] Gillett vs
Hill; ,, ; , applied.
(2) As no time was fixed under the contract of sale for acceptance of the goods, under section 73 of the Indian Contract Act, the respondent was entitled to the difference between the contract price and the market price on 29th March 1952, the date of repudiation, as damages.
[244E C] 240
