The ten appellants were ratings who had entered into an agreement with a shipping company in Cochin to navigate one of its ships between December 11, 1963 and June 10, 1964.
During this period, after they had performed some voyages and while the ship was berthed in Calcutta port, a dispute arose between the appellants and the Company as to the payment of bazar money (victualling charges) which the ratings were allowed according to a custom obtaining in merchant shipping.
The appellants claimed Re. 1 per day while the Company normally paid only 0.62 P. per day.
The dispute was referred to the Shipping Master, Calcutta, whereupon meetings took place between representatives of the Company and the appellants before the Shipping Master and an agreement was reached according to which the Company promised to pay the amount claimed.
However, it was not clear whether this payment was to be made before the commencement of the next voyage or on the termination of the agreement.
As the appellants were in fact not paid before commencement of the voyage, upon the instigation of certain labour leaders they left the vessel in a body and, as a result, the ship could not leave port at the appointed time of sailing.
The appellants were thereafter prosecuted for deserting the ship and were convicted under section 191 and (b) and section 194(b) and (e) read with section 436 of the .
Their revision applications to the High Court were summarily rejected.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellants (a) that there was no desertion on their part, and (b) that even if they be held to have left the ship, they were protected by the fact that there was reasonable cause for absenting themselves at the time.
of the sailing of the ship.
HELD: dismissing the appeal: (i) The gist of desertion is the existence of animus not to return to the ship or, in other words, to, go against the agreements under which the employment of seamen for sea voyages generally take place.
The way the appellants had acted clearly showed that they were using the weapon of strike with a view to force the issue ,with their employers and were not intending to, return to the vessel unless their demands were acceded to immediately.
It was therefore legitimate to infer that they were breaking the agreement with the company which was to keep the ship in voyage up to June 10, 1964 .
and this was rendered impossible by all the appellants absenting themselves.
Their action therefore amounted to desertion.
[309 B, F G] 307 Moore vs Canadian Pacific Steamship Co., ; The West morland; , ; referred to.
(ii), Section 191(1) is in two parts.
The first part deals with only desertion and therefore, if desertion was proved, the penalty which the law provides under the Act was duly incurred.
There is no excuse against desertion became reasonable cause which is indicated in the same section is included in cl.
(b) and not in el.
In the present case there was not that sufficient cause even for the purpose of el.
(b) of section 191(1).
The dispute was already before the Shipping Master, meetings had taken place and minutes had been recorded.
the log book of the shipping Company and other records would clearly show the mount of money due to the appellants.
The settlement of the claim could well have waited till the completion of the voyage and there was machinery in law for the enforcement of a demand.
[309 H; 310 D F] The law has chosen to regard the duties of seamen as of paramount importance and has therefore, in addition to the ordinary liabilities which arise under the general law, added a penalty of imprisonment for absence from duty without reasonable cause and has also provided for forfeiture of wages and the effects left on board.
This indicates that the policy of the law is that the crew must perform their duties under such agreements as they execute with the shipping company on pain of being found guilty and punished if they cannot make out that they had sufficient and reasonable cause for what may otherwise be regarded as dereliction of duty.
[310 C D]
