By a petition under Art.32 of the Constitution,the petitioner challenged an order of detention passed against him under r. 30(1)(b) of the Defence of India Rules, 1962.
It was contended on his behalf, inter alia, (i) that the order of the President passed on November 3. 1962 as amended on November 11, 1962 under article 359(1) of the Constitution, suspending the right to move any court for the enforcement of the fundamental rights conferred by articles 14, 21 and 22 if any person was deprived of such right during the period of the Emergency under the Defence of India Ordinance No. 4 of 1962 or any rule or order made thereunder, was a law within the meaning of article 13(2) of the Constitution and could therefore be tested against the fundamental rights in Part III of the Constitution including the very fundamental right the enforcement of which is suspended; that only such fundamental rights can be suspended which have nexus with the reasons which led to the Proclamation of Emergency, i.e., the President can only suspend enforcement of fundamental rights under articles 22 and 31(2) by an order under article 359; that the order under article 359 in the present case was violative of article 14 as it enabled the executive to decide.
in exercise of an arbitrary discretion, whether to detain a person under the more drastic provisions of the Defence of India Act 51 of 1962 or the Preventive Detention Act; (ii) that in view of the language of article 359 there should have been an express provision in the Defence of India Act and the Rules that the enforcement of fundamental rights under articles 14, 21 and 22 was suspended and in the absence of such a provision the order passed under article 359 cannot stand in the way of the detention order being tested under Part III of the Constitution; (iii) that article 22(5) requires that grounds of detention should be furnished to the detenu and the President 's order of November 1962 does not do away with this requirement which was not satisfied in the present case; and (iv) that the order of detention was not in the form required by article 166 of the Constitution and the State Government therefore had to prove that it was passed by the authority empowered to do so.
Held: (by the Court) :The petitions must be dismissed.
Per majority: (i) An order passed under article 359(1) cannot be tested with the aid of article 13(2) under that very fundamental right the enforcement of which it suspends.
Even if an order under article 359 is assumed to be law in its widest sense, it cannot be a law within the mean 228 ing of article 13(2), for if that were so, the Article would be made nugatory.
article 359 gives categorical powers to.
the President during the period when a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation to suspend the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights conferred by Part III.
There is nothing in it which in any way limits the power of the President and it is for him to decide the enforcement of which of the fundamental rights should be suspended during the Emergency.
[234D G; 232B D] There is a basic assumption in article 359 that it may be necessary for the President to suspend the enforcement of any of the fundamental rights in the interest of the security of India and in the face of that basic assumption, there is no scope for enquiry into the question whether the fundamental right the enforcement of which the President has suspended under article 359 has anything to do with the security of India which is threatened whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
It cannot be said that only fundamental rights under article 22 or article 31 (2) can be suspended under article 359.
[232 F, G; 235C D] Even if the provisions for detention under the Defence of India Act and the Rules are more stringent, after the suspension of article 14 under article 359, no question of the order under article 359 being bad under article 14 can arise.
[235H] Ghulam Sarwar vs Union of India ; ; dissented from.
(ii) The clear intendment of the President 's order is that if any fundamental right of any person under articles 14, 21 and 22 was invaded by any action taken under the Ordinance (later replaced by the Act), or any rule or order thereunder, that action could not be tested on the anvil of those fundamental rights.
It was therefore not necessary to make any express provision in the Act or the Rules for the suspension of the enforcement of the fundamental rights under articles 14, 21 and 22.
[236E] (iii) As the President 's order suspending article 22 was validly made, there was no question of furnishing any ground under article 22(5) to the detenu if the detention was under the Defence of India Act or the Rules, for the entire article 22 was suspended.
[236G] (iv) Article 166 has no application to the State of Jammu & Kashmir and as the detention order was made in the form required by section 45 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir, it must be presumed to have been validly made.
[237B] Per Hidayatullah, J.
Although a suspension of a fundamental right under article 359(1) may be made either for the whole of India or any part of the territory of India, Ghulam Sarwar 's case points out that there is nothing to prevent the President from restricting the scope of the order to a class of persons provided the operation of the order is confined to an area and to a period.
As the order was applicable to the whole of India and for the duration of the emergency although it affected a class, namely, foreigners, it was upheld.
This was not the application of article 14.
This was said because the argument was that the order could only be with reference to the whole or a part of the territory of India and not with respect to a class such as foreigners.
That meant that the order was considered in relation to the words of article 359(1).
The meaning now attributed to the decision in Ghulam Sarwar 's case is in view of the width of language used in that case and the decision of the majority in the present also suffers from a width of language in the other direction whereas the truth ties midway.
[238A F] 229
