Section 3 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, authorises the Central Government to make, by order, provisions for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling import, export, carriage etc.
of goods of specified description.
In exercise of this power, the Central Government issued the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, and other orders setting out the policy governing the grant of import and export licences.
The Central Government also evolved an Import Trade Policy to facilitate the mechanism of the Act and the orders issued thereunder.
and it was modified from time to time by issuing fresh Schemes in respect of new commodities.
In 1962, the Central Government promulgated the Export Promotion Scheme providing incentives to exporters of woolen textiles and goods.
It provided for the grant to an exporter, certificates to import raw materials of a total amount equal to 100% of the F.O.B. value of his exports.
Clause 10 of the Scheme provided that the Textile Commissioner could grant an import certificate for a lesser amount if he is satisfied, after holding an enquiry, that the declared value of the goods exported is higher than the real value of the goods.
The Scheme was ex.tended to exports of woolen textiles and goods to Afghanistan.
The respondents exported woolen goods to Afghanistan and were issued an Import Entitlement Certificate by the Textile Commissioner not for the full F.O.B. value of t,he goods exported, but for a reduced amount.
In doing so, the Textile Commissioner collected evidence ex parte and acting upon the report of a Committee appointed by him passed orders without informing the respondents or giving them an opportunity to explain the materials on the basis of which the 'import entitlement ' of the respondents was reduced.
Some of the exporters had appeared before the Committee and explained the circumstances in which they made the exports, but the report of the Committee was not made available to them.
The respondents made representations to the Central Government but the Government confirmed the orders.
The respondents then filed writ petitions in the High Court.
The High Court set aside the orders of the Textile Commissioner and Government, and held that the respondents were entitled under the Scheme to obtain import licences for an amount equal to 100% of the F.O.B. value of their exports, unless it was found on enquiry duly made under el.
10 of the Scheme that the respondents had by 'over invoicing ' the goods disentitled themselves to the import licences of the full value; and that the Textile Commissioner without making any such enquiry.
proceeded upon his subjective satisfaction ' that the respondents had 'over invoiced ' the goods exported; and that Government also acted in a similar manner in dealing with the representation of the respondents.
367 In appeal to this Court, it was contended: (1 ) that the Export Promotion Scheme was administrative in character, that it contained mere executive instructions issued by the Central Government to the Textile Commissioner.
and created no enforceable rights in the exporters who exported their goods in pursuance of the Scheme and that it imposed no obligations upon the Government to issue import certificates, (2) that the textile Commissioner was the sole judge of the reasons for reducing the import entitlement, that the Scheme did not require him to set out the reasons for reducing the import entitlement, or to give an opportunity to the respondents because, the exercise of the power to reduce, conferred upon the Textile Commissioner, was not limited by the terms of el.
10 of the Scheme, and was not, except on proof of mala fide exercise, open to judicial review; (3) that the Government on grounds of 'executive necessity ' was the sole judge of the validity of its action in matters relating to import and export policy, because the policy depended upon the economic climate and other related matters and had to be in its very nature flexible with power in the Government to modify or adjust it as the altered circumstances necessitate; and (4) that if the Government is held bound by every representation made by it regarding its intentions, the Government would be held bound by a contractual obligation even though no formal contract in the manner required by article 299 of the Constitution was executed.
HELD: The Government is not exempt from liability to carry out the representation made by it as to its future conduct and it cannot on some undefined and undisclosed ground of necessity or expediency fail to carry out the promise solemnly made by it, nor claim to be the judge of its own obligation to the citizen on an ex parte appraisement of the circumstances in which the obligation had arisen.
[385 E F] (1) Whether the Schemes for implementing the Import Trade Policy are merely executive or administrative instructions, or are legislative directions as well, depends not on their form, or the method of publication or the source of their authority.
but it is their substance that determines their true character.
It cannot be assumed merely because the policy is general in terms and deals with the grant of licences for import of goods and related matters, that it is statutory in character.
But even if it is only executive or administrative in character, courts have power in appropriate cases to compel performance of the obligations imposed by the Schemes upon the departmental authorities.
[376 H; 377 B C, F G] (2) The Textile Commissioner was not the sole judge of the quantum of import licence to be granted to an exporter and courts are competent in appropriate cases to grant relief, if, contrary to the Scheme, the Government and its officers at their mere whim ignore the promises made by the Government and arbitrarily decline to grant the promised import licence to an exporter who has acted to his prejudice relying upon the representation r381 C D] Where a person has acted upon representations made in an Export Promotion Scheme that import licence upto the value of the goods exported will be issued, and had exported goods, his claim for the import licence for the maximum value permissible by the Scheme cannot be arbitrarily rejected.
In such a case reduction in the amount of import certificate may be justified on the ground of misconduct of the exporter in relation to the goods exported or on special considerations such as difficult foreign exchange position, or other matters having a bearing on the general interests of the State.
But, where, as in the present case, the Scheme provided for the rant of import entitlement of the value and not 368 up to the value, of the goods exported, the Textile Commissioner should in the ordinary course, grant import certificate for the full value of the goods exported: he may reduce that mount only after the enquiry contemplated by cl. 10 of the Scheme, that is, enquiry made after giving an opportunity to the respondents and held in a manner consistent with the rules of natural justice and the basic concepts of justice and fair play.
[379 H: 380 A C] Ramchand Jagadish Chand vs Union of India & Ors. ; , Probhudas Morarjee Rajkotia & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1044 and Joint Cheil Controller of Imports and Exports, Madras vs M/s.
Amin Chand Mutha, ; , followed.
(3) Executive necessity, if any, does not release the Government from honoring its solemn promises relying on which citizens have acted to their detriment especially when the representation in the Scheme was not ' subject to any implied term that the Government will not be bound to grant the import certificate for the full value of the goods exported if they deem it inexpedient [376 A C] Rederiaktiebolaget Amphitrite vs The King, [1921] 3 K.B. 500 and Robertson vs Minister of Pensions, [1949] 1 K.B. 227, referred to.
(4) The respondents were not seeking to enforce any contractual right: they are seeking to enforce compliance with the obligation which is laid upon the Textile Commissioner by the terms of the Scheme.
The claim of the respondents was rounded upon the equity which arose in their favour as a result of the representation made on behalf of the Government in the Export Promotion Scheme, and the action taken by the respondents acting upon the representation.
Even though the case did not fall within the terms of section 115 of the Evidence Act, it was still open to a party who had acted on a representation made by the Government to claim that the Government should be hound to carry out the promise made by it, though not recorded in the form of a formal contract as required by the Constitution.
[382 D G, 383 H] Ahmad Far Khan & Ors.
vs Secretary of State for India in Council and Anr.
L.R. 28 I.A. 211, The Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay, vs The Secretary of State for India in Council, I.L.R. 29 Born.
580 and The Ganges Manufacturing Co. vs Surujmull, I.L.R. , applied.
Collector of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay & Ors. ; referred to.
