The General Manager of the appellant Corporation issued a notice on July 21, 1964 inviting applications for appointments, to two junior posts in the Corporation.
The respondent, who was an employee of the Corporation and claimed that he had a right to be promoted to one of the posts, filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the notice on the ground that the Corporation had no power to issue it.
The High Court, following its earlier decision in Karnakar Mangesha Desai vs State of Mysore and other [1960](1) Mysore Law Journal 72), held that until regulations had been framed by the Corporation under section 45(2) (c) with the previous sanction of the State Government and this has admittedly not been done the Corporation could not appoint officers and servants and lay down their conditions of service.
On appeal to this Court by special leave.
HELD: Allowing the Appeal: section 14(2) expressly confers upon the Corporation the incidental power to appoint such officers and servants as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and Section 19(1)(c) empowers it to provide for its employees suitable conditions of service.
Although the conjoint effect of ss 14(3)(b), 34 and 45(2)(c) is that the appointment of officers and servants and their conditions of service must conform to the directions, if any, given by the State Government under section 34 and the regulations, if any, framed under section 45(2)(c).
until such regulations are framed or directions are given, the Corporation may appoint such officers or servants as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its duties on such terms and conditions as it thinks fit.
[770 H: 771 A, B D].
There was no merit in the contention that the General Manager had no power to issue the notice dated July 21, 1964 in the absence of any resolution by the Corporation under section 12(c) expressly authorising him to issue it.
[771 F].
Dundee Harbour Trustees vs D. & J. Nicol, ; , 556, referred to.
