A childless Hindu lady brought up a boy B and a girl K as foster children.
She made a will whereby after her death B and K were to get a life estate in her property and 'after their death the children that may be born to them should enjoy the same with powers of gift transfer and sale '.
After the lady 's death B and K divided the property in equal shares by a partition deed.
B married K 's daughter and had a child by her.
He then took another wife and had four children by her.
The said four children filed a suit for a declaration, inter alia, that after the death of B and K, their children namely, K 's daughter and B 's children would be entitled to take the property in equal shares.
The trial court as well as the High Court held that B and K had inherited a life estate as tenants in common and their descendants would inherit per stirpes and not per capita.
The plaintiffs appellants came to this Court.
It was urged on their behalf that B and K had inherited as joint tenants and not as tenants in common.
HELD: A joint tenancy is unknown to Hindu law except in the case of a coparcenary between members of an undivided family.
The terms of the will also did not in the present case spell out a joint tenancy.
As by the will the foster children were to have a life interest with a vested remainder to their children, the latter could only take per stirpes and not per capita.
[398 G 399 A] Jogeswar Narain Deo vs Ram Chund Dutt & Ors.
23 I.A. 37 and Babu Rani vs Rajendra Baksh Singh, 60 I.A. 95, relied on.
In re Hutchinson 's Trusts, , Errington, In re: Gibbs vs Lassam.
and Mcdonnel vs Neil. , referred to.
The donees of the life estate were minors at the date of the will and there was no knowing when they would get married and how many children each would have.
It would therefore be reasonable to expect that the testarix would so arrange her affairs that each of the foster children should get half of the income of the property for life and that their children should succeed to the respective interests of their parents.
It is hardly likely that the testatrix would know the difference between joint tenants and tenants in common and she would naturally be eager to treat the foster children as her own children so that the heirs of the foster children would take share and share alike the properties being divided per stirpes between them.
1398 A B]
