The first appellant holding only a learner 's licence was driving a jeep without a trainer by his side and injured a person.
The first appellant and his companion in the journey the second appellant put the injured in the jeep for getting medical aid, but the injured died on the way.
They cremated the dead body.
The first appellant was convicted under section 304 A I.P.C. and sections 3, 89 and 112 of the Motor Vehicles Act and the second appellant under section 201 I.P.C., and sections 5 and 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
HELD : There was no evidence to show that the first appellant was responsible for the incident so his conviction under section 304 A could not be sustained.
[517 H] The requirements of section 304 A I.P.C. are that the death of any person must have been caused by the accused by doing any rash or negligent act.
In other words, there must be proof that the rash or negligent act of the accused was the proximate cause of the death.
There must be direct nexus between the death of a person and the rash or negligent act of the accused.
There is no presumption in law that a person who possesses only a learner 's licence or possesses no licence at all does not know driving.
For various reasons, not excluding sheer indifference, he might not have taken a regular licence.
The prosecution evidence that first appellant had driven the jeep to various places on the day previous to the occurrence war.
a proof of the fact that he knew driving.
[519 B C; 520 B C] The question whether first appellant was proficient in driving a jeep or not does not conclude the issue.
His proficiency in driving might furnish a defence.
which a learner could not have, but the absence of proficiency did not make him guilty.
[521 D E] As the conviction of the first appellant under section 304 A I.P.C. could not be sustained, the conviction of second appellant under section 201 I.P.C. had to be set aside.
Because to, establish the charge under section 201, the prosecution must first prove that an offence had been committed not merely a suspicion that it might have been committed and that the accused knowing or having reason to believe that such an offence had been committed, and with the intent to screen the offender from legal punishment, had caused the evidence thereof to disappear.
The proof of the commission of an offence is an essential requisite for bringing home the offence under section 201 I.P.C. [517 D G; 521 F G] Palvinder Kaur vs State of Punjab, , and Kurban Hussein Mohammedan Rangwalla vs State of Maharashtra ; , followed.
Emperor vs Omkar Rampratap 4 B.L.R. 679, approved.
516 Juggankhan vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; distinguished.
The 'second appellant could not be convicted either under section 5 or section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
In convicting him under those provisions, the fact that he was not the owner of the jeep had been overlooked.
Nor was there any proof that he was in charge of the jeep.
