Gold was smuggled into India by bringing it in steam launches from places on the Persian Gulf, transhipping it into Indian boats standing out at sea, then bringing it to the Indian shores and by being taken away by persons waiting for it.
There was a raid on the night of August 13, 1961 while a consignment was being brought in.
Many of the smugglers were arrested, the case was investigated into, and on the 14th, the Customs Authorities served notices upon the suspects under section 171A of the Sea Customs Act.
On the 15th, two Customs Officers recorded the statements, in answer to the notices, from two of the suspects K and B, independently, and almost simultaneously.
The statement of K implicated himself and the appellant in the smuggling and the satement of B contained a confession of his own guilt as well as the implication of the appellant in the smuggling.
The, appellant himself was served with a notice by the Customs authorities, but he was unwilling to make a statement till he had seen what the others had said.
The appellant and 17 others were tried for (the offence of conspiracy to smuggle gold into India.
At the trial, K was a witness for the prosecution and B, who was jointly tried with the appellant retracted the confession he made before the Customs authorities alleging duress and torture.
He however died before judgment was delivered but after the conclusion of the trial of the case.
Some of the accused were acquitted and others, including the appellant, were convicted.
In appeal, the High Court, confirmed the conviction of the appellant relying on the evidence of K corroborated by his statement before the Custom authorities and the retracted confession of B.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that, as K was an accomplice, no conviction could be based on his evidence unless it was corroborated in material particulars; and the statement of K before the Customs authorities and the confession of B to the Customs authorities.
which was later retracted, could not be used for purposes of such corroboration.
HELD : An accomplice is a competent witness and his evidence could be accepted and a conviction based on it if there is nothing significant to reject it as false.
But the rule of prudence, ingrained in the consideration of accomplice evidence, requires independent corroborative evidence first of the offence and next connecting the accused, against whom the accomplice evidence is used, with the crime.
Such corroborative evidence could be direct or circumstantial.
On such circumstance may be the making of confessions by more than one accused, provided there was no chance for prior consultation between the confessing co accused for implicating another, and they inspire confidence both in their content and in the manner and circumstances of their making.
If a confessing co accused is tried jointly, within the.
meaning of section 30 of the Evidence Act, with the accused against whom the accomplice evidence is sought to be used for has 642 ing a conviction, the confession could be referred to as lending some assurance to the verdict.
The fact that the confession was later retracted would make no difference unless the admissions made in the confession are satisfactorily withdrawn, or, the making of it explained as having proceeded from fear, duress, promise or the like, of some one in authority.
[644 D. 646 A. C E; 648 D H; 650 E F] In the present case, though K was an accomplice and his own statement before the Customs authorities could not be used for purposes of corroboration, his evidence, impressed the lower Courts and was accepted by them.
There was nothing to make this Court form a different opinion about his veracity.
There was no gap of time between the statements of K and B, and it was impossible that the Customs officers could have tutored them to make the statements which agree in many details.
Further, both the statements received corroboration at numerous other points in the story from independent evidence.
Therefore, the confession of B given independently and in circumstances which exclude any collusion or malpractice affords corroboration to the evidence of K in respect of the appellant.
B 's confession could also be taken into consideration under section 30 of the Evidence Act, to lend assurance to the verdict, as B was fully tried jointly with the appellant, and his allegations of duress and torture for retracting his confession came months later and it was impossible to heed them.
[644 C D; 645 D E; 649 F G] Rameshwar vs State of Rajasthan, ; , Nathu vs State of U.P., A.I.R. 1956 section C. 56, Subramania Goundan vs State of Madras, 119581 S.C.R. 428, Ram Prakash vs State of Punjab, , Chauraria 's case [1968] 2 S.C.R. 624, Babhoni Sahu vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1949 P.C. 257, Emperor vs Lalit Mohan Chuckerburty, I.L.R. and Ram Sarup Singh.
& Ors.
vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1937 Cal. 39, referred to.
