After an enquiry under section 476 of the Code of Criminal procedure the Judicial Magistrate, Baroda, ordered that the appellant he prosecuted for offences under sections 205, 467 and 468 read with section 114 of the Indian Penal Code.
In Appeal the Additional Sessions Judge held that the said complaint was justified but only in respect of the offence under section 205 read with section 114.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's revision pettion but granted a certificate under article 134(1)(c).
The appellant came to this Court.
On behalf of the respondent State it was contended that the High Court 's order dismissing the revision was not a final order as it, did not determine the complaint filed by the Magistrate nor did it decide the controversy between the parties viz., the State of Gujarat and the appellant.whether the appellant had committed the offence.
Held : (Per Wanchoo C. J. and Shelat and Vaidialingam JJ.) (i) A judgment or order may be final for one purpose and interlocutory another or final as to part and interlocutory as to part.
The meaning of the two words 'final ' and 'interlocutory ' his, therefore to be considered separately in relation to the particular purpose for which it is required However, generally speaking a judgment or order which determines the principal matter in question is termed final.
It may be final although it directs enquiries or is made on an interlocutory application or reserves liberty to apply.
[687 H; 688 A ,B] Salaman vs Warner , Standard Discount Co., vs La Grange, , A. Great Eastern Rail Co. [1879] 27 W.R,.
759, Shutrook vs Tufnell, , Bozson vs
Altrincham Urban Council, , Abdul Rehman vs The King [1947] Cassim & Sons vs 60 IA.
76, S.Kuppusami Rao vs King, , Mohammad Amin Brothers Ltd. vs Dominion of India, Sardar Svedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb vs The State of Bombay , Jethainand and Sons vs The State of Uttar Pradesh ; , Premchand Satramadas vs State of Bihar ; , State of Uttar Pradesh vs Sujan Singh, [1964] 7 S.C.R. and State of Orissa vs Madan Gopal [1952] S.C.R. 28, referred to.
(ii) The order of the High Court in the present case disposed of the controversy whether the filing of the complaint against the appellant was justified, The finality of that order was not to be judged by co relating that order with the controversy in the controversy viz., whether the appellant had committed the offence charged against him therein.
The fact 686 that that controversy remained alive was irrelevant.
Consequently the order passed by the High Court in the revision filed by the appellant was it final order within the meaning of article 134(1)(c).
[693 D H] Ramesh vs Patni, ; , relied on.
(iii) The High Court, before it certifies the case in cases not covered by clauses (a) and (b) of article 134(1)(c), must be satisfied that it involves some substantial question of law or principle.
Only it case involving something more than mere appreciation of evidence is contemplated by the Constitution for the grant of a certificate under article 134(1) (c) The question in the revision petition before the High Court was whether the filing of a complaint against the appellant was expedient in the interest of justice.
This was a question of fact and therefore the grant of certificate was not justified.
[694 B F] Haripada Dey vs Slate of West Bengal, ; , and Babu State of Uttar Pradesh, relied on.
Per Bachawat and Mitter, JJ.
(dissenting) : Whatever test is applied,in order directing the filing of a complaint and deciding that there is a prima facie case for enquiry into an offence is not a final order.
It is merely a preliminary step in the prosecution and therefore and, interlocutory order.
As the order is not final, the High Court was not competent to grant a certificate under article 134(1)(c).
[695 B] section Kuppuswamy Rao vs The King , relied on.
