Certain documents were executed between the appellant firm and the respondent company in respect of premises of which the latter was a tenant.
According to the appellant these documents were intended to effect a sublease of three portions of the premises in question though in order to avoid consequences under the Delhi and Ajmer Merwara Rent Control Act 10 of 1947 they apparently purported to create a partnership.
The firm was actually given possession of two of the three portions thus given to it.
After some time the firm was dispossessed by the company of the premises occupied by it and it therefore filed a suit claiming delivery of possession.
In defence the company contended that the documents relied upon by the firm did not evidence either a sub lease or a partnership.
According to it there were negotiations for a partnership which never fructified.
The trial court held that the documents executed by the parties evidenced an agreement for a sub lease and since the agreement did not require registration the firm was entitled to the reliefs claimed by it on the basis of the agreement.
In appeal by the company the High Court held that the documents constituted a completed lease of at least an agreement to lease falling within section 2(7) of the Indian Registration Act, and since the lease or the agreement to lease was evidenced by documents in Writing and they were unregistered, the lease or the agreement to lease could not be enforced.
On this sole ground, the High Court allowed the appeal and dismissed the suit of the firm, which thereupon, appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) The three documents in question were relied on by the appellant firm itself as evidence of the lease and the terms thereof; the firm could not therefore be heard to say that these documents did not represent the completed lease and did not, for that reason, require registration.
[724 C H] (ii) According to the firm 's case based on the said documents rent in the first instance was payable to.
the company in the shape of 10% of the profits of the firm for the period 1st April 1950 to 30th June 1951.
Therefore the lease that came into existence through these documents was certainly for more than a year.
Section 107 of the was thus clearly applicable and such a lease could not have been validly made except under a registered instrument.
Admittedly there was no registration of the documents which constituted the lease, and, consequently, the firm could not claim any rights on the basis of this lease evidenced by unregistered documents.
[725 B F] (iii) Merely because the ]case was for an indefinite period and related to immovable property which was not used for agricultural or manufacturing purposes it could not be held to be a lease from month to month 721 to which section 106 of the was applicable.
There was nothing in the terms of the lease which showed that it was from month to month.
[725 F H] Ram Kumar Das vs Jagadish Chandra Deb Dhabal Deb & Anr. ; , distinguished.
(iv) Section 53A of the is only meant to bring about a bar against enforcement of rights by a lessor in respect of property of which the lessee had already taken possession, but does not give any right to the lessee to claim possession or to claim any other right on the basis of an unregistered lease.
Section 53A is only available PA a defence to a lessee and not as conferring a right on the basis of which the lessee can claim rights against the lessor.
[726 C E] In the present case the claim which was put forward by the firm in the plaint, could by no means be construed as a mere defence of the firm 's rights.
What the firm was actually seeking to do was to enforce the rights under the lease and, in such a case, section 53A of the was clearly inapplicable.
[727 H 728 A] Probodh Kumar Das & Ors.
vs Dantmara Tea Company Ltd.,& Ors.
I.A. 293, relied on.
Ram Chander vs Maharaj Kunwar & Ors., I.L.R. 1939 All.
distinguished.
(v) Specific performances of the lease could not be enforced because (a) In the plaint no specific performance was claimed by the appellant, (b)The appellant 's own case was that the entire contract was not included in the three written documents, and section 27A of the Specific Relief Act under which only the contract could be enforced requires the whole contract to be in writing; (c) The difference between the words of section 53A of the and section 27A of the Specific Relief Act brings out clearly that the latter is applicable when the entire property under contract has been taken possession of by the lessee in part performance of the contract.
In the present case only two out of the three portions of the premises leased out to it were taken possession of by the appellant.
[728 G H, 729 H, 730 A B]
