When the Raja of Tanjore died in 1855 without leaving male issue the East India Company took possession of all his properties including his private property.
However on a memorial being presented by the senior widow of the late Raja, the Government of India in 1862 "sanctioned the relinquishment, of the whole of the landed property of the Tanjore Raja in favour of the heirs of the late Raja.
" The Tanjore Palace Estate thus came into existence.
In 1948 the appellant purchased certain lands situate in Orathur Padugai which was part of the aforesaid Tanjore Palace Estate, and thereafter instituted suits for possession of these lands from various defendants.
The trial court dismissed the suits on the ground that the lands were situated in an 'estate under section 3(2)(d) of the Madras Estates Lands Act 1 of 1908 and they were 'ryoti lands ' as defined in section 3(16) in which the defendants had acquired occupancy rights.
The Madras High Court affirmed the decree, whereupon the appellant came to this Court.
it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the lands did not form an 'estate ' under section 3 (2) (d) of the aforesaid Act because the restora tion of the land to the widows of the Raja of Tanjore did not amount to a fresh grant but only a restoration of the status quo ante; (ii) that Orathur Padugai was not a whole village as required by the definition of 'estate '; (iii) the widows of the Raja enjoyed both the 'warams ' and the lands purchased by the appellant were 'private lands ' in section 3(10)(b) so that the defendants did not have any occupancy rights therein.
HELD: (i) The relinquishment by the Government of India in favour of the widows of the Raja in 1862 was a fresh grant as already held in several cases.
In view of the authorities it could no longer be questioned that the Tanjore Palace state was an 'estate ' within the meaning of section 3(2)(d) of the Madras Estates Lands Act.
[759 F 760 B] Jijoiamba Bayi Saiba vs Kamakshi Bayi Saiba, 3 M.H. C.R. 424, Sundaram Ayyar vs Ramachandra Ayyar, I.L.R. 40 Mad.
3891, Maharaja of Kolhapur vs Sondaram Iyer, I.L.R. 48 Mad. 1, Sundaram vs Deva Sankara, A.I.R. 1918 Mad.
428 and T. R, Bhavani Shankar Joshi vs Somasunakra Moopanar, , relied on.
Chota Raja.
Saheb Mahitai vs Suddaram Iyer, 63 I.A. 224, referred to.
(ii) There was sufficient material on the record to show that at least since 1830 onwards Orathur Padugai was a whole village and therefore an 'estate ' within the meaning of the Act.
[762 C] (iii) The lands in suit were 'ryoti lands ' and not 'private lands '.
The definition in section 3(10) read as a whole indicates clearly that the ordinary test for 'private land ' is the test of retention by the landholder 7 5 5 for his own personal use and cultivation by him or under his personal supervision.
No doubt, such lands may be let on short leases for the convenience of the landholder without losing their distinctive, character; but it is not ' the intention or the scheme of the Act to treat as private those lands with reference to which the only peculiarity is the fact that the landlord owns both the warams in the lands and has been letting them out on short ]cases.
1765 H 766 B) In the present case there was no proof that the lands were ever directly cultivated by the landholder.
The High Court had found that the same tenants continued to cultivate the lands without break or change, and the fact that there were periodical auctions of the lease rights did not necessarily deprive the tenants of the occupancy rights which they were enjoying.
The appellant had not been able to adduce sufficient evidence to rebut the presumption under section 185 of the Act that the lands in the inam village are not private lands.
[766 C G] Yerlagadda Malikarjuna Prasad Nayudu vs Somayya, I.L.R. , referred to with approval.
