By section 4 of the Amending Act (Punj.
Act 10 of 1960) section 15 of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913 was repealed and in its place was substituted a new provision which omitted to confer a right of pre emption in the case of persons 'owning land in the estate ' as the original section 15(c) 'thirdly ' had done.
Retrospective effect was given to the provisions by the insertion of new section 31 in the parent Act.
In respect of sales effected after the promulgation of the Amending Act, one N filed suits and obtained decrees for pre emption in all suits against the appellants under section 15(1)(a) of the Punjab Pre emption Act.
These decrees were confirmed by the first appellate court.
While the second appeals were pending in the High Court, N died, and his legal representatives were brought on record.
The High Court dismissed the appeals.
In appeals to this Court, it was contended that (i) the statutory right of pre emption under the Punjab Preemption Act, was not a 'heritable right ' and no decree for pre emption should have been passed by the lower court in favour of the legal representatives; and (ii) section 31 of the Act as amended retrospectively by Punjab Act 10 of 1960, stood as a bar to the granting of a decree in favour of substituted legal representatives.
HELD : The appeals must be dismissed.
(i) The statutory right of pre emption though not amounting to an interest in the land is a right which attaches to the land and which can be enforced against a purchaser by the persons entitled to pre empt.
The right of pre emption under section 15(1) (a) of the Punjab Act of 1913 is a personal right in the sense that the claim of the pre emptor depends upon the nature of his relationship with the vendor.
But under section 14 of the Act, the pre emptor must be a member of an agricultural tribe in the same group of agricultural tribes, as the vendor and the land of which preemption is sought must be in respect of agricultural land sold to a member of the agricultural tribe.
If an involuntary transfer takes place by inheritance the successor to the land takes the whole bundle of the rights which go with the land including the right of pre emption.
This view is sup ported by the language of section 306 of the Indian Succession Act and therefore, the claim of N for pre emption did not abate upon his death and his legal representatives were properly brought on 'record of the second appeals under the provisions of 0. 22, r. 1 read with 0. 22, r. 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(836 G; 837 B D] Faqir Ali Shah vs Rani Kishan & Ors.
133 P.R. 1907 and Wajid Ali & Ors.
vs Shaban & Ors.
1.L.R. 31 All 623, approved.
Muhammad Husain vs Niamat un nissa & Ors.
I.L.R. 20 All, 88, referred to. 834 (ii) The Amending Act came into.
force long before N instituted the present suits.
Even the sales of land were effected after the promulgation of the Amending Act.
In Ram Sarup 's case, the right of the plaintiff to pre empt was extinguished retrospectively; in the present case N 's right to sue has not been extinguished.
N had the right of pre emption under the Amended Act at the time he instituted the suit and N 's right was not extinguished on his death but passed to his legal representatives.
[839 G] Ram Sarup vs Munshi & Ors.
[196.3] 3 S.C.R. 858, distinguished.
