The appellant company obtained a lease of certain mica bearing land from the owners for a period of fifteen years.
The lease deed provided for a renewal of the lease on the expiry of the period at the option of the lessee.
The land was within an estate and by virtue of a notification under the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950, the estate vested in the State Government under section 4, free from all encumbrances and free from all rights of the lessees.
But the appellant continued in occupation for the remaining period of the contractual lease, under a statutory lease deemed to have been granted by the State under section 10 of the Act.
On the question whether the appellant was entitled to specific performance of the covenant of renewal, HELD : The agreement of renewal of the lease infuture was not binding upon the State Government after the vesting ofthe estate.
(1) The Original contractual lease came to an endby the operationof section 4 and under section 10 a fresh statutory lease for theremainder of the term of that lease, in favour of the lessee, came into being with terms and conditions mutatis mutandis the 'same as the conditions of the original lease.
But the covenant granting an option of renewal of the lease on the expiry of the period of the lease is merely a covenant running with the land, and does not create any interest in land.
It being in the nature of an encumbrance and by virtue of section 4 it was extinguished and the land vested in the State free from the obligation created by the renewal clause.
[885 C E] The State of Bihar vs Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. I.L.R. 38 Pat.
1160, approved.
(2) Rule 40 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1949, under which a lessee of a mining lease is entitled to at least one renewal for a period not exceeding the duration of the original lease, applies to grants made by Government and not to statutory leases.
Therefore, the rule has no application.
Even assuming the rule was applicable, the duration of the original lease in the case of such a statutory lease must be deemed to be no longer than the period between the date of vesting and the date of expiry of the original lease and that period, for which renewal may have been claimed, expired many years ago.
[885 G; 886 A B]
