The State of Haryana came into existence On 1st November 1966.
The Cabinet placed certain sums of money at the disposal of the ministers, one of whom was the appellant to be used at their discretion for purposes of public utility, for the benefit of the general public and for the uplift of backward communities.
The money had to be disbursed before 31st March 1967 through Panchayat, Municipal or Government agencies.
The appellant sanctioned certain payments for building two dharmashalas in two wards of a Municipality.
Long after the sanction, her candidature for election to the Vidhan Sabha of the State was recognised by her party and she stood for election from a constituency which included these two wards.
She was elected, and some time later, the money was made available to the wards though the recipients were writing that the money should be made available at once.
The first respondent challenged the election alleging corrupt practices and later amended the petition giving better particulars.
The pleas in the petition contradicted each other, the evidence tendered at the trial of the petition contradicted the pleas, and the witnesses were found to be thoroughly unreliable.
In spite of this the petition was allowed on the ground that the circumstances showed that the were in fact paid to bargain for votes and to influence the voters in favour of the appellant.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The action of the appellant could not be construed against her.
It was done in the ordinary course of her duties as Minister and there was no evidence that it was, directly or indirectly, part of a bargain with the voters.
No hurry to make the money available to the recipients emanated from the appellant.
It was only the persons who were to benefit by the discretionary grant that were anxious to lay hands on the money, as soon as possible, so that the grant might not be cancelled later by a change of attitude caused by the election going against the particular party.
[117 H; 118 A C] Ghasi Ram vs Dal Singh & Ors. ; followed.
Bhagwan Dutta Shastri vs Ram Ratanji Gupta, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 200 and Kandaswami vs Adityan, , referred to.
