In the State of Madhya Pradesh vs V. P. Sharma, ; this Court held that once a declaration under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act 1894 was made the notification under section 4(1) of the Act was exhausted and there could be no successive notifications under section 6 with respect to land in a locality specified in one notification under section 4(1).
Relying on the above judgment the present writ petitions were filed in order to challenge successive notifications under section 6 following a single notification under section 4(1) in respect of land belonging to them.
Meanwhile in order to meet the situation created by the judgment in V. P. Sharma 's case the President of India promulgated the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance (1 of 1967).
The Ordinance was later followed by the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Act 1967.
Section 2 of this Act purported to amend section 5 A of the principal Act by allowing the making of more than one report in respect of land which had been notified under section 4(1).
Section 3 purported to amend section 6 of the principal Act by empowering different declarations to be made from time to time in respect of different parcels of land covered by the same notification under section 4(1) irrespective of whether one report or different reports had been made under section 5 A sub section
Section 4 of the Act purported to validate all acquisitions of land made or purporting to have been made under the principal Act before the commencement of the ordinance namely January 10, 1967, notwithstanding that more than one declaration under section 6 had been made in pursuance of the same notification under section 4(1), and notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court to the contrary.
The Amending Act also laid down time limits for declarations under section 6 of the principal Act after the notification under s 4(1), had been issued in respect of notifications made after January 20.
1967 the time limit was three years; in respect of notification made before that date the time limit was to be two years after that date.
Provision was also made for payment of interest on compensation due to persons in respect of whose land declarations under section 6 had been delayed beyond a specified period; no interest was however, to be paid to those to whom compensation had already been paid.
The petitioners by leave of Court amended their petitions to attack the validity of the.
aforesaid Validating Act on the following main grounds : (1) By seeking to validate past transactions of a kind which had been declared invalid by this Court without retrospectively changing the substantive law under which the past transactions had been effected the legislature was encroaching over the domain of the judicial power vested by the Constitution in the judiciary exclusively; (ii) The Validating Act did not L4Sup.
C.I.1684 42 revive the notification under section 4 which had become exhausted after the first declaration under section 6 and no acquisition following thereafter could be made without a fresh notification under section 4; (iii) The Validating Act violated article 31(2) of the Constitution inasmuch as it purported to authorise acquisitions without fresh notifications under section 4 thereby allowing compensation to be paid on the basis of the said .
notification under section 4 without allowing for increase in the value of land thereafter; (iv) The Validating Act violated article 14 of the Constitution in various ways.
HELD: Per Wanchoo C.J., Bachawat & Mitter, JJ. (i) The American doctrine of well defined separation of legislative and judicial powers has no application to India and it cannot be said that an Indian Statute which seeks to validate invalid actions ' is bad if the invalidity has already been pronounced upon by a court of law.
A.K. Gopalan vs State, ; , referred to.
(ii) The absence of a provision in the amending Act to give retrospective operation to section 3 of the Act does not affect the validity of section 4.
It was open to Parliament to adopt either course e.g. (a) to provide expressly for the retrospective operation of section 3, or, (b) to lay down that no acquisition purporting to have been made and no action taken before the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 1967 shall be deemed to be invalid or even to have become invalid because, inter alia, of the making of more than one declaration under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, notwithstanding any judgment decree or order to the contrary.
Parliament was competent to validate such actions and transactions, its power in that behalf being only circumscribed by appropriate entries in the Lists of the Seventh Schedule and the fundamental rights set forth in Part III of the Constitution.
Section 4 of the Amending Act being within the legislative competence of Parliament, the provisions thereof are binding on all courts of law notwithstanding judgments, orders or decrees to the contrary rendered or made in the past.
[67 C F] Case law referred to.
(iii) The impugned Act does not violate article 31(2).
The Act does not in express terms enact any law which directly affects compensation payable in respect of property acquired nor does it lay down any principles different from those which were already in the Land Acquisition Act of 1894.
After the amendment of the Constitution in 1955 the question of compensation is not justiciable and it is enough if the law provides that a person expropriated must be given compensation for his property or lays down the principles therefor.
[67 G H] The Legislature might well have provided in the Act of 1894 that it would be open to the appropriate Government after issuing a notification under section 4 to consider objections raised under section 5 with regard to the different localities from time to time enabling different reports to fie made under section 5 A with consequent adjustments in section 6 providing for declarations to be made as and when each report under section 5A was considered.
By the validation of action taken under section 6 more than once in respect of a single notification under section 4, the original scheme of acquisition is not altered.
The public purpose behind the notification remains the same.
It is not as if a different public purpose and acquisition of land for such purpose were being interploated by means of the Validating Act.
Only the shortcoming in the Act as to want to provision to enable more than one decla ration under section 6 are being removed.
[68 D F] 43 The date of valuation under the Validation Act is that of the issue of notification under section 4(1), a principle which has held the field since 1923 Legislative competence to acquire land under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be challenged because of constant appreciation of land values all over the country due to the prevalent abnormal inflation.
There must be some time lag between the commencement and conclusion of land acquisition proceedings and in principle there is nothing wrong in accepting the said commencement as the date of valuation.
Sections 4 and 23 of the Land Acquisition Act are protected by article 31(5) (a) of the Constitution.
Only sections 5 A and 6 of the Act have been amended.
The amendment does not alter the principle of compensation fixed by the Act nor contravene article 31 of the Constitution in any way.
[69 G 70 B] It cannot be said of the Validating Act that it was fixing an arbitrary date for the valuation of the property which bore no relation to the acquisition proceedings.
The population in Indian cities especially in the capital is ever increasing.
The State has to plan the development of cities and it is not possible to take up all schemes in all directions at the same time.
The resources of the State may not be sufficient to acquire all the area required by a scheme at the same time.
Of necessity the area under the proposed acquisition would have to be carved into blocks and the development of one or more blocks at a time could only be taken up in consonance with the resources available.
Even contiguous blocks could be developed gradually and systematically.
In view of such factors it cannot be said that the principle of fixing compensation on the basis of the price prevailing on the date of the notification under section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act was not a relevant principle which satisfied the requirements of article 31(2).[70 C 71 H] The State of West Bengal vs Mrs. Bela Banerjee, ; , State of Madras vs D. Namasivaya Mudaliar, ; and, P.V. Mudaliar vs Deputy Collector, ; , considered.
(iv) The validating Act was not violative of article 14.
Whenever an Amending Act is passed there is bound to be some difference in treatment between transactions which have already taken place and those which are to take place in the future.
That by itself will not attract the operation of article 14.
Again, even with respect to transactions which may be completed in the future, a reasonable classification will not be struck down.
[72 C] Jalan Trading Co. vs Mazdoor Union, ; , relied on.
It is not possible to say that because the Legislature thought of improving upon the Act of 1894 by prescribing certain limits of time as from 20th January 1967 the difference in treatment in cases covered by the notification before the said date and after the said date denies equal protection of laws because the transactions are not similarly circumstanced.
Some of the notifications issued under section 4 must have been made even more than 3 years before 20th January, 1967 and such cases obviously could not be treated in the same manner 'as notifications issued after that date.
article 14 does not strike at differentiation caused by the enactment of a law between transactions governed thereby and those which are not so governed.
[73 H 74 B] Hatisingh Manufacturing Co., Ltd. vs Union of India, ; No grievance can be made because interest is denied to persons who have already taken the compensation.
Even here the classification is not unreasonable and cannot be said to be unrelated to the object of the Act.
[74 E F] 44 Per Shelat and Vaidialingam, JJ.
(dissenting) By validating the acquisition orders and declarations made on the basis of an exhausted notification under section 4 the impugned Act saves government from having to issue a fresh notification and having to pay compensation calculated on the market value as on the date of such fresh notification and depriving the expropriated owner of the benefit of the appreciated value in the meantime.
The real object of section 4 of the impugned Act is thus to save the State from having to compensate for such appreciation under the device of validating all that is done under an exhausted section 4 notification and thus in reality fixing an anterior date i.e. the date of such a dead section 4 notification for fixing the compensation.
The impugned Act thus suffers from a two fold vice : (i) that it purports to validate acquisitions orders and notifications without resuscicating the notification under section 4 by any legislative provision on the basis of which alone the validated acquisitions, orders and declarations can properly be sustained and (ii) that its provisions are in derogation of article 31(2) as interpreted by this Court by fixing compensation on the basis of value on the date of notifications under section 4 which had become exhausted and for keeping them alive no legislative provision is to be found in the impugned Act.
It is therefore not possible to agree with the view that the purpose of section 4 is to fill the lacuna pointed out in Sharma 's case nor with the view that it raises a question of adequacy of compensation.
The section under the guise of validating the acquisitions, orders and notifications camouflages the real object of enabling acquisitions by paying compensation on the basis of values frozen by notifications under s 4 which by part acquisitions thereunder had lost their efficacy and therefore required the rest of the land to be notified afresh and paying compensation on the date of such fresh notifications.
The fact that neither section 4 nor section 23 of the principal Act are altered does not make any difference.
[89 D H, 85 H] Section 4 of the Amending Act must therefore be struck down as invalid.
[90 A]
