The petitioner company a licensee was supplying electrical energy to the 3rd respondent.
By the Electric Supply Act 1948 the Electricity Board was constituted and by Indian Electricity (U.P.) Amendment Act, 1961, the disability of the Board to supply directly electrical energy to consumers such as the 3rd respondent was removed.
The State Government issued a notification directing the Board to directly supply energy to the 3rd respondent.
The rates chargeable by the Board for energy supplied to licensees were higher than the rates the direct consumers.
The 3rd respondent terminated the agreement with the petitioner company.
The petitioner company filed a petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
HELD : (Per Full Court) : The notification could not be sustained as a valid notification as it was discriminatory.
If the Board were to supply energy directly to the 3rd respondent it had to do so at rates lower than the rates at which electricity was supplied by it to the petitioner company ' The petitioner company being thus charged at higher rates must as a distributor charge higher rates from its other consumers with the result that the 3rd respondent would get energy at substantially lower rates than other Consumers including other industrial establishments in the area.
The notification thus resulted in discrimination between the 3rd respondent on the one hand the other consumers on the other as also between the, 3rd respondent and the petitioner company.
[319 B D] (Per Wanchoo C.J., Sikri, Shelat and Vaidialingam, JJ.).
The Board ,could not have distributed energy to the consumers though it was a licensee under 1910 Act unless (a) there was a scheme or (b) that it was authorised in public interest under the amended section 3(2)(e).
Neither of these two ,conditions having been fulffilled the notification and the direction contained therein to the Board to supply energy to the 3rd respondent were in breach of the petitioner company 's rights under its licences and the, requirements of the amended section 3 (2) (a).
[3 1 8 H] The allegation that the 3rd respondent suffered in production and losses as a result of short or defective supply by the petitioner company was not borne out by the record in this case.
if there was any justification for the allegation now made by the respondents it is inconceivable that for all these years the 3rd respondent would not have made any complaint for such defective supply either to the Board or to the State Government.
(Per Bhargava, J.) The notification cannot be held to be invalid on the ground that it was issued in breach of the amended section 3 (e) of the Act.
If the State Government was competent under the original section 3 (2) (e) of the Act of 1910 to grant a licence to any person for supply of electricity 313 in the areas covered by the, licences issued to the petitioner company , it cannot be seen why a similar result could not be validly brought about by legislation by the appropriate legislatures creating a statutory licensee for purposes of the Act of 1910.
Consequently the power granted to the Electricity Board by the notification to supply electricity to a consumer in the area covered by one of the licences of the petitioner company could not be held to be in violation of the conditions of the licence.
In view of the language of the provisions contained in the amended 3 (2) (e) of the Act of 1910, it was not competent for this Court in this writ petition, on the material available, to declare that the notification was invalid for the reason that the direction contained therein was not made by the State Government in public interests As long as the State Government based its order on an opinion formed on relevant material, it was not open to the courts to examine and take a different view on the, basis of other materials.
[320 G 321 B]
