In 1950 51, the appellant was plying his motor buses in Bihar.
Bihar Act 17 of 1950 imposed a tax on passengers and goods carried by public service motor vehicles.
As the imposition of the tax was found to be invalid the appellant did not pay the tax.
In 1961, the tax was reimposed by Act 17 of 1961 with effect from 1st April 1950 and the imposition was found to be valid.
Therefore, the appellant was liable to pay the transport tax for 1950 51.
This liability was outsanding on 15th January 1965, on which date, the Regional Transport Authority ordered that a permit to ply a stage carriage be granted to him on condition that he produced a clearance certificate of transport tax within one month from the date of the order failing which the grant will stand automatically cancelled and the permit will be granted to the first respondent.
As the appellant failed to carry out the condition the permit was cancelled and given to the first respondent.
The order was confirmed by the Government, in revision, under section 64A of the , as amended by the Bihar Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1950, after calling for and considering a report from the Dy.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, that the transport tax was due from the appellant for 1950 51.
The writ petition in the High Court to quash the Government order was dismissed.
The appellant appealed to this Court with certificate granted by the High COurt under article 133 of the Constitution.
The respondent contended that the High Court was not competent to grant the certificate in proceedings under article 226; and the appellant contended that : (1) on the date of the order granting the permit there was no liability to pay the tax as there was no assessment; (2) the condition regarding payment of tax was invalid; (3) the Minister of Transport who disposed of the revision to the Government had no right to call for any additional evidence; and (4) the report of the Dy.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes should have been disclosed by the Minister to the appellant.
HELD : (1) The words 'civil proceedings ' in article 133 cover all proceedings which directly affect civil rights, and therefore the High Court was competent to grant the certificate in a proceeding under article 226 involving civil rights.
[324 E F] section A. L. Narayan Row vs Ishwar Lal Bhagwandas, ; and Ramesh vs Seth Gendalal Motilal Patni, ; , followed.
(2) Under the scheme of the Act the liability to pay tax arises by statutory injunction and not from any order of assessment.
Therefore, there was a liability to pay the transport tax outstanding, against the appellant, on the date of the order granting him the permit and failure to 323 produce the clearance certificate in respect of the tax disentitled him to the sant of a permit.
[326 H; 327 C] Raipur Transport Co. (P.) vs M. P. Singh, A.I.R. 1968 M.P. 36 distinguished (3) If it be held that the grant of a permit was to be subject only to such of the matters specified under section 47(1) (a) to (f) and to such of the conditions as may be prescribed under section 48, the order of the Regional Transport Authority in the present case must be deemed to be an order refusing the permit, and, the appellant should have challenged, by way of appeal, the validity of the imposition of the condition relating to payment of tax; he could not ignore the condition subject to which the permit was granted.
[328 D E] (4) The expression 'pass such order as it thinks fit ' in s 64A, as amended by the Bihar Act, is not restricted to the passing of final orders.
If for the purpose of doing complete justice between the parties, the authority who hears the revision petition is satisfied that it is necessary to call for additional evidence, he may do so.
There is no bar in the Act or the Rules against an appellate or revising authority taking into consideration the additional evidence brought on record.
[328 G H] (5) Such additional evidence must undoubtedly be disclosed to the parties and they must be given an opportunity to meet an inference that may arise from it.
In the present case, the High Court, on a consideration of the evidence came to the conclusion that the additional evidence called for by the Minister of Transport was disclosed by him, at the hearing, to the appellant 's counsel and there was no reason for this Court to disagree with that view.
[329 A B, H]
