The appellant was a tenant of the respondent.
Having fallen into arrears of rent he was given a notice (a) demanding arrears of rent and permitted increases under the Bombay Rents.
Hotel and Lodging House Rat as Control Act, 1947, and (b) terminating his tenancy in terms of section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, Receiving no response to the notice the respondent filed a suit against the appellant.
On the first day of the Heading of the suit and during its pendency the appellant deposited part of the arrears in Court but not the full amount due.
The trial Court passed a decree against him which was confirmed by the appellate Court.
The High Court dismissed his revision petition.
With special leave he appealed to this Court and urged that (i) he was entitled to the benefit of section 12 ( 1 ) of the Act and that (ii) even if section 12 (3) (b) was applied he was not liable to be eiected.
HElD : (i) Section 12(1) must be read with the Explanation and so read it means that a tenant can only be considered "to be ready and willing to pay" if, before the expiry of the period of one month after notice referred to in sub section
(2), he makes an application to the court under sub section
(3) of section 11 and hereafter pays or tenders the amount of rent or permitted increases specified by the court.
The readiness and willingness to pay has to be judged in the light of the facts of the case.
Where as in the present case a suit is filed on the ground that the tenant was in arrears for a period of more than six months and although raising a dispute as to the standard rent or permitted increases recoverable under the Act, the tenant makes no application in terms of section 11(3) he cannot claim the protection of section 12(1) by merely offering to pay or even paying aii arrears due from him when the court is about to pass a decree against him.
[351 H 352 B] Shah Bhojraj Kuverji Oil Mills and Ginning Factory vs Subbash Chandra Yograi Sinha; , , distinguished.
Vora Abbasbhal Alimahomed vs Haii Gulamnabi Haii Safibhai, ; , Mrs. Manordma Masurekar vs Mrs. Dhanlaxmi G. Shah and another.
; , applied.
(ii) The case did not come under section 12(3) (b).
To be within the protection of that provision, the tenant must not only pay all the arrears due from him on the first day of the hearing of the suit, but he must thereafter continue to 'pay or tender in court regularly the rent and the permitted increase till the suit is finally decided.
There was a failure on the part of the appellant to pay or tender in court all the amounts which fell due, and he could not therefore get the protection of section 12(3) (b) of the Act.
[353 B E]
