In September 1966 the Customs authorities seized certain contraband . gold from the possession of the appellant.
Thereafter the appellant along with certain other persons was charged before.
a Magistrate for offences in connection with the smuggling of gold under section 120 B of the Indian Penal Code read with section 135 of the Sea , r. 131 B of the Defence of India Rules and section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
Before the commencement of the trial the Assistant Collector of Customs issued a notice to the appellant to bow cause why the gold should not be confiscated under section III of the Sea and why a penalty should not be imposed on him under section 112 of the same Act.
Thereupon the appellant under article 226 of the Constitution asked the High Court for a writ of prohibition restraining proceedings for imposition of penalty on him in pursuance of the aforesaid notice.
The contention was that the threatened proceedings (i) amounted to contempt of the Magistrate before whom the trial was imminent and (ii) were in violation of article 20(3) inasmuch as he would be compelled to go into the witness box to rebut the evidence of an accomplice witness.
The High Court rejected these contentions, but granted a certificate to appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) Identical issues arise in proceedings for imposition of penalty under section 112(b) of the Sea and in a trial for an offence punishable under section 135(b) of the same Act.
If a person incurs liability under section 1 1 1 he may be proceeded against under section 112(b) and also under section 135(b).
Similar issues arise in the trial for contravention of r. 131B of the Defence of India Rules and section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act.
The customs officers will have to enquire into these issues though the same issues will later be tried by the criminal court.
Section 127 expressly provides that the award of a penalty under section 112 is not bar to the infliction of punishment under section 135.
The offender may be punished under section 135 without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under the Act.
[424 E H] The Customs Officers were acting bona fide and discharging their statutory duties under sections 111 and 112.
The power of adjudicating penalty and confiscation under those sections is vested in them alone.
The criminal court cannot make this adjudication.
The issue of the show cause notice and proceedings thereunder were authorised by the Act and were not calculated to obstruct the course of justice in any Court.
There was no justification for holding that the proceedings amounted to contempt of Court.
[425 C] 423 Reg vs Gray, , Arthur Reginald Perera vs the King, , Saibal Kumar Gupta vs B. K. Sen, ; and section section Roy vs State of Orissa, A.I.R. , referred to.
(ii) The customs officers have a discretion to stay the proceedings under sections III and 112 during the pendency of the trial in the criminal court.
In the exercise of their discretion they had refused to stay the proceedings.
It was not shown that their action was mala fide or arbitrary.
The Court would not issue a mandamus to control this exercise of their discretion.
[425 H] (iii) The proceedings under sections 111 and 112 could not be said to be in Violation of article 20(3) of ;he Constitution.
The possibility of having to enter the witness box to rebut the evidence of an accomplice was not such a compulsion as would attract the Provisions of proceedings from another person or authority.
If an accused voluntarily gives evidence in his defence he is not being compelled to be a witness against himself.
[The Court however observed that different considerations might arise if the appellant was summoned by the customs authorities under section 108 to give evidence in the proceedings under sections III and 112.1 [426 D F]
