The appellant was the Managing Trustee of a public charitable trust maintaining a Dharamshala.
He filed an application under the provisions of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, XCIX of 1958 before the Naib Tehsildar, the third respondent to direct the fourth respondent, the tenant, to surrender four acres of land, on the ground that the lands were required for personal cultivation.
According to the appellant, the necessary notices, terminating the tenancy of the fourth respondent, had been given and be was entitled to get pos session of the lands.
The tenant raised a legal contention that inasmuch as the lands belonged to the Trust, the appellant could not be considered the landlord; the trust itself 'could not 'cultivate personally ' the lands within the meaning of the.
Act and therefore the appellant 's application was not maintainable.
This contention was overruled and the tenant ordered to surrender possession of the land to the appellant.
However, the tenant 's appeal to the Special Deputy Collector, Tenancy Appeals, Akola, the second respondent, was allowed and this decision was confirmed in revision by the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal, Nagpur.
A writ petition filed by the appellant was summarily rejected by the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The appeal must be allowed and the order of the Naib Tehsildar restored.
Under section 2(18), of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, a Trustee has been defined as meaning a person, in whom either alone or in association with other persons.
the trust property is vested and includes a manager.
In view of this definition, it is clear that in the present case, the properties of the Trust vest in the Managing Trustee the appellant; and he is the 'landlord ', under cl.
(32) of section 2.
As trustee, he would have to administer the properties for the purpose of carrying out the objects of the Trust; but, as the properties vest in him and he it a 'landlord ', he can ask for a surrender from the tenant of the lands of the Trust 'to cultivate personally '.
He can cultivate the lands, either, by his own labour, or under the personal supervision of himself, by hired labour or by servants as contemplated under sub cls.
(i) or (iii), of cl.
(12) of section 2.
As the properties vest in him.
in law, cultivation by him, is to be considered 'on one 's own account. ' [444 H 445 C] Shri Kalanka Devi Sansthan, Patur vs Pandu Maroti [1963] Mh.
L. J. 249, referred to.
Buvasaheb vs Yesu Krishna, (1960) N.L.J. 219 and Kesheoraj Deo Sansthan Karanja v Bapurao, (1964) Mh.
L.J. 589.
distinguished.
