The appellant was elected Pramukh of a Kshettra Samiti and his term of office which was co terminus with that of the Samiti, was for five years The Government of Uttar Pradesh issued two notifications under sections i and 8 of the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Samities and Zila Parishads Adhiniyam, 1961, by which the rural areas in the district were redivided into new Khands, the Khand relating to the appellant 's Samiti was abolished and the term of the Samiti was brought to a close.
As a consequence, the appellant lost the office of Pramukh of the Samiti.
His writ petition in the High Court challenging the notifications was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that : (1) The two notifications are repugnant to the scheme of the Act; (2) Sections 3 and 8 are contrary to the other provisions of the Act under which a Samiti once constituted had a corporate existence with perpetual succession owning property and a fund, and whose existence for 5 years was contemplated under the Act with the possibility of further continuance; (3) Sections 3 and 8 were invalid because they involved excessive delegation of legislative functions to the State Government, and (4) The sections violate article 14 of the Constitution because they furnish an indirect method of re moving the Pramukh, Up pramukh and members of a Kshettra Samiti without resorting to the appropriate provisions in the Act.
HELD : (1) The notifications flow from an express grant of power to the Executive by the Legislature.
[438 B] The Act was intended to make democracy broad based and to give training, in the art of administration and running democracy, to the rural population.
Its scheme indicates that the area of the district is required to be divided into many Khands with a Kshettra Samiti in each Khand.
The power to create Khands must be read with the power to abolish Khads and create new Khands in their place.
Sections 3, 4, 8 and 8A confer power upon the State Government to alter the area of the Khand, abolish old Khands, constitute new Khands and re establish old ones; and this power is given by the Legislature advisedly, so that the working of democracy in the rural areas in Kshettra Samities and Zila Parishads may be smooth and without difficulty.
[435 D E; 437 G H; 538 G] (2) The provisions of sections 3 and 8 cannot be said to negative the other provisions of the Act, which merely indicate what a Kshettra Samiti is required to do as long as it exists.
Perpetual 'succession only means succession of one Samiti to another, but does not entail perpetual existence of any Samiti or any Khand notwithstanding the inadvisability of continuing it for administrative or other valid reasons.
Similarly, the fact that the Samities are required to function with right to hold property, to 434 possess fund and to carry on administration, does not show that the power given by the Act to reconstitute Khands is in any way impaired or frustrated.
The first power exists when the Samities are established and continue; and the second comes into play when the need for the reconstitution of a Khand emerges.
[438 B F] (3) The Act has not erred by conceding unfettered or uncanalized power to the State Government.
[439 D E] The underlying policy and the objective of the legislation is set out in the preamble and other provisions of the Act and the Act gives ample indication of what the purpose of making a Khand is and the duties which the Samiti must perform.
The details of how big a Khand should be, what territory it should involve and how many Samities should be constituted in each district, etc.
cannot be the subject of detailed legislation and they are eminently matters which can be left to the determination of the Executive which is to act in conformity with the wishes of the local people, the political exigency of the situation and the requirements of administrative control.
On this subject the legislative will has been expressed in sufficient detail giving guidance to the State Government in making its notifications to implement it [438 G H; 439 C E] State of Bhopal & Ors.
vs Champalal & Ors., [1964] 6 S.C.R. 35, followed.
(4) Sections 3 and 8 do not violate article 14.
The provision in the Act on the subject of removal of members of a Samiti and that dealing with the subject of reorganisation of Khands deal with different powers and cannot be compared at all.
One is concerned directly with the removal of Pramukh, Up Pramukh and other members, while the other is concerned directly with the abolition and reconstitution of Khands.
It may be that by abolishing a Khand and its Kshettra Samiti the members, including the Pramukh, must also go; but, that is the consequence of the exercise of a different power.
If, however the action in abolishing the Khand is for the direct purpose of the removal of a Pramukh, Up Pramukh or member of a Samiti, the action of the Executive Government can be struck down as mala fide.
In the present case, there is no evidence of any mala fides.
[439 G H; 440 A C] Rani Dial and Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; distinguished.
