One V lost his father when he was only 10 years old and.
thereafter lived along with his mother, in the house of the first defendant who was his maternal uncle.
The first defendant had considerable influence over V as he was slow witted and below the average level of intelligence and, understanding.
V died when he was 24 years old.
A few.
days before his death he executed a will by which he bequeathed his entire property to the first defendant absolutely with a direction that his mother should be maintained, and that, even if his mother lived separately from the first defendant, she was to have only a life interest in certain items which were also to be taken absolutely by the first defendant after her death.
At the time of the execution of the will V was physically in a weak condition.
The first defendant took a prominent part in summoning the attesting witnesses and the scribe and in Procuring, writing materials for the execution of the will.
Evidence was given on behalf the first defendant that though V was delirious on the day previous to the execution of the will and also subsequent to that date, V was in a normal condition on the date of the execution of the will.
On the question of the validity of the will, HELD : The will was not executed in a sound disposing state of mind and was therefore not legally valid.
[480,A B] In a case in which a will is prepared under circumstance which raise the suspicion of the court that it does not express the mind of the testator it is for those who propound the will to remove that suspicion.
What are suspicious circumstances must be judged on the facts and circumstances of each particular case.
If, however, the Propounder takes a prominent part in the execution of the will which confers substantial benefits on him that itself is a suspicious circumstance attending the execution of the will and in appreciating the evidence in such a case the court should proceed in a vigilant and cautious, manner.
[477 R; 478 A B] Barry vs Butlin, ; , 482, Fulton vs Andrew, , Tyrrell vs Painton, , 157, 159 and Sarat Kumari Bibi vs Sakhi Chand & Ors., 56 I.A. 62, applied.
