Under section 73 of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925 read with rr.
4(1) and 5 made thereunder a rate on nonresidential buildings belonging to factories and mills was leviable on a capital basis, and the capital value for this purpose was to be worked out, if 'reliable data ' were furnished by the assessee, on the basis of such data.
The respondent company owned certain buildings on which rat was leviable under r. 4(1) on the basis of capital value.
The respondent company claimed that the actual cost of construction of the buildings in 1920 ought to be taken as the capital value.
The Municipality of Godhra however made its own estimate of the capital value.
Thereafter the Judicial Magistrate and the Sessions Judge made valuations taking into account the rise in the cost of building materials since 1920.
The High Court in revision upheld the view that the actual cost minus depreciation thereon should be the capital value; it observed that the English law and practice as to levy of rates was not relevant in the Indian context.
The Municipality appealed.
HELD: (i) When legislatures in this country enact statutes which closely resemble statutes in England and have the same purpose and object in view, then unless the expressions used in the Indian Statutes are defined courts of law cannot go wrong in interpreting them in the way English judges have done.
Further, the words which have acquired a particular shade of meaning in England may be given the same meaning unless there is anything in the statute its, If which would be contraindicative.
[486 F G] (ii) Section 73 empowered the municipality to impose a rate on buildings or lands.
The word 'rate ' had not been defined in the Act but it has a well known meaning.
In Patel Gordhandas,s, case this Court examined various statutes bearing on the English rating law and held that the word 'rate ' was used with respect to a tax which was levied on the net annual value or rateable value of lands and buildings and not on their capital value, but capital value could be adopted as the basis for working out the annual value.
[485G 486E] (iii) Rule 4 of the Godhra Municipal Rules shows what properties are to be valued on capital basis.
What the capital basis is not defined.
The capital value however can be determined in the way laid down in Patel Gordhandasg case by adopting the contractor 's method.
[487B].
(iv) The figures given in the balance sheet of the company could not be regarded as 'reliable data ' for the purpose of r. 5.
The figures given in the balance sheet are merely statements in terms of the form given in 482 Schedule VI.
They have no relevance in determining the capital value of property for the purpose of assessment to a rate.
[488 B C] [Case remanded to District Judge for determining capital value by adopting contractors method in the light of the observations made by this Court.] Patel Gordhandas Hargovindas vs Municipal Commissioner, Ahmedabad, ; , relied on.
R. vs School Board for London, (1885) 55 L.J.M.C. 33, referred to.
