The eviction of the Respondent 'from the appellants premises, which was used as a factory, was decreed and application for execution of an order for possession was made.
The respondents resisted the execution on the plea that the machinery installed in the factory could not be re moved without the prior permission of chief Inspector of Factories as provided by the East Punjab Factories (Control of Dismantling) Act.
The premises was allowed.
Both parties appealed.
The appellate Court took of the machinery was stayed, but the Possession of the part the premises was allowed.
Both parties appealed.
The appellate Court took the view that the machinery and spare parts were lying practically in all the rooms, and the locking and sealing of the factory would result in its closure which would be against the provisions of the Act, and therefore directed the appellant to pursue the matter with the State Government.
The order dated April 22, 1953 was not challenged by any appeal.
But the appellant restarted the execution proceedings in which it was held that the State Government had refused permission for demolition of the factory, so the file was ordered to be consigned to the record room. 'Me appellant filed an appeal, which was dismissed, but in further revision the High Court by its order dated July 13, 1955 observed that on the record it was not possible to decide whether the execution of the decree would defeat the provisions of section 3 of the Act, so it set aside the order and directed the executing court to give decision on points that arose under section 3 of the Act. 'Me executing court found that the provisions of the Art did not prohibit the execution and as such the respondents were liable to ejectment but since the application had become over a year old it would be 'struck off the file with liberty to make a fresh application.
The respondents appealed.
The District Judge held that the Act did not apply to involuntary dismantling of factories and that the issue raised by the executing court did not arise but in fact it had been decided against the appellant by the High Court in revision.
The appellant 's appeal to High Court was dismissed by a Single Judge, and in the Letters Patent Appeal, it was held that the delivery of possession was not barred in execution of decree by the Act, but the matter had become res judicata in consequence of the decisions in the first execution application and the decision of the High Court dated July 13 1955 in the second execution applica tion.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : The Act does not bar the delivery of possession in execution, of a decree.
It makes no reference to any decree for Possession against the owner of a factory.
By ordering delivery of possession of the premises, the executing court does not make an order for dismantling a factory and a bailiff charged with execution of a warrant for possession, does not infringe the provision of law by rendering possession of the property to the decree holder.
[510 C D] 507 There was no final order about the inexecutability of the decree on the first application for execution.
Further the High Court by its order dated July 13, 1955, did Dot decide the question as to whether the decree for possession would be inexecutable in view of the Act.
It stated expressly that it was not possible for it to decide whether the execution of the decree would defeat the provisions of the Act, and being unable to come to a decision on the record it remanded the matter to the court of execution.
It found itself unable to interpret the section on the evidence beforeit.
The proceedings subsequent to the remand order culminated in theorder of the Division Bench from which the present appeal arose.
The order dated July 13, 1955 was not a final order which put a seal on the proceedings.
[510 F H]
