Inams were granted by Hindu kings for performance of certain servicer, (e.g. watchmen, music players etc.) in the ancient temple, of Thirumoolanathaswami.
The inams were confirmed by the British Government.
For over 80 years the inams were enjoyed by alienees from the inamdars.
By an order passed on April 10, 1947 under section 44 B of the Madras Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1926, the Revenue Divisional Officer resumed the inam lands and regranted them to the temple.
His order was confirmed on appeal by the District Collector.
Both these authorities held that the inams comprised both melwaram and kudiwaram rights.
The alienees instituted a suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge under the proviso to section 44 B (2) (d) (ii) asking for a decree declaring that the inam grants consisted of the melwaram only.
They filed another suit asking for a declaration that the aforesaid order passed by the Collector was a nullity.
In appeals against the order of the trial judge the High Court decided against the plaintiffs except as regards Dasi inams.
Against the High court 's order the plaintiff appellants came to this Court.
It was contended on their behalf that : (i) the inam grants did not comprise the Kudiwaram; (ii) the inams were personal inams burdened with services and were not resumable under s.(iii) Section 44 B(2) was not retrospective in operation and did not authorise resumption of the inams on the ground of any alienation thereof made before 1934 when it came (iv)there was no alienation of the inams as contemplated by section 44 B (2) (a) (i); and (v) the tight of resumption of the inam lands was extinguished by adverse possession of the lands by the alienees for 60 years.
HELD: (i) The documents in evidence showed that the lands were being enjoyed by the inamdars and were granted as inams.
The amount of the assesment or melwaram was very low and could not be an adequate remuneration for the services to be rendered.
The plaintiffs claimed title to the lands under a grant from the inamdars on the footing that the inamdars were entitled to the kudiwaram and the melwaram.
The conclusion is irresistible that the inam comprised both the warams.[547 F G] (ii) There is a well recognised distinction between the grant of the land burdened with a condition of service and the grant of land as remuneration for an office.
Section 44 B does not apply to a personal inam burdened with a condition of service.
It applies to an inam granted to an office holder as remuneration for his services connected with a math or temple as also to an inam granted to the institution directly.
The inams in the present cases were not personal inams.
They were inams granted 543 to office holders as remuneration for services to be rendered by them and were within the purview of section 44 B. [548 B C].
(iii) The words 'has made ' in section 44 B(2)(a)(i) take in all alienations past and future and not only future alienations or alienation made after the section came into force.
Section 44 B(2) is in its direct operation prospective as it authorises only future resumption after it came into force.
It is not properly called retrospective "because a part of the requisites for its action is drawn, from , a time antecedent to its passing.
" The inams in the present case were resumable under section 44B(2)(a)(i) though the alienations were made before 1934.
[548 G 549B].
Maxwell on interpretation on Statutes 11th Ed., p. 211, relied on.
(iv) The appellants admitted that they held the land from the inamdars under a cowle lease and at no earlier stage did the appellants contend that the lease was not within the purview of section 44 B(2)(a)(i).
The plea that the lease was from year to year and hence outside the purview of the section could not be allowed to be raised for the first time in this Court.
[849 E H].
(v) The appellants being lessees their possession was not adverse to the inamdars.
A fortiori, their possession was not adverse to the Government under whom the inamdars held the inam lands.
They did not acquire any prescriptive title to the kudiwaram rights either against the inamdars or against the Government.
The Government could therefore resume the inam lands under section 44 B(2) and dispossess the inamdars and the plaintiffs claiming as lessees under then.
[550 B C].
[The question whether an alienee from the inamdar can acquire a prescriptive title to the kudiwaram rights in the inam lands and thereby defeat the latter 's right to resume the inam did not on the above view arise for decision and the court therefore expressed no opinion on it.] Roman Catholic Mission vs State of Madras, [1966] 3 S.C.R. 283, referred to.
Forbes vs Noor Mahomed Tuquee, [1870] 13 M.I.A. 438, 464 and P V. Dheenuena Rao vs Sirigiri Pedda Yella Reddi, ; , relied on.
