The first appellant was convicted under.s.
324 IPC for shooting and injuring PW 1, at the instigation of the second appellant, who was himself convicted of an offence under section 324 read with section 109 IPC.
The existence of enmity between the appellants and most of the prosecution witnesses who spoke to the occurrence was satisfactorily established.
The plea of the appellants in their defence was that on the date of the incident when they were returning home in the evening, they were way laid by PWI and several others and were assaulted; thereafter with a view to foist a false case against them, a revolver was forcibly thrust into the hands of the first appellant.
In connection with this incident, the State came to initiate three prosecutions : One case was instituted on the basis of a complaint by the first appellant; a second case was commenced against the first appellant under section 19(f) of the Indian Arms Act for being armed with a revolver; and the third was the present case.
The case instituted on the first appellant 's complaint as well as the case against him under the Arms Act were both dismissed.
The trial court as well as the High Court refused to examine the defence of the appellants solely on the ground that the case pleaded by them had been rejected by the Magistrate in the prosecution commenced on these basis of the complaint by the first appellant.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that they did not have a fair trial; the High Court as well as the trial court on an erroneous view of the law refused to take their defence into consideration; they ignored important circumstances appearing in favour of the appellants; and furthermore, some of the conclusions reached by them were unsupported by any evidence on record.
It was also contended that an inadmissible document, namely a statement made by, the 'second appellant in the course of the investigation was wrongly admitted; this admission was hit by a. 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which bad also greatly prejudiced the case of the appellants.
HELD : The appeals must be allowed and the appellants acquitted.
(i) The trial court as well as the High Court erred in summarily ejecting the defence of the appellants on the sole ground that the version put forward by them having been rejected by the Magistrate in the case filed on the complaint of the first appellant, it could not be considered again.
The defence of the appellants was highly Probabilised by three important circumstances, namely, (1) it was put forward immediately after the occurrence, (2) it satisfactorily explained the injuries found on the persons of the appellants while the prosecution evidence failed to 526 explain those injuries; and (3) the prosecution evidence itself showed that the first appellant could not have used the revolver exhibited and therefore his version that weapon was thrust on him was probabilised.
[531 H 532 B] In both the prosecutions in the complaint made by the first appellant as well as in the complaint made by P.W.I the prosecutor before the court was the State.
Therefore, the decision in the former case could not operate as an issue estoppel against the appellants in the present case, because they were not parties in the former case.
In other words, the plea taken by the appellants in this case was never before litigated between them and the State, the Opposite party in the present case.
All that ran be said is that the case put forward by the State in the one case was in consistent with that put forward by it in the other.
In those circumstances it was wrong to hold that the appellants were estopped from putting forward their defence.
1531 B D] Pritam Singh vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415; Manipur Administration vs Thokchom, Bira Singh, (1964] S.C.R. 123; Sambasivam vs
Public Prosecutor, ; and King vs Wilkes; ; at pp.
518 519, referred to.
(ii) The trial court and the High Court relied on the second appellant 's statement in the document admitted in evidence to the effect that it was a particular person who fired a pistol to contradict the statement of the first appellant in his complaint that a pistol was fired by some other person.
No portionof this statement could have been used for that purpose either section 157 ors.
145 of the Evidence Act.
As the second appellant was not examined as a witness in the present case, his previous statement could not have been used either to contradict his evidence or corroborate it even if it were to be held that it was a statement falling under s.154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[532 H 533 B] Nazir Ali, vs State of U.P.
A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 366; distinguished.
