For the period 1st April 1948 to 25th January 1950, goods (oil) were manufactured produced in the State of Uttar Pradesh by the appellants who were carrying on business in the State in those goods.
Part of the goods were sent to their depots outside the State before any contract of sale in respect of them was made, and thereafter, sold to various parties.
those outside sales were also assessed to sales tax under the U.P. sales Tax Act, 1948.
The matter was taken to the Appellate Authority and thereafter to the Revising Authority constituted under the Act.
Though the revision was filed before last April 1954 when the Amending Act of 1954 came into force, it was disposed of in 1957, in favour of the appellants.
On the application of the commissioner of Sales Tax two questions of law were referred to the High Court one of which related to the constitutional validity of Explanation II (ii) to section 2(h) of the Act, according to which, the sale of any goods 'which are produced or manufactured in U.P. by the producer or manufacture thereof, shall, wherever the delivery 'or contract of We is made, be deemed for the purposes of this Act to ,have taken place in U.P ' The High Court decided both questions in favour of the Commissioner.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that : (1) For attracting tax liability the Explanation requires that the goods should have been manufactured or produced in U.P. after the contract of sale was entered into , (2) the Explanation was ultra vires as being outside legislative competence, because, Wes tax legislation was concerned with tax on the transaction of a completed sale, and a State could not impose sales tax on the basis that one of the component parts of sale constitutes sufficient nexus between the taxing state and the sale; (3) the Revising Authority could not refer to the High Court and the High Court could not decided on such reference, any question regarding the constitutional validity the Explanation; and (4) the Revising Authority could not make a reference to the High Court under section 11, at the instance of the Commissioner, as the Commissioner had no power to apply when the revision was filed before the Authority but was empowered to do so only by the amending Act of 1954 which had no retrospective operation.
HELD : (I) For the application of the Explanation and attracting tax liability, it is only necessary that the goods must have been sold by the person who produced or manufactured them, but there is no requirement that he must have manufactured or produced them after the contract of sale and not before.
(518 C] (2)To confer jurisdiction upon the 'State Legislature to impose sales tax, 'it is sufficient if there is a proper territorial nexus or connection 512 513 between the taxing authority and the transaction sought to be taxed.
and, the fact that goods were manufactured in the State constitutes a real and pertinent nexus.
[519 C] The Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; and Bharat Siigar Mills vs The State of Bihar, 11 S.T.C. 793, followed (3) The appellants did not challenge the jurisdiction of the High Court to examine the constitutional validity of the Explanation; nor was any such challenge made in the special leave petition to this Court or in the statement of case.
On the contrary, the appellants contended in the revision before the Revising Authority that the Explanation was ultra vires.
Therefore, having voluntarily submitted to the jurisdiction of the Revising Authority it is not open to the appellants to challenge the.
jurisdiction Of the Revising Authority to refer the question of the constitutional validity of the Explanation to the High Court, or of the High Court to decide it.
[522 E G] (4) The Commissioner had the power to apply for a reference on the date he applied for a reference, as the amending Act had by then come into force.
There is nothing in the language or in the context of section 1 1 to suggest that he could exercise the right only if it existed on the date on which the revision was filed before the Revising Authority.
The rule that a statute should be interpreted, as far as possible, so as to respect vested rights has no application because,, the amendment does not affect any vested right of the appellants, but only deals with a procedural matter.
[523 E H] Gardner vs Lucas, , 603, applied.
