The respondent was the proprietor of certain estates in Bihar.
He was also in receipt of a permanent malikana allowance from the Government.
After the passing of the Bihar Land Reforms Act 1950 followed by a notification under section 3 thereof the estates of the respondent vested in the State of Bihar.
In 1958 the State of Bihar stopped payment of the malikana allowance on the ground that it was a proprietary interest which had vested in the State.
The respondent thereupon filed a petition under article 226 ,of the Constitution.
The High Court held that the respondent 's right to the malikana was not an intermediary interest and did not cease with the extinction of his proprietary rights in the estate.
The State of Bihar appealed to this Court.
The contentions raised on behalf of the appellant were : (i) that the right to malikana was an interest in the estates belonging to the respondent which on the issue of the notification under section 3 became extinguished and (ii) alternatively, the respondent was an intermediary of temporary settled estates in respect of which malikana was payable and on the transference of his intermediary interests in those estates, his right to the malikana stood extinguished and he became entitled only to the compensation payable under section 24A.
HELD : (i) The history of the malikana allowance showed that it was a permanent grant of money in lieu of the proprietor 's rights in lands originally held by him.
The proprietors retained certain estates and it was only the interest in these estates that was lost on the publication of the notification under section 3.
The malikana payable to the respondent in the present case was not an interest in such estates and did not cease on the issue of the notification.
[740 B] (ii) The respondent was not a proprietor, tenure holder or an intermediary of the estates in respect of which malikana was paid to him.
The malikana was not rent or income derived from those estates.
Nor was the malikana an incumbrance on them.
The respondent 's right to the malikana was not an intermediary interest in the estates for which compensation was payable under section 24A and it did not therefore vest in the Government.
[740 H] Herranund Shoo vs Mst.
Ozeerun & Ors., , Gobinda Chunder Roy Choudhuri vs Ram Chunder Chowdhury, , Hurmuzi Begum vs Hirday Narayan, and Jaggo Bai vs Utsava Lal, 51 AN. 439, distinguished.
Bhoalee Singh vs Mst.
Neemoo Behoo, , Syed Shah Najamuddin Hyder vs Syed Zahid Hossein, 8 C.L.J. 300, Maharaja P. section Bahadur vs State of Bihar, 18 Pat.
1018, Deo Kuar vs Man Kuar, 21 I.A. 148 and Mahendra Narayan Roy Chowdhuri vs Abdul Gafur Choudhry, referred to.
State of Uttar Pradesh vs Kunwar Sri Trivikram Narain Singh, ; , relied on.
