In an explosion which took place, the persons who were working in the factory of the appellants where crackers were being manufactured died or were injured.
The appellants were convicted under sections 304A and 337 I.P.C.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that criminal liability could not be imposed upon them under sections 304A and 337 as it had not been established that the deaths or injuries caused were the direct result of any rash or negligent act on the part of the appellants or that any such act had been proved which was the proximate and efficient cause of the explosion without the intervention of another 's negligence.
HELD: The appellants were rightly convicted.
[773 C] Although there was no direct evidence of the immediate cause of the explosion but the explosives the possession of which was prohibited under the notifications issued under the Indian Explosives Act were found in the shops or the premises where the appellants carried on their business and the substances which were of highly hazardous and dangerous nature were apparently being used in the manufacture of the fire works.
since they were found at the scene of the explosion.
These explosives had sensitive composition and even friction or percussion could cause explosion.
In the factory itself where the explosion took place the persons who were employed were mostly women who brought their small children with them and young children below the age of 18 had been employed in the manufacture of fire works.
It became therefore, all the more incumbent on all appellants to have completely avoided the use of highly sensitive compositions.
The appellants had, undoubtedly displayed a high degree of negligence by allowing or causing to be used dangerous and prohibited compositions and substances which must be held to have been the efficient cause of the explosion.
[771 A C; 773 C] Rustom Sharior Irani vs State of Maharashtra.
A. No. 72/65; Balachandra Waman Pathe vs The State of Maharashtra, Cr. A. 62 of 1965 decided on 20 11 1967.
followed.
Regina vs David Dant., 169 English Reports (C.C.) 1517; Rex vs Pittwood. , applied.
Kurban Hussein Mohammedali Rangwalla vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; Suleman Rahiman Mulani & Another vs The State of Maharashtra Cr.
A. 50 of 1965 decided on 1 12 1967, distinguished.
