The ten appellants were convicted under sections 302 and 201 both read with section 149 of the I.P.C. mainly on the evidence of four eye witnesses who were members of the family of the two murdered persons.
Four of the appellants were sentenced to death and the rest to imprisonment for life.
The High Court confirmed the convictions and sentences.
in appeal to this Court by special leave it was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellants that (i) there were various discrepancies and inconsistencies in the evidence showing miscarriage of justice; (ii) though two independent eye witnesses were available they were purposely excluded and only the family members were examined as eye witnesses; and the High Court had wrongly refused to draw from their non examination an adverse inference under section 114(g) of the Evidence Act; and (iii) the sentences on the appellants were wrongly confirmed by the High Court.
HELD : (i) There was no reason to interfere with the concurrent findings of the trial court and the, High Court that the appellants were responsible for the deaths of the two deceased persons and were guilty of ,the offences they were charged with.
[782 E] (ii) The prosecutor need not examine witnesses who, in his opinion, have not witnessed the incident.
Normally, he ought to examine all the eye witnesses in support of his case.
But in a case where a large number of persons have witnessed the incident, it is open to him to make a selec tion which must, however, be fair and honest and not with a view to suppress inconvenient witnesses.
If it is shown that persons who had witnessed the incident have been deliberately kept back, the court may draw an adverse inference and in a proper case record such failure.
as constituting a serious infirmity in the proof of the prosecution case.
[781 G H; 782 A] In the present case, the prosecution had explained that the two independent eye witnesses were not necessary.
The defence remained content with that explanation and did not ask the other concerned witnesses any questions to elicit why these two persons were considered unnecessary witnesses.
Furthermore, there was nothing in the evidence to suggest that they were not produced because they would have turned out to be inconvenient witnesses.
It was not therefore possible to say that the prosecution had deliberately withheld these two persons for any oblique motive or that the High Court ought to have drawn an adverse inference.
[782 C D] (iii) The sentence of death on four of the ten appellants must be set aside and the sentence of rigorous life imprisonment substituted therefore.
775 In imposing the sentence of death on four of the appellants the trial court made a distinction between them and the others as three of them were armed with firearms and the fourth with a hatchet.
This reason for imposing the extreme penalty on the four appellants could not be sustained on the evidence as the others were also armed with equally, dangerous weapons.
In the absence of evidence as to who inflicted the fatal blows, the same punishment should have been imposed on all of them.
[783 C D]
