Section 23A(3) of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, makes it an offence if a retiring President to whom a direction has been issued by the State Government to hand over charge of his office does not comply with such direction and under section 200(1) the authorities who "may direct" ' any prosecution for punishment of any person offending against the provisions of the Act are the Standing Committee and the Chief Officer.
The appellant who was removed from the office of President ship refused to obey the order of the State Government directing him to hand over charge to the newly elected President.
He was prosecuted and convicted for an offence under section 23A(3), not on the direction of the Standing Committee or the Chief Officer as required by section 200(1) but on a complaint filed at the instance of the State Government by the newly elected President.
The High Court, dismissing revision application against the order of conviction, took the view that section 200(1) was only an enabling provision and it could not be held to be exhaustive of the authorities who could make directions for initiation of such proceedings.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The conviction must be set aside.
The Scheme of the Act and the purpose of section 200(1) make it clear that if any proceeding for punishment of any person for contravention of any of the provisions of the Act is to be instituted, it must be instituted in the manner laid down in section 200(1) of the Act and in that manner only.
The word "may" was intended to give a discretion to the Standing Committee or the Chief Officer to make directions for taking proceedings only when they considered it appropriate that such a direction should be made and to avoid compelling the Standing Committee or the Chief Officer to make such directions in all cases.
If the interpretation of the High Court were to be accepted it would mean that this provision was totally unnecessary, because, there would be no need to confer power on the Standing Committee or the Chief Officer to make such directions if such directions could be made or proceedings instituted at the instance of any private individual.
[826 C D. F] Baliavdass Agarwala vs Shri J. C. Chakravarty, ; Mangulal Chunilal vs Manilal Maganlal and Another, Criminal Appeal No. 59 of 1965 decided on 23 11 1967, followed : The State vs Manilal Jethalal, , referred to.
Section 200(1), as it stands at present, is clearly applicable even to a proceeding for punishment of a retiring President under section 23A(3) even though it might look anomalous that the prosecution in such 822 circumstances has to be ordered by the Chief Officer who was his subordinate at least during the time when he was working as the President.
The remedy lies in suitable amendment of section 200(1).
L828 E]
