The appellant was a Mukhtear practising in Bihar.
He along with ,some others attested the identity of certain persons on applications for loans under the Agriculturists Loan Act, 1884.
It was found that the applications had been made under false names and the appellant along with other accused was tried for an offence under section 467 read with section 109 I.P.C.
The appellant 's plea was that he had made the endorsements on the assurance of a co accused and in view of the fact that another Mukhtear, D had also attested the loan applications.
D 's plea as an accused was that he had made the attestation on the assurance of one R.
The Sessions Judge acquitted all the accused.
The State of Bihar appealed to the High Court.
During the pendency of the appeal D died.
The High Court set aside the acquittal of the appellant and convicted him on two grounds namely, (i) that though he had raised a defence that he had attested the applications on the assurance of S, no evidence had been produced to support this defence,, (ii) that D with whose case the appellant 's case was closely connected had not examined himself under section 342A of the Criminal Procedure Code in support of his plea, and the same consideration applied to the appellant also.
On appeal to this Court by special leave.
HELD : The order of the High Court could not be sustained.
(i) In requiring evidence in support of the plea raised by the appellant the High Court really threw the burden of proof on him instead of finding out whether the prosecution had proved its case and whether the order of acquittal was erroneous.
[174 F] (ii) In commenting on the failure of the accused to examine them,selves on oath under section 342A Cr.
P.C. the High Court committed a breach of the proviso to that section which specifically states that the failure of an accused to give evidence shall not be made the subject of comment by any of the parties, or the court, or give rise to any presumption against himself or any other person charged together with him at the same time.
[175 B]
