The appellant occupied an office cabin in Bombay on leave and licence from respondent No. 1.
In an application under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the appellant alleged that on June 11, 1966 respondent No. 1 wrongfully took possession of the cabin and gave in to respondents 2 and 3 who forcibly presented his re entry.
He also lodged a report of the incident with the, police as a result of which respondent No. 1 was arrested for an offence under section 351 Indian Penal Code but was released on bail.
Respondent No.1 filed a civil suit and took out a notice of motion for restraining the appellant from interfering with the possession of the cabin, but the same was dismissed.
The Magistrate trying the application under section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure passed a preliminary order on June 20, 1966 recording his satisfaction that a dispute existed.
After considering the affidavits and the evidence led by the parties the Magistrate accepted the appellant 's version of facts and on June 22, 1967 passed the final order under sub section (6) directing restoration of possession to the appellant tin evicted in due course of law.
The High Court in revision set aside the order ,of the Magistrate on the following grounds : (i) That the Magistrate had not recorded his reasons for passing the preliminary order; (ii) that the Magistrate had passed the said order without calling for a police report, merely on the basis of the appellant 's allegations; (iii) That the dispossession of the appellant was completed and a report of assault was lodged by the appellant with the police before the preliminary order was passed, and therefore there was no longer any dispute on the day of the order likely to lead to a breach of the peace.
HELD : (i) The satisfaction under sub section
(1) of section 145 is that of the Magistrate.
The question whether on the materials before him be should initiate proceedings or not is, therefore, in his discretion which, no doubt, has to be exercised in accordance with the well recognised rules in that behalf.
The High Court in the exercise of its revisional jurisdiction would not go into the question of sufficiency of material which had satisfied the Magistrate.
[86A B] In the present case the Magistrate had expressed his satisfaction on the basis of the facts set out in the application before him after he had examined the appellant on oath.
That means that those facts were prima facie sufficient and were the reasons leading to his satisfaction [86C D] (ii) The jurisdiction under section 145 being of an emergency nature, the Magistrate must 'act with caution but that does not mean that where on an application by one of the parties to the dispute he is satisfied that the requirements of the section 'are existent he cannot initiate proceedings 81 without a police report.
The other view limits the discretion of the Magistrate and renders the words , other information ' in section 145(1) either superfluous or qualifies them to mean other information verified by the police.
187D E] Phutania vs Emperor, (1924) 25 Cr. L.J. 1109, Ganesh vs Venkataswara and Raja of Karyentnagar vs Sowcar Lodd Govind Doss, Mad.
561, disapproved (iii) The High Court erred in holding that merely because dispossession of the appellant was completed before June 20, 1966, there was no dispute existing on that day which was likely (to lead to breach of peace or that the Magistrate was, therefore, prevented from passing the preliminary order and proceeding thence to continue the enquiry and pass his final order.
This reasoning would mean that if a party takes the law into his hands and deprives forcibly and wrongfully the other party of his possession and wrongfully completes his act of dispossession, the party so dispossessed cannot have the benefit of section 145.
as by the time he files his application and the Magistrate passes his order, the dispossession would be complete and therefore, there would be no existing dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace.
Such a view does not take into consideration the second proviso to sub section
(4) which was introduced precisely to meet such cases.
[87F H; 88A] The word 'dispossessed ' in the second proviso means to be out of possession, removed from the premises, ousted, ejected or excluded.
Even where a person has a right to possession but taking the law into his hands makes a forcible entry otherwise than in due course of law, it would be a case of both forcible and wrongful dispossession.
[88 D Reading section 145 as a whole it is clear that even though respondent 1 had taken over possession of the cabin, since that incident took place within the prescribed period of two months next before (the date of the preliminary order, the appellant was deemed to be in possession on the date of that order and the Magistrate was competent to pass the final order as he did.
[89 D] Edwick v, Hawkes, , Jiba vs Chandulal, A.I.R. , A. N. Shah vs Nageswara Rao, A.I.R. 1947 Mad. 133 and Subarna Sunami vs Kartika Kudal, (1954) I.L.R. Cuttk. 215, applied.
