The first and the second respondents purchased a quantity of foodgrains from certain cultivators who had imported them into the municipal area of the appellant Committee and, at the time of importation, had paid octroi duty on those foodgrains.
The first and the second respondents exported the identical goods out of the municipal areas and there upon applied for refund of octroi duty paid on the foodgrains.
The appellant Committee refused to pay the refund mainly on the ground that the respondents had failed to produce the: receipts of duty paid on the importation of the foodgrains.
An appeal to the Additional Deputy Commissioner as well as the revision application to the Board of Revenue were both dismissed, but a writ petition against these orders was allowed by the High Court which held that an, exporter was entitled under r. 27 to the refund of 7/8th of the, duty paid on the goods exported.
Subsequently a Division Bench, in appeal, remanded ' the case to the Board for dealing with certain other contentions raised by the appellant and after considering these, the Board get aside, the orders of the Committee and the Deputy Commissioner and directed payment of the refund.
The appellant Committee then filed a writ petition challenging the ,order of the Board but this was dismissed, the High Court holding, inter alia, that the Rules did not require a claimant who had exported dutiable goods to produce receipts of payment of duty and that the amount of refund is to be determined from the quantity of foodgrains exported or from their value.
The Committee appealed by special leave to this Court.
It was urged on its behalf that a person claiming refund would not be entitled to it unless he had followed the procedure prescribed by rr. 27 to 43, and that this had not been done in the present case.
HELD : Dismissing the appeal Though the rules lay down a procedure which an appellant seeking refund has to follow, they do not provide at the game time that an applicant for refund who has failed do follow the procedure laid down in rr.
35 to 39 would be disentitled to claim the refund.
In the absence of such a provision, coupled with the categorical language of r. 27 giving a right to an exporter of dutiable goods to claim 7/8th of the duty paid on such goods on their import, it becomes difficult to uphold the denial by the appellant Committee of the right of the first ' and the second respondents to such a refund.
[171 E G]
