An unmarried woman gave birth to a child and on her request, her uncle and aunt made arrangements for the child being brought up by some one who wanted to adopt a child.
The appellant, who was a police officer, accused the uncle and aunt of having disposed of an illegitimate child and demanded a bribe.
The anti corruption department was thereupon informed, a trap laid and currency notes which were given as bribe were recovered from the appellant.
He was prosecuted and convicted for offences under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and section 161, I.P.C. The High Court confirmed the conviction and sentenced him to 2 years R.I.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The order of sanction showed on the face of it what were the facts constituting the offence, that 'a prima facie case was made out, and that the sanctioning authority had fully and carefully examined the material Therefore,, the order of sanction fulfilled the requirements of section 6 of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
[186 B, D] Gokukhand vs The King, A.I.R. 1948 P.C. 82, distinguished.
(2) (a) When a public servant is charged under section 161 I.P.C. and it is alleged that illegal gratification was taken by him for doing or procuring an official act, it is not necessary for the court to consider whether or not the accused public servant was capable of doing or intended to do such an act.
[186 F G] Mahesh Prasad vs The State of U.P. ; , followed.
Therefore, though the concealment of the birth of an illegitimate child is not an offence and the appellant could not have prosecuted any one, it could not be said that the obtaining of money by the appellant for refraining from an imaginary prosecution was not an offence under 161 I.P.C. [186 E F] (b) In any event, the appellant was guilty of an offence under section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, in that he grossly abused his position within the meaning of the section and thereby obtained for himself pecuniary advantage and so, the sentence imposed on him was not excessive [187 D, E]
