The predecessors in interest of the respondent executed usufrutory mortgage deeds in 1898 in favour of the predecessors in interest of the appellants in respect of certain 'sir ' land.
In 1940 one of the mortgagors, R, the husband of respondent, was declared insolvent and his share in the proprietary rights which vested in the Insolvency Court was purchased by the mortgagee.
Some disputes arose about the amount and the right of redemption under the mortgage between the mortgagee and the other mortgagor S, the matter was referred to arbitration.
In pursuance of the decree in this award, the mortgagee purchased the share of 'S ' including his rights in 'sir '.
R died, and when his widow the Respondent was dispossessed from the land in pursuance of the mortgage decree passed in terms of the award, she filed an application to the Revenue Court under section 12 and section 13 of the Central Provinces Tenancy Act for restoration of possession of her occupancy rights in the land, which was allowed.
Thereupon the appellants filed the suit claiming possession, which was partly allowed.
Both the parties appealed and in appeals the suit was dismissed, which in further appeals, was upheld by the High Court.
HELD : The appellants were not entitled to claim possession in this suit.
The mere mention of the 'sir ' land as part of the property mortgaged can only be interpreted as laying down that the proprietary rights in the 'sir ' land were subject of the mortgages, so the cultivator rights continued to remain with the mortgagors.
The circumstance was further borne out by the fact that even after execution of the usufructuary mortgages in 1895, the mortgagors continued to cultivate this land and actual possession over this land for the purposes of cultivating it was not obtained by the mortgagee.
In the circumstances, it was clear that the mortgagors must have become ex proprietary occupancy tenants of this land in the year 1895.
[273 G. H] Even if the mortgagors become ordinary tenants in 1895, it was clear that by the time the Act came into force in the year 1920, they must have become occupancy tenants as defined in section 10 of the Act.
So the claim of the appellants that they acquired rights to possession of this land on the basis of the mortgages in 1895, in these circumstances, must fail.
[274 D] The appellants ' claim that the rights of S passed to them when they purchased his rights in execution of the decree under the award and that the share of R passed to them when his rights were transferred by the insolvency Court, fails in view of the provisions of section 12 or section 49 of the 271 Act, as they then stood.
As a result of these provisions, the rights of the ex proprietory occupancy tenant could not have been transferred in favour of the mortgagees.
Section 50, as it was at that time, did permit transfer of certain rights of an ex proprietory occupancy tenant; but, to be valid such transfers required permission of the appropriate revenue authority.
In this case, there is no suggestion that, when transfers were obtained by the mortgagees in pursuance of the decree in the award and in pursuance of the insolvency proceedings against R, the transfers purported to.
be affected were made with the permission of the appropriate authority.
Consequently under section 49 those transfers would be void.
[274 H 275 C] Section 12 barred the transfer of cultivatory rights of an occupancy tenant in execution of the decree of a civil court or in insolvency proceedings.
In fact, such rights did not vest in the Insolvency Court at all under the Provincial Insolvency Act.
Consequently, the mortgagees could not acquire title to cultivatory right by virtue of the proceedings, taken in execution of the decree in civil suit or in the insolvency proceedings.
The right continued to vest in the mortgagors and the Respondent, who was entitled as the 'sole survivor to those rights, was rightly restored to possession by the revenue authorities.
[275 E G] The challenge, to the decision of the revenue authorities on the ground that its jurisdiction to grant relief under section 13 of the Act is confined to cases where one of the covenants claims possession on being illegally dispossessed and not in a case where the sole tenant has been dispossessed, was immaterial, because relief from the same revenue authority could be claimed by a sole tenant by an application under section 100 of the Act.
The application filed by the respondent could, therefore, be treated as an application under section 100 of the Act in case she was the sole tenant, and the grant of relief to her was not without jurisdiction.
[275 H]
