The appellants ' lands consisting of orchards were acquired under the Land Acquisition Act.
1894 and they were awarded compensation.
The appellants, were dissatisfied with the amount, so it was referred to the District Court, which enhanced it.
The respondent appealed to the High Court.
The High Court looked into: documents which were not a part of the records of the case and also did not give any opportunity to the appellants to rebut the conclusions reached on the basis of those documents.
The High Court held that value of the trees fell under the secondly clause of section 23(1) therefore disallowed the 15% allowance permitted by section 23(2) and directed the parties to bear their own costs.
In appeal, this Court, HELD: The High Court was wrong in disallowing the statutory allowance permitted by section 23(2) over the value of the trees in the orchard.
Section 3(a) prescribed that "the expression 'land ' includes benefits.
to arise out of land, and things attached to the earth".
Therefore the trees that were standing in the land were a component part of the land acquired.
The High Court failed to notice that what was acquired was not the trees but the land as such.
The value of trees was ascertained only for the purpose of .fixing the market value of the land.
On the value of the land as determined, the court was bound to allow the 15% allowance provided by section 23(2) of the Act.
[415 D F] Sub Collector of Godavari vs Seragam Subbareyadu & Ors., I.L.R. 1907, Mad.
p. 151, approved.
(ii) The High Court was not right in looking into.
fresh documents.
If the court wanted to take into consideration any fresh evidence, it should have admitted the same in accordance with law.
So these documents ought to have been excluded from consideration, though it was of no assistance to the appellants.
[414 D F] (iii) There was no reason to interfere with the orders as regards costs.
Costs are essentially in the discretion of the courts.
The claim of the appellants was a highly exaggerated one, and the bulk of the evidence adduced by them was found to.
be unacceptable.
Under those circumstances.
the courts thought that the appellants should not be granted any costs.
[416 B]
