The Ajmer Electric Supply Co. Ltd. a licensee under the , entered into two contracts with the respondent Municipal Committee, (i) for supplying electricity for street lighting, and (ii) pumping water from the wells belonging to the respondent at a particular place.
The Bombay Electricity Surcharge Act, 1946, was extended to the province of Ajmer Metwar subject to certain modifications.
Thereafter, the Ajmer Electric Supply Co. applied under section 3 of the Bombay Act, to the Chief Commissioner, for imposing the surcharge provided in that section, to meet its increased cost.
The Chief Commissioner issued a notification and on the basis of that notification the Ajmer Electric Supply Co. called upon the respondent by a notice, to pay the surcharge detailed therein with respect to the two contracts.
As the respondent did not comply with the demand, the appellant, with which the Ajme 'r Electric Supply Company was amalgamated, filed a suit for the recovery of the surcharge.
The trial Court decree.d the suit but the High Court set aside the decree on the grounds: (1) Before filing the suit a notice as required by section 233 of the Ajmer Metwar Municipalities Regulation, 1925, was not given; (2) The Commissioner 's notification imposing the impugned surcharge was beyond the provisions of the Bombay Act, because of the omission of certain words from section 6 of that Act as extended to Ajmer Merwara; and (3) The relevant provisions of the Bombay Act.
namely, sections 3 and 4 were ultra vires el.
12 of the Schedule to the Indian Electricity In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) No notice under section 233 of the Ajmer Merwar Municipalities Regulation was necessary before instituting the suit.
[438 E] Under the section a notice is necessary when the suit is filed against the Committee only in respect of any act done in its official capacity.
The expression 'act ' includes an illegal omission; but.
before an omission can be considered as an illegal omission, it must be shown that there was an omission to discharge some official duty imposed in public interest.
That is the non discharge of the duty must amount to an illegality entailing penal consequences.
[436 B, G] In the present case, the appellant 's contention was that it was entitled to recover from the respondent the amount of surcharge claimed, while the respondent 's case was a bonafide contention, namely, that the levy of 431 surcharge was invalid.
Under the Regulation it was the duty of the respondent to di 'scharge all its liabilities, but failure to do so would not ordinarily make it an illegal omission, because, the respondent or its members or office hearers could not be punished for their failure to pay the amount due to the appellant.
[436 D G] Revati Mohan Das vs Jitendra Mohan Ghosh, 61 I.A. 171, applied.
Debendra Nath Roy vs Official Receiver, A.I.R. 1938 Cal. 191 approved.
Bhagchand Dagdusa Gujrathi vs Secretary of State for India, 54 I.A. 338.
distinguished.
(2) The provisions of section 3 of the Bombay Act empower the Chief Commissioner to levy surcharge on the bills for the supply of electricity for street lighting.
Section 4 empowers the licensec to collect from the consumer the surcharge levied.
Municipal councils are not excluded from the operation of sections 3 and 4 of the Act as extended to Ajmer Metwar.
Similarly, electrical energy supplied on the basis of a contract is not excluded from the operation of section 3.
For taking action on the basis of those sections no assistance is needed from section 6, and so, section 6 as it stood originally or as modified does not in any manner cut down the operation of as. 3 and 4.
Therefore, the High Court was Wrong in its decision that the notification issued by the Chief Commissioner levying surcharge on the price of electrical energy supplied for street lighting was without the authority of law.
[440 C E, H; 441 A] (3) Since 'Electricity ' is a concurrent subject, the Bomhay Legislature was competent to provide for the levy of surcharge so long as the relevant provision did not conflict with any provision in any Central Act.
Clause 12 of the Schedule to the , which is deemed to form part of the licence under section 3(f) of the Electricity Act, does not conflict with sections 3 and 4 of the Bomhay Act.
The clause merely prescribes a procedure for settling the price of electricity supplied by the licensec for street lighting and lays down the machinery for settling the price if there is a dispute between the contracting parties.
It o.nly means that the licensee cannot dictate its terms to the authority responsible for street lighting, but does not fix the price to be paid or even the maximum price payable.
It imposes no fetters on the powers of the Provincial Legislature in the matter of enhancing the price of electricity supplied by the licensec for street lighting.
The High Court was, therefore, wrong in holding that by incorporating cl. 12 into the licenee the Central Legislature intended that under no circumstances the liability of the consumer can be increased heyond what was agreed during the continuance of the contract.
[441 H; 442 A D] (4) Under the notification imposing surcharge, the appellant, however, was not entitled to get any additional sum as regards the pumping of water.
Under the notification surcharge is levied on the price of electrical energy supplied under a contract.
In construing a contract it must be read as a whole.
So read, under the second contract, the appellant only undertook to pump water from the wells and not to supply any electricat energy.
[442 E F, H]
