The appellants are : (i) an establishment with less than 20 employees and which was not a factory; and (ii) an establishment in the public sector.
On the question, whether in view of the non applicability of the , to the two appellants in the first case by reason of exclusion under section 1(3) and in the other by reason of exemption under section 32(x) the employees of the two appellants were entitled to claim bonus dehors the Act.
HELD : Considering the history of the legislation, the background and the circumstances in which the Act was enacted the object of the Act and its scheme, it is not possible to accept the construction suggested on behalf of the respondents (employees) that the Act is not an exhaustive Act dealing comprehensively with the subject Matter of bonus in all its aspects, or that Parliament still left it open to those to whom the Act does not apply by reason of exclusion or exemption to raise a dispute with regard to bonus dehors the Act through industrial adjudication under the , or other corresponding laws.
(1) The Court is justified in looking into the history of the legislation and the statement of objects and reasons, not for the purpose of construing the Act, but for the limited purpose of ascertaining the background, the conditions and circumstances which led to its passing, the mischief it was intended to prevent and the remedy it furnished to prevent such mischief.
[372 B C] Heydon 's case, 76 E.R. 637, Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, , R. M. D. Chamarbaughwalla vs Union of India, ; , Central Bank of India vs Their Workmen, ; , Corporation, of the City of Nagpur vs Its Employees, ; , State of West Bengal vs Union of India, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 371 and Azeez Basha vs Union of India, ; referred to.
Until the enactment of the , payment of bonus was not a statutory obligation on the part of the employer nor was it a statutory right of an employee.
It was originally a voluntary payment.
Under the Full Bench formula, evolved by the Labour Appellate Tribunal with respect to disputes for payment of bonus in the Bombay Textile Industry, it acquired the character of a right to share in the surplus of profits enforceable through the machinery of the Industrial Dispites Act, 1947, and other corresponding Act.
Under that Act, workmen of industrial establishments could raise an industrial dispute and 367 demand by way of bonus a proportionate share in profits on the principle that both capital and labour had contributed to the making of profits and therefore both were entitled to a share therein.
As a result of the observations of this Court in Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen, and in Ahmedabad Miscellaneous Industrial Workers ' Union vs The Ahmedabad Electricty Co., ; , the Government of India appointed a Commission to make recommendations with respect to legislation regarding bonus.
The Government accepted the majority of the Commission 's recommendations and sponsored the enactment of the .
Under this Act.
liability to pay bonus has now become a statutory obligation imposed on employers.
In providing such statutory liability Parliament has laid down a statutory formula on which bonus would be savable irrespective of whether the establishment had, during a particular accounting year, made profit or not.
Parliament further laid down that the formula it had evolved and the statutory liability it provided, shall apply only to certain establishments and not to all.
In such circumstances, Parliament has not to provide by express words that henceforth no bonus shall be payable under the industrial Disputes Act or other corresponding Acts, as those Act never conferred any statutory right to bonus.
[373 G H; 375 H; 376 B C; 381 A D] Muir Mills Co. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union, Kanpur, ; , Baroada Borough Municipality vs Its Workmen, ; , Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Their Workmen ; , State of Mysore vs The Workers of Gold Mines, ; , Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs Its Workmen, r.[1959] S.C.R. 925 and The Ahmedabad Miscellaneous Industrial Workers ' Union vs The Ahmedabad Electricity Co. Ltd. ; , referred to.
(2) The was intended to be a comprehensive and exhaustive law dealing with the entire subject of bonus.
The fact that the preamble states that the Act shall apply only to certain establishments and that section 1(3) of the Act excludes establishments where less than 20 persons ape employed, from the application of the Act, does not necessarily mean that Parliament ras not dealt with the subject matter of bonus and the persons to whom it shall apply comprehensively in the Act.
Even where an Act deals comprehensively with a particular subject matter, the Legislature can provide that it shall apply to particular persons or group of persons or to specified institutions only, and so, Parliament can lay down as a matter of policy that it will exclude from the application of the Act certain types of establishments and also provide for exemption of certain other types of establishments which would otherwise fall within the scope of the Act.
[380 C H; 385 H] (3) Since the Payment of Bonus Art is an exhaustive statute dealing with subject of bonus, one of the consequences is that under section 1(3) of the Act, employees in establishments engaging less than 20 Persons would get no bonus either under this Act or under industrial adjudication provided for by the and other corresponding Acts.
Under section 1(3)Parliament has excluded petty establishments with less than 20 employees in view of the recommendations of the Commission in that regard, namely, that the application of the Act to such establishments would lead to harassment of petty proprietors and disharmony between them and their employees.
To hold that employees in such establishments would still be entitled to bonus, though not under the Act, would lead to the anomaly that if there are two establishments in the same trade or industry one engaging more than 20 persons and the other engaging less than 20 person, then, in the former case the employer would be 368 liable to pay bonus at the rate laid down in the Act, while in the latter, the employer would be liable to pay bonus on the basis of the Full Bench formula which may be at a higher rate depending upon the quantum of profits in the particular year.
[382 C F; 384 C E] (4) Under section 32(x) of the , establishments in the public sector are exempted from the application of the Act.
Therefore, employees in public sector concerns would not be entitled to bonus, either under the Act or which they might otherwise have got by raising a dispute under the and other corresponding statutes.
The exemption is a limited one and in granting it, Parliament had a definite policy in mind, namely, not to subject such establishments which are conducted without any profit motive and are run for public benefit, to the burden of bonus.
To hold that even in these exempted cases, the employer would still be liable to pay bonus if the employees of such institutions were to raise a dispute under the and claim bonus in accordance with the Full Bench formula would also lead to the anomaly that the Legislature would be giving exemption with one hand and taking it away with the other.
If Parliament wanted to retain the right to claim bonus by way of industrial adjudication in the case of establishments which are either excluded or exempted from the Act it would have made an express saving provision to that effect as it has done for employees of coal mines.
[382 F H; 383 F H; 384 A C] (5) There is no question of a right to bonus under the or other corresponding laws being saved under section 39 of the , because : (a) the or the corresponding laws though they confer substantial rights on a workman with regard to lay off, retrenchment compensation, etc., do not provide for a statutory right to payment of bonus; and [385 C G] (b) the definition of 'employee under section 2(13) of the is wider than that of 'workman ' under the .
Therefore, a dispute between an employer and his employees, in relation to bonus may not be an industrial dispute.
Section 22 of the , by fiction, makes such disputes industrial disputes and applies the provisions of the .
But the does not provide any machinery or procedure for the investigation and settlement of disputes which may arise between employers and employees, such as a dispute as to the computation of allocable surplus, or quantum of bonus or as to whether an establishment in the public sector is liable to pay bonus in view of section 20 of the Act.
Therefore, section 39, which provides that the provisions of the are in addition to and not in derogation of the and other corresponding laws, became necessary in order that the machinery of the may be available for adjudication of such disputes under the F377 H; 378 A G; 379 B D]
