The 1st respondent waqf filed a suit against the appellants 'and the 3rd respondent, for setting aside a lease deed executed by the 3rd respondent in favour of the appellants, on the ground that the properties covered by the lease deed were waqf properties dedicated by a deed of waqf of the year 1827.
The existence of the deed of waqf was proved by numerous 'admissions by the 3rd respondent and others who were its mutawallis.
The 3rd respondent had produced the original deed along with the return filed by him before the Waqf Board under rr. 6 and 11 made under the Bihar Waqfs Act, 1948, and stated that the properties in dispute were waqf properties.
He also produced a plain copy in Persian and an English translation of the original deed of waqf.
He attested the English translation and made an endorsement on the Persian copy that it corresponded to the original.
The original, after comparison.
was returned to him, and the copy and translation were retained in the office of Waqf Board.
At the triaL, the 3rd respondent did not produce the original even though a notice was issued to him for its production.
No copy of the deed was traceable in the registration office.
The first respondent, therefore, relied upon the copy and the translation in the office of the Waqf Board.
The high Court decreed the suit and the High Court confirmed the decree.
In the appeal to this Court, on the question whether the copy was admissible in evidence to show that the disputed properties were waqf properties, HELD: The case fell under section 65(a) of the Evidence Act and so the copy was admissible, since any secondary evidence of the existence and contents of the original document was admissible.
Though the case may also fall under section 65(f), it is not necessary to produce a certified copy of the deed as el.
(a) is not controlled by cl.
The copy as well as other unimpeachable evidence established that the disputed properties were waqf properties.
[419 D E; 420 D] In the matter of a collision between the 'Ava ' and the Brenhilda Cal.
568, approved.
