Section 67 of the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 provides that the contravention of an order or direction made under the Act by the Charity Commissioner is an offence.
Section 69 relates to the duties, functions and powers of the Charity Commissioner.
Under section 69(H), the Charity Commissioner can, under section 37, call for a "statement" or "report" from a trustee of a public trust.
The respondent was one of the trustees of a public trust.
In respect of certain constructions made with the funds of the public trust, without the Charity Commissioner 's permission, the Charity Commissioner wrote to the respondent asking him to furnish information regarding, g the purpose of the constructions and when they were stated, the amount spent and to be spent, the income expected, and details and particulars regarding the contracts.
For failure to comply with the notice, the respondent was prosecuted.
He was convicted by the Magistrate under sections 37 and 67 of the Act.
In revision.
he was acquitted by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The items mentioned by the Charity Commissioner only involve calling of "information" on various matters and did not fall within the meaning of the words "report" or "statement" used in section 37(1)(c), and the Charity Commissioner is not empowered to call for such "information".
[463 C] From the context in which the word "report" has been used in section 37(1)(c) the word can have reference only to a formal report which a trustee may be required to make under the provisions of the Act or the rules if any framed under section 84(1)(b).
Similarly, the word "Statement" has been employed in rr. 17, 22 and 23 of the rules, and this word, appearing in section 37(1)(c) has to be construed with reference to them.
So construed, it cannot be equated with the word "information" which would have a much wider sweep than the word "statement".
The distinction between the words "statement" and "information" is recognised by the Legislature itself by the use of the words "other information" in section 56(N) (2) (h) of the Act and r. 18 of the Rules made thereunder, which take in the answering of all inquiries and giving all kinds of information.
[462 E G]
