The election of the appellant to the Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly from Khategaon constituency was challenged on two grounds: (1) That the nomination paper of one of the contesting candidates was wrongly rejected by the Returning Officer; and (2) that there was a violation of section 123 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in that the appellant and his election agent made speeches, wherein they stated, that Congress had not abolished cow slaughter in India and that to vote for the Congress therefore was to commit the sin of gohatya.
The trial Judge of the High Court allowed the petition on both the grounds.
In appeal to this Court under section 116 A the Act, HELD: (1) The candidate whose nomination paper was rejected was not registered as a voter in the Electoral Roll relating to Khategaon constituency but to a different constituency.
Under section 33(5) of the Act, he had to produce before the Returning Officer at the time of scrutiny, a copy of the Electoral Roll of that constituency, or of the relevant part thereof, or a certified copy of the relevant entry in such Roll, or should have filed any of those documents earlier with his nomination paper.
He did not do any of these but instead, filed with his nomination paper a certificate giving only a gist of an entry from the Electoral Roll of the other constituency, and that too from an officer who was not proved to have the authority to issue a certified copy of the Electoral Roll.
The provisions of the section were thus not complied with and the Court had no power to dispense with the requirement.
Therefore, the rejection of the nomination paper of the candidate, by the Returning Officer, was justified and the trial Judge erred in holding that it was wrongly rejected [501 F H; 502 A E] (2) By stating that if the voters voted for congress they would be committing the sin of gohatya, the appellant and his agent attempted to induce the voters to believe that they would become objects of divine displeasure or spiritual censure and thus committed an election offence under section 123 of the Act.
[506 G; 507 B] Since the witnesses who spoke about the speeches were believed by the trial Judge not on the probabilities of the case, but, on his observation of their demeanour this Court would be slow to depart from the trial Judge 's assessment of the evidence.
According to that evidence, the voters were reminded that they would be committing the sin of gohatya.
Since the cow is venerated in this Country and it is also beleved that gohatya is one of the cardinal sins, such a reminder would be equivalent to reminding them that they would be objects of divine displeasure of spiritual censure.
The case therefore fell within section 123(2)(ii) and the 500 trial Judge was right in holding that the election of the returned candidate should be set aside.
[505 D E; 506 H]
