Both under section 4(3)(xxi) of the Income tax Act, 1922 and section 10(26) of the Income tax Act, 1961, income of the members of a scheduled tribe included in article 366(25) of the Constitution and residing in any area specified in Part A or Part B of the Table appended to Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution, excepting that of government servants, ' is exempt from income tax.
The respondent was a member of such a scheduled tribe residing in such an area, but, as he was a government servant, he was assessed to income tax.
He challenged the validity of the assessments and the High Court quashed the assessments holding that the two sections.
to the extent they excluded government servants from the benefit of the exemption given thereunder, were discriminatory and therefore void.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD: The State has a wide discretion in selecting persons or objects it will tax, but within the range of selection made by it for the purpose of exemption, namely, among members of certain scheduled tribes residing in specified areas, the law as stated in the two sections.
operates unequally and the inequality cannot be justified on the basis of any valid classification.
[168H; 169B C] (1) The classification of trials into government servants and others cannot be justified on the basis of administrative convenience viz. that it was easy to collect taxes from government servants, because.
their case does not stand on a different footing from that of the employees in statutory corporations or well established firms.
[169F G] (2) There is no legislative practice or history treating government servants as a separate class for purposes of income tax.
The reason for making, in the past, persons in the service of the government of British India serving outside British India subject to Indian income tax.
is not t, hat their income was treated in a manner different from that of other salaried officers in those areas, but that the Indian Legislature had no legislative competence to tax residents of those areas but had competence to tax the income of persons in British Indian government service, serving in those areas.
Further, the notification of 6th June 1890 under which the income earned by members of certain scheduled tribes, other than those in government service, was exempt from income tax, and the notification of 21st March 1922.
under which income of certain indigenous hill men, other than those in government service.
was exempt from tax, are not sufficient to prove a well established legislative practice.
Those notifications were issued at a time when the power of the legislature to grant or withhold any exemption from tax was not subject to any constitutional limitation.
Classification based on past legislative 166 practice and history does not mean that because in the past the legislature was enacting arbitrary laws it could do so now.
[170A; 171D F] (3) The social status and economic resources of a government servant are not different from that of another holding a similar position in a corporation or that of a successful medical practitioner, lawyer, architect etc.
Therefore, merely because a tribal becomes a government servant he is not lifted out of his social environment and assimilated into the forward sections of society.
[172A B] (4) The portions of the two sections struck down are severable from the rest of the provisions in which they appear.
[172E F]
