The respondent leased his land to the appellant on yearly lease for the year 1950 51.
As the appellant did not vacate at the end of the year the respondent filed a suit for his eviction.
Pending the suit, the Bera Regulation of Agricultural Leases Act, 1951, came into force and the appellant contended that he continued to be a tenant for the year 1951 52, that he was a 'protected tenant ', and that the civil court had no jurisdiction to eject him.
The trial court rejected the contentions.
The appellant appealed and while the appeal was pending the Act was amended by the 1953 Act.
Sections 16A and 16B of the Act as amended provided, that whenever any question as to whether a transaction between a landholder and a person claiming to be his lessee was a lease, arose in any suit or proceeding, it should be referred to the revenue officer that the revenue officer 's decision shall be accepted by the civil court; and that no civil court shall entertain any suit to obtain a decision on a matter which the revenue officer was empowered to determine.
The appellant contended in the appellate court that the determination of the question whether he was the respondent 's tenant was a matter entirely within the jurisdiction of the revenue courts only.
The appellate court held that the 1953 Act did not affect pending proceedings, that the appellant was not the respondent 's tenant for the year 1951 52, and dismissed the appeal.
In second appeal, a single Judge of the High Court held that in view of the 1953 amendments, it was for the revenue courts to decide whether the appellant was the respondent 's lessee for the year 1951 52 and referred the matter to the revenue courts.
The revenue courts held that the appellant was paying rent to the respondent for the year 1951 52, and remitted the finding to the .High Court.
Another Single Judge of the High Court, before whom the matter came up for final disposal, accepted the finding and held that.
the respondent was not entitled to eject the appellant.
He also rejected the respondent"s contentions that the 1953 amendments were not applicable and that the matter should never have been referred to the revenue courts.
The respondent thereupon appealed under Letters Patent.
The Bench held that sections 16, 16A and 16B of the Act were not intended to affect pending proceedings, that the civil court could decide the question whether the appellant was the respondent 's tenant in 1951 52, and allowed the appeal accepting the findings of the trial court and the first appellate court that the appellant was not the respondent 's tenant for the year 1951 52.
In appeal to this Court.
HELD: (1) It was open to the Letters Patent Bench to decide all points decided by the single Judges even though no appeal was filed against the order referring the matter to the revenue courts, as that order 574 was only an interlocutory one to which section 105(2) C.P.C.; was not applicable.
[578H; 579A B.] Satyadhyan Ghosal vs Smt.
Deorajin Devi, [1960] 3 S.C.R. 590, (2) The intention of the Legislature was not to apply the 1953 Act to pending proceedings and therefore sections 16, 16A and 16B did not bar the jurisdiction of the civil.courts in the present case.
The 1953 Act came into force after the trial court decreed the suit and an appeal was pending in the first appellate Court.
The words 'suit or proceeding in section 16A do not ordinarily, indicate appllate proceedings and there is nothing in sections 16, 16A or 16B which can lead to the necessary inference that these provisions were intended to apply to appeals pending when the 1953 Act came into force.
Further, the words used in section 16B are 'entertain ' and not 'entertain and try. '.
If the intention was to affect pending proceedings the word 'try. ' would have been in the section along with the word 'entertain '.
[578 C El
