The appellant Bank, agreed to finance the contracts undertaken by M. and to advance monies against his bills for supplies under the contracts.
For the purpose of carrying out this arrangement M executed an irrevocable power of attorney in favour of the appellant authorising the latter to receive all monies due or to become due to M in respect of pending or future contracts.
M made a bill, endorsed it in favour of the appellant for collection, and handed it over to the appellant for collection.
Before the appellant received the payment, the amount under the bill was attached by the first respondent in execution of a money decree obtained by him against M.
The appellant filed a suit for a declaration that he was the assignee of the bill and the first respondent had no right to attach it.
The suit was decreed, but in appeal, the High Court dismissed the suit.
In appeal, on certificate, this Court: HELD: The appeal must be allowed.
The power of attorney coupled with the endorsement on the bill was a clear engagement by M to pay the appellant Bank out of the monies receivable under the bill and amounted to an equitable assignment of the fund by way of security.
The obvious intention of the parties was to provide protection for the lender and to secure repayment of the loans.
With that object in view the lender was authorised to receive payment of the loans.
As the lender had an interest in the funds the power of attorney was expressed to be irrevocable.
[597 D, H] There can be a valid equitable assignment of future.
debts.
A pay order is revocable mandate.
It gives the payee no interest in the fund.
An assignment creates an interest in the fund and is not revocable.
Read in the light of the power of attorney the endorsement on the bill created an interest in a specific fund and was irrevocable.
There was thus a sufficient equitable assignment of a specific fund in favour of the appellant Bank.
[598 H; 599 B] Loonkaran Sethiya vs State Bank of Jaipur, ; followed.
Palmer vs Carey ; at 706; Tailby vs Official Receiver, , applied, Jagabhai Lallubhai vs Rustamji Nauserwanji, Bom.
311, referred to.
