Seven candidates were duly nominated for election from a Parliamentary constituency, but two of the candidates withdrew.
The first respondent, who was one of the remaining five contesting candidates, was declared elected.
His election was challenged on various grounds by the appellant who was an elector.
To the petition, only the returned candidate (first respondent) and the other four contesting candidates were made parties.
On the first respondent 's objection that the allegations were vague, the appellant amended his petition.
In his amended petition, with respect to one of the grounds, namely, offering bribes to voters, the appellant gave instances of bribes having been offered or paid by the first respondent, his election agents, and others.
Two persons were referred to as the election agents of the first respondent.
One of them was one of the candidates who had withdrawn and who was not made a party to the election petition.
The first respondent in his written statement contended that the petition should be dismissed under section 86(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, as the candidate against whom corrupt practices were alleged and who was a necessary party under section 82(b) was not made a party to the election petition.
The appellant then filed an application for amendment of his petition wherein he stated that by 'election agent ' he never meant the candidate who had withdrawn, that there was never any intention to make any allegations against that candidate and that his name may be deleted from the petition, as he was not the first respondent 's election agent and reference to him was.
made by inadvertence.
The High Court dismissed the election petition under section 86(1).
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) A candidate who is duly nominated continues to be a candidate for purposes of section 82(b) in spite of withdrawal, and if he is not joined as a party when allegations of corrupt practice are made against him, the election petition shall be dismissed under section 86(1).
F] Aminlal V. Hunna Mal, ; and Har Swarup V. Brij Bhushan Saran; , , followed.
Chaturbhuj V. Election Tribunal, Kanpur, (1958) 15 E.L.R. 301, approved.
(2) The record showed that allegations of corrupt practice were made against the candidate who had withdrawn.
It could not be contended by the appellant that the allegations were made against him not as a candidate but in the character of an election agent, because, the appellant had himself stated in his application for amendment that the candidate who had withdrawn was not the election agent of the first respondent.
Therefore, the 631 allegations were made against an individual who was a candidate within the meaning of section 82(b) and who had to be joined as a necessary party to the election petition.
[634 B C; 636 F G] (3) The Court cannot use O. VI, r. 17 or O. I, r. 10 of the Civil procedure Code to avoid the consequences of non joinder for which a special provision, namely section 86, is found in the Act.
The Civil procedure Code applies to the trial of election petitions only subject to the provision of the Representation of the People Act and the rules, made thereunder.
When the Act makes a person a necessary party and provides that the petition shall be dismissed if he is not joined, the power in the Code, of amendment or to strike out parties.
cannot be used at all.
If the deletion prayed for by the appellant was granted, every election petition can be by amendment and the provisions of section 86(1) and the policy of frae law will be defeated.
[636 A C, D E]
