A Hindu undivided family committed default in payment of income tax, and a certificate for recovery of tax due to the family was issued by the Income Tax Office in exercise of the power conferred by rule 76 of Sch.
II of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The Tax Recovery Officer directed the arrest and detention in prison of the karta of the family for non payment of tax.
The Karta then moved a petition in the High Court of Andhra Pradesh challenging his detention on the ground that he was not a defaulter.
The petition was rejected.
The Karta appealed.
He also moved a petition under article 32 of the Constitution in the Supreme Court for an order for his release from custody.
HELD : The Legislature having treated a Hindu undivided family as a taxable entity distinct from the individual members constituting it,.
and proceedings,for assessment and recovery of tax having been taken! against the Hindu undivided family, it was not open to the Tax Recovery Officer to initiate proceedings against the manager of the Hindu undivided family for his arrest and detention.
The manager by virtue of his status is competent to represent the Hindu undivided family, but on that account he cannot for the purpose of section 222 of the Act of 1961 be deemed to be.
the assessee when assessment is made against the Hindu undivided family and certificate for recovery is also issued against the family.
[695 B D] For the purposes of cl.
(a) of section 2(7) the person against whom, any proceeding under the Act has been taken is deemed an assessee: but that postulates that the proceeding should be lawfully taken against the person before he may be deemed to be an assessee for the purpose of section 222 or r. 2 and r. 73.
There is no provision in the Act which deems the manager to be the assessee for the purpose of assessment and recovery of tax, when the income of the Hindu undivided family of which he is the Manager is assessed to tax.
Nor is there any provision in the Act enabling the Income tax Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer to treat the manager of the Hindu undivided family as an assessee in default in respect of tax due by the Hindu undivided family.
The Legislature has again made no provision for recovery of tax by resort to the personal property of the manager of the Hindu undivided family assessed to tax or by his arrest and detention for default by the family in paying the tax due.
[695 H696D]
