The Deputy Commissioner of Bombay made a reference under section 10(2) of the , to the Industrial Tribunal, Maharashtra, of a dispute between the appellant Cricket Club of India Ltd. and the workmen employed by it in respect of various demands made by the workmen.
A preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the Club that it was not an 'industry ', and, the provisions of the Act were not applicable to it, so that a reference under section 10(2) was not competent.
The Tribunal rejected this preliminary objection holding that the club came within the definition of "industry" in section 2(j) of the Act and set down the case for hearing.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, it was contended inter alia on behalf of the respondents, that the objects and other facts on the record showed the Club was an "industry" as it was carrying on various activities in the nature of trade or business, such as constructing buildings for the purpose of earning income from the rents payable by business concerns, letting out residential accommodation in the club premises to members some of whom lived there more or less permanently, undertaking catering activities through maintaining stalls and otherwise where various things were sold not only to members but outsiders also, providing catering for large parties on a systematic basis, deriving large income from holding cricket test matches and other games at its Stadium and the club premises; it was further contended that the club was incorporated as a limited company under the Companies Act and the effect of this in law was that the club became an entity separate and distinct from its members so that, in providing catering facilities, the club as a separate legal entity, was entering into transactions with the members who were distinct from the club itself.
HELD: The order made by the Tribunal holding that the club was an "industry" was incorrect and must be set aside.
The appellant was a dub .of members organised with the primary object of encouraging and promoting sports and games.
The activity of promotion of sports and games by a set of people combining together to form a club cannot be said to be an undertaking in the nature of a trade or business in which material goods or material services are provided with the aid of the employees.
[607 C D] The Secretary.
Madras Gymkhana Club Employees ' Union vs The Management of the Gymkhana Club, [1968] 1 S.C.R. 742; followed.
601 (i) The Tribunal fell into an error in ignoring the circumstances that the income, which was earned by the club from investment of immovable properties, could not be held to be income that accrued to it with the aid and cooperation of the employees.
From the evidence it was clear that in effect no employees of the club were engaged in looking after the buildings which were let out for use as shops and offices.
[608 C, D E] (ii) The facility of residential accommodation provided by the club could not be said to be in the nature of keeping a hotel as this facility was provided exclusively for members of the club at much lower charges than those prevailing at hotels in the city with comparable accommodation.
It was in the nature of a serf service by the club organised for its members.
[509 B] (iii) The catering provided in the refreshment room of the club was also clearly provided only for the members and the bye laws of the Counoil lay down that even if a guest was introduced by a member, the guest was not entitled to pay for any refreshment served to him, The transaction continued to be confined to the members of the club who introduced the guest.
[509 G] (iv) The catering facilities provided to members and outsiders at stalls at the time of sports tournaments were only so provided twice a year and at concessional rates.
The provision of these stalls could not therefore be said to be for the purpose of carrying, on an activity of selling snacks and soft drinks to outsiders but was really intended as provision of a facility to persons participating in or coming to watch the tournaments in order that these may he run successfu 'lly.
These stalls were thus brought into existence as a part of the activity of promotion of games and was not as a systematic activity for the purpose of carrying on transactions of sale of snacks and soft drinks to outsiders.
[610 C D] (v) Although large parties were held at the club where catering was provided by the club and non members attended such parties, these facilities were in fact provided at the instance of the members of the club.
The privity of contract was between the member concerned and the club and the dues for such functions were realised from the members only.
The club was thus ' in fact catering only for its members.
FUrthermore, in the absence of any evidence that a large number of such parties were held, no inference could follow that holding such parties was a systematic arrangement by which the club was attempting to make profits.
[611 D F] (vi) The primary object with which the club entered into contracts with certain organisations whereby a certain number of seats in the Stadium were given exclusively for the use of such organisations whenever any test matches were held, was to encourage persons who were interested in the game of cricket, even though at the disadvantage of having ,to charge 1ower rates for such seats.
Furthermore, charges from other spectators by selling tickets to them when test matches were held were obviously realised in order to ensure that the club could carry on its activity of the promotion of the game of cricket and also make up losses for purposes of providing other facilities and amenities to the members of the club.
In these circumstances, it could not he said that these activities, including the holding of cricket test matches were in the nature of carrying on trade or business, but were activities in the course of promotion of the game of cricket and it was incidental that the club was able to derive an income from such activities which income was later utilised for the purpose of fulfilling its other objects as incorporated in the Memorandum of Association.
[613 D, H] 602 (vii) Though the club was incorporated as a Company, it was not like an ordinary Company constituted for the purpose of carrying on business.
There were no shareholders.
No dividends were ever declared and no distribution of profits took place.
Admission to the club was by payment of admission fee and not by purchase of shares.
The membership was not transferable like the right of shareholders.
There was provision for expulsion of a member under certain circumstances which feature never exists in the case of a shareholder holding shares in a Limited Company.
ln view of these and other distinguishing features, the club cannot be treated as a separate legal entity of the nature of a limited company carrying on business.
[614 D F]
