The assessee was running a business of plying buses and during its previous year ending on August 16, 1959, the buses had been plied for part of the year but were sold thereafter.
The Income tax Officer assessed the difference between the sale price of the buses and their written down value to tax as profit under the second proviso to section 10(2) (vii).
In appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the assessee 's contention that the business had been transferred as a whole and therefore the profit in question could not be taxed.
The Tribunal also dismissed an appeal taking the view that the buses had been plied by the assessee for part of the previous yea.r and the profit on the sale of these buses was taxable under the said provision.
However, the High Court, upon a reference, held that the amount in question was not assessable as profit under section 10(2)(vii) on the assumption that the whole of the bus service business had been wound up during the relevant period.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD: allowing the appeal: Even on the assumption that the sale of the buses was a closing down or a realization sale it would nonetheless be taxable since the sale was made after the amendment of the second proviso.
section 10(2)(vii) by Act 67 of 1949.
[533 F G] According to the law laid down by this Court the view of the High Court would have been sustainable if the sale in the present case had been effected during the assessment year prior to the amendment of the proviso by Act 67 of 1949.
The critical words which were inserted by that proviso namely, "whether during the continuance of the business or after the cessation thereof", must be given their proper meaning.
It is quite plain that if the building, machinery or plant is sold during the continuance of the business or after the business ceases, the sale proceeds would be liable to tax in accordance with the proviso.
When the legislature clearly provided that the proviso would apply even if the sale was made, after the cessation of the business, it is difficult to conceive that it was intended to exclude from the ambit of the proviso a sale made for the purpose of closing down the business or effecting its cessation.
[535 F H] Commissioner of Income tax, Madras Iv.
Express Newspapers Ltd., Madras, , 195; Commissioner of Income tax, Kerala vs West Coast Chemicals and Industries Ltd. ; Commissioner of Income tax, Kerala vs
R.R. Ramakrishna Pillai, and The Liquidators of Pursa Limited vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar; , ; distinguished.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Ajax Products Ltd., ; ; referred LI 3Sup.
CI/68 3 532
