The assessee, a dealer in shares and securities, held as part of its stock in trade, shares of certain companies.
The assessee 'received from those companies, at different times, bonus shares proportionate to its equity holding.
On the question whether the sale proceeds of such bonus shares are liable to be included in the assessee 's total income as profits of the share dealing business, the Tribunal found that the sale proceeds of the bonus shares were received by the assessee in the course of and as part of its business in shares, and held that the proceeds were, on that account, taxable as income.
The High Court, on reference, held in favour of the assessee.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1 ) A trader may acquire a commodity in which he is dealing, for, his own purposes, and hold it apart from the stock in trade of his business.
There is no presumption that such an .acquisition, even if it is an accretion to the stock in trade of the business, is an acquisition for the purpose of his business: in each case the question is one of intention to be gathered from the evidence of conduct and dealings by the acquirer with the commodity.
Bonus shares given by a company in proportion to the holding of equity capital by a shareholder are, under the income tax Act at the relevant time (1946 50), liable to be treated as capital and not as income.
Therefore, the bonus shares received by the assessee did not become part of its stock in trade merely because they were accretion to its stock in trade.
[10 C, F, G] C.I.T. Central Bombay vs Maneklal Chunilal, I.T. Ref.
No. 16 of 1948 (Bombay High Court), disapproved.
C.I.T., Bengal vs Mercantile Bank of India, 4 I.T.R. 239(P.C.), applied.
Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs John Blottt, 8 T.C. 101 (H.L.) referred to.
(2) In the present case, however, the Tribunal found that the bonus shares, received as capital, were converted by the assessee into its stockin trade and were not retained as a capital asset.
The question posed for the opinion of the High Court was no whether the finding of the Tribunal was rounded on evidence, but whether the sale proceeds of the bonus shares were of the nature of revenue.
On this question, when the assessee had not filed any application under section 66(1) of the Income tax , expressly raising the question about the validity of the Tribunal 's finding of fact, the High Court must accept the finding and cannot enquire whether the finding is supported by evidence or not.
The High Court was therefore, not justified in interfering with the finding and conclusion of the Tribunal.
[11 D, F H] India Cements Ltd. vs
C.I.T., followed.
