The assessee firm carried on business at Bangalore in the State of Mysore, which at the relevant time was a Part B State.
It was appointed as the sole selling agent for certain areas in Ceylon in respect of tiles and ridges manufactured by the principal at Feroke in British India.
According to the agreement between the parties all prices quoted by the manufacturer were to be F.O.B. Beypore Port situated in taxable territory.
Chartering and loading of vessels was done by one of the employees stationed at Calicut.
The bills of lading were obtained by the assessee 's representative at Beypore and sent to Bangalore when the hundis together with the invoices and shipping documents were handed over by the assessee to a bank at Bangalore.
Pursuant to the letter of credit opened ' by the purchaser in Ceylon, payments were made by the aforesaid bank to the assessee.
In income tax proceedings for the assessment years 1951 52, 1952 53, and 1953 54 the assessee claimed that since its registered office was in Bangalore and as the agency agreement with the purchaser at Colombo was entered into in Bangalore the entire come should be treated as income accruing or 'arising in Part B State and concession regarding rates and allowances as provided in Part States (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1950 should be allowed to it.
The income tax authorities and the Tribunal decided against the assessee.
The High Court however held that since the profits were received in Part State at Bangalore, it could not be said that the entire profit accrued or arose within the meaning of el.
(a) of sub section
(1) of section 4 of the Income tax Act, 1922 in the taxable territories other than Part B State.
According to the High Court the profits arose at Bangalore, Feroke, and Ceylon, of which only Feroke was in the taxable territories, and therefore, the assessee was entitled to the concession under the order in respect of the profits that could be apportioned under section 42(3) of the Act to the business operations conducted in Bangalore and Ceylon.
The Revenue appealed to this Court contending that hardly any activity took place of such a nature as could be said to give rise to accrual of profits at Bangalore.
HELD: The conclusion which the High Court arrived at must be upheld.
The making of contracts pursuant to which all the subsequent activity in respect of the execution of those.
contracts took place resulting in profits to the assessee was an integral part of the entire selling operations.
The contracts in the present case having been entered into at Bangalore it could not be said that no part of the business activity which produced the profits took place there.
[53 H] 56
