For the assessment years 1940 41 to 1943 44 the assessee company claimed to be an investor in shares and properties and not a dealer.
The contention was rejected by the Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal.
The company then applied to the Tribunal under section 66(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922 for a reference of the following questions of law for the opinion of the High Court: (i) whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the assessee company can rightly be treated as a dealer in investments and properties ? (ii) whether the profits and losses arising from the sale of shares, securities and immovable properties of the assessee company can be taxed as business profits.
The Tribunal refused to make the reference and the High Court dismissed the application under section 66(2).
On appeal by special leave this Court held that the question as to what were the characteristics of the business of dealing in shares or that of an investor was a mixed question of law and fact.
It remanded the case to the High Court for directing the Tribunal to state a case under section 66(2) on the following questions: (i) whether there are any materials on the record to support the finding of the Income tax Officer that the assessee company was a dealer in shares.
, securities and immovable property during the assessment year in question (ii) whether the profits and losses arising from the sale of shares, securities and immovable properties of the assessee company can be treated as business property ? On these questions being referred to the High Court by the Tribunal, the High Court decided them against the assessee company.
The company again appealed to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the questions as framed by this.
Court did not reflect the real controversy 'and therefore the questions as originally framed in the company 's application under section 66(1) should be referred to the High Court in a fresh statement of case to be made by the Tribunal.
HELD: (i) The questions framed by this Court and the form in which they were framed seemed to assume that the questions involved were questions of fact for it is only in regard to a question of fact that the question can properly be framed "as to whether there was material to support the said finding".
This Court had itself held that the questions involved in the present case were mixed questions of law and fact.
Therefore the questions framed by this Court were not appropriate and did not reflect the real controversy between the parties.
It was therefore appropriate that the questions should be modified as suggested by the appellant in its petition under section 66(1) to the High Court.
[53 G 54 B] (ii) The proper construction of statutory language is always a matter of law and therefore the claim of the assessee that the profits and losses arising from the sale of shares securities etc.
cannot be treated as profits 47 of a business involves the application of law to the facts found in the setting of the particular case.
In dealing with findings on such questions of law and fact the High Court must No. doubt accept the findings of the.
Tribunal on the primary questions of fact; but it is open to the High Court to examine whether the Tribunal had 'applied the relevant legal principles correctly or not in reaching its final conclusion; and in that sense, the scope of enquiry and the extent of the jurisdiction of the High Court in dealing with such points is the same as in dealing with pure questions of law.
[53 B D] G. Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs
C.I.T., , relied on.
