The appellant challenged the respondent 's election to the Gujarat State Legislative Assembly in February 1967, on the ground, inter alia, that he had committed corrupt practice under section 123(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
It was alleged that a car was hired or procured by the returned candidate and on the date of the poll it was used for free conveyance of three ladies to the polling booth.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that an inference arose in the present case that the ladies must have been taken free to the polling booth and reliance was placed in this respect on certain findings given by the High Court.
There was also a prayer that a general recount was wrongly disallowed by the High Court and that it should be ordered in the present appeal.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal: (i) section 123(5) requires three things, (1) hiring or procuring of a vehicle; (2) by a candidate or his agent etc. 'and (3) for the free conveyance of an elector.
[102 B C] In the present case there was proof that the vehicles were procured; there was also proof that a particular vehicle was in fact used for the conveyance of the three lady voters to the polling booth; what was not proved was that there was free conveyance of the ladies in that vehicle.
The burden of establishing that this fact was on the appellant petitioner and it was not impossible, of proof because the owner of the car or the driver or the ladies could have been examined to show that the, ladies had traveled free in the vehicle.
in the absence of this proof the ingredients of the section had not been established and there was therefore no room for interference with the High Court 's decision though based on slightly different reasons.
The High Court 's finding that the ladies must have travelled free was a mere surmise because there was no evidence whatever on this part of the case.
[100 H, 102 G, H] (2) A scrutiny of the pleadings showed that there was no plea on which the prayer for a recount could be rested though in the relief clause there was mention of a general recount.
The pleas concerned the votes caste by impersonators 'and rejected votes and as these had already been considered, there was no room for a further count.
[103 B]
