In 1949 the Government took possession of certain land belonging to the appellant under an arrangement whereby the Government was to give to the appellant in exchange other suitable lands of equal value.
After the Government had constructed some buildings on the land, it decided to acquire the land compulsorily.
On February 1, 1959, the .Government issued a notification under section 6(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, declaring that the land was needed for public purposes and stating that possession of the land had already been taken.
The Collector made an award on April 22, 1957 but the appellant objected to the amount of compensation and the Collector, on his application, made a reference to the Court under section 18.
At the hearing of the reference before the District Judge, the Government concluded that the appellant was entitled to the market value of the land as on February 1, 1955 and the District Judge awarded compensation accordingly.
Thereafter the Government filed an appeal in the High Court and contended that in the absence of a notification under section 4(1); no compensation could be awarded to the appellant.
The High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the District Judge.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: Allowing the appeal: The Government having constructed buildings on the land was not in a position to restore it and had no option but to acquire it compulsorily.
With a view to make the acquisition the Government published a notification under sec.
6(1) on February 1, 1955.
On finding that there was no separate notification under sec.
4(1) the Government had a choice between two courses.
It could say that in the absence of such a notification the acquisition was invalid and that no compensation could be awarded under sec.
If it did so it would be compelled to start fresh acquisition proceedings and pay a larger sum by way of compensation.
The other course was to treat the notification of February 1, 1955 as a composite one under sections 4(1) and 6(1) with the consent of the appellant and to say that the market value of the land on that day could be awarded by way of compensation.
The Government elected to choose the letter course and the appellant agreed to accept compensation on that footing.
Having regard to the consent of both parties, it could properly be assumed that the procedure of section 5A had been waived by the appellant and that the notification of February 1, 1955 could be treated as a composite one under sections 4(1) and 6(1).
The District Judge could therefore lawfully award the market value of the land on that day.
[63 C G] Somavanti.
vs State of Punjab, , 821 823 and Toronto Corpr.
vs Russell, ; referred to.
61 Furthermore, relying on the concession made by the Government the appellant had acted to its detriment in that it did not challenge the acquisition and the Government had come to be in adverse possession of the land for more than 12 years.
In these circumstances the Government could not be permitted to resile from the election which it deliberately made and to say that the appellant was not entitled to the market value of the land on February 1, 1955.
[63 G H] Rama Charan Chakrabarty vs Nimai Mondal, 15 C.L.J. 58; referred to,
