The appellant applied for a Congress ticket for election to the Legislative Assembly and deposited certain sums, which according to the rules of the Congress Party was refundable if the candidate was not selected but the deposit was to be forfeited if he contested the election against the official Congress candidate.
The appellant was denied the Congress ticket.
Thereafter the notification inviting electors to elect a member to the Assembly was issued, and the last date for filing nomination papers and for withdrawing from the contest was fixed.
The appellant contested the election against the respondent who was the official Congress nominee and incurred the penalty of forfeiture.
The appellant was declared elected and he filed his return of election expenses.
The respondent challenged the 'appellant 's election on the ground that he had committed corrupt practice under section 123(6) of the Representation of People Act, 1951, for not having included the sum deposited by him in seeking the Congress ticket in his return and by adding this sum to the return of election expenses filed the prescribed amount was exceeded, thereby contravening section 77(3) of Act.
The High Court held in favour of the election petitioner.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Section 77 as framed now departs in language from the earlier provision on the subject which was r. 117.
The words 'conduct 'and management of election ' are; not as wide as the words 'all expenditure in connection with election incurred or authorised by him ' which now find place in section 77 with 'election ' and 'incurred or authorised. ' 'Expenditure ' means the amount expended and 'expended ' means to pay away, lay out or spend.
It really represents money out of pocket, a going out.
The amount paid away or paid out need not be all money which a man spends on himself during this time.
It is money 'in connection with ' his election.
These words mean not so much as 'consequent upon ' as 'having to do with '.
All money laid out and having to do with the election is contemplated.
But here again money which is liable to be refunded is not to be taken note of.
The word 'incurred ' shows a finality.
It has the sense of rendering one self liable for the amount.
The words are not equivalent to 'conduct or management of an election ' and the expenses need not be for promotion of the; interest of the candidate.
Therefore the section regards everything for which the candidate has rendered himself liable and of which he is out of pocket in connection with his election, that is to say having to do with his election.
[87 G 88 B] (In this case, the appellant put out the money for his election since he was trying to obtain a Congress ticket.
If he had got the ticket and the money was refunded to him, this would not have counted as 'an expenditure since the expense would not have been incurred.
When the appellant knowing that the money would be lost went on to stand as an independent candidate, he was willing to let the money go and take a 85 chance independently.
So the 'amount was an expenditure within the meaning of the section.
[88 C D] Haji Aziz and Abdul Shakoor Bros. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, ; , distinguished.
