21 currency notes of Rs. 1,00.0 each were seized from the Appellant Bank by the police in the course of an investigation of a case against the third respondent of cheating the first and second respondents.
The seized currency notes were said to be part of the property obtained by the third respondent from the other two respondents.
The third respondent was acquitted by the trial court of the offence charged.
In the course of the trial the appellant made an application under section 517(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure asking for the delivery of the currency notes to it on the ground that the appellant was an innocent third party who had received the said notes without any knowledge or suspicion of their having been involved in the commission of an offence.
By its order of 24th April 1962, the trial court allowed the application and directed that the currency notes 'should be returned to the appellant.
Subseqently an appeal filed by the State was allowed by the High Court which set aside the trial court 's order of acquittal of the third respondent and convicted him of the offence charged.
On an application made by the first respondent asking for delivery of the currency notes to him as they belonged to.
him and the second respondent, the High Court, by an order of April 5, 1963 directed that the notes be handed over to the first and second respondents.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the appellant that the High Court had reversed the order of the trial court directing the return of the currency notes to the appellant without giving a notice to the appellant.
and without giving an opportunity of being heard; and that the order of April 5, 1963 was therefore violative of the principles of natural justice and was illegal.
The contention on behalf of the respondents was that there was no provision in section 520 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for giving notice to the affected parties and the order of the High Court could not be challenged on the ground that no hearing was given to the appellant.
It was also contended that the High Court had a discretion under the statute as to whom.
the property was to be returned and there was no reason why this Court should interfere with the exercise of discretion by the High Court.
HELD: The appeal must be allowed and the order of the High Court dated April 5, 1963 set 'aside.
The seized currency notes must be directed to be returned to, the appellant.
(1) It is mainfest that the High Court was bound to.
give notice to the 'appellant before reversing the order of the trial court directing the disposal of the property under section 517 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
As no such notice was given to the appellant, the order of the High Court dated 5th April 1963 is vitiated in law.
Although the statute does not expressly require a notice to be issued, or a hearing to be given to the 217 parties adversely affected.
there is in the eye of law a necessary implication that the parties adversely affected should be heard before the Court makes an order for return of the seized property.
[220 C D, 221 E] Cooper vs Wandsworth Board of Works. ; , Ridge vs Baldwin, ; and Board of High School and Intermediate Education, U.P. Allahabad vs Ghanshyam Das Gupta and Ors, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1110, referred to.
(2) The appellant asserted that it had obtained the currency notes in the normal course of its business and without any knowledge or suspecion of their having been involved in the commission of any offence and that the respondents had not alleged fraud or lack of good faith on the part of the appellant.
In the circumstances the High Court should have directed the return of the currency notes to the appellant which had the "right to possess" the notes within the language of section 517 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Property in coins and currency notes passes by mere delivery and it is the clearest exception to the rule Nemo dat quod non habet.
[222 B. C] Whistler vs Forster, , referred to.
