Certain amounts were imposed as penalty upon the assessee (respondent) under sections 271(1)(c) and 274(2) of the Income tax Act, 1961, for concealment of particulars of income and for furnishing inaccurate particulars.
The assessee preferred appeals before the Appellate Tribunal and prayed for stay of recovery of the penalties pending disposal of the appeals, but the Tribunal declined to stay on the ground that it had no power to do so.
The assessee moved the High.
Court under article 226 and the High Court held that the Tribunal had the power to stay and directed the Tribunal to dispose of the stay application in accordance with law.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The Tribunal has the power to order the stay of recovery of the penalty as an incidental and ancillary power to its appellate jurisdiction.
[72 C] Under section 220(6) the Income tax Officer has a power not to treat an assessee as being in default, when an appeal under section 246 before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner is pending.
But neither the Income tax Officer nor any other departmental officer has the power to stay the recovery of penalty when an appeal is pending before the Tribunal.
The Act is silent in that behalf, and there is no provision in the Act or the Income tax Appellate Tribunal Rules, 1963, granting expressly such a power to the Tribunal.
That is because, the Tribunal, though not a court, exercises in its appellate jurisdiction under section 254 judicial powers of an appellate court of the widest possible amplitude 'and such a statutory power impliedly grants the power of doing all such acts, or employing such means as are essentially necessary to the execution of such jurisdiction and carries with.
it the power to stay proceedings in proper cases.
In view of the special nature of taxation 'and revenue laws.
such power can be exercised after imposing conditions for safeguarding the revenue only in deserving and appropriate cases where the appeal will be otherwise frustrated or rendered nugatory.
The general principle that in a taxing statute there is no room for what could be called equitable construction applies only to the taxing part of the statute and not to its procedural part.
[68 C E; 69 E; 70 D E; 72 F G] Burhanpur Tapti Mills Ltd. vs Board of Revenue, Madhya Pradesh, (1955) 6 S.T.C. 670, referred to.
Observations in Vatcha Sreeramamurthy vs I.T.O. Vizianagaram, at p. 271, disapproved.
