The petitioner, a Second Lieutenant in the army, was involved in a quarrel between two groups of soldiers on September 1, 1965 which led to an altercation and the stabbing and death of a soldier.
On September 2, 1965, the matter was reported to the Civil Police at the local police station.
The Inspector o.f Police inspected the place: of occurrence on the same day, seized certain exhibits produced by an Army Officer, held an inquest on the dead body of the deceased soldier and sent it for postmortem examination through a police constable.
Later on the same day, he stopped further investigation as the Army Officer incharge wanted the case to be handled by the Military authorities.
On September 2, 1965, a Court of Inquiry under the provisions of Ch.
VI of the Army Rules was ordered by the Commander for the area.
After the Court of Inquiry had concluded its proceedings, a Court Martial was constituted by an order dated August 11.
1966, by the General Officer Commanding for the area to try the petitioner and other accused persons.
The Court Martial came to the finding that the petitioner was guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and that he was a member of an unlawful assembly; it sentenced him to cashiering and six years rigorous imprisonment.
The petitioner filed a petition under section 164 of the Army Act, but this was dismissed by the confirming authority and the finding and sentence of the Court Material was confirmed.
The petitioner 's appeal under section 165 of the Army Act to the Central Government was also dismissed.
In the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, the petitioner sought a writ of certiorari to quash the proceedings of the Court MartiaL It was contended on his behalf (i) that the Court Martial had no jurisdiction to try and convict him of offences under sections 304 'and 149 I.P.C. having regard to the mandatory provisions of section 125 of the Army Act and having also regard to the fact that the Army Officer incharge had in the first instance decided to hand over the.
matter for investigation to the Civil Police; (ii) that no notice was given by the Commanding Officer to the Magistrate under Rule 5 of the Rules framed by the Central Government under section 549 of the Criminal Procedure Code, that the petitioner should be tried by a Court Martial; the Criminal Court alone 178 therefore had jurisdiction under Rule 3 to try the petitioner for the offence charged; (iii) that even if the Court Martial had jurisdiction, it could not give a finding of guilt against the petitioner with regard to culpable homicide not amounting to murder unless the charge was altered and amended in accordance with sub rule 2 of Rule 50 of the Army Rules, 1954; the procedure contemplated by Rule 121(4) 'of the Army Rules was not followed by the Court Martial and its finding must therefore be held to be defective; and (iv) that the orders of the Chief of the Army Staff confirming the proceedings of the Court Martial under section 164 of the Army Act and of the Central Government dismissing the petitioners appeal under section 165 were illegal since no reasons had been given in support of the decisions contained in them.
HELD: Dismissing the petition: (i) Merely because the First Information Report was lodged with the civil police on September 2 and the Inspector of Police inspected the place of occurrence, seized certain exhibits and held an inquest on the body of the deceased, it could not reasonably be said that there was a decision of the competent military authority under section 125 of the Army Act to hand over the inquiry to the criminal court.
On the other hand the action of the General Officer Commanding the area, who was the competent authority under section 125 constituting the Court of Inquiry on September 2, 1965 indicates that there was a decision taken under section 125 that the proceedings should be instituted before the Court Martial.
[184 H] (ii) Rule 3 of the Rules framed by the Central Government under section 549 Criminal P.C. only applies to a case where the police has completed the investigation and the accused is brought before the Magistrate after submission of a charage sheet.
The provisions of Rule 3 cannot be invoked in the present case where the police had merely started investigation against a person subject to military law.
The situation contemplated by Rule 5 had not arisen and the requirements of that rule were not attracted.
Furthermore, Regulation 527 of the Defence Services Regulations itself provides that in cases of unnatural death, information should be given under section 174 Criminal Procedure Code to the civil authorities.
The action of the Army Officer in sending information to the civil police was merely in accordance with the provisions of this particular Regulation.
[187 D] (iii) There Was no necessity for amending the charge by the Court Martial under Rule 50(2) because that sub rule only relates to an alteration of charge before the examination of witnesses.
The Court Martial had also not contravened the provisions of Rule 121(4) because that sub rule was not attracted in the present case.
On the contrary, the finding of the Court Martial was justified in view of the language of section 139(6) of the Army Act.
[188 H] (iv) There is no express obligation imposed by section 164 or by section 165 of the Army Act on the confirming authority or upon the Central Government to give reasons in support of its decision to confirm the proceedings of the Court Martial.
No other Section of the Act or any Rule had been shown from which a necessary implication could be drawn that such a duty is cast upon the Central Government or upon the confirming authority.
Furthermore, there was no force in the contention that there is any general principle or any rule of natural justice that a statutory tribunal should always and in every case give reasons in support of its decision.
[190 H; 192 A B] 179 Rex.
vs Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, ; , considered.
