The Commissioner of the appellant (Municipal Corporation of Delhi) issued notice to the respondents stating that the building owned by them posed a danger to the residents of the area and that necessary repairs may be carried out immediately after obtaining sanction.
The respondents thereupon submitted plans to the Corporation but the Commissioner of the Corporation refused the sanction on the ground that the land belonging to me respondents would be covered by a road proposed in the Master Plan prepared .by.
the Delhi Development Authority.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court praying for a direction to the Corporation to accord the sanction.
The High Court allowed the petition, holding that the Commissioner could decline the sanction only if there was a contravention of section 336(2) or section 340 of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 and that in this case there was no such contravention.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that the Commissioner was, trader section 336(2) (a), entitled to refuse sanction of a building or work if the building or work or use of the site for building or work contravened any other law ', that the Master Plan prepared had come into effect under the Development Act and that as the proposed construction would not be in conformity with the Master Plan it would contravene section 14 of the Development Act.
HELD: The appeal must fail.
The provisions of section 7 of the Development Act indicate that the Master Plan will only give a very broad outline of the Development Act that the moment a Master Plan has come into operation and if it contains a proposal regarding the width that a road should have, all use of land adjoining that road is prohibited for an indefinite period.
Under section 14, if any particular and definite use of land is indicated in a Master Plan, different use of that land cannot be permitted.
Similarly, if a Zonal Development Plan, the preparation of which is mandatory under section 8, provides for a particular use of any land or any building in that Zone, it cannot be put to a different use; if neither of the plans provide for the particular use of any land or building in the area or Zone, section 14 will have no application whatsoever.
The respondents ' lands were not in any manner indicated as being taken up by any part of the proposed road mentioned in the Master Plan, nor was a Zonal Development Plan prepared, in the present case.
Therefore, there was no violation of section 14 of the Development Act and hence there was no violation of 'any other law ' under section 336(2)(a) of the Corporation Act.
[175 F 176G]
