Six months after the, appelIant 's Standing Orders as modified had come into operation, the respondent applied for further modification of the Standing Orders, under section 10(2) of the , 'as amended in 1956.
The certifying officer allowed some of the modifications and on appeal by the respondent, the Appellate Authority allowed some more modifications.
In appeal, to this Court under article 136 of the Constitution, the appellant objected to four modifications, namely: (i) that the appellant should give reasons and communicate them to the workmen even in cases of discharge simpliciter; (ii) that appeals against penalties imposed should be disposed of within 60 days; (iii) that when a workman is removed on the ground of inefficiency due to physical unfitness, the appellant should offer to such workman alternative; employment on reasonable emoluments; and (iv) that a second show cause notice should be served on the workman at the stage of taking a decision on the suitable punishment.
The grounds urged were: (1 )The authorities under the Act can certify modifications of existing Standing Orders under section 10(2) only when a change of circumstances is established, because, section 6 of the Act confers finality on certified Standing Orders or modifications thereof; (2).
On principles analogous to res Judicata, the authorities had no jurisdiction to grant the modifications in the present case; and (3) the modifications were not reasonable or fair.
HELD: (1) [Per Shelat and Vaidialingam, JJ.]: A change of circumstances is not a condition precedent to the maintainability of an application for modification under section" 10(2).
Under the Act before its 'amendment in 1956, a workman could not object that the Standing Orders were not reasonable or fair.
His only remedy was to raise an industrial dispute, but that remedy was unsatisfactory, since the dispute had to be sponsored by a union or at least a substantial number of workmen and even then, the process was a protracted one.
Parliament knew that the workmen had the right to raise an industrial dispute and also the defects in that remedy and so amended sections 4 and 10 of the Act by Act 36 of 1956.
The amendment conferred on individual workman the right to object to draft Standing Orders submitted by an employer on the ground that they are either not fair or not reasonable, and also gave the right to apply for their modification.
Under section 6, a person aggrieved by the order of the certifying officer certifying or modifying Standing Orders, may appeal to the Appellate Authority whose decision shall be final.
But the finality only means that there is no further appeal or revision against the order and that the order cannot be challenged in 'a civil court.
It can, however.
be modified under section 10(2).
The only limitations on the power are, (a) reason. 132 ableness and fairness of the modification and (b) except on agreement between employer and the workmen six months must have elapsed from the date on which the Standing Orders or the last modifications thereof, came into operation, the object being that Standing Orders or the modifications should be allowed to work for some time to see if they are satisfactory.
In an application for modification the issue before the authority would be not as to reasonableness or fairness of the existing Standing Orders.
but whether the modification 'applied for is fair and reasonable.
Such an application is an independent application and merely because it could be made on the ground that the existing Standing Orders are discovered to be unsatisfactory even without any change in circumstances, it would not amount to a review of an earlier order.
Further, there will not be a multiplicity of applications because the workmen individually have the right to apply for modifications.
For, unless there is some justification for the modification, the authorities under the Act would reject the applications.
[139 G H; 140 C D; 141 A C; 142 A C; G H; 143 A C] Bangalore Woollen Cotton & Silk Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen [1968] l L.L.J. 555, Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. v Workmen C.A. No. 674 of 1968 dt.
25th July 1968 and Hindustan Brown Boveri Ltd. vs The Workmen C.A. No. 1631 of 1966 dt.
31st July 1967, referred to.
[Per Bhargava, J. dissenting]: When an application under section 10(2) is made, the certifying officer can modify Standing Orders already certified, only if the request is not made on the basis of the same material which existed at the earlier stage when they were certified.
[155 G H] Before the amendment in 1956 if the workmen had any grievance on the ground of unfairness or unreasonableness of the Standing Orders, their only remedy lay under the Industrial Disputes Act.
By amendment in 1956, a limited remedy was provided for them in the Act itself by conferring on the certifying officer the power of judging the reasonableness and fairness of the Standing Orders and of modifying them under section 10(2).
Therefore, after 1956 the workmen have two alternative remedies for seeking alteration in the Standing Orders proposed or certified.
Under section 10(2) a request for modification can only be made on the basis of fresh facts or fresh circumstances arising subsequent to the passing of the order by the Appellate Authority under section 6 on the limited ground of reasonableness and fairness.
The Industrial Tribunal, however.
can direct the alteration of a Standing Order held to be reasonable and fair, without any fresh grounds, material, or change in circumstances if an industrial dispute, in 'relation to it is raised, and this is the only remedy available if a modification is desired without a change of circumstances.
If it is held that even the certifying officer can reconsider the reasonableness or fairness of a Standing Order already certified and confirmed under section 6 the finality envisaged by the section would be nullified.
After a period of six months had elapsed, the certifying officer could set aside an order passed earlier by his superior, or a succeeding Appellate Authority may interfere with his predecessor 's order, merely because the certifying officer or Appellate Authority considers the modification to be reasonable and fair even though there was no change in the circumstances.
[153 F G; 154 A B, D F; 155 C F; 156 A C] (2) [Per Shelat and VaidiaIingam, JJ.]: It is doubtful whether principles analogous to res judicata can property be applied to industrial adjudication.
[143 H] Burn & Co. vs Their Employees, ; , Guest, Keen, Williams (P) Ltd. vs Sterling, ; and Workmen of Balmer Lawrie & Co. vs Balmer Lawrie & Co. , referred to, 133 [Per Bhargava, J.]: This Court bas expressed conflicting views on the question of 'applying the principle underlying the rule of res judicata to industrial adjudication.
[150 E] Burn & Co. 's case; , , Balmer Lawrie Co. 's case; , and Associated Cement Staff Union vs Associated Cement Co. referred to.
(3) [Per Shelat and Vaidialingam, JJ.]: So far as modifications (ii) and (iii) are concerned, in an appeal under article 136, this Court would not interfere with the conclusion of the authorities under the Act since no principle is involved.
[144 F] As regards modification (iv), the authorities under the Act held that it was fair and reasonable, and there is no justification for this Court to interfere with the decision.
In Industrial matters, at present, the doctrine of hire and fire is completely abrogated, because, security of employment is one of the necessities for industrial peace and harmony.
If reasons for discharging an employee are furnished tO him he not only has the satisfaction of knowing why his services are dispensed with, but in appropriate cases he can challenge it, as even when the services of an employee are terminated by an order of discharge simpliciter, its legality and propriety can be challenged before an industrial tribunal.
[145 A E] As regards modification (iv) the requirement of a second show cause notice is peculiar to cases coming under article 311 of the Constitution and neither the ordinary law nor the industrial law requires an employer to give such a notice.
Even in article 311, the requirement is now removed and so, it is not necessary to import it into industrial matters.
[145 E F] [Per Bhargava J. dissenting]: The order must be set aside because the four modifications were not based on any fresh facts, material or change of circumstances.
In fact, modification (i) was, specifically disallowed by the Appellate Authority at an earlier stage and merely because his successor considered it reasonable and fair it was permitted without any change in the circumstances.
[156 E F, H]
