The appellant was a tenant of the respondent in respect of a shop in Agra, Uttar Pradesh.
The respondent applied to the District Magistrate under section 3(1) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 for permission to institute a suit against the appellant for evicting him from the shop.
The application was rejected by the District Magistrate, but the Commissioner, by order under section 3(3 ), granted the permission.
The appellant thereupon moved the State Government under section, 7(F) of the Act, but it was only after the respondent had flied a suit and ,obtained a decree that the State Government passed an order revoking the permission granted by the Commissioner.
The first Appellate Court, in view of the order under 7(F) act aside the decree of the trial Court.
However in second appeal the High Court, relying upon a Full Bench decision of that Court in Bashi Ram vs Mantri Lal (1965) 1 All 545, decided in favour of the respondent.
In appeal before this Court by.
special leave, the question for consideration was whether a decree for eviction obtained in a suit instituted after obtaining the permission of the Commissioner under section 3(3) of the Act becomes unenforceable if the State Government acting under section 7(F) of the Act revokes the permission granted by the Commissioner after the decree is passed.
HELD: The order of the District Magistrate is by section 3(1) specifically made subject to the order of the Commissioner in revision under section 3(3 ), but the Commissioner 's order according to section 3 (4 ) is final though subject to the order of the State Government under section 7(F).
There is no provision in the Act providing that a suit validly instituted after getting the required permission under section 3 (1 ) ceases to be maintainable because of any order made by the State Government under section 7(F).
[305 G H] Similarly there is no provision in the Act invalidating a decree passed after the Act came into force in a validly instituted suit.
The finality or the force of a decree can be taken away by a statute, .but the Court will not readily infer that a decree passed by a competent Court has become unenforceable unless it is shown that a provision of law has specifically or by necessary implication made that decree unenforceable.
[305 H 306 C D] On an examination of the relevant provisions of the Act the conclusion must be that when the Commissioner sets aside the order passed by the District Magistrate granting permission to file a suit for ejecting a tenant, the order of the Commissioner prevails.
If he cancels the permission granted by the District Magistrate, there is no effective permission left and the suit instituted by.
the plaintiff without awaiting his decision must be treated as one filed without any valid permission by the District Magistrate.
To this extent the decision in Munshi Lal and ant.
Shambhu Nath Ramkishan, was correct.
[305 D F] Sup.
C1/69 2 298 It follows that the Full Bench decision in Bashi Ram 's case to the extent it held that a suit filed by the landlord after obtaining the permission of the District Magistrate cannot become infructuous even if the Commissioner revokes the permission, was incorrect.
[306 F] Bashi Ram 's case was however correctly decided in so far as it held that a suit validly instituted after obtaining a permission as required by section 3(1) does not cease to be maintainable even if the State Government revokes, after the institution of the suit, the permission granted.
if the State Government revokes the permission granted before the institution of the suit, then there would be no valid permission to sue.
In other words the State Government 's power to revoke the permission granted under section 3(1) gets exhausted once the suit is validity instituted.
[306 G] Bashi Ram vs Mantri Lal, (1965) 1, All. 545 and Munshi Lal and ant.
vs Shambhu Nath Ram Kishan, (1958) A.L.J., p. 584; considered.
Dr. S.L. Khoparji vs State Government, (1958) A.LJ., p. 724; Basant Lal Sah vs Bhagwan Prasad Sah, A.I.R. 1964 All.
p. 210 and Shri Bhagwan and ant.
vs Ram Chand and anr.
; , ; referred
