The appellant who was a dealer in textiles in Bombay entered into an agreement with a registered cooperative society for weaving yarn supplied by him into cotton fabrics on powerlooms owned by its members.
The Society had obtained L 4 licence as required by the .
Under Rule 8 of the Rules made under the Act.
the Central Government was empowered to exempt any excisable goods from the whole or any part of duty payable on such goods.
In exercise of the power under Rule 8, the Central Government by a notification dated July 31, 1959 ' granted exemption to "cotton fabrics produced by any Cooperative Society/formed of owners of cotton powerlooms which is .registered or which may be registered on or before March 31, 1961" subject to certain conditions set out in the notification.
A subsequent notification dated April 30, 1960 granted exemption to "cotton fabrics produced on powerlooms owned by any Cooperative Society or owned by or allotted to the members of the Society which is registered on or before March 31, 1961".
On the strength of these notifications the appellant sought exemption from excise duty in respect of ' the cotton fabrics which were manufactured for it on powerlooms by the Cooperative Society.
The excise authorities did not accept the claim for exemption and in a writ petition filed by the appellant, the High Court gave only partial relief.
In appeal before this Court the question was whether the exemption granted under the; notifications in question could be claimed only when the cotton fabrics were manufactured by a Cooperative Society 'for itself.
HELD: On a true construction of the language of the notifications dated July 31, 1959 and April 30, 1960, it is clear that all that is required for claiming exemption is that the cotton fabrics must be produced on powerlooms owned by the Cooperative Society.
There is no further requirement under the two notifications that the cotton fabrics must be produced by the cooperative society on powerlooms "for itself '.
The appellant was therefore entitled to the exemption claimed.
[259 D E] It is well established that in a taxing statute there is no room for any intendment but regard must be had to the dear meaning of words.
A statutory notification may not be extended so as to meet a casus omissus.
It could be that the object behind the two notifications in question was to encourage the actual manufacturers of handloom cloth to switch over, to powerlooms by constituting themselves into Cooperative Societies.
But, the. operation of the notifications had to be judged not by the object which 254 the rule, making authority had in mind but by the words which it had employed to effectuate the legislative intent.
Applying this principle, the case of the appellant was covered by the language of the: two notifications and the appellant was entitled to exemption from excise duty for the cotton fabrics.
[259 E; 260 A D)] Salomon vs Salomon & Co. ; , 38 and Crawford vs Spooner, , referred to.
