An arbitrator appointed by the appellants and respondent partitioned their immovable property exceeding the value of Rs. 100.
The arbitrator applied under section 14 of the Indian to the Court for making the award a rule of the court.
On the question whether the award was admissible in evidence as it was not registered, HELD:(per Full Court.) The award required registration.
(Per Sikri and Bachawat, JJ.) All claims which are the subject matter of a reference to arbitration merge in the award which is pronounced In the proceedings before the arbitrator and after an award has been pronounced, the rights and liabilities of the parties in respect of the said claims can be determined only on the basis of the said award.
After an award is pronounced, no action can be started on the original claim which had been the subject matter of the reference.
The position under the Act is in no way different from what it was before the Act came into force.
Therefore.
the conferment of exclusive jurisdiction on 'a court under the does not make 'an award any less binding than it was under the provisions of the Second Schedule of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The filing of an unregistered award under section 49 of the Registration Act is not prohibited: what is prohibited is that it cannot be taken into evidence so as to affect immovable property falling under section 17 of the Registration Act.
It cannot be said that the registration does not in any manner add to its efficacy or give it added competence.
If an award affects immovable property order the value of Rs. 100 its registration does get rid of the disability created by section 49 of the Registration Act.
The award in question was not a mere waste paper but had some legal effect and it plainly purports to affect or affects property within the meaning of section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act [248 F H; E] M/s. Uttam Singh Dugal & Co. vs Union of India, C.A. No. 162 of 1962 dated 11 10 1962, Champalal vs Mst.
Samarath Bai; , 816 and Kashinathsa Yamosa Kabadi vs Narsingsa Baskarsa Kabadi, [1961] 3 S.C.R. 792, 806, followed.
Sheonarain Lal vs Prabhu Chand, I.L.R. 37 Pat.
252 and Sardooll Singh vs Hari Singh I.L.R. [1967] 1 Punj.
& Har. 622 disapproved.
Chamanlal Girdhat Ghanchi vs Dhayabhai Nathubhai Ghandi A.I.R. 1938 Bom.
422, M.A. M. Salamullah Khan vs
M. Noorullah Khan, A.I.R. 1939 Nag. 233, Keltaha vs
U. Pannawa A.I.R. 1940 Rang.
228, Nani Bela Saha vs Ram Gopal Saha.
A.I.R. 1945 Cal.
19 and Bhajahari Saha Banikya vs Behary Lal Basak, , approved.
(Per Hegde.
J. concurring): It is one thing to say that a right is not created.
it is an entirely different thing to.
say that the right created can 245 not be enforced without further steps.
An award does create rights in that property but those rights cannot be enforced until the award is made a decree of the Court.
For the purpose of section 17(1)(b) of the Registration Act, all that had to be seen is whether the award in question purport or operate to create or declare, assign, limit or extinguish whether in present or future any right, title or interest whether vested or contingent of the value of one hundred rupees and upwards to or in immovable property.
Since it does, it is compulsorily registerable.
[252 B D]
