The plaintiffs defendants 5 to 7 and the ancestor of defendants 8 to 13 leased the forest rights in theft villages to defendants 1 and 2 at an annual rental.
The deed mentioned the share of each lessee and the annual rent for the purpose of indicating what amount would be contributed by each .of them towards the rent jointly payable by them.
It was stated in the lease that the entire lease would be terminable on default of payment of rent for two.
consecutive years and the lessee shall pay interest at Re. 1 per cent in case of default, and that the lessors either separately or jointly shall realise the amount according to their choice.
Defendant 3 was a transferee of a portion of lessees ' interest from defendant 1.
The plaintiff lessors flied a suit in September 1954 claiming a decree of their share of rent for 1356 to 1360 Fasli and interest thereon.
The plea that suit was.
barred by limitation was not taken in the written statement.
Defendant 2 died and his heirs were substituted as defendants 2 and 2(a).
The trial court decreed the suit.
On appeal, the High Court held that (i) the defendants 1 to 3 were liable to pay the amount of the annual rent up to the extent of their respective shares; (ii) as the lease deed granted a lease of forest rights, the suit was governed by article 2(b)(1) of Schedule HI of the Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 and consequently the suit in respect of rent for 1356 and 1357 Faslis was barred by limitation; and (iii) in view of section 67 of the Bihar Tenancy Act the plaintiffs could claim at the rate of 61/2% per annum only.
In appeal.
this Court, HELD: The defendants 1 to 3 were jointly and severally liable to pay the plaintiff 's share of the rent for 1358, 1359 and 1360 Faslis and simple interest thereon at 61/4% per annum up.
to date.
(i) The deed mentioned the share of each lessee and the annual rent for the purpose of indicating what amount would be contributed by each of them towards the rent jointly payable by them.
The joint liability of the lessees was clearly indicated by the provision that the entire lease would be terminable on default on payment of rent for two consecutive years.
Having regard to section 43 of the defendants 1 and 2 were jointly and severally liable to pay the rent, and the liability of defendant 3 stood on the same footing.
[362 H 363B] (ii) Under section 184 of the Bihar Tenancy Act a suit instituted after the expiry of the period of limitation is liable to be dismissed though limitation is not pleaded.
The respondent was rightly allowed to raise the 361 point of limitation though the plea was not taken in the written statement.
[363 C] The lease deed granted a lease in respect of forest rights only.
It gave the lessees the right to cut and appropriate trees of certain types and the fruits and flowers of certain fruit bearing trees.
The right to open roads and to construct buildings were incidental to the right to enjoy a forest produce.
The suit was for recovery of rent in respect of forest produce and having regard to section 193 of the Bihar Tenancy Act was governed by article 2(b)(1) of the Schedule III therefore.
The special period of limitation applied though the claim for arrears of rent was claimed on a registered document.
[363 D F] The suit in respect of rent for 1356 and 1357 was barred by limitation.
Abdulullah vs Asraf Ali, 7 C.L.J. 152, Bande Ali Fakir vs Amud Sarkar, and Mackenzie vs Haji Syed Muhammad Ali Khan, I.L.R. , approved.
(iii) Interest was payable at the rate of 6 1/4% per annum only.
By section 193 of the Bihar Tenancy Act all the provisions of the Act applied to the suit.
Section 67(1) provides that arrears of rent shall bear simple interest at the rate of 61/2% per annum.
The section overrides the contractual stipulation that the interest be payable at 1% per annum.[363 F G]
