By a notification dated April 15, 1948 .the
Government of India extended the Assam Sales Tax Act, 1947 to the Administered Area in Shillong under section 4 of the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction.
Act, 1947.
The instrument of accession by which the administration of the Indian Princely State, of Mylliem in the Shillong Administered Area was transferred to the Central Government was accepted by the Governor General of India on August 17, 1948.
Under section 30 of the Assam Sales Tax Act, as amended by Act 6 of 1958, a dealer may appeal against an order of assessment or penalty, but the appeal shall not be entertained by the appellate authority unless he was satisfied that the amount of tax assessed or penalty levied, if not otherwise directed by him, had been paid.
The sales 'tax authorities assessed the appellant to sales tax and imposed penalties for Various periods.
Though some of the; assessment periods were before April 1, 1958 when the Amending Act 6 of 1958 came into force, all the orders of assessment and penalty were passed after April 1, 1958.
The appellant did not pay the tax assessed or the penalty but filed petitions along with its appeals praying that it may be allowed to furnish security in lieu of payment of cash on account of its financial condition.
The petitions were rejected and the appeals were consequently dismissed.
Writ petitions flied by the 'appellant in the High Court, to quash the orders of dismissal of the appeals, were also dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that; (1) After August 15, 1947 the State of Mylliem became an independent State and since the Central Government could exercise extra provincial jurisdiction under the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Act, only if the Central Government exercised ' such jurisdiction under a treaty, agreement, or by other lawful means, the Central Government in the present case, could not exercise such jurisdiction till August 17, 1948 when the instrument of accession was acCepted; and therefore, the notification dated April 15, 1948 was not validly issued and hence the Assam sales Tax Act was not operative in the Shillong Administered Area; (2) As the Amending Act of 1958 came into force on April 1, 1958 it could not be given retrospective effect so as to apply to assessment periods anterior to that date; and (3.) The authorities were not right in holding that there was no provision in the Act empowering them to accept security in lieu of cash payment.
262 As the material on the record was not sufficient to enable the Court to determine the question whether the Dominion of India was entitled to exercise extra provincial jurisdiction over the Shillong Administered Area on April 15, 1948 this Court under section 6 of the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Act, forwarded to the Union Government the questions: (a) whether the Dominion of India exercised such jurisdiction on April 15, 1948, and (b) whether the Dominion of India had such jurisdiction to extend the Assam Sales Tax Act to, the Area After receiving the answers, HELD: (1) The answers submitted by the Union Government showed that prior to April 15, 1948, the British Government had exercised jurisdiction over the Area under the Indian (Foreign Jurisdiction) Order in Council, 1902, as amended by the Order in Council of 1937 that on the withdrawal of British rule the jurisdiction continued to be exercised with the consent of the Siem (ruler) of Mylliem State by the Dominion of India, that the Jurisdiction was retained thereafter by the instrument of accession signed by the Siem, and that the exercise of the jurisdiction by the British Government and the Dominion of India several Acts were extended to the Shillong Administered Area.
Since under section 6(2) of the Extra Provincial Jurisdiction Act the answer of the Central Government is conclusive evidence of the matter therein the Union Government was entitled to exercise such jurisdiction over the Shillong Administered Area on April 15, 1948 and therefore, the Assam Sales Tax Act was properly extended to the Area.
[269 F H, 270 B C] (2) The assessments for periods anterior to April 1, 1958 were completed after the Amending Act came into force and the appeals were also filed thereafter.
Therefore the Amending Act of 1958 was applicable to the appeals before the appellate authority and was not given retrospective effect.
[271 C D] (3) The expression 'otherwise directed ' only means that the appellate authority can ask the assessee to deposit a portion of the amount and not the whole but the section gives no power to the appellate authority to permit the assessed to furnish security in lieu of the cash amount of tax.
[271 D E]
