The Income tax Officer, Companies Circle, Bombay treating the petitioner as an agent of a non resident issued a notice of demand under section 156 read with section 210 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1961.
By this notice the petitioner was called upon to pay advance tax as agent of the foreign principal during the financial year 1964 65.
The petitioner filed a petition under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the demand.
The contentions.
in support of the petition were: (i) that under sections 209 and 210 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1961 no order for payment of advance tax can be made against an agent of a non resident; (ii) that a provision which authorises collection of advance tax from an agent of a non resident infringes the equality clause of the Constitution.
In support of the first contention it was urged that since under section 209(1) the amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year is to be computed on his total income of the latest previous year in respect of which he has been assessed by way of regular 'assessment, an agent cannot be directed to pay advance tax the liability whereof depends upon the determination of total income of the, principal.
HELD: (i) Sections 207 and 208 which impose liability to pay advance tax in a financial year, section 210 which authorises the Income tax Officer to make a demand for payment of advance tax from a person who is previously assessed, and section 212(3) which imposes the duty to make an estimate of the total income likely to be received or to accrue or arise.
and to pay advance tax if the total estimated income exceeds the maximum amount not charge.able to tax in his case by Rs. 2,500/apply to every person whether he is assessed ' in respect of his own income or as a representative assessed and it is not possible to imply in the application of these: provisions 'an unexpressed limitation on the express words of the statute in favour of an agent of a non resident principal.
[358 C D] It is expressly enacted by section 161 that as regards income in respect of which a person is a representative assessee, he shall be subject to the same duties, 'responsibilities.
and liabilities as if the income.
were income received by or accruing to or in favour of him beneficially.
It is clearly implicit therein that a representative assessee is not exempt from liability to pay advance tax.
[357 C] of the liability to pay advance tax it is not predicated that the previous year should have come to.
an end before the liability can anse.
The previous year of an assessee may in some cases end after the commencement but before the end of a financial year in which advance tax is payable: it may in other cases commence and end with the financial year.
But the liability to pay advance tax is not in any manner 354 affected because the previous year ends before or with the financial year.
There is nothing in the Act under which the liability to pay advance tax of a representative assessee depends upon determination of the total for the previous year.
[357 C G] Accordingly, it could not be held that the petitioner was not liable to pay advance tax on behalf of his non resident principal.
[358 E F] (ii) The plea that the provisions imposing liability to pay advance tax upon an agent of a non resident infringe the equality clause of the Constitution could not be accepted.
The only ground urged, that an assessee may escape liability to pay advance tax when his previous year coincides with the financial year, was without substance.
[359 B C]
