The petitioner was a company manufacturing Indian made foreign liquor in Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.
It had depots for sale of its products at Patna and Ranchi in the State of Bihar.
Before October 13, 1967 it .imported foreign liquor into the State of Bihar from Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh for purposes of sale at its Patna and Ranchi depots on payment of duty at the then current rate.
Duty on liquor from Himachal Pradesh was paid upon or before importation by making deposits in the State Bank of India at Patna and Ranchi.
Duty on liquor from Uttar Pradesh was paid on importation by making deposits with the government of that State.
By notification dated October 13, 1967 duty on foreign liquor was enhanced with.
effect from November 1, 1967.
The Superintendent of Excise, Patna directed the company to pay the, difference in duty on the opening balance of Indian made foreign liquor in its stock on November 1, 1967.
The company challenged the demand in a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
Apart from sections 27 and 28 of the Act the respondent State relied on the proviso to r. 147 of the Rules made under section 90 of the Act.
HELD i (i) The foreign liquor was imported before November 1, 1967 on payment of duty at the current rate in the manner indicated in section 28(a)(i).
Duty on imported foreign liquor was enhanced with effect from November 1, 1967.
Sections 27 and 28 did not authorize the levy of the enhanced duty on the liquor imported before November 1, 1967 but lying with the importer on that date.
(ii) A close scrutiny of r. 147 reveals that the main part and the proviso deal with the same subject matter.
The expression "an excisable article" in the proviso means foreign liquor imported under .bond and other articles on which duty is payable.
before removal from the excise warehouse or distillery where they are kept.
It is for this reason that under the proviso the difference of duty is realised from or credited to the licensee to whom the article has been issued from the excise warehouse or distillery on payment of duty prior to such revision.
The proviso does not apply to all imported foreign liquor.
It applies only to foreign liquor imported under bond, that is to say, foreign liquor on which duty has been levied under section 28(a)(ii) by payment upon issue, for sale from an excise warehouse.
It does not apply to foreign liquor not imported under bond upon which duty has been levied under section 28(a)(i).
The petitioner 's foreign liquor was not imported under bond.
The petitioner was therefore not liable to pay under the proviso 3 Sup.
C.I./69 12 458 to r. 147 the difference of duty in respect of its stock of foreign liquor on November 1, 1967.
The demand for payment of the difference of duty in respect of this stock was not authorized by the Act or the proviso to r. 147.
[460 C F]
