The accused persons were charged with having entered into a conspiracy at Bombay and other places in the beginning of October 1959 or there about for the purposes of smuggling foreign goods into India and having, in pursuance of that conspiracy, smuggled several items of foreign goods in the years 1959 and 1960.
In that connection an enquiry was held by the Customs authorities.
In the course of the enquiry some of the goods said to have been smuggled were seized.
After the close of the enquiry those.
goods were ordered to be confiscated.
In addition penalty was imposed on some of the accused.
Accused No. 1 and 2 were given by the Collector benefit of doubt on the ground that there was no conclusive evidence against them.
Thereafter the Assistant Collector of Customs 'after obtaining the required sanction of the Government filed a complaint against five persons including Accused 1 and 2 under section 120 B I.P.C. read with section 167 of the as well as under section '5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947.
Before the commencement of the enquiry the 1st accused filed an application before the Magistrate raising therein various questions of law namely (i) whether the prosecution of Accused 1 and 2 was barred by article 20(2) of the Constitution by reason of the decision of the Collector of Customs (ii) whether the finding of the Collector of Customs operated as an issue estoppel in the criminal case against Accused 1 and 2, (iii) whether the prosecution amounted to 'an abuse of the process of the Court in view of the inordinate, delay in launching the same, and (iv) whether section 273(4) Cr.
P.C. was applicable to the facts of the case, and (v) whether the documents mentioned in the petition of Accused No. 1 to the Magistrate could be summoned under section 94 Cr.
The Magistrate dismissed the application of Accused No. 1.
In revision the High Court, while agreeing with the Magistrate on other issues, did not agree with him that there was no need at the stage to summon the statements of the witness recorded by the customs authorities in the enquiry under the .
It directed the Magistrate to 'summon those statements and to see that the prosecution made available copies of these statements to the accused before the commencement of the ennquiry in the case.
Against the orders of the High Court the customs authorities as well as the accused appealed to this Court.
HELD: (i) In order to get the benefit of section 403 Criminal Procedure Code or article 20(2) it is necessary for an 'accused person to establish 439 that he had been tried by a "court of competent jurisdiction" for an offence and he is convicted or acquitted of that offence and the said acquittal is in force.
If that much is established.
it can be contended that he is not liable to be tried again for any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against hun might have been made under section 236 or for which he might have been convicted ' under section 237.
It has been repeatedly held by this Court that adjudication before a Collector of Customs is not a "prosecution" nor the Collector of Customs a "Court".
Therefore in the present case the plea of the accused based on article 20(2) could not be accepted.
[442 E G] .
Maqbool Hussain vs State o/Bombay; , and Thomas Dana vs State o/Punjab, , applied.
(ii) Before the accused can call into aid the rule of issue estoppel he must establish that in a previous lawful trial before a competent court he has secured a verdict of acquittal which verdict is binding on his prosecutor.
In the instant case since the proceeding before the ' Collector was not a criminal trial it follows that the decision of the Collector did not amount to a verdict of acquittal in favour of accused Nos. 1 and 2.[444 A B] Sambasivan vs Public Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya, at p. 479, Pritam Singh vs State of Punjab, Aj.I.R. and N.R. Ghose @ Nikhil Ranjan Ghose vs State of west Bengal; , , applied.
(iii) The question of delay in filing the complaint may be a circumstance to be taken into consideration in arriving at the final verdict.
But by itself it affords no ground for dismissing the complaint.
[444 D] (iv) Section 173 Criminal Procedure is attracted only in a case in, vestigated by a police officer under Ch.
XIV of the Code followed by a final report.
Section 173(4) was incorporated into the Code by Central Act 25 of 1955 because of the changes effected in the mode of trials in cases instituted on police reports.
Under the new procedure prescribed in section 251(A) of the Code, but for the facility provided to him under section 173(4) an accuse person would have been greatly handicapped in his defence.
But in a .case instituted on complaint like the present, and governed by sections 252 to 259 of the Code no such difficulty.
arises and the position is as it was before the amendment of the Code.
in 1955.
[444 H; 445 G] The High Court was wrong in holding that the Legislature did not make available the benefit of section 173(4) Criminal Procedure Code in cases instituted otherwise than on police reports by oversight.
It is not proper to assume except on very good grounds that there is any lacuna in any statute or that the legislature has not done its duty properly.[445 H] (v) Section 94 (1) does not empower a Magistrate to direct the prosecution to give copies of any documents to an accused person.
It was impermissible for the High Court to read into section 94 Criminal ProcedUre COde the requirements of section 173(4) of the, Code.
The High Court was wrong in indirectly applying to cases instituted on private complaints the requirements of section 173(4).
[446 E F] Further the High Court was not justified in interfering with the discretion of the learned Magistrate.
Whether a particular document should be summoned or not is essentially in the discretion of the trial court.
In the present case the reasons given by 'the Magistrate.:for his 440 order were good reasons.
Unnecessary interference with the orders of the ,trial court results in waste of public money and time as had happened in the present case.
[447 D]
