To ensure against the grave nuisance which may be caused to the residents of a locality if carcasses of dead animals are allowed to remain on the premises within the city, 'a duty is imposed by sections 367, 372 and 385 of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888, as amended by Act 14 of 1961, upon the owner of the animal or the person having charge of the animal or the occupier of premises in which the animal .dies, to remove the carcass at his own expense with the permission of the Commissioner of the City of Bombay.
or, to have.
it removed through the agency of the Corporation, for which he was required to pay a fee of Rs. 20.
It was further enacted that after it was removed it shall be deposited in 'a receptacle, depot or other place set apart for the purpose, either by the owner or the Corporation.
Thereupon, the owner lost his property in the carcass and ' it became the property of the Corporation.
Under the Act it was the duty of the Corporation to arrange for its disposal causing the least practicable nuisance.
The second respondent was the owner of a stable of filch cattle in Bombay.
He was selling the carcasses of animals dying in his stable for a price.
The first respondent was a purchaser of carcasses and carried on the business of skinning the dead animals and utilising the products for industrial uses.
The Corporation prohibited the first respondent from removing carcasses and resolved to grant the contract for the disposal of carcasses deposited under the provisions of the Act to Harijan Workmen 's Cooperative Labour Society.
The respondents challenged the provisions and the High Court declared them ultra vires.
In appeal to this Court, on the questions: (1) Whether the obligation not to sell the carcass but to dispose it of as per the provisions of the Act infringe the fundamental rights of the respondents under article 19(1)(f); (2) Whether there was infringement of the fundamental right because of the obligation on the second respondent to incur expenditure for its removal; (3) Whether fee of Rs. 20 was excessive; (4) Whether the second respondent 's loss of ownership and property in the carcass on depositing it as per the provisions of the Act violated the.
respondents ' fundamental right under article 31; and (5) Whether the granting of the contract to the Harijan Society destroyed the business of the first respondent and infringed its fundamental right to carry on business.
HELD: (1) The second respondent had a right of ownership in the carcasses of his animals.
But he was only entitled to constitutional protection against unreasonable restriction on his right to sell the carcasses.
393 Reasonableness of restrictions imposed by a law has to be.
adjudged in the light of the nature of the right, danger or injury which may be inherent in the unbridled exercise of the right and the necessity of protection against danger which may result to the public by the exercise of the right.
In each case the test is whether the restriction is commensurate with the need for protection of public interest against the exercise of the right.
[400 C; 402] A mere imposition of an injunction to remove a carcass only abates the nuisance arising from a dead animal remaining on the premises: it does not eliminate the graver hazard caused by the adulteration of food of the people from its products.
Meat and fat from carcasses are used by unscrupulous persons for adulterating the food of the community.
Even b.y imposing stringent supervision upon persons carrying on the business of skinning carcasses,, protection of the community against food adulteration cannot be effectively secured, because, a purchaser who was not subject to the Corporation control could remove it beyond the Corporation limits and bring back contaminated meat and fat.
Therefore, the Legislature has devised a scheme by which reasonable restrictions are placed upon a citizen 's right to dispose of the carcass.
Under the Act, the Corporation has to set apart a place for depositing the carcass and it is implicit in the scheme of the Act that the Corporation shall provide a suitable place for skinning it.
The Corporation has control over the contractors entrusted with the disposal of carcasses and has supervision over the disposal of the products.
A law which compels the removal of a carcass to an appointed place and its disposal under the supervision of the Corporation which has the duty to take steps for maintaining public health, cannot be regarded as arbitrary or excessive.
The Corporation, has to arrange for effectively disposing of the carcass and it would be necessary for effectuating that purpose to provide that the tatle of the owner in the carcass should be extinguished.
Such a provision is not beyond ' the legitimate purpose for which it was intended, and the fact that the owner is unable to sell for a price the carcass does not render a provision, which is essentially conceived in the interest of the general public,unreasonable.[401 E H;402 B D; 403 E; 404 D] Restriction upon the right of the owner to sell the carcass does not directly infringe the fundamental right of the purchaser.
who, but for the restriction may have been able to purchase it.
Assuming however, that the imposition by law of the restriction upon the owner of the carcass involves also a restriction upon the right of the first respondent having regard to the character of t_he legislation and its avowed object,the restriction upon the first respondents right to carry on his occupation or business is a reasonable one within the meaning of Art 19(5) and (6).
[409 E G] .
Chintaman Rao vs State of M.P. [5950] S.C.R. 759 and State Row; , , followed.
(2) If the carcass is likely to be deleterious to public health and its removal from the place where it is lying being in the interests of the public health, imposition of an obligation upon the owner to remove the carcass at his own expense or to Pay for its removal cannot be regarded as unreasonable, even if the charge which falls upon the owner is in addition to the loss which he suffers by reason of the extinction of his tetle in the carcass.
[404 B D] (3) Whether the fee of Rs. 20 levied on the owner of a carcass for its removal was in excess of the expenditure which the Corporation may go.
Cll69 s 394 have to incur.
was not investigated into by the High Court.
and therefore the question could not, be raised for the first time in this Court.
[404 A B] (4) (a) In the present case, the restrictions imposed by the impugned law upon the right of the owner satisfy the test of reasonableness under article 19(5) and (6).
Therefore, though there is a deprivation of property, it is by a valid law and hence there is no violation of article 31(1).
[406 C D] Smt.
Sitabati Debi vs Stale of West Bengal, , followed.
Kavalappara Kottarathil Kochuni vs State of Madras, referred to.
(b) A law which provides for extinction of the ownership and creation of an interest in the Corporation for .the purpose of disposal of the carcass is not a law for acquisition 'of property for a public purpose: its primary purpose is destruction of a carcass in the public interest, and not its utilisation for a public purpose.
The case does not, therefore, fall within the terms of article 31(2).
[406 F G] (c) In any case the statute is squarely protected by article 31 (5) (b) (ii) and on that account the owner is not entitled to compensation for loss of his property.
Where the State acquires property and seeks to utilize it for promotion of public health or prevention of danger to life or property the State is liable to pay compensation.
But a law which directive and immediately seeks to promote public health or to prevent danger to life or property falls within the exemption of cl.
(5)(b)(ii) even if thereby, the owner 's interest in the property is extinguished and is vested in the State for purposes of destruction.
[406 G H; 407 A B] (d) Article 31(5)(b)(ii) is not confined to 'temporary occupation of property.
In the case of acquisition of immovable property, to have the protection of the clause the occupation of the property must be temporary.
But in the case of movable property, even if its possession is taken with a view to destroying it, if such destruction is in the interests of general public, that is.
for the prevention of danger to life or property, it need not be temporary.
Even such taking of movable property will be protected by cl.
(5) (b) (ii) and the guarantee of article 31(2) would not be attracted.
[408 E G] Deputy Commissioner and Collector, Kamrup vs Durganath Sarma, ; , explained.
The first respondent cannot claim the protection of article 31(2), because, until it purchases the carcasses from the owner it has no right in the property, and it cannot set up a grievance for loss of property which it does not own.
[409 H] (5) Whether by virtue of the contracts given by the Corporation to other persons who are claimed to be rivals in business of the first respondent unreasonable restrictions may be deemed to be placed upon the first respondent 's fundamental right is a matter on which no argument Was advanced before the High Court.
In any event, it cannot affect the validity of the statute or its provisions.
[410 B D]
