The appellant 's husband was one of the applicants for a permanent stage carriage permit on a route under the jurisdiction of the North Bihar Regional Transport Authority.
On her husband 's death during the pendency of the aforesaid application, the appellant came into possession of all his transport vehicles.
The Regional Transport Authority allowed the appellant to prosecute the application and directed the grant of the permit to her.
The appeal filed by the unsuccessful applicants against this order was allowed by the State Transport Authority but the Transport Minister, in revision under section 64A of the , decided in favour of the appellant.
Against the orders of the Transport Minister writ petitions were filed in the High Court and were allowed.
The ,appellant came to this Court.
The question for consideration was whether on the death of an applicant for a stage carriage permit in respect of his transport vehicles the Regional Authority has power to a11ow the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles, to prosecute the application filled by the deceased applicant.
HELD: The High Court was in error in setting aside the order of the Transport Minister., A person in possession of a transport vehicle is not entitled to a permit as a matter of right.
His only right is to make an application under section 45 of the and to a consideration of the application under the provisions of the Act.
If he dies after obtaining the permit, the Regional Transport Authority has power under section 61(2) to transfer the permit to the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles covered by the permit.
In the case of death of the applicant before the final disposal of his application for the grant of a permit in respect of his vehicles the Regional Transport Authority has power to substitute the person succeeding to the possession of the of the. deceased applicant.
As the relief sought for in the application is dependent upon and related to the possession of the vehicles, the application is capable of being revived at the instance of the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles.
[509 G 510 C] Verappa Pillai.v.
Raman.
& Raman Ltd., ; , 591, 595.
referred to.
Under section 57 an application for a stage carriage permit or a public carrier permit must be made within the appointed time and published in the prescribed manner.
The representations relating thereto must also be made at the appointed time.
In the event of the death of the applicant after the expiry of the time appointed for making the application, the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles cannot, having regard to the lapse of dine, make another application in his own right.
508 The successor cannot obtain the permit unless he is allowed to prosecute the application filed by his predecessor and there is no reason why he cannot be permitted to do so.
Section 57 does not deal with the situation arising on the death of an applicant nor has it prescribed any time for the making of an application for substitution of the successor or for the filing of objections against the grant of the permit to him.
In the absence of any statute or statutory rule the Regional Transport Authority may devise any procedure for dealing with the situation.
The Regional Transport Authority has complete discretion in the matter of allowing or refusing substitution.
It is not bound to embark on a prolonged investigation into disputed questions of possession.
Nor is it bound to allow substitution if such order will delay the proceedings unreasonably or will otherwise be detrimental to the interests of the public generally.
[510 C 511 A] The same principle would apply to applications under sections 57(1), 58(8) and 58, as well as to appeals under section 64, and revisions under section 64A. [511 B] Ratanlal vs State Transport Authority, A.I.R. 1957 All 471, disapproved Meenakshi vs Mysore S.T.A. Tribunal, A.I.R. 1963 Mys. 279, Hanuman Transport Co. vs Meenakshi, C.A. No. 794/63 dt.
20 12 63, Maruthavanan vs Balasubramaniam A.I.R. 1963 Mad. 292, Kuppu swarmi vs Ramchandran, A.I.R. 1964 Mad. 356, and Director of Public 'Works vs Ho Po Sang & Ors., [1961] A.C. 901, referred to.
