The appellant had obtained a decree for possession of certain lands in a pre emption suit which he had brought against the respondents.
The respondents ' appeal to the District Court was dismissed.
The District Court directed the appellant to deposit purchase money by a certain date and directed the respondents on the deposit to deliver possession of the property.
There was also a direction in the decree that in case the amount was not paid on the due date the suit shall stand dismissed with costs.
The respondents preferred a second appeal to the High Court and pending disposal of the appeal the respondents prayed for stay of the execution decree.
Before the date fixed for depositing the purchase money the High Court stayed the execution of the decree of the lower appellate court.
The appellant deposited the purchase price 3 days after the date fixed stating that he could not deposit in time as he fell ill.
Thereafter the High Court dismissed the second appeal, and the appellant, obtained possession of the properties.
The respondents applied to the Executing Court for restitution of properties on the ground that the appellant had defaulted in depositing, the purchase money by the date fixed by the lower appellate court 's decree.
The appellant contended that the stay order made by the High Court in the second appeal prevented him from acting in accordance with the terms of the lower appellate court 's decree, and in any case the High Court had dismissed the second appeal and the decree holder would get by necessary implication a fresh starting point for depositing the purchase amount from the Sate of the High Court 's decree.
The Executing Court rejected the claim of the respondents for restitution.
This decision was affirmed, on appeal by the District Court.
But the High Court in appeal, took the ' view that there was default on the part of the appellant in depositing the amount and therefore the appellant 's suit stood dismissed automatically and the appellant was not therefore entitled to possession in enforcement of the pre emption decree.
HELD: The appeal must be allowed.
A decree in terms of 0.20 r. 14, Civil Procedure Code imposes obligations on both sides and they are so conditioned that performance by one is conditional on performance by the other.
To put it differently, the obligations are.
reciprocal and are inter linked, so that they cannot be separated.
If the defendants by obtaining the stay order from the High Court relieve themselves of the obligation to deliver possession of the properties the plaintiff decree holder must also be deemed thereby to be relieved of the necessity of depositing the money so long as the stay order continue.
[517 D, E] The effect of the order of the High Court dismissing the second appeal was to give by necessary implication a fresh starting point 515 depositing the amount from the date of the High Court 's decree and the appellant could have deposited the amount immediately after the High Court 's decree.
But the appellant had deposited the amount before the date of the High Court 's decree and there was no default on the part of the appellant in fulfilling the terms of the pre emption decree.
[517 F G] Satwaji, Balajiray Deshamukh vs Sakharlal Atmaramshet, I.L.R. and Sita vs Ramanth I.L.R. 28 Patna 371, approved.
