In Bhawani Cotton Mills vs Stale of Punjab 119671 3 S C R 577 this Court struck down section 5(1) second proviso and sections 5(2)(a)(vi) of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 as contravening section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1955.
because, neither the Punjab Act nor the rules made thereunder indicated, as required by the Central Act the stage at which tax was to be levied.
After the formation of the new States of Punjab and Haryana, the Act was amended by the legislatures of the two States by Act 7 of 1967 and 14 of 1967 respectively.
The amen,dments fixed it at the stage of sale or purchase of respectively, goods by the last dealer liable to pay tax.
In a writ petition before this Court the petitioners contended that (i) the position had not altered at all even after the amendments and the liability to taxation at different stages still remained and therefore the Act con.tinned to be in conflict with the Central Sales Tax Act; (ii) the legislatures of the two States were not competent to amend retrospectively an act passed by the composite State; (iii) by leaving it free to the executive to impose the tax within the maximum fixed there was excessive delegation of legislative functions; (iv) there was discrimination in the new section 11AA and the opportunity given to a dealer to ask for reassessment or to submit to the old assessment and (v) the Act discriminated between imported goods and local goods and therefore contravened the equality clause and article 30.
of the Constitution.
HELD: Dismissing, the petition.
(1) The Act by specifying the stage its the last purchase or sale a dealer liable It) pay the tax makes the stage quite clear.
The matter now in the hands of the dealer and he has to find out for himself whether he is liable to pay the tax or not.
A dealer knows what he has done with his goods or is going to do with them.
By providing that he need not include in his turnover any transaction except when he is the last dealer, the position is now made clear.
[553 F. G] (2) The competency of the Icgislatures of Punjab and Haryana to amend an Act passed the composite State cannot be questioned.
After reorganisation the Act applied as an independent Act to each of the areas and is subject to the legislative competence of the legislature in that area.
[556 B] (3) There is no abdication of legislative funtions in favour of the administrative authoritv as the Central Act itself gives power to the legislature to choose a rate of tax at not more than 3% of the taxable turnover.
The tax levied is well within that limit and therefore the legislature has chosen the maximum and has left it free to the 545 authorities to impose the tax within that maximum regard being had to the requirements of revenue and the expenditure necessary for the State.
[555 G] (4) The opportunity given to a dealer in section 11AA to ask for reassessment or to submit to the old assessment does not result in discrimination.
This is open to every dealer and the intention is to give an opportunity to the dealer himself leaving it to his own will whether to ask for a refund or not.
[555 E F] (5) When a taxing State is not imposing rates of tax on imported goods different from rates of tax on goods manufactured or produced.
Article 304 has no application.
So long as the rate is the same article 304 is satisfied.
In the instant case the tax is at the same rate and therefore tax can,not be said to be higher in the case of imported goods.
When the rate is applied the resulting tax may be somewhat higher but that does not contravene the equality contemplated by article 304.
[557 B. C] State of Madras vs
N.K. Natraja, Mudaliar, [1969] 1 S.C.R. referred to
