The appellants were tobacco merchants in Baroda in Gujarat State and were holding Central Excise licence in Forms L 2 and L 5 for the purpose of storing, selling and processing duty paid and non duty paid tobacco.
On December 23, 1958 while the process of mixing some tobacco was going on in a godown where duty paid tobacco was.
kept, the Superintendent of Central Excise., Preventive Headquarters, Baroda and his party raided the premises of the appellants and seized a mixture of tobacco weighing 1,64,834.50 lbs.
tobacco This mixture included 60,770 lbs.
of tobacco on which duty had not been paid.
After the 'appellants were issued a show cause notice why action should not be taken against them under rule 40 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, and after they had filed their reply, the Collector, Central Excise, by his order dated April 13, 1959 held the appellants guilty of contravening rule 40 levied on them a penalty of Rs. 2,000 as well as the duty payable under the law, and also ordered the confiscation of the entire quantity of the tobacco seized.
As he gave the appellants the option of redeeming the same on payment of a fine of Rs. 1 lakh, they paid the fine under protest and secured release of the tobacco.
The appellant 's appeal as well as revision against the Collector 's order under the provisions of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944, were both dismissed.
The appellants then filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the legality of the Collector 's order but this was dismissed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court the only challenge was to the Collector 's order of confiscation.
It was contended, relying on the decision in Messrs. Valimahomed Gulamhusain Sonavala & Co. vs
C.T.A. Pillai, (1960) 42, B.L.R., p. 634, that the Collector could not have confiscated the tobacco mixture as it consisted of both duty paid tobacco as well as tobacco on which duty had not been paid, the alternative contention was that the Collector could not in any extent have.
confiscated more than 60,770 lbs.
of mixture which could be said to represent tobacco on which duty had not been paid.
HELD: Rule 40 permits the Central Excise.
authorities to confiscate only those goods on which duty had not been paid.
It does not permit them either specifically or by necessary implication to confiscate other goods.
Therefore it was not permissible for the Collector to confiscate the entire tobacco mixture.
At the same time no person can be permitted to benefit by his wrongful act.
No rule of law should be so interpreted as to permit or encourage its circumvention.
If by the wrongful act of a party he renders it impossible for the authorities to confiscate under 581 rule 40 the non duty paid goods, it is open to those authorities to confiscate from out of the goods seized, goods of the 'value reasonably representing the value of the non duty paid goods mixed in the goods seized.
Applying that rule to the facts of the present case it follows that although the appellants were guilty under Rule 40 of an unlawful act in mixing duty paid tobacco with non duty paid tobacco, the Collector could have confiscated out of the tobacco seized so much of it as can be held to reasonably represent the value of the tobacco on which the duty had not been paid.
[586 G 581 B] As the parties were agreed that the value of the tobacco used in the mixture for which no duty had been paid could be fixed at Rs. 35,000,.
the fine to be levied on the appellant in lieu of the confiscation that could have been ordered had to.
be fixed at Rs. 35,000.
The Collector therefore had to refund to the appellant a sum of Rs. 65,000.
Institutes of Justinian, p. 104; Williams on Personal Property (18th edition) p. 50; Spence and Ant.
vs The Union Marine Insurance Co. Ltd., Law Reports (Common Pleas) 3, 1867 68 and Smurthwaite and Ors.
vs Hannay and Ors.
, [1894] A.C.p. 494; referred to.
