The appellant along with others was charged with various offences relating to transport of gold.
Their confessional statements recorded by customs authorities under sections 107 and 108 were sought to be given in evidence at the trial.
On the question, whether the customs authorities should be deemed to be police officers, and therefore, the statements were inadmissible by reason of section 25 of the Evidence Act, HELD: Under , the customs authorities have been invested with many powers of a police officer in matters relating to arrest, investigation and search, which the customs officers did not have under the repealed Act namely, the .
For example, under section 104(3) after arrest, the customs officer has the power of releasing the arrested person on bail and for that purpose has the same powers as an officer in charge of a police station.
Under section 107 a customs officer empowered by the Collector of Customs can require any person to produce any document, which power is similar to those exercisable by 'a police officer under sections 160 and 161, Cr.
Under section 105, if the Assistant Collector of Customs has reason to believe that any goods liable to confiscation are secreted in any place he may authorise any customs officers or may himself search for the goods.
But, customs officers have not been invested with all the powers which an officer in charge of a police station can exercise under Chapter XV, Cr.
The powers conferred do not include the power of submitting a charge sheet under section 173, Cr.
P.C., either expressly or by necessary implication.
Therefore, in order to enable a magistrate to take cognizance of an offence under the , (the offences under the Act are non cognizable), the customs officer will have to file a complaint before the magistrate under section 190(a), Cr. P.C., and cannot like a police officer submit a report under section 190(b).
Hence even though the customs officers have been invested with many of the powers which an officer in charge of a police station exercises when investigating a cognizable offence he does not thereby become a police officer within the meaning of section 25 of the Evidence Act and so the confessional statements made by accused persons to customs officials would be admissible in evidence against them.
[617 C D; 618 B C. F G; 621 C D; 622 C D] Romesh Chandra Mehta vs State of West Bengal.
and Dad.
v Adarji Fatakia vs
K.K. Ganguly, Astt.
Collector of Customs & Anr.
A. No. 46 of 1968 dated October 18, 1968, followed.
State of Punjab vs Barkat Ram, ; , Raja Ram faiswal vs State of Bihar; , Badku Joti Savant vs State of Mysore, ; and P. Shankar Lal & Ors.
vs Asstt.
Collector of Customs, Madras, Cr.
52 & 104/65 dated 12 12 1967.
referred to.
