On a complaint filed by 'the Registrar of Companies, and after an investigation by the Police ordered by the Chief Presidency Magistrate, Calcutta, proceedings were instituted against the appellants for conspiring to commit criminal breach of trust in respect of a company 's funds.
After a large number of witnesses were examined and several documents were tendered in evidence, the Magistrate committed the accused to stand trial for offences under section 120B read with Sections 409, 477A I.P.C. before the Court of Sessions.
A revision application against the order of committal was rejected in limine by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that there was no evidence on which the order of commitment could be made and that under section 209 (1) Cr.
P.C., the charge may be framed only if in the view of the committing Magistrate the evidence on record is sufficient to justify conviction of the accused.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal: On the facts, it could not by said that there was no evidence on which a charge could be framed against the appellants or that the evidence was so totally unworthy of credit that are order recording the conviction against the accused could not be made.
Although in terms section 209 'applies to cases which are instituted otherwise than on a .police report, the principle underlying that section also applies to cases which are instituted on a police report.
A Magistrate holding an inquiry has to see whether there is sufficient evidence for commitment, and not whether there is sufficient evidence for conviction.
If there is no prima facie evidence or the evidence is totally unworthy of credit, it is his duty to discharge the accused: if there is some evidence on which a conviction may reasonably be based, he must commit the ' case.
[525 A C] Normally the High Court in a revision application flied against the order of commitment under section 207A will not enter upon a reappraisal of the evidence on which the order of commitment is made.
The High Court would be justified in exercising its revisional jurisdiction where a substantial question of law arises on which the correctness of the order of commitment may be effectively challenged.
But in other cases the trial before the Court of Session should be allowed to run its course.
[522 G 523 B]
