The respondent, a building contractor, entered into a contract with the Government of India for the construction of certain flats.
On disputes arising, they were referred to an arbitrator.
the arbitrator made an award and directed certain sums to be paid by the Union of India to tile respondent.
Rupees twenty two thousand two hundred and ninety two, annas five were to be paid as the amount due to the respondent 'as calculated by the Union of India.
Rupees six thousand were to be paid as the amount of security deposit made by the respondent with the Union of India.
The third item was mentioned as Rupees seventy nine thousand three hundred and thirty nine.
total amount payable was mentioned as Rupees one lakh seven thousand six hundred and thirty one, annas five.
The respondent made an application for modifying the award and for remitting it to the arbitrator for reconsideration.
The Second Civil Judge, Kanpur dismissed the objections and pronounced judgment according to the award.
The appellant filed an appeal against the order under section 39 of the .
The High Court allowed ' the appeal and set aside the award on the ground that it was vague and uncertain.
According to the High Court it was not clear why the arbitrator awarded the first item of Rs. 22,292/5/ and the third item of Rs. 79,339/ separately.
Since the arbitrator found only the fir.st item of Rs. 22,922/5/to be due to the respondent, the High Court did not find it clear whether he intended also to award the 3rd item of Rs. 79,339/ to the respondent.
As the dispute related to 29 items of claims and counter claims the arbitrator, according to High Court, should have made an award in respect of all the items separately or in combination or should have made a lump sum award in respect of nil the items.
Against the order of the High Court the Union of India appealed to this Court with certificate.
HELD: The reasoning of the.
High Court could not be accepted.
(i) The award on the face of it professed to be of and concerning all matters submitted for arbitration.
In respect of all such matters the arbitrator awarded a sum of Rs. 1,07,631/6/ to the respondent.
This amount was made of three sums separately mentioned in the award.
On the record there was nothing to show that the award was not intelligible to the parties.
[590 G] The court leans towards the construction that the award is certain.
the evidence item No. 1 represented the sum admitted the sum due to respondent and item No. 3 represented the additional sum found by the arbitrator to be due to him.
[590 H] (ii) The arbitrator is not bound to give an award on each point.
He can give his award on the whole case.
An 'arbitrator may award one sum generally in respect of all money claims submitted to him.
unless the submission requires him to award separately on some one or more of them.
589 The arbitrator can lawfully make an award of a sum admitted to be due and a lump sum in respect of the remaining claim.
As the final award in favour of the respondent professed to be made of and concerning all the matters referred to him, it must be presumed that in making it the arbitrator had taken into consideration 'all the claims and counter claims.
The award must be held to be a final and certain determination of all the disputes referred.
[591 C, D] (iii) The mention of the second item of Rupees six thousand in the award was a mistake.
This part of the award being clearly separable must be struck out.
The award of the sum of Rupees six thousand was to the advantage of the respondent and the court could not set aside an award at the instance of a party who had not suffered any injury.
[591 F] Mays and Anr.
vs Cannel 24 Law Journal Q.B. 41, 45; Ghulam Khan vs Mohammad Hassan I.L.R. , 186 (P.C.); Whiteworth vs Hulse (1866) L.R. 1 exhibit 251; Harrison vs Creswick ; , Jewell vs Christie and Narsingh Narain Singh vs Ajodhya Prasad Singh, , 113, referred to.
