For the first year of production by a unit of the appellant Corporation (a Central Government Undertaking), it granted ad hoc bonus for good performance to the unit 's employees.
For the next year, the appellant granted bonus as recommended by the Bonus.
Commission and also made ex gratia payment for good performance.
The appellant decided to pay bonus for the third year, strictly in accordance with the Payment of Bonus Ordinance and the Act, which had come into force then.
The Central Minister announced in the Lok Sabha that with the specific approval of the Central Cabinet ex gratia payments had been allowed in the past by way of bonus to the employees and this was communicated by the Government of India by a letter.
In the fourth year the production did not exceed the target, and the appellant offered to pay only the statutory bonus under the Bonus Ordinance and Act 'and stated that a production scheme had been introduced, that with the introduction of the production bonus scheme all ex gratia payments were eliminated and that this scheme was approved by the Government of India.
The workmen demanded that the bonus should be paid for the third and fourth years at the same rate as it had been paid in previous years and the appellant was bound to act according to the decision of the Central Cabinet and communicated by the letter.
The workmen also stated that if their demands were not met within 15 days, they would be forced to adopt agitation approaches.
Conciliation proceedings started.
The appellant offered the workmen the option of either accepting the Cabinet decision or the production Bonus Scheme as formulated by the management.
The workmen desired that the Cabinet 's directions be made applicable to them, declined the offer to opt for the production bonus, and prepared a draft of a letter which was intended to be sent by the workmen to the appellant stating that the offer was also made.
The workmen went on strike and the reference to adjudication was made.
The Tribunal accepted the claim of the workmen, and held that the strike was justified.
HELD: (i) The appellant failed to establish that production bonus scheme was introduced with the consent and approval of the Central Government and that on its introduction the ex gratia payment of bonus stood eliminated.
The evidence established that the Cabinet 's decision was made known to the workmen, who were given the option either to accept the Cabinet decision or the production bonus scheme as formulated by the 'appellant.
So long as the Cabinet decision had been communicated and option was given to the workmen, it did not matter at what stage the communication was made to the labour.
The fact that the communication of the 707 Cabinet decision after the submission of the charter of demands was of no consequence.
The striking down of section 34(2) of the Bonus Act by this Court has no bearing in considering the claim of the.
respondent in this case.
When once it was established, as this case, that the Cabinet decision regarding ex gratia payment of bonus had been communicated to the workmen with an option to accept the said decision or the production bonus scheme and the labour wanted the Cabinet decision to be implemented, it followed that an agreement, under section 34(3) of the said ' Act had come into effect and it was valid.
[720] Therefore, the workmen were entitled to ex gratia payment of bonus as in the previous years.
(ii) The management was prepared to pay at all times the bonus as per the Bonus Act.
They had also announced the introduction of the production bonus scheme.
They were actively taking part in the conciliation proceedings.
The appellant also made to the Union certain proposals at the conference which 'proposals ' the representatives of the workmen promised to discuss with the workmen and give a reply to the appellant.
But, at a meeting of the workmen next day, they were incited to go on strike.
The receipt of the telegram sent by the Labour Commissioner fixing a date for further discussions and inviting the Union and the management to attend the meeting, was falsely denied by the Union.
The receipt of a telegram from a person representing the workmen at conciliation meeting, requesting the Union to put off going on strike by one day was admitted by the President of the Union, but that request was not complied with by the workmen.
All these circumstances clearly established that the demand of the Union regarding ex gratia bonus could not be considered to be of an 'urgent 'and serious nature '.
They also showed that the launching of the strike was unjustified.
[725 H] Therefore, the workmen were not entitled to any wages for the period of strike.
