The Central Wage Board was constituted for devising a wage structure, based on the principle of fair wages payable in the Jute industry.
In determining the financial capacity of the industry the Board selected 20 mills from West Bengal and 9 mills from the rest of the region as representing a cross section of the Industry.
The respondent, a fairly small mill in Andhra Pradesh.
was considered 'as a comparable unit with two larger mills in the State as also with some of the very big and prosperous mills in West Bengal.
The Management of the mill refused to accede to the demand of the workmen to pay wages in accordance with the recommendations of the Board fixing a uniform scale for the entire industry, on the plea that the mill had no financial capacity to bear the burden of the wage scale.
The dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal upheld the claim of the management.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the Wage Board recommendations did follow the principles laid down by this Court in the matter of fixation of wages and as such the Tribunal should have implemented its recommendations.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal.
The essential pre requisite of deciding the wage structure viz., consider the capacity of the industry to pay on the principles laid down by this Court was absent in the recommendation of the Wage Board.
This Court has laid down that the capacity of the industry to pay should be gauged on an industry cum region basis after taking a fair cross section of the industry and that the cross section to be truly representative and capable of giving a true picture of the conditions of both industry and labour must be one from each region where establishments of the industry in question are situate.
[608 E F] In the present case taking 20 mills from West Bengal and 9 mills from outside as forming a representative.
cross section was manifestly incorrect as the West Bengal mills could not be said to be comparable units with the rest of the mills.
These mills so clubbed together could not reflect the economic and other conditions prevailing in the mills in different regions with their peculiar problems and differing conditions.
The Board ought to have considered the units in each area separately and determined the wage scales for each such area by taking from that area a representative cross section of the industry where possible or where that was not possible by taking comparable units from other industries within that area.
[608 G H] Express Newspapers Ltd. vs Union of India, [1959] S.C.R. 12, French Motor Car Co. vs Workmen, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 16 and Greaves Cotton & Co. vs Workmen, [1964] 5 S.C.R. 362, followed.
594 If the wage scale had been determined by the Board in the mam aforesaid, even though the Board was not a statutory body and decisions were only of a recommendatory character, it would be possi for Industrial Tribunal to give due weight to its recommendations such recommendations would have been in conformity with the princil of industry cum region, a principle binding on the ' tribunals.
[609 H] [The difficulty felt by the Tribunal faced with the dilemma whether not to follow the recommendations of the Wage Board arrived at principles different from those consistently followed in industrial adjucation should have been realised by the Government before accepti the recommendations of the Wage Board.] [609 F G]
