At an auction held on April 8, 1950 of the theka for collecting Tahbazari dues of a Mandi, the appellant 's bid was accepted.
At the time of auction a meeting of the respondent Board was also held in which the auction was confirmed by resolution and the usual conditions relating to the payment of auction money were amended to provide for payment in four installments.
The appellant was asked to execute and complete an agreement in favour of the respondent according to the conditions and rules, but he 'failed to do so.
In view of this and the fact that he failed to pay the second installment, the respondent Board cancelled the appellant 's theka and reauctioned it.
After taking into account the money received from the reduction and the instalment paid by the defendant, the Board sued the appellant for the recovery of the balance and future interest.
One question considered by the Trial Court was whether the provisions of section 97 of the U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916, which required certain contracts made by or on behalf of the Board be in writing, had been complied with.
The Trial Court found that there was a list of bidders at the auction held on 8th April, 1950 which bore the signature of the appellant and of the Chairman of the respondent Board; it therefore considered that the contract was a written contract and decreed the suit.
In appeal the High Court remanded the case as it took the view that the question of the applicability of and compliance with section 97 of the Act had not been dealt with.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: On the facts, it was clearly proved that there was a contract in writing within the meaning of the proviso to section 97(1) and the provisions of sub.
section (2).
The signed list of bidders and the resolution of the Board passed at the time of the auction constituted a contract in writing within the meaning of section 97 of the Act.
There was therefore no justification in the High Court remanding the case.
[797 H; 798 F G] Union of India vs Ralla Ram, ; , 173, referred to.
