The appellant was the returned candidate from the Rajura constituency Maharashtra State Legislative Assembly in the general election held in February 1967.
The first respondent who was one of the defeated candidates challenged the appellant 's election in an election petition.
The High Court held that the appellant had made false statements about the personal character and conduct of the first respondent and was guilty of corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(4) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
On this view the High Court allowed the election petition and set aside the election of the appellant who appealed to this Court.
HELD: (i) The election law in this country as in England guarantees freedom of criticism of political nature at the time of election.
The freedom of criticism may sometimes be misused, but the advantage gained from free criticism though sometimes it may turn out to be irresponsible in the long run outweighs the disadvantages.
It is in the interests of democracy that such criticism should be allowed.
However democracy will be a farce if interested persons are allowed to freely indulge in character assassination during election.
A political party may not be affected by passing winds but a campaign of slander against an individual is likely to create prejudice in the mind of the people against him.
Section 123(4) is designed to achieve the dual purpose of protecting freedom of speech and prevention of malicious attack on the personal character and conduct of rivals.
[769 C] (b) The ingredients of the corrupt practice mentioned in section 123(4) are (1) the publication by a candidate or his election agent or by any other person with the consent of that candidate or his election agent of any statement of fact; (2) which statement is false and which was believed by the candidate to be false or at any rate was not believed by him to be true; (3) the said statement relates to the personal character or conduct of a candidate or is in relation to his candidature or withdrawal; and (4) the same being a statement reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of that candidate 's election.
The burden of proving 'every one of the ingredients of the corrupt practice alleged is on him who alleges it.
[768 G; 77] (c) Every false allegation does not come within the mischief of section 123(4).
The language of the section is 'any statement of fact which is false ' and that language must be used in contrast to a false statement of opinion.
The statement in question must be in relation to the personal character of candidate.
It is when the false allegation pierces the politician and touches the person of the candidate that section 123(4) is contravened.
Further one of the ingredients of the corrupt practice under the section is that the statement complained of must be one reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of the election of the person against whom it is ' made. 'Calculated ' means designed: it denotes more than mere 767 likelihood and imports a design to affect voters.
The emphasis in the last limb of the section is not so much on the intention of the publisher but on the probable effect on the election of the candidate against whom those statements are directed.
[769 F G; 770 E] (ii) In the present case the statements alleged to have been made by the appellant did not amount to corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(4) as they amounted either to fair political criticism or were mere expressions of opinion.
The complaint that the appellant had stated that the respondent had a share in the profits earned by a contractor is neither alleged in the election petition nor satisfactorily proved.
[777 D, F] Sheopat Singh vs Ram Pratap, [1965] t S.C.R. 175, T.K. Gangi Reddy M.C. Anjaneya Reddy & Ors., XXII E.L.R.p.
266 and Dattatraya Narayan Patil vs Dattatraya Krishnaji Khenvikar & Ors. , relied on.
Cumberland (Cockermouth Division) Case, , referred to.
