The Sugar Cane (Control) Order, 1955 was promulgated by the Central Government in the exercise of its powers under the Essential Supplies Act.
Under cl. 6 of the Order the Central Government could reserve any area where sugarcane was grown for a factory taking into account various relevant 'factors.
Clause 11 allowed the Central Government to delegate its power under el. 6, and the Central Government by a notification dated July 16, 1966 delegated the said power to the several State Governments and the Cane Commissioners of those States.
The appellant was a sugar mill situated in U.P. near the border of Bihar State.
For a long time its source of supply of sugarcane had been the neighboring area of Bihar State consisting of 208 villages.
For the seasons 1966 67 and 1967 68 the 5th respondent a sugar mill situate on the Bihar side of the order sought to have the area reserved for itself but by order dated November 30, 1966 the request was rejected by the State Government.
In December 1966 the Cane Commissioner, Bihar passed an order under el.
6(1) of the Sugar Cane (Control) Order reserving the said area of 208 villages for the appellant for the seasons 1966 67 and 1967 68.
The 5th resportdent made representations to the Chief Minister.
Acting on directions given by the Chief Minister the Cane Commissioner, Bihar passed orders on November 14, 1967, whereby by a notification in the Bihar Government Gazette 121 of the aforesaid villages were reserved for the appellant and 99 villages for the 5th respondent.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging this order of the Cane Commissioner but the petition was rejected.
With certificate appeal was filed in this Court.
The contentions urged on behalf of the appellant were: (i) The orders in question though purported to have been made by the Cane Commissioner were in fact not so, and were therefore invalid; (ii) Every proceeding to modify any reservation under cl. 6 is a quasi judicial proceeding.
As the impugned notifications were made without affording the appellant reasonable opportunity for representing its case they were bad in law; (iii) Even if the said proceeding was considered an administrative proceeding the impugned orders were liable to be set aside on the basis of the rule laid down by this Court in State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, ; HELD: (i) From the material on record the only conclusion possible was that the Chief Minister imposed his opinion on the Cane Commissioner.
The power exercisable by the Cane Commissioner under cl.
6(1) is a statutory power.
He alone could have exercised that power.
While exercising that power he cannot abdicate his responsibility in favour of anyone not even in favour of the State Government or the Chief Minister.
It was not proper for the Chief Minister to have interfered with the 808 functions of the Cane Commissioner.
In this case what had happened was that the power of the Cane Commissioner had been exercised by the Chief Minister, an authority not recognised by el.
(6) read with cl.
(11) but the responsibility for making those orders was asked to be taken by the Cane Commissioner.
The executive officers entrusted with statutory discretions may in some cases be obliged to take into account considerations of public policy and to some context the policy of a Minister or the Government as a whole when it is a relevant factor in weighing the policy but this will not absolve .
them from their duty to exercise their personal judgment in individual cases unless explicit statutory provision has been made for them to be given binding instructions by a superior.
[816] Commissioner of Police, Bombay vs Gordhandas Bhanji, ; and State of Punjab vs Hari Kishan Sharma, A.I R. , applied.
(ii) As soon as the 5th respondent moved the Government for altering or modifying the reservation made in favour of the appellant, a lis commenced.
The dispute that arose between the appellant and the 5th respondent had to be decided on the basis of the objective criteria, prescribed by el. 6 of the order i.e. (1 ) the crushing capacity of the appellant mill; (2) the availability of the sugarcane in the reserved area and (3) the need for the production of sugar.
There could hardly be any doubt that the modification of the reservation made in favour of the appellant would have had serious repercussions on the working of the appellant 's mill.
It was bound to affect its interests adversely.
Hence it was not possible to accept the conclusion of the High Court that the proceeding before the Cane Commissioner was not a quasi judicial proceeding.
[817 E H] Province of Bombay vs Kusaldas section Advani & Ors., ; at p. 725, Shivji Nathubhai vs The Union of India, ; , Board of High School and Intermediate Education U.P. Allahabad vs Ghanshyam Das Gupta & Ors., [1962] 3 Supp.
S.C.R. 36.
New Zealand Dairy Board vs Okitu Co operative Dairy Co. Ltd., (1953) New Zealand Law Reports.
p. 366, and James Edward Jeffs & Ors.
vs New Zealand Dairy Production & Marketing Board & Ors., [1967] A.C.p. 551, referred tO. (iii) In the present case both the appellant and the 5th respondent were making repeated representations to the Chief Minister as well as to the Cane Commissioner.
The representations made by the 5th respondent or even the substance thereof were not made available to the appellant.
The proposal to split the reserved area into two or the manner in which it was proposed to be split was not made known to the appellant and his objection invited in that regard.
It had no opportunity to represent against the same.
Hence the appellant was justified in complaining that the principles of natural justice had been contravened.
[822 D F] Suresh Koshy George vs The University of Kerala & Ors., ; , referred to.
(iv) The appellant 's interest was adversely affected by the impugned order and the contention of the respondent that as no orders had been passed under cls.
6(c) and (d) of the 'order ' the appellant could not be considered as an aggrieved party.
was not correct.
[823 A] 809 [The Court did not consider it necessary to decide the questions (a) whether the impugned orders could have been validly made in an administrative proceeding, (b) whether the Cane Commissioner who. had the power to make the reservation in question also had the power to alter or modify that reservation]
