On a winding up petition being filed in respect of the respondent company in June, 1965, a provisional liquidator was appointed, who took charge of the Cotton Textile Mills of the Company after they had stopped working.
Thereafter an agreement was entered into in August, 1965 between the S group who owned the majority of equity shares in the company and the J group which agreed to buy the shares and to take over the management.
The agreement provided, inter alia, that after the J group took over, the Company would execute a second legal mortgage of its fixed and other assets in favour of the S group and certain other unsecured creditors mentioned in Schedule B to the agreement m consideration of which those creditors; agreed to receive interest at a nominal rate and receive repayment of their debts over a long period.
The agreement also contained provision which contemplated the Company obtaining loans from certain financial institutions, the Central and State Governments and other persons and securing them by a prior charge over its fixed assets as well as liquid assets; After this agreement with the unsecured creditors and another with the workers union, the COmpany submitted a scheme for the sanction of the High Court.
By an order in February, 1966, a single Judge of the High Court approved the scheme which provided, inter alia, for payments to various categories of creditors within specified periods and for the execution of a second mortgage in favour of the Schedule B creditors; or alternatively for the execution of a debenture trust deed 'and the issue of debentures in their favour if sanction of the Controller of Capital Issues could be obtained.
It was also provided in clause (4) of the scheme that the J group "will provide the necessary finance required for running the mills".
The winding up petition was then withdrawn, the provisional liquidator discharged and 'the J group Wok over the Company 's management.
The mills were restarted in April, 1966 and payments to various categories of creditors other than the Schedule B creditors were duly made.
However in view of certain disputes between the two groups, the company did not execute the mortgage or the proposed debenture trust deed in favour of the Schedule B creditors.
The mills continued to work until June, 1967, but the management experienced various difficulties in raising adequate working finances.
in securing sufficient supplies of cotton, due to price rise following devaluation of the Rupee in 1966 and for various other reasons.
In view of 867 these the mills were eventually closed down in June, 1967, and thereafter the Company and others filed a petition for its winding up.
However, the Company Judge in the High Court took the view that under clause (4) of the scheme the J group were bound not only to procure but to personally bring in the finance sufficient to work the mills.
Holding that the scheme was workable he directed the J group to provide the necessary finance.
He also directed the company to execute the debenture trust deed in favour of the unsecured creditors in Schedule B. He therefore dismissed the winding up petitions.
In appeal, a Division Bench of the High Court held that the Company Judge was in error in giving the said directions and in dismissing the petitions for winding up.
Accordingly, it allowed the appeals and ordered winding up of the company.
In appeal to this Court it was contended inter alia that the Appeal Court was in error in setting aside the directions given by the Company Judge and in ordering winding up instead; the Company had reached its unsatisfactory position in view of (i) the failure of the J group to provide finance in accordance.
with clause (4) of the scheme; and (ii) giving away the processing unit of the mills which was the most profit yielding part of the mills for a nominal value to a nominee of the J group.
It was also contended that once the scheme was sanctioned by the court, it became a statutory bargain and pan of the company 's constitution, and therefore, all further arrangements of the company 's affairs had to be on the basis of the rights and obligations thereunder; if the company were to be wound up, such winding up could only be Ordered after compelling it to carry out those obligations and it would be opposed to equity and public policy to allow the company to escape its obligations by ordering it to be wound up; even if the scheme could be ignored by directing winding up, it could only be done by putting the parties in the position they were prior to the scheme; and that the winding up of the company being at the instance of the J group who had failed to carry out their obligation to find the finance, acceding to their prayer for winding up was tantamount to acceding to their default.
It was further contended on behalf of the Schedule B creditors that the J group had deliberately failed to secure permission of the Controller of Capital Issues for execution of the debenture trust deed and that they were entitled to a charge on the company 's assets not merely on the second mortgage being executed.
but irrespective of it and in presenti; as the agreement of August, 1965, specified the property out of which a debt was to be payable and this was coupled with an intention to subject such property to a charge, the property became subject to a charge in presenti even though a regular mortgage was to be executed 'at some future date.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal: (1) The direction of the Company Judge that the J group must provide the required finance was nebulous and vague and impossible of being enforced.
In the.absence of any enquiry as to whether the mills could be worked at a profit no court would compel a party to furnish monies without even specifying how much 'and for how long he should provide.
If such a direction was not possible, no direction could be given under section 392(1) to work the scheme as its implementation depended on the 'mills working at profit.
The only course left to the Court was to pronounce that in the circumstances then prevailing the scheme could not be satisfactorily worked and, therefore, a winding up order under section 392(2) had become inevitable.
[887 H 888 B] 868 Although the scheme had statutory force, it had to be construed as a commercial document, that is, in the manner in which businessmen would read it.
There can be no doubt that the J group took the responsibility to provide finance required for running the; mills so that from out of their profits the obligation to pay the creditors could be met in the manner laid down in the scheme.
Therefore, the J group were to "provide" finance either on the credit of the company or on the security of its 'assets, or if necessary, their own monies for running the mills in the commercial sense, i.e. with a reasonable prospect of making profits and not in all events and in all circumstances.
even if there was no prospect of running them in reasonable profit.
Such a constitution would be contrary to the fact that the creditors knew there was hardly any chance of their being paid and wore anxious that instead of taking the company into liquidation the mills should be restarted and their dues paid bit by bit.
By virtue of the provisions of section 391 of the Act, a scheme is statutorily binding even on creditors and share holders who dissented from or were opposed to its being sanctioned.
It has statutory force in that sense and therefore cannot be altered except with the sanction of the Court even if the share holders and the creditors acquiesce in such alteration.
The effect of the scheme is "to supply by recourse to the procedure thereby prescribed the absence of that individual 'agreement by every member of the clause.
to be bound by the scheme which would otherwise be necessary to give it validity".
Sub sec.
(2) of section 391 of the Act allows the decision of the majority prescribed therein to bind the minority of creditors and shareholders and it is for that reason that a scheme is said to have statutory operation and cannot be varied by the shareholders or the creditors unless such variation is sanctioned by the court.
The effect, therefore, of a scheme between a company and its creditors is that so long as it is carried out by the company by regular payment in terms of the scheme, a creditor who is bound by it cannot maintain a winding up petition.
But if the company commits a default, there is a debt presently due by the company and a petition for winding up can be sustained at the instance of a creditor.
The scheme, however, does not have the effect of creating a new debt; it simply makes the original debt payable and in the manner and to the extent provided in the scheme.
It cannot be said that a winding up order can Only be passed after compelling the company to complete the rights which are still incomplete under the scheme.
[891 F] Once a scheme is cancelled under section 39 '2(2) on the ground that it cannot be satisfactorily worked and a winding up order passed, such order is deemed to be for all purposes one made under section 433.
It is not as if because the scheme has been sanctioned under section 391 that a winding up order under section 39 '2(2) cannot be made.
If the contention, that a winding up order can only be made subject to the rights and obligations of the parties under the scheme were to be right, it would mean that where a company makes default in paying an instalment on the date prescribed by the scheme and a creditor files a winding up petition, even though a winding up order is made on the basis that the debt has become presently payable, still the creditor is bound by the scheme and his debt is to be.
payable by instalments as provided by the scheme.
[893 C E] (2) The Appeal Court was right in holding that no proof had been offered in support of the allegation that the I group had let out the processing unit of the mills which was the most profit yielding part to one of their nominees to the prejudice of the company.
869 (3) An examination of the scheme and the agreement of August 1965 did not show that there was any intention to subject the company assets a charge in presenti in favour of the Schedule B creditors.
The provisions of these two documents amounted only to an agreement to mortgage which could give rise to an obligation to specifically perform it but did not constitute either a mortgage under section 58 or a charge under section 100 of the Transfer of Property Act.
There was, therefore, no force in the contention that the: Schedule B creditors, irrespective of the proposed mortgage, were entitled to be treated as secured creditors.
[889 G] Jewan Lal Daga vs Nilmani Choudhuri, 55 I.A. 107; Khajeh Solehman Quadir vs Salimullah, 49 I.A. 153; Hukamchand vs Radha Kishan, A.I.R. 130 P.C. 76; referred to.
(4) On the findings by the Appeal Court that the company was commercially insolvent and the scheme could not be satisfactorily worked with or without modifications, the only alternative for that Court was to pass the winding up order under section 392(2).
Court could not have completed, as contended by the appellants, their rights which were still incomplete or order the company to execute a debenture trust deed or the second mortgage, and thus set up the appellants and the other Schedule B creditors as secured creditors against the rest of the unsecured creditors.
Such an order could not be passed as it would be contrary to and in breach of the right of distribution pari passu of the joint body of unsecured creditors.
The Appeal Court had, therefore correctly followed the principle that the status of creditors which could be recognised was that which existed at the date of the ' windingup order, that the second mortgage or the debenture trust deed not having so far been executed, the appellants and the other Schedule B creditors were still unsecured creditors and therefore could not claim any priority over the rest of the unsecured creditors.
[894 H 895 C] Bank of Scotland vs Macleod ; at 317, 318; Tulsidas Jasrai Parekh vs The Industrial Bank of Western India 32 Bombay Law Reporter 953 at 967; Re Anglo Oriental Carpet Manufacturing Company , referred to.
The principle that no act of a court should be permitted to harm a litigant who has acted on the faith of such an act cannot be invoked for the purpose of completion of rights where such ' rights are incomplete at the date when a winding up order is made.
There was no question of the appellants having done something on the faith of an act of the court, the appellants and the other Schedule B creditors having agreed to a postponement of repayment to them in consideration of an agreement between them and the company providing for a second mortgage in their favour.
[892 D] Premila Devi vs Peaples Bank of Northern India Ltd., ; Re Garner Motors Ltd., ; Jang Singh vs Brijlal, ; ; Jai Behram vs Kedar Nath Marwari, 49 I.A. 351 at 356; Re Downing (T.H.) & Co. ; also Buckley on the Companies Acts (13th Ed.) 411 referred to.
