The appellant Company was taken over by the Government of Madras in exercise of the powers conferred on it by the Madras Electricity Supply Undertakings (Acquisition) Act 1954.
All the property and assets of the company became vested in the Madras Government.
Under r. 17 of the Madras.
Government Undertakings (Acquisition) Rules, 1954 all the staff of the Company employed immediately before the vesting date were retained by the Government and were continued provisionally for a period of 12 months from the date of vesting on the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable W them under the Company immediately before the date of vesting.
In respect of the future, employment of the workmen by the Madras Government, their conditions of service were to be regulated by section 15 of the Madras Act and ' the various conditions laid down in r. 17 of the Rules.
Subsequently the workmen claimed that they had become entitled to retrenchment compensation under section 25F read with section 25FF of the and filed application for computation of the compensation payable to them under section 33C of the Act, before the Labour Court.
Initially the Company was the only opposite party to the applications but later the State of Madras and the Electricity Board of Madras to which the State had transferred the undertaking, were also made parties.
The Company and the Electricity Board raised certain preliminary objections to the jurisdiction of the Labour Court which did not find favour with that Court.
On merits the Labour Court held that the workmen were entitled to retrenchment compensation under section 25FF and directed the Company to pay the amount.
The High Court upheld the Tribunals orders on merits as well as on the question of jurisdiction.
The Company appealed to this Court.
The submissions on behalf of the appellant were: (i) That the Labour Court as well as the High Court were not right in holding that the conditions laid down in the.
proviso to section 25FF were not satisfied; (ii) that the applications under section 33C(2) of the Act were not maintainable because the question whether the workmen were entitled to retrenchment compensation was outside the jurisdiction of the Labour Court which was not competent to decide such a disputed question; (iii) That the High Court was wrong in holding that the question whether the liability to pay the retrenchment compensation fell on the Company or the State of Madras or the Electricity Board could not be decided by the Labour Court under section 33C(2) of the Act and had to be decided in other appropriate proceedings.
903 HELD: (i) The conditions of service of the workmen under section 15 of the Madras Act and under r. 17 were less favourable than their conditions of service had been under the company.
In the circumstances the requirements of el.
(b) of the proviso to section 25FF were obviously not satisfied and that proviso could not be invoked by the Company for the purpose of defeating the claim made by the workmen under the principal clause of that section.
Under the principal clause the workmen became entitled to receive retrenchment compensation in accordance with section 25F of the Act on She basis of the legal fiction envisaged that those rights would accrue to them as if the workmen had been retrenched.
The Labour Court and the High Court were therefore right in holding that the workmen were entitled to claim retrenchment compensation in accordance with the provisions of section 25F of the Act because of the right accruing to them under section 25FF of the Act.
[910 A C] The employment under the new employer could only commence from the time when the ownership or the management of the undertaking vested in the State Government; but simultaneously with that vesting, the workmen had to be deemed to be retrenched from service.
The retrenchment could, therefore, be deemed to have been made only by the previous employer.
Further, it would be the previous employer who would be competent to give the notice in accordance with the provisions of section 25F of the Act.
In these circumstances the conclusion was irresistible that the claim under section 25FF of the Act to compensation accrues to the workmen against the previous employer under whom he was employed until the date of the transfer.
In the present case therefore the right to receive compensation clearly accrued under section 25FF of the Act against the Company and there was, therefore, no difficulty in the Labour Court exercising jurisdiction on that basis.
[910 H 911 C] (ii) The right which had been claimed by the various workmen in their applications under section 33C(2) of the Act, was a right which accrued to them under section 25FF of the Act and was an existing right at the time.
when these applications were made.
The Labour Court clearly had jurisdiction to decide whether such a right did or did not exist when dealing with the application under that provision.
The mere denial of that right by the company cold not take away its jurisdiction, so that the order made by the Labour Court was competent.
[911 H 912 A] Chief Mining Engineer, East India Coal Co. Ltd. vs Ratneswar & Ors.
[1968] 1 S.C.R. 140, applied.
State of Bikaner and Jaipur vs
R.L. Khandelwal, , Punjab National Bank Ltd. vs
K.L. Kharbanda, [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 977, Central Bank of India vs
P.S. Rajagopalan & Ors., ; and Bombay Gas Company Ltd. vs Gopal Bhiva and Ors. ; , referred to.
(iii) The Labour Court was concerned with the right claimed under the Act.
Whether by virtue of the provisions or the terms of transfer of the undertaking from the company to the Government or by virtue of the provisions of the Madras Act, the company was entitled to claim that this liability should be ultimately met by the State Government was a point which did not affect the right of the workmen to claim their compensation from the Company and the Labour Court was therefore: not required to go into the question when dealing with application under section 33C(2) of the Act: [912 'C E]
