Proceedings were instituted under section 107 Cr.
P.C. against four persons including the two respondents and an order was made against them under section 112 Cr.
P.C. stating that they were indulging in various acts of violence involving breach of peace and requiring them to show cause why each of them should not execute a bond for keeping the peace.
This order referred to four incidents, the first of which was that on June 22, 1964, eleven persons including the two respondents had indulged i.n certain acts of violence as a result of which a case under sections 148, 323 and 325 I.P.C. had been registered.
After holding an inquiry, the Magistrate was of the view that the evidence led in support of the first incident was not reliable and the first incident was not proved against any of the eleven persons.
Subsequently the respondents were convicted at a trial of offences under sections 323 and 324 I.P.C. committed in the first incident in the order under section 112 Cr.
The Court of Session in appeal confirmed the conviction but the High Court, in revision, set it aside holding that on the principle of "issue estoppel" approved by this Court in Manipur Administration vs Thockchom Bira Singh, ; , since in the proceedings under section 107 Cr.
P.C. the incident which was made the subject matter of the complaint against the respondents in the Trial Court was one of the incidents relied upon and was held not proved, it was not open to the State to prosecute the respondents in respect of the same incident.
In appeal to this Court with special leave, it was contended that the rule of "issue estoppel" had no application in the present.
case, since there was no "previous trial" of the respondents for any offence alleged to arise out of the incident in respect of which they were tried; and furthermore, that the rule of issue estoppel was inconsistent with the statutory provisions contained in section 403 Cr.
P.C. and could not be resorted to in criminal trials.
HELD: (i) The High Court was in error in holding that the respondents could not be tried and convicted of offences under sections 324 and 323 I.P.C. because in the earlier proceeding under section 107 Cr. P.C., evidence with regard to the incident out of which the offences arose which were the subject matter of the present appeal was taken, and was regarded as insufficient to sustain the order.
The rejection of evidence given in the earlier proceeding to sustain an order for binding over the respondents to keep the peace did not preclude the trial of the respondents in respect 1005 of the specific incident which together with the other incidents was sought to be made the basis of the order of binding over the respondents.
The rule of "issue estoppel" prevents relitigation of the issue which has been determined in a criminal trial between the State and the accused.
If in respect of an offence arising out a transaction a trial has taken place and the accused has been acquitted, another trial in respect of the offence alleged to arise out of that transaction or of a related transaction which requires the Court to arrive at a conclusion inconsistent with the conclusion reached at the earlier trial is prohibited by the rule of issue estoppel.
In the present case there was no trial of the respondents for an offence in the earlier proceeding and there was no order of conviction or acquittal.
[1011 D F, H] (ii) Section 403 Cr.
P.C. enacts the 'rule of autre fois acquit and autre fois convict applicable to criminal trials.
The rule is that so long as an order of acquittal or conviction at a trial held by a court of competent jurisdiction of a person charged with committing an offence stands, that person cannot again be tried on the same facts for the offence for which he was tried or for any other offence arising therefrom.
But the rule of "issue estoppel" in criminal trials evolved by the High Court of Australia and approved by the Judicial Committee has been applied to criminal trials in India, apart from the terms of section 403.
[1008 C] Manipur Administration vs Thokchom, Bira Singh, ; ; Sambasivam vs Public Prosecutor, Federation of Malaya, ; Pritam Singh vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1956 S.C. 415; Banwari Godara vs The State of RaJasthan, Cr. A. No. 141 of 1960 decided on Feb. 7, 1961; Lalta & Ors.
vs The State of U.P., Cr. A. No. 185 of 1966 decided on Oct. 25, 1968; The assistant Collector of Customs and another vs
L.R. Malwani and another, Cr. ,As.
15 & 35 of 1967 decided on Oct. 16, 1968; Sealfron vs United States, (1948) 332 U.S. Rep. 575 and The King vs Wilkes; , , referred to.
Connelly vs Director of Public Prosecutions, , distinguished.
