A private complaint was lodged against the appellants for an offence under section 220 of the Mysore Village Panchayats and Local Boards Act, 1959.
Rule 16 of the Mysore Panchayat Secretaries ' Powers and Duties Rules, 1961 provided that the Secretary shall have power to file complaints and suits on behalf of the Panchayat, and to conduct the proceedings on its behalf and on the orders of the Panchayat.
On their conviction the appellants went to the High Court and contended that in view of Rule 16 they could not be prosecuted on a private complaint.
The High Court decided against them on the view that the said Rule did not preclude persons other than the Secretary from filing a complaint but it only debarred complaints being made by others on behalf of the Panchayat.
Against the High Court 's judgment appeal by special leave was filed in this Court.
HELD: (i) In the presence of r. 16 and for the reasons given by this Court in R. M. Kanavi 's case which dealt with similar provisions.
under the Bombay Municipal Borough Act, 1925, it must be held that it was the Secretary of the Panchayat who alone was competent to file the, complaint.
Section 213(3) of the Mysore Act is analogous to section 23A(3) of the ' Bombay Act under which the offence fell in Kanavi 's case.
On a parity of reasoning it could not be suggested that if there had been any contravention of section 213 ( 3 ) any voter or member of the public could have filed a complaint in the matter.
The other provisions.
also of the Act which follow, namely, as.
214 to ' 219 indicate that it was never contemplated that a complaint for an infringement or contravention of the prohibition contained therein could be lodged before a Magistrate having jurisdiction under section 233 by any private individual in the presence of specific rule that the Secretary shall have the power to file a complaint on behalf of the Panchayat.
Most of these sections i.e. sq. 217 and 218 postulate infraction of orders of the Panchayat for which the Panchayat alone would be interested in filing a complaint.
Thus the scheme of the Act also supports the view that a complaint could be filed only under r. 16 of the Mysore Panchayat Secretaries ' Powers and Duties Rules, 1961 and could not have been filed by a private complaint.
[936 H 937 C] K.M. Kanavi vs State of Mysore, ; , followed and ' (ii) The High Court was not fight in saying that all offences committed under the various provisions contained in the Act would be cognizable owing to the general powers conferred on police officer by section 236 of the Act.
The section gives Only a limited power to the police 934 officer to effect arrest if an offence is committed In his presence.
The present case moreover did not relate to the powers which a police officer could exercise in respect of an offence under section 220 of the Act but to the question whether a private complaint could be filed.
[937 G 938 C] Public Prosecutor vs A. V. Ramiah, A.I.R. 1958 A.P. 392 referred to.
(iii) The difficulty felt by the High Court that a Secretary who is subordinate to the Chairman may find it embarrassing to file a complaint against him can hardly be accepted as serious.
The Secretary has to act on behalf of the Panchayat and it is the panchayat that would be vitally interested in preventing and stopping any contravention of the provisions of section 220 of the Act. 'The ' Secretary acts on behalf of the Panchayat and the question of his subordination to any one of its office bearers is of no consequence.
[938 D]
