The appellant was elected to the Madras Legislative Council from the Madras District Graduates Constituency.
His election was challenged by the Respondent, his nearest rival candidate by an election petition alleging, mainly, that a large number of cars had been employed for the conveyance of voters to the polling booths in violation of section 123(5) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The High Court held that the corrupt practice was established and set aside the appellant 's election.
It also declared the respondent elected in his place.
The original order passed by the High Court did not :name the appellant as guilty of corrupt practice but the Court, by a subsequent order reviewing its previous order, gave a declaration to that effect.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended by the appellant that the plea in the petition regarding violation of section 123(5) was vague and not sufficiently defined so as to give him notice of the charge he had to meet, and furthermore, that the learned Judge who tried the case improved both the pleading on the subject and the evidence led by the election petitioner by calling certain witnesses and looking into documents which he had no power to do.
It was therefore contended that all the evidence which the learned Judge collected suo motu should not be looked at and if the case of the petitioner was confined to the bare plea raised, the petition would deserve to be dismissed because it was not clear in the plea and was lacking in proof.
HELD: dismissing the appeal: On the facts, the High Court had rightly found that many cars were employed for the conveyance of voters in the constituency.
The circumstantial chain of evidence was sufficient to show the connection between the appellant and the use of the cars for the conveyance of voters.
The corrupt practice under section 123(5) was therefore brought home.
A B] (i) The plea in the petition in essence was that cars were used for the purpose of conveying voters contrary to the prohibition contained in the Election Law.
The names of the booths and the divisions in which the booths were situated together with the particulars of the cars and the persons primarily concerned with cars at the polling booths had been mentioned.
The connection of the appellant with the use of the cars had been specifically pleaded.
Sufficient particulars of the allegation had therefore been given and the rest were matters of evidence which did not require to be pleaded.
(ii) The power of a Civil Court to summon court witnesses is contained in O. XVI r. 14 of the Co& of Civil Procedure.
The Representation of People Act enjoins that all the powers under the Code can be exercised and all the procedure as far as may be ,applicable to the trial 1020 of civil suits may be followed in the trial of election petitions.
The court trying an election petition therefore has the power to summon a Court witness if it thinks that the ends of justice require or that the case before it needs that kind of evidence.
The policy of election law seem to be that for the establishment of purity of elections, investigation into to be that for the nasal factices including corrupt practices at elections all allegations of malpractices include corrupt practices at elections should be thoroughly made.
In the present case a large number of cars were obviously used presumably for the purpose of carrying voters to the booths.
In the face of this voluminous evidence it was open to the judge, if evidence was available to establish who had procured or hired judge, summon witnesses who could depose to the same.
Such a vehicles, to exercised by the learned judge .
[1028 B F] (iii) In the present case it was not possible to reach the conclusion the voters were brought to the polling booths in violation of that 23(5), the result de the election had been materially affected.
In a single transferable vote, it is very difficult to say how the voting would have gone, because if all the votes which the appellant had got, had gone to one of the other candidates who were eliminated at the earlier counts, those candidates could have won.
The declaration of the respondent 's election would be merely a guess or surmise as to the nature of the voting which would have taken place if the corrupt practice had not been perpetrated and the High Court 's direction declaring him elected must therefore be set aside.
[1032 B D] (iv) The appellant was properly named as guilty of corrupt practice although the order was incorporated by the learned Judge through a review.
It was his duty to have named persons who had been guilty of corrupt practice and he made this up later.
There is no need 'for any specific power for review since the power to name any person guilty of corrupt Practice is already contained in the Act.
Whether it comes in the original judgment or by a supplementary or complementary order, is not much to the purpose that order was correctly made.
[1032 E]
