The appellant, who was a Platform Inspector employed by the North Eastern Railway was prosecuted for offences under section 161 I.P.C. and section 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 for accepting a bribe from another subordinate railway employee.
The prosecution was commenced after obtaining the sanction of the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent but it was discovered during the trial that this officer was not competent to sanction the appellant 's prosecution.
The trial Judge, at the request of the Public Prosecutor, quashed the proceedings.
Thereafter.
sanction was obtained from the Chief Commercial Superintendent and in fresh proceedings for the same offences, the appellant was convicted and the order of conviction was confirmed in appeal by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (i) that in view of the provisions of cl.
(i) of r. 1704 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code, the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent had the power to remove the appellant from service, and was competent to grant sanction under section 6(c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act for his prosecution; the sanction given by the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent for prosecuting the appellant was therefore valid and the order passed by the Special Judge quashing the proceeding amounted in law to an order of acquittal so that the appellant could not again be tried for the same offence; (ii) that in relation to the evidence of two witnesses for the prosecution, the provisions of section 356 Cr.
P.C. had not been complied with in that, the evidence of these witnesses was recorded in the presence of one trial Judge and the record of the evidence had been signed by his successor in office, after the death of the former; and (iii) that the investigation was made by an officer who.
in view of the provisions of section 5A(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 had no authority to investigate the offence as he was a Police Officer below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police.
949 HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (i) The powers exercisable under r. 1704 (i) being subject to cl.
(c) of r. 1705 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code and also to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution in the present case the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent could not remove the appellant from service and, therefore had no power to sanction his prosecution.
the trial judge who had taken cognizance of the case on a sanction given by the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent was incompetent to try the case, and an order of acquittal passed by a court which had no jurisdiction did not bar a retrial for the same offence.
[952 C E] (ii) There was irregularity in maintaining the record of the evidence at the trial because the evidence was recorded before one Judge and another Judge.
subscribed his signature to the record of that evidence, and on that account there was nOn compliance with the provisions of section 356(1) Cr.P.C., but this was an irregularity curable under section 537 Cr.
P.C. and did not vitiate the trial.
[955 B. E] The object of the provisions in the Code relating to the recording of evidence is to ensure that a correct record is maintained of what is said in court by witnesses, and the record may be available at a later stage of the trial and in appeal.
If the court is satisfied that in a given case the record notwithstanding any departure from the provisions relating to maintenance of the record is correct the irregularity may be ignored if no injustice has resulted therefrom.
[954 D] Liverpool Borough Bank vs Turner, ; , referred to.
Abdul Rahman vs King Emperor, L.R. 54 I.A. 96, distinguished.
(iii) By section 5A(1)(d) the legislature has expressly provided that an officer below the rank of a Deputy Superintendent of Police may conduct the investigation with the order of a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the First Class.
In the present case such are order of the Additional District Magistrate who held the office of a First Class Magistrate was obtained and there was compliance with the provisions of section 5A(1)(d).
[957 H]
