The Nagpur District Land Development Bank Ltd. was registered as a society under the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960.
There was dispute as to whether one 'M ' had been elected as a member of the Bank at a meeting of the Board of Directors.
The Registrar of Cooperative Societies referred the dispute to a nominee.
Certain documents including the minutes book of the Bank were produced before the nominee. 'M ' filed a complaint against the President and Secretary of the Bank charging them with offences under sections 465 and 471 I.P.C. for having forged the minute book and producing it before the nominee.
The two accused raised an objection that the magistrate had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the complaint without the previous sanction of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies under section 148(3) of the Maharashtra Cooperative Bank Act, 1960.
The trial magistrate rejected the contention.
The order was confirmed by the Court of Session and the High Court Of Bombay.
In appeal before this Court the following contentions were urged on behalf of the accused appellants : (i) That the nominee of the Registrar appointed under section 95 of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960, was a 'court ' within the meaning of section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and a complaint for offences under sections 465 and 471 Indian Penal Code alleged to have be en committed by a party to any proceeding in respect of the document produced or given in evidence in such proceeding, cannot be entertained except on a complaint in writing of such court, or of a court to which it is subordinate, (ii) That the ingredients of the offence of forgery punishable under section 465 I.P. Code 'and of the offence under section 146(p) of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act are the same, and the general provision is on that account pro tanto repealed, and in any event in view of section 148(3) of the Maharashtra Act no prosecution could be initiated in respect of the offences charged otherwise than with the sanction of the Registrar.
HELD : (i) The nominee exercising power to make an award under section 96 of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960, derives his authority not from the statute but from investment by the Registrar in his individual discretion.
The power invested is liable to be suspended and may be withdrawn.
He is not entrusted the judicial power of the State : he is merely an arbitrator authorised within the limits of the power conferred to 'adjudicate upon the dispute referred to him.
He is not a court within the meaning of section 195 of the Code of Criminal Pro 'Sup.
CI/69 13 18 6 Thadi Subbi Reddi vs Emperor, , Velayuda Mudali & Anr.
vs Co operative Rural Credit Society & Ors., , Y, Mahabaleswarappa vs M. Gopalaswami Mudaliar, A.I.R. 1935 Mad. 673, Nand Lal Ganguli vs Khetra Mohan Ghose, I.L.R. , Jagannath Prasad vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , Lalji Haridas vs State of Maharashtra & Anr., ; , Shri Virindar Kumar Satyawadi vs State of Punjab, [1955] 2 S.C.R. 1013, Brajnandan Sinha vs Jyoti Narain, ; , Hari Pandurang & Anr.
vs Secretary of State for India in Council I.L.R. , Thakur Jugal Kishore Sinha vs Sitamarhi Central Co operative Bank Ltd. ; and Malabar Hill Co operative Housing Society Ltd. Bombay vs K. L. Gauba & Ors.
A.I.R. 1964 Bom.
147, considered.
(ii) Section 146(p) of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 and sections 463 and 464 I.P.C. are two distinct offences which are capable of being committed with different intentions by different sets of persons and it could not be contemplated that the Legislature of the State of Maharashtra intended to repeal pro tanto the provisions of section 465 I.P.C. by enactment of section 146 of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act.
The prosecution in the present case not being under the Maharashtra Act sanction of the Registrar under section 148 thereof was not necessary.
[201 H 202 A] Om Prakash Gupta vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1957] S.C.R. 423 and T. section Balliah vs T. section Rengachari, ; , applied.
