One W owned several tea, coffee and other.
plantations.
In 1927, he formed a limited company and conveyed his estates to the company.
All the shares of the company were held by him and the members of his family.
The company borrowed Rs. 10 1/2 lakhs from the Imperial Bank of India 'against the issue of debentures secured by an English mortgage.
The loan was repayable on March 15, 1937.
In default of payment within November 15, 1937 the trustee under the debenture trust deed was authorised to enter into possession of the estates and sell them.
The appellant company was appointed as the secretary of the company.
Since 1931, the family was keen on selling the estates, but none of the offers materialised.
In 1936, there was a slump in tea and coffee prices and there was a possibility of a further slump.
The Bank was pressing for the payment of its dues and the company was not in a position to liquidate the debt without selling the estates.
The family 'tried unsuccessfully to raise loans.
In the beginning of November 1937, the family had a firm offer from A.L. & Co. for the purchase of all the estates for Rs. 14 lakhs, but the family wag anxious to retain one of them.
The appellant company offered Rs. 10 lakhs for all the estates excluding the estate which the family wanted to retain.
The family knew that this estate, if sold separately, would not fetch more, than Rs. 2 lakhs and yet they chose to retain it and to accept the appellant 's offer.
At a meeting all the shareholders (members of the family) unanimously accepted the, proposal.
There all sui juris and had business acumen.
They knew the value of he properties and accepted Rs. 10 lakhs as a just and fair price.
The offer enabled them to retain the estate which they wanted to retain and at the same time enabled them to liquidate the Bank 's dues.
They had legal advice and the documents were in proper legal form.
The meeting was also attended by the chairman of the company and the director nominated by the Imperial Bank.
After the transfer, the company went into voluntary liquidation and it stood dissolved on March 1, 1940, under section 209 H of the Companies Act, 1913.
The appellant took possession of the properties on January 10, 1938 and promoted a new company to which the properties were transferred by conveyances dated January 14, 1939 and May 15, 1939 50 % of the shares of the new company were held by the appellant company which managed and controlled the new company.
The members of the family made no complaint about 'the transaction for 12 years, but, on December 21, 1950, they instituted a suit against the appellant and others alleging that the old company had not been wound up in accordance with law and was still in existence, that the old company was the real owner of the properties and the new company held them in trust for the old 204 company, that the appellant took advantage of its fiduciary capacity and gained pecuniary advantage and that the various sales and conveyances were vitiated by fraud, and prayed for 'a decree vesting or retransferring the properties to the old company or the family.
The trial court dismissed the suit, but the appeal to the High Court was allowed in part.
In appeal to this Court, on the, questions : (1) (a) Whether there was a fiduciary relationship between the appellant and the old company, and (b) Whether the appellant gained a pecuniary advantage by availing itself of the fiduciary character; (2) Whether the suit was barred by limitation; and (3) Whether the members of the family as shareholders of the old company were entitled to maintain the suit, HELD : (1) (a) The appellant company was the secretary of the old company, was in charge of its correspondence and accounts and was actively engaged in assisting it and its share holders in selling the estates.
In the course of such employment it acquired intimate knowledge of the income, prospects and market value of the properties.
Therefore, the appellant stood in a fiduciary relationship towards the old company and was bound to protect its interests.
Having regard to its fiduciary character, the appellant should have avoided entering into the transaction.
[209 B D; 211 D] (b) But, there is no rule, which incapacitates a trustee from dealing with a cestui que trust, provided there was no fraud and no advantage was taken by the trustee of any information acquired by him in the character of a trustee.
The onus, however, is upon the trustee to establish affirmatively that the transaction was righteous and that he did not gain any pecuniary advantage by availing himself of his fiduciary character.
in the present case, the appellant had discharged this difficult onus.
The transaction was just and fair and the appellant did not gain any pecuniary advan tage by availing itself of its fiduciary character, nor was there any conflict between its own interests and those of the old company.
, No advantage was taken by the appellant of any information acquired by it in its character as secretary and, the circumstances ,how that there was no fraud, no concealment and no undue influence.
The long acquiescence of the members of the family in the sale is also evidence that the transaction was fair in all respects.
E; 211 E D] Coles vs Trecothick, ; , 247; ; , 597 and Parks vs White, , 226; , 1074, applied (2) The suit was barred by limitation.
[212 D] A suit by a beneficiary, claiming recovery of possession from the trustee is governed by article 120 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
The plaintiffs had not established fraud and consequently article 95 of the Limitation Act has no application.
Section 10 of the Act also does not apply, because, the properties were not vested in the new company for the specific purpose of making them over to the old company or to the plaintiffs.
In the plaint there was no prayer for recovery of possession.
The old company could not ask for recovery of the properties until they obtained a reconveyance from the new company.
The suit is not there fore governed by article 144 of the Limitation Act and since the ' period under article 120 is 6 years from the date of cause of action and the cause of action in the present case arose in 1939 when the conveyances were executed, the suit was barred.
[211 F H] 205 Rani Chhatra Kumari Devi vs Prince Mohan Bikram Shah, L.R. 58 I.A. 279, applied.
(3) The plaintiffs were not entitled to maintain the suit.
[216 C] As the plaintiffs failed to establish any fraud affecting the dissolution of the company, the dissolution has put an, end to its existence.
On the dissolution of the company, its properties, if any, Vested in the Government The right of the Government to take by escheat for want of an heir or successor or as bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner has been recognised in our country.
The various Government of India Acts and the Constitution show that the Government takes by escheat immovable as well as movable property for want of an heir or successor.
It is an incident of sovereignty and rests on the principle of ultimate ownership by the State of all property within its jurisdiction.
Unlike the law in the United States, winding up 'under the Indian Law precedes dissolution and there is no statutory provision vesting the properties of a dissolved company in a trustee or having the effect of abrogating the law of escheat.
The shareholders or creditors of a dissolved company cannot be regarded as its heirs or successors.
Therefore, the Government took by escheat or as bona vacantia all properties of a company dissolved under the, Indian Companies Act,. 1913, except in so far as its right was cut down by that Act.
Accordingly, the shareholders or creditors of the dissolved company cannot maintain arty action for recovery of its assets As the company was not a party and the assets could not be restored to its coffers, no effective relief could be given in such an action.
D E; 214 C D, F; 215 B C; 216 A B] Collector of Masulipatam vs C. Vencata Narainapah, 8 M.I.A. 500, 525, in re.
Wells , 49, Coxon vs
Gorst, and In re.
Lewis and Smart Ltd. , applied.
Bombay Deying and Manufacturing Co. vs State of Bombay, ; , 1146 and Legal Remembrancer vs Corporation of Calcutta; , , 204, followed.
In re.
U. N. Mandal 's Estate, A.I.R. 1959 Cal.
493, 498, approved.
