Article 136 of the Constitution is worded in the widest terms possible.
It vests in the Supreme Court a plenary jurisdiction in the matter of entertaining and hearing appeals by granting special leave against any kind of judgment or order made by a Court or ' Tribunal in any cause or matter and the powers can be exercised in spite of the specific provisions for appeal contained in the Consti tution 'or other laws.
The powers given by the article are, however, in the nature of special or residuary powers which are exercisable outside the purview of ordinary law, in cases where the needs of justice demand interference by the Supreme Court.
The non obstante clause in article 329 of the Constitution which debars the Supreme Court as well as any other Court in India from entertaining a suit or a proceeding calling in question any election to Parliament or the State Legislature and section 105 of the Representation of the People Act which gives finality to the decision of the Election Tribunal so far as that Act is 268 concerned and does not provide for any further appeal, do not cut down or affect the overriding powers which the Supreme,Court can exercise in the matter of granting special leave under article 136 of the Constitution.
The overriding power vested in the Supreme Court under article 136 of the Constitution is wider than the prerogative right of entertaining an appeal exercised by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in England because the prerogative right of the Grown can be taken away or curtailed by express legislation but the Constitutional provision in article 136 cannot be limited or taken away by any Parliamentary legislation and this Constitutional provision overrides ordinary laws and no presumption can arise from words and expressions declaring an adjudication of a particular Tribunal to be final and conclusive that there was an intention to exclude the exercise of the special power.
Where on the finding of the Tribunal there has been a viola tion of or non compliance with the provision of article 173 of the Constitution because the candidate suffers from a Constitutional disability by reason of his under age the case falls under sub section (2) (c) of section 100 of the Representation of the People Act and not under sub section (1) (c) of section 100 of the Act and election should be held to be void on the ground of the Constitutional disqualification of the candidate and not on the ground that his nomination was improperly accepted by the Returning Officer and therefore the 'election of that candidate only should be declared void and not the whole election.
The expression " non compliance with the provisions of the Constitution " in clause (c) of sub section (2) of section 100 of the Act is sufficiently wide to cover such cases where the question is not one of improper acceptance or rejection of the nomination by the Returning Officer but there is a fundamental disability in the candidate to stand for election at all.
Bharat Bank Ltd., vs Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd. ([1950] S.C.R. 459), Theberge vs Laudry ( [1876 771 2 A.C. 102), Stowe vs Jolliffe and Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency and Others ( ; referred to.
