On July 19, 1945 the assessee took an lease certain premises in Calcutta on a monthly rental.
He made some alterations in the premises so as to convert it into a cinema house but found himself short of money.
As permitted by the terms of his lease he leased the premises on February 23, 1946 to certain parties.
According to the terms of the indenture the lessees agreed to pay him Rs. 55,2GO towards construction of the cinema house which would on completion be let to them at a monthly rental of Rs. 2,100 payable with effect from June 1, 1946.
The Income tax authorities treated the sum of Rs. 55,200 thus received as taxable ;and the High Court on reference held the same.
in appeal by the assessee this Court had to consider whether the receipt was taxable.
HELD : (i) The departmental authorities as well as the High Court were in error in treating the amount of Rs. 55,200 as advance payment of rent.
The lease by which the cinema house was demised did not contain any condition or stipulation from which it could be inferred that the aforesaid amount had been paid by way of advance rent.
The transaction embodied in the indenture of lease was clearly business like.
The lessees wanted the building for running it as a cinema house and the lessor agreed to give it to them but apparently represented that he did not have enough money to complete it in accordance with the suggestions and requirement of the lessees.
The lessees agreed to pay him the aforesaid amount by way of a lump sum without making any provision for its adjustment towards the rent or repayment by the lessor.
On the terms of the lease and in the absence of any other material or evidence it could not be held that the sum of Rs. 55,200 was paid by way of advance rental.[465 G 466 B] (ii) The question whether premium is a capital or a revenue receipt cannot be decided as a pure question of law.
Its decision necessarily depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
It would not however be wrong to say that prima facie premium or salami is not income and it would be for the income tax authorities to show that facts exist which would make it a revenue receipt.
[467 B] According to the terms of the lease, in the present case ' the payment of rent was to commence not from the date of the lease which was February 23, 1946 but with effect from June 1, 1946.
The lessees entered into possession after the cinema house had been completed which was subsequent to the date of the lease.
These facts coupled with the payment of a lump sum which was of a non recurring nature showed that the amount in question had all the characteristics of a capital payment and was not revenue.
[467 C D] Henriksen vs Grafton Hotel Ltd., , Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & Orissa vs Visweshwar, [1939] 7 I.T.R. 536 and 463 Member for the Board of Agricultural Income tax vs Sindhurani Chaudhurani & Ors., , applied.
