The poll for election to the Gujarat State Assembly from Mehsana State Assembly constituency was taken on February 21, 1967.
On February 18, 1967 one S.M. addressed public meetings at various villages which were part of the constituency.
The appellant who was the successful candidate was present at those meetings and did not dissociate himself from any of the remarks in the speeches.
Police con tables, under instructions of the Government, took down notes of the speeches and reported to their superior officers.
These police constables did not take down every word spoken by S.M. but whatever was taken down was spoken by S.M.; and in the reports, though the exact words were not reproduced the substance of the speeches was correctly reproduced.
These reports showed that S.M. made the following statements in his speeches (i) He appealed to the Hindu voters as such not to vote for the Congress Party lest they might be betraying their religious leader (Jagadguru Sankaracharya of Puri), particularly when he had fasted for 73 days in the cause of preventing cow slaughter; (ii) He put forward an appeal to the electors not to vote for the Congress Party but to vote for the Swatantra Party in the name of religion; (iii) He said that a relationship of cause and effect existed between the slaughter of 33,000 bullocks every day and natural calamities like famine and flood; (iv) He asked his voters to vote for the appellant because he was a Brahmin; and (v) He said that if the voters voted for the Congress who are responsible for 24 crore of cows being slaughtered then God will be displeased.
On the questions : (1) whether the reports made by the police constables were admissible in evidence; (2) Whether any weight should be attached to them; and (3) Whether they showed that the appellant was guilty of corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(2) and (3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 HELD (Per Sikri and Bachawat, JJ.) (1) The reports were properly used under section 160 of the Evidence Act, 1872, and were admissible in evidence.
[406 C D] 401 Before a witness testifies to facts stated in a document, under section 160 of the Evidence Act two conditions must be satisfied namely : (a) that the witness bad no specific recollection of the facts themselves; and (b) the witness says that he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
For satisfying the conditions it is however not necessary that the witness should specifically state that he has no specific recollection of the facts and that he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
It is enough if it appears from the evidence of the witness that those conditions are established.
[405 C E] In the present case, it could be implied from the Circumstances that the conditions of section 160 were satisfied.
The witnesses were giving their testimony in Court after a lapse 'of 9 months after the speeches were made and it is implicit that they could have no specific recollection of the speeches, especially when they attended and 'reported many similar meeting as part of their duty during.
the election campaign.
The second condition is also satisfied because, the witnesses made notes on the spot and made out reports from those notes when the speeches were fresh in their memory.
The reports are, strictly not substantive evidence as such and could only be used as part of the oral evidence on oath.
The reports should therefore have been read out in Court and not marked as exhibits.
But the practice of marking such a report as in exhibit is well established and avoids the useless formal ceremony of reading it out as part of the oral evidence.
[405 E G; 406 D E] Wigmore on Evidence (Third Edn.
III pp.
97 98), Mylapore Krishnaswami vs Emperor, , 395 and Mohan Singh Laxmansingh vs Bhanwarlal Rajmal Nahata, A.I.R. 1964, M.P. 137, 146, referred to.
Public Prosecutor vs Venkatarama Naidu, I.L.R. [1944], Mad. 113, approved.
Jagannath vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1932 Lah.
7 and Sodhi Pindi Das V. Emperor, A.I.R. 1938 Lah.
629, disapproved.
(2) Though the reports were not taken down in short hand nor were the exact words spoken by S.M. taken down by the various police constables.
the reports show a remarkable similarity of approach, appeal and attack on the Congress Party; and in those circumstances it must he held the police constables correctly reproduced the substance of the speeches.
It is not necessary that the exact words must be reproduced before a speech can be held to amount to corrupt practice.
[414 A C] (3) (i) This statement does not amount to corrupt practice, because, there was no proof that the Jagadguru was the religious head of the majority of the electors in this constituency or that he exercised great influence on them, and so, it could not be held that an ordinary Hindu voter of the constituency would feel that he would be committing a sin if he disregarded the alleged directive of the Jagadguru.
[410 A C] Ram Dial vs Sant Lal, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 748, distinguished.
(Per Hegde, J. dissenting) : The statement amounted to corrupt practice.
What section 123(2) requires is to induce or attempt to induce 'an elector ' which means even a single elector that he will be rendered an object of spiritual censure if he exercises or refuses to exercise his electoral right in a particular manner.
While undoubtedly the inducement or attempt 40 2 to induce complained of should be such as to amount to a direct or indirect interference with the free exercise of the electoral right it is not in the public interest to cut down the scope of the sub section.
Whether a particular statement comes within it or not depends on various factors such as the nature of the statement, the person who makes it and the persons to whom it is addressed.
Therefore, when a respected religious preacher induces or attempts to induce the illiterate and 'superstitious voters who form the bulk of the voters that they will become objects of divine displeasure if they do not exercise their franchise in a particular manner, though his statements are not supported by religious books and he himself may not be a religious head of the majority of electors, the statements may yet amount to a corrupt practice in law.
[415 C G] (Per Sikri, and Bachawat, JJ.) : (ii) There is no bar to a candidate or his supporters appealing to the electors not to vote for the Congress in the name of religion, or appealing to vote for the Swatantra Party because the people in that party are fond of their religion.
What section 123(2) of the Representation of the People Act bars is that a candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or his agent should appeal to the voters to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, that is the religion of the candidate.
[410 C D; 411F] (iii) This statement does not amount to corrupt practice within s.123(2) proviso (a)(ii), because, the law does not place any bar on describing a party as irreligious or saying that because that political party is irreligious natural calamities had resulted on account if its disregard of religion.
[411 E F] (iv) Asking the voters to vote for the appellant because he was a Brahmin, fell within the mischief of section 123(3).
[411 F G] (Per Hegde, J. dissenting).
: When he stated that there should be at least one Brahmin Minister in the Cabinet, S.M. was merely giving expression to the fact that communal and regional representations in our political institutions have come to stay and was not appealing to the voters to vote on the basis of the appellant 's caste.
[415H] (By Full Court) : (v) As this statement constitutes an attempt to induce the electors to believe that they would become objects of divine displeasure if they voted for the Congress and thereby allowed cow slaughter to be continued, and as in the circumstances of the case, it must be deemed to have been made with the appellant 's consent, the appellant was guilty of corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123(2) proviso (a) (ii) [413C; 415B C] Narbada Prasad vs Chhagan Lal, ; followed.
