The respondent, a fabricator of steel windows, submitted a tender for 'Providing and fixing ' window leaves in a building.
The window leaves.
were to be fabricated according to the specifications in the contract and.
were to be fixed within six months from the date of acceptance to the: building with rawl plugs in cut stone work.
The 'rate quoted by the respondent was based on the current price of mild steel billets and the price was to be revised in the light of cost revision of the controlled price of steel.
The tender was accepted and the respondent carried out the contract.
The Sales Tax Officer levied sales tax on the amount received. under the contract holding that the contract was for sale of goods and to promote its sale the respondent undertook to fix the windows without demanding any charge for that service.
But in appeal the Deputy Commissioner Exercise & Taxation held that two contracts resulted : one for Providing windows and the other for fixing them in the building, and that the price of goods supplied, but not the charge for service was taxable.
The Board of Revenue confirmed the order passed by the Deputy commissioner observing that the contract was not a contract of service.
On reference, the High Court held that it was a building contract and amount received was not taxable.
In appeal, this Court, HELD : It was a contract for rendering service and the amount received by the respondent was not taxable.
Whether a particular contract is for sale of goods or is a contract for service depends upon the main object of the parties gathered from the.
terms of the contract, the circumstances of the transaction, and the custom, of the trade, and no universal rule applicable to all transactions can be evolved.
[509 A] In this case, the primary undertaking of the respondent was not merely to supply the windows but to 'fix ' the windows.
This service was not rendered under a separate contract, nor was shown to be rendered customarily or normally as incidental to the sale by the person who supplied ' window leaves.
The fixing of the windows in the manner stipulated required special technical skill.
If the windows were not properly 'fixed ' the contract would not be complete, and the respondent could not claim the amount agreed to be paid to it.
It was only upon the 'fixing ' of the window leaves and when the window eaves had become a part of the building construction that property in the goods passed under the terms of the contract.
[512 E G] The State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras ) Ltd. 9S.T.C. 353; The Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Guntur Tobaccos Ltd., 16 S.T.C. 240: (S.C.); Patnaik and Company vs State of Orissa, 16 S.T.C. 364 (S.C.); Mckenzies Ltd. vs The State of Maharashtra, 16 S.T.C. 518 (S.C.); Commissioner of Sales tax, Maharashtra State, Bombay vs Arun.
, 506 Electrics 16 S.T.C. 385; Arun Electrics, Bombay vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Maharashtra State, 17 S.T.C. 576; The State of Madras vs Richardson Cruddas Ltd., 21 S.T.C. 245; Love vs Norman Wright (Builders) Ltd., [1944] 1 K.B. 484, referred to.
