The first respondent, who was the Chief Minister of the State, and the first appellant were candidates for election to the Mysore Legislative Assembly from Shiggaon constituency.
The notification fixing the time schedule for the elections fixed 20th January 1967, as the last date for filing nominations, 21st as the date of scrutiny, and 23rd as the last date for withdrawal of candidature.
The first respondent, had also filed his nomination at two other places, Bagalkot and Hospet, and validly made the affirmations required by article 173 (a) of the Constitution, at those places on the 19th and 20th January.
He also made the affirmation before the Returning Officer of the Shiggaon constituency on the date of scrutiny, that is, 21st January.
The first respondent was declared elected unopposed on the date of scrutiny on the ground that all other candidates, including the first appellant, had withdrawn their candidature.
The first appellant challenged the first respondent 's election on the grounds that the first respo ndent was disqualified for failure to make the affirmation under article 173(a) before filing the nomination paper in Shiggaon constituency, that the withdrawal from candidature of the first appellant was attempted to be obtained by inducement, threats and undue in and was in fact procured with the connivance of the Returning Officer, and that the first respondent committed other irregularities in the filing of his nomination.
It was alleged that one P was responsible for the corrupt practices with the consent of the first respondent.
P was not examined as a witness by the respondents.
The first appellant filed an application to examine P as a court witness, on the ground that the appellant could not examine him as his own witness since he would be hostile to the appellant.
The High Court rejected the ;application.
The High Court, after rightly repelling the contention that the affirmation should have been made prior to the filing of the nomination, held that the affirmation made prior to scrutiny was sufficient compliance with the requirements of article 173(a), and that the charges of corrupt practice of undue influence and bribery against the first respondent, and the connivance of the Returning Officer in relation to the corrupt practices and irregularities, were not proved.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (1) This Court, in Pashupati Nath Singh vs Harihar Prasad Singh, ; , held that the affirmation should be made before the date of scrutiny, so that, in the present case, it should have been made at the latest by the mid 525 night between 20th and 21st January; and (2) On the failure of the first respondent to examine P an adverse inference should have been drawn against the first respondent, and that the High Court erred in not summoning P as a court witness.
HELD:(1) (a) Since the first appellant was permitted to raise the new ground based upon the decision in Pashupati Math Singh 's case, the first respondent should not be debarred from putting forward his alternative plea that article 173(a) was satisfied on the basis of the affirmations made at Bagalkot and Hospet.
[532 E F] (b)The notification issued by the Election Commission in pursuance of article 173(a) stated that the affirmation should be made before the Returning Officer or Assistant Returning Officer for that constituency.
In using the expression 'that constituency ', the intention of the Election Com mission was that the affirmation must be made before the Returning Officer or Assistant Returning Officer of that particular constituency from which the candidate was seeking election to the Legislature of the State, whether it be an Assembly Constituency or 'a Council Constituency.
[534 A B] (c)When the first respondent made his affirmations on the 19th and 20th before, the Returning Officer at Bagalkot and Hospet respectively, he was a candidate nominated for election from those constituencies.
Once he made such an affirmation before one of the persons authorised by the Election Commission he had fully complied with the requirements of article 173(a), and thereupon, became qualified to be a candidate for election to the Mysore Legislative Assembly.
[534 C E].
The purpose of article 173(a) is to ensure that any person, who wants to be a member of a Legislature of a State, must bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution as by law established and undertake to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India, and, to ensure this, he must make an oath or affirmation.
The Article requires one oath or affirmation in accordance with the form set out in the Third Schedule to the Constitution so as to 'remove the disqualification from being a candidate for election to the Legislature of the State.
The Article does not mention that the making of oath or affirmation is to be preliminary to the validity of candidature in each constituency, and the Article does not require that the qualification must be acquired separately in respect of each constituency from which a candidate was seeking election.
Once the oath or affirmation is made before a competent authority in respect of one constituency, the candidate becomes bound by that oath or affirmation even if he gets elected to the Legislature from a different constituency [534 E H; 535 A B] (2)In the present case, the circumstantial evidence indicated that the version put forward on behalf of the appellants could not be true.
therefore, the High Court was justified in holding that the appellants ' case was shown to be false by other evidence, so that, there was no compelling reason for the High Court to examine P as a court witness or to draw an adverse inference against first respondent for his failure to examine P as a witness.
[540 G H; 541 A] Dr. M. Chenna Reddy vs V. Ramachandra Rao, C.A. No. 1449/68 dt.
17 12 1968, R. M. Seshadri vs G. Vasantha Pai, ; and Nani Gopal Swami vs Abdul Hamid Chowdhury, A.I.R. 1959 Assam 200, referred to.
