In the State of Punjab local authorities and individual owners of land were holding cattle fairs.
The Punjab Cattle Fairs (Regulation) Art, 1967, was passed by the State Legislature in exercise of powers under entry 28 of List II of VII Schedule to the Constitution, declaring a monopoly in the State to hold cattle fairs and prohibiting all local authorities and individuals from holding cattle fairs at 'any place in the State '.
There was no definition of the expression 'cattle fair ' in the Act.
The validity of the Act was challenged on the ground that the provisions of the Act were 'vague and ambiguous ', and the High Court, in Mohinder Singh Sawhney vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1968 Punj. 391, accepted the contention. 'Me State Legislature thereupon, by Amendment Act 18 of 1968 introduced section 2(bb) defining the expression 'cattle fair ' to mean 'a gathering of more than 25 persons for the purpose of general sale or purchase of cattle '.
Fair Officers were appointed under section 4(1) of the Act, and under section 4(2) they declared certain areas as fair areas. 'Some of the areas so declared belonged to a Municipal Committee in the State.
The Munici pal Committee, a lessee from the Municipal Committee and some residents in the State, challenged the Act in this Court on the following grounds (1) Since the Act was struck down in Mohinder Singh Sawhney 's case, the Act ceased to have any existence in law and could not therefore be amended; (2) The order of the High Court in that case operated as res judicata between the parties and could not be enforced without a re enactment of the Act; (3) The Act violated articles 19(1)(b), (d), (f) and (g); and (4) Section 15 (if the Act, which authorises the State to call upon a Panchayat Samiti or a Municipal Committee within whose jurisdiction the fair is held to deposit a prescribed amount in the Cattle Fair Fund to cover the initial expenses of the fair and compels the local authority to abide by the directions, was invalid.
The Municipal Committee also challenged the demand by the Fair Officer, asking the Municipal Committee to supply water, electricity and to make sanitary arrangements and to make the staff articles and offices of the Municipal Committee available to the Fair Officer.
448 HELD: (i) The Act as originally enacted was not vague.
, When the Legislature did not furnish a definition of 'cattle fair ' it must be deemed to have used the expression in its ordinary signification, as meaning a periodical concourse of buyers and sellers in a place, generally for sale and purchase of cattle, at times or on occasions ordained by custom.
[454 C E] But even if it was vague it could not have been struck down on that ground.
The High Court in Mohinder Singh Sawhney 's case struck down the Act on the ground of vagueness on the assumption that the validity of the Act was liable to be adjudged by the test of 'due process of law '.
But this Court, in A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, [1950] S.C.R. 88, held that the doctrine of due process has no place in our Constitution.
Superior Courts in India may declare a law invalid, if the Legislature has no power to enact the law or if the law violates any of the fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or is inconsistent with any constitutional provision, but not on the ground that it is vague.
Therefore as a result of the judgment of the High Court the Act did not cease to have existence in law.
[453 C D, G; 454 A B] Kehar Singh vs The State of Punjab, , approved.
(2) The decision in Mohinder Singh Sawhney 's case does not operate as res judicata even in favour of the petitioners in that case.
Its effect was only that the Act was in law non existent so long as there was no definition of the expression 'cattle 'fair ' in the Act.
But that defect has been remedied by the Amending Act.
[454 B C] (3) (a) The Act does not impose unreasonable restrictions upon the fundamental rights guaranteed under article 19(1)(b) and (d).
It prohibits an individual or local authority from arranging a gathering of more than 25 persons for the purpose specified in the definition.
The restriction was only for the purpose of making the monopoly effective, and must be regarded as a reasonable restriction within the meaning of cls.
19(3) and (5) upon the freedom of assembly and of free movement.
[456 C E] (b) The Act is restricted in its scope and the freedoms guaranteed by article 19(1) (f) and (g) are also not infringed.
(i) A law which is 'basically and essentially necessary ' for creating a State monopoly and thereby deprives the citizens of the right to carry on he same business is not, by virtue of article 19(6), open to challenge on the ground that it infringes the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1) (g).
In the present case, the primary object of the Act is to give a monopoly to the 'State to hold cattle fairs and as a necessary concomitant of that monopoly, holding of cattle fairs by local authorities and individuals is prohibited.
The law will not also be exposed to attack on the ground that the right to carry on business is property, for, the validity of restrictions on the right to carry on occupation, trade or business, or to practice any profession must be adjudged only in the light of article 19(6).
Moreover, the presumption of reasonableness of a statute creating a monopoly in the State applies not only in respect of the right under article 19(1)(g) but also under article 19(1)(f).
[456 E G; 457 A C] Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 691, followed.
State of Bihar vs Rameshwar Pratap Narain; [1962] 2 S.C.R. 382 and M. V. P. Ramunni Kurup vs Panchayat Board, Badagara, A.I.R. 1954 Mad.
754, referred to.
449 (ii) The prohibition imposed upon all persons and authorities is in respect of only cattle fairs and not in respect of cattle markets, that is, places where the business of see or purchase is regularly conducted by private parties and not as a fair.
The Act does not prohibit anyone from carrying on the business of cattle market on his own land.
[455 E F; 461 E] When the business is in the nature of a market for sale of sheep and goats brought by intending sellers 'for slaughter, such a place cannot be called a fair.
A person carrying on his business in a cattle market on his own land need not take out a licence under section 9 of the Act even though he was collecting brokerage and was carrying on the business of a broker, because, it is only a person carrying on his business within a fair area, lawfully declared, that is required to obtain the licence.
[460 F H] (iii) Though the words used in section 4 are wide and are capable of the interpretation that the State could hold a cattle fair at any place, it is implicit in sections 3 and 4 that the monopoly acquired by the State to hold and manage cattle fairs is confined to property belonging to the State and does not extend to the property of local authorities or private owners.
[456 A C] A Municipal Committee is not a 'citizen ' within the meaning of article 19 and therefore, is not entitled to claim protection of any of the fundamental 'rights under article 19.But a direction to make municipal property available for holding a cattle fair by the 'State is a threat to requisition municipal property without authority of law and is not a mere direction to regulate the fair held on behalf of the Municipal Committee.
Such a taking possession of property without payment of compensation as required by article 31(2) must be deemed unauthorised and section 23, giving the pro visions of the Act a paramount operation notwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law, will not supersede the constitutional guarantee.
[458 E G] (4) Under section 17(d), out of the Cattle Fair Fund, the amount recovered from a local authority may be reimbursed but the provision in section 15, authorising the State to call upon a local authority to pay a sum of money towards the Cattle Fair Fund is an unreasonable deprivation of property and violates the right under article 19(1) (f) and hence is invalid.
[457 C E] Also the demand made by the Fair Officer for assistance of the staff, articles and offices of the Municipality for holding a fair, and the demand for supply of water and electricity and making suitable sanitary arrangements are not warranted by any provision of the Act, and must be de clared invalid.
[459 A C]
