Under section 81 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, an election can be challenged by means of an election petition filed within 45 days of the date of election, on the grounds specified in section 100(1).
Section 100 (1) (b) and (d) (ii) deal with corrupt practices, and section 123 sets out what shall be deemed to be corrupt practices.
To establish the corrupt practice under section 123(4) the election petitioner must prove : (a) the publication of a statement of fact by (i) a candidate, or (ii) his agent, or (iii) any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent; (b) that the statement is false or the candidate believes it to be false or does not believe it to be true; (c) that the statement refers to the personal character and conduct of another candidate; and (d) that it is reasonably calculated to prejudice that other candidate 's prospects of election.
Under the Explanation to the section, the word 'agent ' includes an election agent, a polling agent or any person who is held to have acted as an agent in connection with the election with the consent of the candidate.
If the corrupt practice is committed by the returned candidate or his election agent, under section 100(1) (b), the election is avoided without any further condition being, fulfilled, but if the petitioner relies on a corrupt practice committed by any other agent other than an election agent the petitioner must prove that it was committed with the consent of the returned candidate or his election agent as required by section 100(1) (b), or, that the corrupt practice which was committed in the interests of the returned candidate materially affected the result of the election in so far as it concerned the returned candidate.
[617 A B; 618 B D] Section 83 requires that the petition must contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies and the fullest possible particular of the corrupt practice alleged. 'Material facts ' and 'particulars ' may overlap but the word 'material ' shows that the ground of corrupt practice and the facts necessary to formulate a complete cause of action must be stated.
The function of the Particulars is to present as full a picture of the cause of action as to make the opposite party understand the case he will have to meet.
Under section 86(5), if a corrupt practice.
is alleged in the petition the particulars of such corrupt practice may be amended or amplified for ensuring a fair and effective dial, that is, more and better particulars of the charge may be given later, even after the period of limitation; but if a corrupt practice is not previously alleged in the petition, an amendment which will have the effect of introducing parti 604 culars of such a corrupt practice will not be permitted, after the period of 'limitation, because, it would be tantamount to the making of a fresh petition.
Merely repeating the words of the statute does not amount to a proper statement of material facts where the allegation of corrupt practice is the making of a false statement.
The false statement must appear in the petition.
if the corrupt practice is the publication of an article in a newspaper no incorporation of the contents by reference can be allowed, for, if a newspaper is not exhibited and only the date is mentioned, the material fact, namely, the exact offending portion of the newspaper, would not have been stated.
If the charge is that an agent did something, it cannot be amplified by giving particulars of acts on the part of the candidate or vice versa, because, in the scheme of: election law, publication of false statements by an agent is one cause of action and publication of false statements by a candidate is quite a different cause of action.
They are separate corrupt practices which cannot be said to grow out of the material facts related to another person.
Since a single corrupt practice committed by the candidate or by his election agent, or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent is fatal to the election, the case must be specifically pleaded and strictly proved; if not, such corrupt practice cannot be alleged later on after the period of limitation [619 C H; 621 B D; 622 A D, F G; 623 E H; 629 A B] In the present case, the election of the first respondent to Parliament from Bombay South Parliamentary constituency, was challenged by the appellant (an elector in the constituency) on the ground that corrupt practices were committed.
The result of the poll was declared on February 24, 1967.
The first respondent secured 1,47,841 votes and his nearest rival, the second respondent, secured 1,18,407 votes.
The petition was filed on April 7, 1967.
The corrupt practice alleged was that the first respondent made some speeches, and that the first respondent and two others, with the consent and for the benefit of the first respondent, made false statements, casting aspersions on the character and conduct of the second respondent, and that those and other false statements were published as news items in the daily newspaper 'Maratha '.
Extracts from the newspapers were annexed.
It was also stated that similar false statements were published in some other issues of the newspaper but no attempt Was made either to specify the offending portions of the newspapers or to file the extracts or the original issues, but only the dates were given.
There was also no averment that the first respondent believed the statements to be false or did not believe them to be true.
After the period of limitation, the originals of all the issues of the newspapers were filed and after the examination of the election petitioner as a witness, applications for amendment were made.
The High Court allowed the following amendments : (a) Speeches attributed to the first respondent and a speech said to have been made at a meeting, when the first respondent presided, casting aspersions on the second respondent, to be included among the list of corrupt practices.
Reports of those speeches appeared in the issues of the 'Maratha ' which were filed later.
(b) An article in the 'Blitz, written by the first respondent defamatory of the second respondent also to be included in the list of corrupt practices.
(c) An averment that the editor of the newspaper 'Maratha ' and the first respondent believed the statements to be false or that they did not believe them to be true.
And (d) an averment that the editor of the newspaper and the two others were the agents of the first respondent.
The High Court however, dismissed the election petition.
[614 E F; 616 B] In appeal to this Court, on the questions : (1) Whether all or any of the amendments should be allowed; (2) Whether the editor of the 'Maratha ' and the two others committed corrupt practices under section 100 605 (1) (b) by publishing the statements about the second respondent with the consent of the first respondent and (3) Whether the result of the election in so far as it concerned the first respondent was materially affected by the publication as required by section 100(1) (d) (ii), HELD: (1) The amendments relating to the speeches of, the first respondent and his article in the Blitz should not be allowed; but the amendments relating to the agency of the editor of the 'Maratha ' and the two others, and that seeking to incorporate the averment about the lack of belief of the editor of 'Maratha and the first respondent should be allowed.
[616 E G] In the petition as originally filed, the agency of the editor of 'Maratha, and the two others was the basis of the charge and the first respondent was left out.
Only one allegation was made personally against the first respondent namely that he made some speeches but that was not relied upon and no evidence regarding it was adduced.
The other allegation in the original petition was that he made some statements, and that the 'Maratha ' published them; and the extracts from the 'Maratha were filed as exhibits.
Since publication of a false statement is the gist of the election offence the charge was against the 'Maratha, and its editor.
If it was intended that the first respondent should be held responsible then the allegation should have been what statement he made and how it offended the election law. 'Mere was however no reference to any statement by the first respondent himself throughout the petition as it was originally filed and in fact there was no charge against him.
During the election the second respondent did not once protest that the first respondent was spreading false propaganda and even after election he did not attribute anything to the first respondent.
Therefore, the amendments which had the effect of introducing new corrupt practices relating to the candidate himself which had not been pleaded earlier should not be allowed, as that kind of amendment, sought after the period of limitation, is prohibited under the law.
But the allegation that in publishing the statements in the 'Maratha ' its editor acted as the agent of the first respondent, that the statements were false or were believed to be false by the first respondent and the editor, and that they were calculated to prejudice the second respondent 's chances and did so prejudice, should be allowed.
They are merely particulars to be added for completing the cause of action relating to a current practice already alleged.
The result is that the 'case is confined to that of a candidate sought to be made responsible for the acts of his agent other than an election agent.
[620 G; 624 A F; 632 A B] Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh, , Bhim Sen vs Gopali, , Chandi Prasad Chokani vs State of Bihar, , Sheopat Singh vs Ram Pratap, ; and Kumara Nand vs Brij Mohan, [1967]1 2 S.C.R. 127, followed.
Harish Chandra Bajpai vs Triloki Singh, ; , explained.
Din Dayal vs Beni Prasad, , Balwant Singh, ;vs Election Tribunal, , Sasivarna Thevar vs Arunagiri, , Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Election Tribunal, , Devaiah vs Nagappa, A.I.R. 1965 Mys.
102, Babulal Sharma vs Brijnarain Brajesh, A.I.R. 1958 M.P. 175 (F.B.), Beal vs Smith L. R. 1 5; Bruce vs Odhams Press Ltd. and Phillips vs Phillips, , referred to.
(2) Regard however being had to the activities of the editor of 'Maratha ' as editor and his own personal hostility to the second respon L10Sup./69 4 606 dent, every act of the editor could not be attributed to the first respondent.
The editor 's field of agency must be limited to what he said as the agent of the first respondent and would not embrace the field in which he as acting as editor of his newspaper unless the first respondent 's con sent to the corrupt practices was established.
[636 E F; 638 B C] Consent need not be directly proved and could be inferred from circumstantial evidence, such as a consistent course of conduct of the candidate.
But the circumstances must point unerringly to the conclusion and must not admit of any other explanation.
Although an election petition is tried in accordance with the Civil Procedure Code, a corrupt pra ctice must be proved in the same way as a criminal,charge is proved.
English cases dealing with illegal practices in which the candidate is held :responsible for the acts of his agent, are not a proper guide, because English law, unlike Indian law, makes a distinction between 'illegal practices ' and 'corrupt practices '.
Fourth the consent of the candidate must 'be specific and must be proved for each corrupt practice.
If every act of an agent is presumed to be with the consent of the candidate there would be no room for the application of the extra condition laid down by section 100(1)(d), namely, the material effect on the result of the election, be ,cause, whenever agency is proved either directly or circumstantially, the finding about consent under section 100(1) (b) will hive, to follow.
[637 A H] In the present case, though the newspaper ran a special column as an ,election front of the first respondent, no article or comment in that column was relied on for proving a corrupt practice.
It was not even suggested that the first respondent wrote any article for the 'Maratha.
The statements which were relied on as corrupt practices we 're made by the editor of the newspaper in the normal course of running a newspaper, as news items or in the editorial.
They stated the policy of the newspaper and its comments upon the events.
Many of the news items ,appeared.
in more than one paper.
If it could not be said that the editors of each of those papers acted as an agent for the first respondent there is no reason for, holding that the editor of 'Maratha ' alone acted as such agent.
It was not as if the matter was left entirely in the hands of the ,editor who acted as a whole time agent or solely as the agent of the first respondent, nor is it a case of some persons setting up the first respondent as a candidate and sponsoring his cause.
The editor did not publish any propaganda material such as leaflets or pamphlets.
Therefore, though the editor was a supporter and agent of the first respondent, it could not be said that the first respondent consented to each publication as it appeared or even generally consented to the publication of items defaming the character and conduct of the second respondent.
The first respondent denied knowledge of the. articles.
From his false suppression of some other facts and denial of others, it could not be said that his denial of knowledge of the articles in the 'Maratha ' was also false.
But even if he had knowledge, it would not be sufficient, because, the law requires some concrete proof, direct or circumstantial, of consent, and not merely 'of knowledge or connivance.
Further, no such inference regarding the first respondent 's consent could be drawn from the comments and speeches attributed to the first respondent by the 'Maratha ' and other newspapers or from any similarity of ideas or language, because, news items when published are garbled versions and cannot be regarded as proof of what actually happened or was said without other acceptable evidence through prom witnesses.
[629 B H; 630 A B: 632 F H; 633 A D; 634 A H; A G; 636 AD; 638 A G; 639 A B] As regards the other two persons, even evidence regarding their agency was non existent and there was no material on which the first respondent 's consent to their statements could be presumed or inferred.
[640 A B] 607 Therefore, since the consent of the candidate to the corrupt Practice was not proved the case will have to be judged under section 100 (1) (d) (ii) and not under section 100(1)(b).
[640 D] Rama Krishna 's case, C.A. No. 1949/67 dated 234 68, Inder Loll Yugal Kishore vs Lal Singh, A.I.R. 1961 Raj. 122, Gopal Swami vs Abdul Hamid Chowdhury, A.I.R. 1959 Assam 200, Adams vs Hon.
E. F. Leveson Gower, 1 O 'Malley & Hardcastle 218, Christie vs Grieve, 1 O 'Malley & Hardcastle 251, Spencer, John Blundell vs Charles Harrison, 3 O 'Mally & Hardcastle 148, Biswanath Upadhava vs Haralal Das, A.I.R. 1958 Assam 97, Abdul Majeed vs, Bhargavan, A.I.R. 1963 Kerala 18, Rustom Satin vs Dr. Sampoornanand , Sarala Devi Pathak T. Birendra Singh, , Krishna Kumar vs Krishna Gopal, A.I.R. 1964 Raj. 21, Lai Singh vs Vallabhdas, A.I.R. 1967 Guj.
62, Badri Narain vs Kantdeo Prasad, A.I.R. 1961 Pat.
41, Sarat Chandra vs Khagendranath, ; and Taunton 's case, I O 'Malley & Hardcastle 181, 185, referred to.
Bayley vs Edmunds, Byron & Marshall , distinguished.
(3) To bring a case under section 100(1) (d) (ii) it is not sufficient to prove that a person acted as an agent with the consent of the candidate.
The petitioner will have to establish that the conditions required by section 100(1).(d)(ii) and section 123(4) are satisfied, that is : (a) that a false statement was made by an agent, (b) that the first respondent did not believe, the statement to be true or believed it to be false; (c) that it related to the personal character and conduct of the second respondent; (d) that it was reasonably calculated to harm the chances of the second respondent; and (e) that it in fact materially affected the result of the election in so far as the first respondent was concerned.
Conditions (a), (b) and (c).
were admitted by the first respondent and, since the articles cast violent aspersions on the second respondent and showed a deliberate attempt to lower his character, condition (d) was also satisfied.
But as condition (e) was not satisfied, the election petition should be dismissed.
[640 D H] Even after considering the nature of attacks made on the second respondent, the frequency and extent of publicity, the medium of circulation and the kinds of issues raised before the voters, it could not be said, in the circumstances of this case, that the result of the. election in so far as the first respondent was concerned was materially affected.
The matter could not be decided on possibilities or on a reasonable judicial guess, because, the law requires proof, and though section 100(1) (d) casts a difficult burden on the election petitioner, that burden must be successfully discharged by him.
[641 B D; 644 B D] There was a large difference (about 30,000) between the votes received by the two rival candidates, namely the first and second respondents, and as many as 38,565 votes were cast in favour of the remaining candidates and it is impossible to say how much the second respondent lost or first respondent gained by reason of the false statements.
After the election the second respondent never for a moment attributed his defeat to the false propangada of the first respondent or his supporters and even said that the election was conducted with propriety.
[64 3 E H; 644 D F] Vashist Narain Sarma vs Dev Chandra, ; , Surendra Nath Khosla vs Dalip Singh, and Inayatullah vs Diwanchand Mahajan, , 235, 236, followed.
Hackney 's case, 2 O 'Malley and Hardcastle, 77, referred to. 608
