The assessee and his minor sons separately held shares in a resident firm.
For assessment years 1952 53 to 1954 55, the assessee filed returns as an individual and therein stated under the head business income that the profit should be ascertained from the Income tax Officer assessing the firm.
The names of the partners were stated, but it was not stated in the return that some of the parties were his minor sons.
The minors, through their mother as guardian, also filed returns for these assessment years, and they were assessed to tax.
The assessee was also assessed as an individual, in respect of his share in the income of the firm and other sources, but the assessment order did not include the share of the minors from the firm.
The Income tax Officer issued notices of reassessment to the assessee under section 34(1) (a) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922 for the years 1952 53 and 1953 54 and under section 34(1) (b) for the year 1954 55.
The Income tax Officer took the view that the assessee had not disclosed the fact that his sons were minors and the income of the sons which should have been included under section 16(3) (a) (ii) had escaped assessment in the assessee 's hands and accordingly he brought that income to tax.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed this order.
The Appellate Tribunal, in appeal held that for the first two, years section 34(1) (a) applied, that in respect of the third year there was no change of opinion but the assessment was made on information received within the meaning of section 34(1) (b) and that the income of the minors could be assessed in the hands of the assessee 'notwithstanding the separate assessments already made on the minors.
On reference, the High Court answered the questions against the assessee.
In appeal, this Court, HELD : Section 16(3) of the Act imposed an obligation upon the Income tax Officer to compute the total income of any individual for the purpose of assessment by including the items of income set out in cls.
(a)(i) to (iv) and (b), but thereby no obligation was imposed upon the tax payer to disclose the income liable to be included in his assessment under section 16(3).
For failing or omitting to disclose that income proceedings for reassessment could not be commenced under section 34(1) (a).
Section 22(5) required the assessee to furnish particulars of the names of the shares of the partners but imposed no obligation to mention or set out the income of the nature mentioned in section 16(3).
In the relevant years there was no head in the form of return prescribed under the rules under which income liable to be assessed to tax under section 16(3) (a) & (b) could be disclosed.
These assessments under section 34(1) (a) for the years 1952 53 and 1953 54 could not, therefore be upheld.
[721 A] (ii) The income of a minor can be included in the hands of an assessee under section 16(3) of the Act, notwithstanding that an assessment has been made on the minor represented by his guardian.
[718 G H] 716 C.R. Nagappa vs Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore, , followed.
(iii) In respect of the assessment years 1954 55, there was no basis for the argument that the Income tax Officer had only changed his opinion.
The order of re assessment was made well within four years from the date of the last day of that assessment year.
The notice was, therefore, competently issued by the Income tax Officer.
L721 F]
