The petitioning creditor in an insolvency proceeding sought annullment of two mortgages, one for Rs. 15,000/ in favour of the appellant in C.A. 845 and another for Rs. 10,000/ in favour the appellant in C.A. 846.
The mortgages were dated November 4, 1950 and were registered on November 6, 1950.
The insolvency Court held that the mortgages were not supported by consideration and were executed with a view to screening some of the properties of the insolvents 'from their creditors.
It therefore, annulled the mortgages under section 53 of the .
The District Judge, in appeal, reversed the findings of the trial court but the High Court, acting under the first proviso of section 75(1) of the Act, set aside the judgment of the District Judge and restored that of the Insolvency Court.
in an appeal to this Court by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellants (i) that the High Court while acting under the first proviso of section 75(1) to satisfy itself "that an order made in any appeal decided by the District Court was according to law" had no power to disturb the findings of fact reached by the appellate court; the jurisdiction of the High Court is a very limited one and not more than that conferred on it by sub section 100(1) C.P.C.; and (ii) that the conclusions of the High Court were unsustainable on the evidence on record.
HELD: (i) The legislature did not confer on the High Court 'under the first proviso to section 75(1) of the Act an appellate power nor did it confer on if a jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence on record.
While exercising that power the High Court is by and large bound by the findings of fact reached by the District Court.
If the legislature intended to confer power on it to reexamine both questions of law and fact it would have conveyed its intention by appropriate words as has been done under various other statutes.
A wrong decision on facts by a competent court is also a decision according to law.
[701 D] A decision being "contrary to law" as provided in section 100(1)(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure is not the same thing as a decision being not "according to law" as prescribed in the first proviso of section 75(1) of the Act.
The latter expression is wider in ambit than the former.
It is neither desirable not possible to give an exhaustive definition of the expression "according to law".
The power given to the High Court under the first proviso to section 75(1) of the Act is similar to that given to it under section 25 of the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act.
[701 F] Bell & Co. Ltd. vs Waman Hemraj, ; Hari Shankar vs Rao Girdhari Lai Chowdhury, [1962] 1, supp.
S.C.R. 399; 699 Official Receiver, Kanpur and Anr.
vs Abdul Shakur ; ; referred to and explained.
(ii) On the evidence, the findings of the District Court on the payment of consideration were correct findings of fact and the High Court could not have interfered with the same.
However, one payment in respect of the mortgage in C.A. 845 was not proved and the mortgage was therefore only valid to the extent of Rs. 10,5001 .
