The respondent 's appeal against an order of assessment was rejected by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and he, thereafter appealed to the Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal, after having granted some adjournments, dismissed the appeal for default in appearance On a day fixed for the hearing, purporting to do so under rule 24 of the Appellate Tribunal Rules, 1946.
The High Court directed the Tribunal to refer two questions to itself one relating to the merits and the other to the effect whether rule 24 of the Appellate Tribunal Rules, 1946, in so far as it enables the Tribunal to dismiss an appeal in default in appearance, is ultra vires.
A special bench of the High Court took the view that under section 3 3 (4) the Tribunal was bound to dispose of the appeal on the merits, whether the appellant was present or not.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : It follows from the language of section 33(4) and in particular the use of the word "thereon" that the Tribunal has to go into the correctness or otherwise of the points decided by the departmental authorities in the light of the submissions made by the appellant.
This can only be done by giving a decision on the merits on questions of fact and law and not by merely disposing of the appeal on the ground that the party concerned had failed to appear.
[824 C D] The provisions contained in section 66 about making a 'reference on questions of law to the High Court would be rendered nugatory if a power is attributed to the Appellate Tribunal by which it can dismiss an appeal, which has otherwise been properly filed, for default, without making an order thereon in accordance with section 33(4).
So far as the questions of fact are concerned the decision of the Tribunal is final and reference can be sought to the High Court only on questions of law.
The High Court exercises purely advisory jurisdiction and has no appellate or revisional powers.
The advisory jurisdiction can be exercised on a proper reference being made and that cannot be done unless the Tribunal itself has passed a proper order under section 33(4).
[824 E H] Rule 24 clearly comes into conflict with section 33(4) and in the event ,of repugnancy between the substantive provisions of the Act and a rule, it is the rule which must give way to the provisions of the Act.
[825 H] Shri Bhagwan Radha Kishen vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. ; Ruvula Subba Rao & Ors.
vs Commissioner of Income tax Madras, ; Mangat Ram Kuthiala & Ors.
vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, ; Hukumchand Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Central Bombay, ; Commissioner of Income 819 tax Madras vs Mtt.
section Ar.
Arunachalam Chettiar, and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Scindia Stearn Navigation Co. Ltd. ; , referred to.
