The respondent held a licence for the supply of Electricity under the ' in the Godhra area of undivided BombaY. On the creation of the State of Gujarat the area went to that State.
The Electricity (Supply) Act came into force in 1948 and under it the condi tions in Schedule VI thereof were deemed to be incorporated in the licence of every licensee.
Under section 57 (2) (c) of the ' Act the Government could fix the rates for supply of electricity and under cl. 1 of the Schedule VI a licensee could reduce the rates for keeping the profit at a reasonable level.
A licensee had no, power to enhance the rates except by requesting the Government to fix new rates on the recommendation of a fresh rating committee.
In 1952 the Covernment fixed certain rates on the recommendations of a rating committee.
In 1956 the Supply Act of 1948 was amended.
By section 57A(1) (e) of the amended Act the rates fixed by the Government under section 57(A)(1)(d) on the recommendation of a rating committee were to enure for a maximum of three years.
Under of the amended Schedule VI the licensee shall so adjust his charges Cl.
the sale of electricity whether by enhancing or reducing them that his clear profit in any year of account shall not as far as possible exceed the amount of reasonable return.
In 1963 the respondent enhanced the rates of supply without having them fixed by the Government on the recommendations of a rating committee.
The appellants who were consumers of electricity in the Godhra area filed suits seeking, to restrain the respondent from enforcing the enhanced charges.
The suits were decreed by the trial court and the decrees were 'confirmed by the first appellate court and in second appeal by a single Judge.
In Letters Patent appeal however the High Court held that under the Supply Act as amended in 1956 the respondent had a unilateral right to enhance the charges subject to the conditions prescribed in, Schedule VI of the Act.
The appellants Came to this Court contending that they had a vested right in.
the rates fixed by Government in 1952, that under the amended Act the respondent did not have a unilateral right to enhance those rates, and that the amended provisions not being retrospective nor inconsistent with the old provisions the charges fixed by the Government in 1952 must in view of section 6 of the continue to be in operation.
HELD : The law declared by the Amending Act does not affect any right or privilege, accrued under the repealed provision.
It merely Prescribes as to what can or should be done in the future.
Therefore there is no basis for saying that it affects vested rights.
[847 F] For finding out the power of the licensee to alter the charges one has to look at the terms of the license in the light of the law as it stands, the 837 past history of that law being wholly irrelevant.
If the terms of the licence, including the deemed terms permit him to unilaterally alter the charges then he has that right.
In the present case looking at those terms, the respondent was certainly within its rights in enhancing the charges as admittedly it had followed the procedure prescribed by law.
[847 F G] The contention that there was no inconsistency between the present scheme relating to the enhancement of charges vis a vis the scheme provided under the Supply Act prior to its amendment in 1956 could not be accepted.
The two schemes are substantially different.
Under the former scheme once the Government fixed the charges the licensee could not en hance them but at present at the end of the period fixed in the Government order the licensee has a unilateral right to enhance the charges in accordance with the conditions prescribed in Schedule VI.
Therefore in, view of section 57 the provisions contained in that Schedule have an overriding effect.
[847 H 848 A] The intention of the legislature being clear and unambiguous there was no need to call into aid any rule of statutory construction or any legal presumption.
Further, there was no reason why those who obtained licences prior to the amendment of the Supply Act in 1956 'should be in a more disadvantageous position than those who got their licences thereafter.
Correspondingly there was no reason why those who are served by licencees who obtained their licences prior to the amendment of the Supply Act in 1956 should be placed in a better position than those served by licensees who obtained their licences thereafter.
[847 C] Section 57(A)(1)(e) was intended to meet the changing economic circumstances.
The purpose behind the new provisions appears to be to, permit the licencees to adjust their charges to get reasonable profits.
But at the same time a machinery has been provided to see whether any excess charges have been levied and if levied 'get the same refunded to the consumers.[847 E] In view of the above considerations and findings the appeals must fail.
State of Punjab V. Mohar Singh, ; and Deep Chand, vs State of U.P. & Ors.
[1959] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 8, distinguished.
Amalgamated Electricity Co. Ltd. vs N. section Bhathena & Anr. ; , applied.
