The respondent a dealer purchased unginned cotton and after ginning the cotton and removing the seeds sold the ginned cotton to customers outside the State.
The respondent paid parchase tax on the purchase turnover.
In respect of cotton seeds sold by it to registered dealers,the respondent claimed deduction from the parchase turnover under section 5 (2) (a) (vi) of the Punjab Sales Tax Act, 1948.
But the assessing authority did not allow the deduction holding that the goods sold viz., cottonseeds were not the goods in respect of which purchase taxhad been levied as the unginned cotton underwent a manufacturing process and the goods.
produced were different from those purchased.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court, which was allowed and the State 's Letters.
Patent Appeal was dismissed.
Allowing the State 's appeal, this Court; HELD : The respondent was not entitled to deduction under section 5(2) (a) (vi) of the Act in respect of cotton seeds sold by it to registered dealers.
"Declared goods" in section 14 of the are individually specified under separate items.
"Cotton ginned ' or unginned" is, treated as a single commodity under one item of declared goods.
It is.
evident that cotton ginned or unginned being.
treated as a single commodity and as a single species of declared goods cannot be subject unders.
15(a) of the to a tax exceeding two per cent of the sale or purchase price thereof or at more than one state.
But so far as cotton seeds are concerned it cannot be held that the sale of cotton seeds must be treated as a sale of 'declared goods for the purpose of is.
15(a) or (b) of the .
Cotton in its unginned state contains cotton seeds, but it is by a manufacturing process that the cotton and the seed are separated and it is not correct to say that the seed so separated is cotton itself or part of the cotton.
They are two.
distinct commercial goods though before the manufacturing process the seeds might have been a part of the cotton itself.
[853 E] Patel Cotton Company Private Ltd. vs State of Punjab & Ors., 15 S.T.C. 865, disapproved.
