The provisions of the Travancore Code of Civil Procedure are similar in terms to Order 47, rule 1, of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 and an application for review is circumscribed by the definitive limits fixed by the language used therein.
The words "any other sufficient reason" mean a reason sufficient on grounds at least analogous to those specified in the rule.
It is well settled that in an ejectment suit the plaintiff must succeed on the strength of his own title and not on the weakness of the defendant 's case.
It is an error apparent on the face of the record if the judgment does not deal effectively and determine an important issue in the case on which depends the title of the plaintiff and the maintainability of the suit.
To decide against a party on matters,which do not come with in the issues on which parties went to trial clearly amounts to an error apparent on the face of the record.
Where the error complained of is that the Court assumed that a concession had been made when in fact none had been made or that the Court misconceived the terms of the concession or the scope and extent of it or the attitude taken, up by the party and has been misled by a misconception of such alleged concession, such error must be regarded as a sufficient reason analogous to an error on the face of the record within the meaning of Order 47, rule I of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Such error will not generally appear on the record and will have to be brought before the Court by means of an affidavit.
A suit filed in 1938 in the Court of the District Judge at Kottayam (Travancore) was dismissed, The plaintiff 's appeal 521 against the decree was allowed by a Full Bench of the High Court of Travancore.
A review application filed by the defendants against the judgment on the ground that it contained several mistakes or errors apparent on the face of the record was dismissed by the High Court.
The High Court declined to grant a certificate under article 133.
The defendants were granted special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
Consequent upon political changes in India culminating in the adoption of the new Constitution of India, there were changes in the judicial administration in the State of Travancore.
Up to the end of June, 1949, the Travancore High Court Act (Regulation IV of 1099) was in force in the State of Travancore.
Section 11 of the Regulation provided that the judgments of a Full Bench from the decrees of District Courts involving certain amount or value of subject matter in suits as well as in appeals shall be submitted to the Maharaja for confirmation by his Sign Manual.
Section 12 of the Regulation applied as far as may be the provisions of section 11 to the judgments after review.
In May, 1949, came the Covenant of Merger between the rulers of Travancore and Cochin which, inter alia, provided for a Rajpramukh.
In July, 1949, came Ordinance II of 1124 repealing Regulation IV of 1099.
Clause 25 of the Ordinance provided that a Full Bench shall hear and decide the appeals, inter alia, from the decrees of the District Courts etc.
involving certain amount or value of subject matter.
Clause 26 related to a review of the judgment by a Full Bench.
The provisions relating to the jurisdiction and powers of High Court were substantially reproduced in a later Act (V of 11 25) and were Continued by articles 214 and 225 of the Constitution of India.
The advocate for the respondents contended in the Supreme Court that the review application, in view of the changes referred to above, had become infructuous and should have been dismissed in limine, because even if the review application were allowed there would be no authority with jurisdiction and power to pronounce an effective judgment after hearing the appeal.
Again, this case was not decided by a Full Bench under section 25 of the Act, and therefore Do review was maintainable under section 26.
And even if the appeal be considered to have been filed under section 1 1 of Regulation IV of 1099, the application for review must be dealt with under section 12 of the Regulation and a fresh judgment after the review would have to be submitted under section 11 to the Maharaja for confirmation by his Sign Manual; and the present Maharaja of Travancore did not possess the power to consider and to confirm or reject the same.
Hold, (repelling the contention) that in view of the change of the laws if the appeal were revived after the admission of review, it must be disposed of under section 25 of Act V of 1125 and that section did not require any confirmation of the judgment passed on the rehearing of the appeal by the Maharaja or Rajpramukh or Any other authority.
Assuming that the appeal, if restored, 67 522 would be governed by section 12 of Regulation IV of 1099, even then section 11 would have to be applied only "as far as may be" and the portion of the section 11 requiring confirmation by the Maharaja, would be inapplicable in view of the events that had happened.
Chhajju Ram vs Neki (49 I.A. 144), Bisheshwar Pratap Sahi vs Parath Nath (61 I. A. 3 78), Hari Shankar Pal vs Anath Nath Mitter ([1949] F.C.R. 36), Sha Mulchand & Co. Ltd. vs Tawahar Mills Ltd. ([1953] S.C.R. 351)), Beg vs Pestan ji Dingha and Another , Madhu Sudan Chowdhri vs Musammat Chandrabati Chowdhraizi ( ), Bekhanti Chinna Govinda Chettiyar vs section Varadappa Chettiyar , and Rex vs Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, Ex Parte Shaw ( ) referred to.
The facts leading up to the appeal, as summarized from the Judgment, are as follows.
There were two rival sections of the Malankara Jacobite Syrian Christian community in Malabar, who came to be represented by the appellants and respondents respectively.
Certain disputes had arisen between the two sections ; and each claimed the right to possess and administer the Church properties to the exclusion of the other.
In 1938, a suit was filed in the District Court of Kottayam by the first and second respondents against the first and second appellants.
The plaintiff s contended that the defendants had committed acts of heresy and became ipso facto alien to the Malankara Jacobite Syrian Church.
They were, therefore, " 'disqualified and unfit to be the trustees of or to hold any other position in, or enjoy any benefit from, the Jacobite Syrian Church" (para 26 of the plaint).
The District Judge, who heard the suit, held, by his judgment delivered on the 18th January, 1943, amongst other things, that the acts and conduct imputed to the defendants did not amount to heresy or schism, or to voluntary separation from the Church, and that in any event, according to Canon Law, there could be no ipso facto going out of the Church in the absence of a decision of an ecclesiastical authority properly arrived at.
The conclusion arrived at by the District Judge was that the plaintiffs were not entitled to maintain the suit, which was, therefore, dismissed.
Being aggrieved by the trial Court 's dismissal of the suit, the plaintiffs appealed to the High Court of Travancore.
The appeal was heard by a Full Bench of the High Court, consisting of three Judges, one of whom expressed a dissenting view.
On the 8th of August, 1946, the High Court held, by a majority that the defendants had repudiated the fundamental principles and tenets of the Malankara Jacobite Syrian Church and had established a new Church and had thereby voluntarily separated from, and ceased to be members of, the Malankara Jacobite Syrian Church.
The majority hold that the plaintiffs and been validly elected as trustees and as such were entitled to possession of the Church 523 properties.
The appeal *as accordingly allowed and a decree was passed for possession and other reliefs in favour of the plaintiffs.
On the 22nd August, 1946, the defendants filed a petition for review of the High Court 's judgment on the ground that it contained several mistakes or errors apparent on the face of the record and that in any event there were sufficient reasons for the rehearing of the appeal.
The application for review was ultimately dealt with by the High Court on merits on the 21st of December, 1951.
The Court hearing the review rejected all the points urged in favour of review and dismissed the application, holding that there was no error apparent on the face of the record and that there were not sufficient reasons for the rehearing of the appeal.
The High Court declined to grant leave to appeal to the Supreme Court under article 133 of the Constitution; whereupon the defendants applied for, and on the 14th April, 1952, obtained, special leave of the Supreme Court to prefer an appeal against the High Court 's decision.
