J, a Hindu Jat governed by the Punjab Customary Laws, sold without legal.
necessity, in 1916, a fourth share of his ancestral land to one section Under the Punjab, Customary Laws females could not challenge a sale of ancestral property by a male owner.
J 's son G, in suit No. 75 of 1920 obtained a declaratory decree to the effect that the sale to S would not enure beyond the life time of J. When J died in 1959, the had come into force and his three sons, daughters and widow inherited his estate in equal shares.
The three sons, the widow and the daughters then filed a suit for possession of the aforesaid alienated land on the basis of the decree in suit No. 75 of 1920.
Under section 8 of the Punjab Custom (Power to Contest) Act 1 of 1920 only those competent to contest an alienation clould take advantage of a decree obtained by a reversioner.
The trial court passed a decree for a half share of the suit property in favour of the sons only, holding that the female heirs of J were not entitled to take advantage of the decree in suit No. 75 of 1920.
The District Court modified the decree by decreeing the suit in respect of the whole property in favour of the sons.
In second appeal the High Court restored the decree of the trial court holding that the claim of the female heirs of J could not be upheld, firstly because of the Punjab customary law and section 8 of Act 1 of 1920, and secondly because they had not filed any appeals against the orders of the lower courts.
In appeals by special leave before this Court, HELD : (i) The preliminary objections 'raised by the alienees that the suit in its entirety should have been dismissed, because by the enactment of the J was to be deemed a full owner and notwithstanding the decree of 1920 his sons had after that Act no subsisting reversionary interest in the property, must stand rejected.
There is nothing in the which retrospectively enlarges the power of a holder of ancestral land or nullifies a decree passed before the Act.
[947 B C] (ii) Under the customary law of the Punjab the wife and the daughters of a holder of ancestral property could not sue to obtain a declaration that the alienation of ancestral property will not bind the reversioners after the death of the alienor.
But a declaratory decree 945 obtained in a suit instituted by a reversioner competent to sue has the effect of restoring the property alienated to the estate of the alienor.
[947 G] The effect of the declaratory decree in the suit filed by G in 1920 was merely to delclare that by the sale, the interest conveyed to the alienee was to enure during the life time of the alienor.
The conclusion was therefore inevitable that the property alienated reverted to the estate of J at the point of his death and all persons who would, but for the alienation have taken the estate were entitled to inherit the same.
If J had died before the was enacted, the three sons would have taken the estate to the exclusion of the widow and the two daughters.
After the enactment of the the estate devolved, by virtue of sections 2 and 4(1) of the , upon the three sons, the widow and the two daughters.
L947 H 948 B] The High Court was therefore in error in holding that because in the year 1920 the wife and daughters of J were incompetent to challenge the alienation of ancestral property by J, they could not, after the enactment, of the inherit his estate when succession (iii) The High Court was equally in error in holding that because the widow and daughters had not filed an appeal or cross objections against the decree of the lower courts, they were not entitled to any relief.
The sons, the daughters and the widow of J had filed the suit for a decree for possession of the entire property and their claim was that the alienee had no subsisting interest.
The District Court accepted that claim and granted a decree in favour of the three sons for the entire property which was alienated.
If the alienees were unable to convince the court that they had any subsisting interest in the property in dispute after the death of J, the court was competent under 0.
41 r. 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure to adjust the rights between the sons, the daughters, and the widow of J in that property.
[948 E G; 949 D] In 0.
41 r. 33 the expression 'which ought to have been passed ' means 'what ought in law to have been passed '.
if the Appellate Court is of the view that any decree which ought in law to have been passed was in fact not passed by the 'subordinate court, it may pass or make such further or other decree or order as the justice of the case may require.
[949 D]
