The first respondent challenged the appellant 's election to the Sangli City Municipality held in June 1967 under the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965.
It was alleged that the respondent had published and circulated pamphlets containing defamatory statements against the respondent and in particular instigating Muslim ' voters to vote against him by arousing their religious sentiments.
At the trial of the petition the respondents applied to have two witnesses examined but the Trial Judge rejected the application, Later, however, the same two witnesses were called by the trial judge as court witnesses.
The Trial Court allowed the petition and disqualified the appellant from being a member of a Municipality for five years.
A petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution by the appellant was rejected in limine by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended inter alia by the appellant (i) that the trial court was wrong in calling as court witnesses the same two witnesses who had been cited as the respondent 's witnesses and having earlier rejected the respondent 's application to call them; (ii) on the evidence the trial court 's finding was not justifiable; (iii) that the result of the election was published in the Gazette on the 8th June as well as 151th June but the limitation of 10 days ran from 8th June and the petition was therefore time barred; (iv) the first issue which was decided against the appellant was confusing and misleading whereby the appellant had been denied a fair trial; (v) the order of the Judge disqualifying the appellant for a period of five years was unduly harsh.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal : (i) Although the trial court 's earlier order refusing to issue summons to the two witnesses was not justifiable, ' under section 21(7) of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965, the Trial Judge is given powers wider than those given by the Code of Civil Procedure under Order 16, Rule 14, as the section does not prescribe any pre requisite to the examination of a person as a court witness as envisaged by the Code of Civil Procedure.
The trial Judge therefore had jurisdiction to call the two persons as witnesses under the provisions of the Act.
[972 D] R. M. Seshadri vs G. Vasanta Pai, ; , referred to.
(ii) On the evidence, no exception could be taken to the trial Judge deciding the issue against the appellant on the facts and circumstances of the case.
It could not be said that there was no evidence on which the Judge could have come to that conclusion.
When the trial Judge accepted 967 the evidence with regard to the distribution of the pamphlets by the appellant, the High Court, which was not hearing an appeal, could not be expected to take a different view in exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution and there was no reason shown to this Court to interfere with the order of the High Court.
[975 A] (iii) The appellant could have set up the first Gazette publication as the one fixing the period of limitation in which case the trial.
Judge would have been required to go into the matter.
But the appellant had precluded himself from doing so by his unconditional acceptance of the statement in the petition that the result was published on 15th June.
There was no error apparent on the face of the record before the High Court and consequently he jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution could not have been exercised on the facts of the case by the issue of a writ of certiorari.
Neither could the High Court set aside the order of the trial court under article 227 of the Constitution under which the High Court 's power of superintendence is confined to seeing that the trial court had not transgressed the limits imposed by the Act.
On the facts of the case the High Court was not called upon to go into this question.
[974 C D] (iv) It could not be concluded that because of the want of preciseness in the issues framed the whole trial was vitiated.
The appellant knew the points he had to meet.
Although the evidence about the disribution of the pamphlets was not beyond reproach, it was not for the High Court to take the view that the order ought to be quashed on the ground that there was no evidence.
[974 F] (v) The allegations of corrupt practices against the appellant were of a serious nature and if be was found guilty, the period of five years ' disqualification could not be considered inappropriate.
