The appellant is a non resident shipping company with its local office in Calcutta.
For its assessment to income tax for the years 1952 53 to 1956 57 the appellant filed returns disclosing taxable income computed on the basis of its annual turn over in its Indian trade but did not furnish particulars of its world income.
The Income tax Officer computed the taxable business income for each year by application of a special formula which was accepted by the appellant.
However, in computing the income, the Income tax Officer only allowed normal depreciation and other trade allowances admissible under the income tax Act 1922 and did not allow any initial depreciation or additional depreciation in respect of the ships of the appellant in any of the assessment years, because the ships acquired by the appellant were not introduced into the Indian business in the years in which they were newly acquired.
The, orders of assessment were confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner but the Tribunal held that in respect of all the four ships, additional depreciation wag 'admissible under section 10(2) (vi a) of the Act, as claimed.
The High Court, on a reference, answered the question against the assessee.
HELD : Additional depreciation was not admissible to the appellant as an allowance in the computation of the taxable income by the special formula adopted by the Income tax Officer.
It was common ground that the, appropriate method for determining the profits was the second method in r. 33.
But that method was never applied; if it was applied in the computation of the world profits of the assessee, it would have been necessary to allow the various depreciation allowances.
The assessee could not, while accepting determination of taxable profits in a manner not warranted by the second method under r. 33, claim that additional depreciation should be allowed.
[8 E] The Supreme Court in the present appeal was exercising an advisory jurisdiction and could not decide whether the computation of taxable income by the Incometax Officer by the application of the formula evolved by him was correct.
Additional depreciation is a statutory allowance in the determination of taxable profit under section 10 of the Act, and in the case of a non resident where, actual income cannot be determined, and resort is had to r. 33, not when an empirical method is adopted for computation of the taxable income.
