The Central Wage Board for sugar industry had recommended revised wage scales, revised categories and fitment of workmen into those, scales and categories as from November 1, 1960.
The State Government had 'accepted those recommendations fully including the date of implementation.
The appellant company, however, did not implement them and hence, its workmen raised a dispute and two questions were referred to the Labour Court namely : (1) of fitment of certain workmen in the new grades, and (2) the date from which it was to have effect.
By its award, the Labour Court held that two of the workmen should be fitted into certain grades and directed the company to do so within one month after the award became enforceable, but, omitted to fix the date from which such fitment should have effect.
On December 7. 1963, the 'award was published in the State Gazette and, under section 6A(1) of the U.P. , it became enforceable on January 7.
The appellant fitted the two workmen in the two grades from February 7, 1964, that is, one month after the award became enforceable.
The union thereupon applied to the Labour Court to amend its award on the ground that it had omitted to answer the second question referred to it and the Labour Court amended its award and directed that the two workmen should be placed in their respective grades from November 1, 1960, as recommended by the Wage Board.
The amendment was published in the Gazette on June 20, 1964.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court for quashing the order of amendment, but the High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, on the questions : (1) Whether the correction was of an error arising from an accidental omission within the meaning of a. 6 (6) of the Act; and (2) Whether the award could be, corrected (i) after it was published in the Gazette 'and had become final, and (ii) after it had become ,enforceable.
HELD : (1) Section 6(6) enables the Labour Court to correct an accidental omission.
in the present case, the Labour Court omitted to answer the second question which it was bound to answer.
Since the first question was answered by it in accordance with the Wage Board 's recommendations and the Government 's notification accepting them fully, if the attention of the Labour Court had been drawn, it would have answered the second question also in consonance with those recommendations and the notification.
Therefore, there was an error in the award due to an accidental omission within the meaning of section 6(6) of the Act.
[39 G H; 40A] (2) (i) The scheme of sections 6 and 6A shows that there are 3 different stages before an award becomes enforceable, namely : (a) when the award is signed by the adjudicating authority; (b) when it is published and be, comes final; and (c) when it becomes enforceable under section 6A. Section 6(6) does not lay down expressly any time limit within which the correctional jurisdiction under the section should be exercised.
To hold by implication that such jurisdiction can only be exercised till the date of publica 36 tion when the award becomes final, would be contrary to the sub section which envisages the correction of an award even after it is published and has become final.
[40 C; 41 G H: 42 D E] (ii)There is nothing in sections 6, 6A or 6D to imply the limitation namely, that the power to correct is to be exercised only before the award becomes enforceable.
The circumstance that the proceedings before a Labour Court and a Tribunal are deemed to be concluded under section 6D when their award becomes enforceable and they become functus officio would be no ground for inferring such a time limit, because : (a) Since an arbitrator is not mentioned in section 6D it would lead to the result, which could not have been intended, that there is a time limit only for the Labour Court and Tribunal and not for an arbitrator; and (b) the power is similar to that of a civil court under section 152 C.P.C. or under r. 28 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957 of an adjudicating 'authority under the , and is based upon the principle that no party should suffer any detriment I on account of a mistake or an error committed by any adjudicating authority, and no limitation of time for exercising the correctional jurisdiction is implied even though a civil court or an adjudicating authority under the also become functus officio after their judgment or award becomes enforceable.
Also, there is no hardship in holding that the Labour Court could correct an error under section 6(6) even after the award had become final as a result of the publication, or 'after it had become enforceable under section 6A, because, the correction is within a circumscribed field, namely, only in cases where a mistake, clerical or arithmetical, or an error arising from an accidental slip or omission, has occurred.
[42 G H; 43 A B, C E, G H; 44 A H]
