The respondent filed suits against the Collector of Customs and the Union of India claiming refund of excess customs duty levied on spindle oil imported into India.
The trial court granted decrees against the Union of India for the amounts charged in excess.
As the respondent had large outstandings of tax, the Income Tax Officer issued a notice under section 46(5A) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 calling upon the Collector of Customs to pay the amount of the decree to him.
The Collector paid the amount into the Reserve Bank, who issued receipts crediting the amount against super tax due from the respondent.
He then applied to the High Court under O. 21 r. 2 C.P.C. for the adjustment of the decree by this amount.
This was refused by a single Judge as well as in appeal by a division bench.
It was held that the decrees were against the Union of India and not the Collector of Customs and that payment by the Collector was not a payment by the judgment debtor.
Furthermore the amounts were held by the Collector on behalf of the Union of India and not on behalf of the Firm.
The High Court also found the notice to be defective inasmuch as it asked for payment towards income tax and penalty, while the receipts which were granted to the Firm stated that the amount paid was against super tax due.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The Union of India operates through different Departments and a notice to the Collector of Customs in the circumstances was a proper notice to issue because it was the Collector of Customs who had in the first instance recovered the amount and held it from the respondent.
Collector paid the amount on behalf of the Union of India.
[126 A] A notice under section 46(5A) is no more than a kind of garnishee order issued to the person holding money and the money is due to an assessee.
The amount which was held.
by the Collector of Customs could properly be asked to be deposited with the income tax authorities under section 46(5A).
[127 B D] Super tax is also a kind of income tax and therefore, the notice could issue in the form it did.
There was no force in the contention that the amount, which could be adjusted under O. 21, r. 2, is a voluntary payment by the judgment debtor to the decree holder and the present case was not one of voluntary payment at all.
Order No. 21, r. 2 merely contemplates payment out of court and says nothing about voluntary payment.
A garnishee order can never by its nature lead to a voluntary payment and it is not to be thought that a garnishee order does not lead to the adjustment of the decree 124 sufficient for being certified by the Court.
Payment by virtue of section 46(5A) is in the nature of a garnishee payment and must, therefore, be subject to the same rule.
[127 G 128 B] In re Beckitt, [1933].T.R. 1, Bidhoo Beebee vs Keshub Chunder Baboo & Ors. , Mahiganj Loan Office Ltd. vs Behari Lal Chaki, I.L.R. , A. P. Bagchi vs Mrs. F. Morgan A.I.R. 1935, AU 513, Thomas Skinner vs Ram Rachpal I.L.R. [1938] All 294, distinguished.
