The Geneva Conventions Act 6 of 1960 was passed by the Indian Parliament to enable effect to be given to the International Conventions done at Geneva in 1949.
India and Portugal have both signed and ratified the Conventions.
The four Conventions were adopted in as many Schedules to the Act. 'Mc Fourth Convention was meant to apply to all cases of partial or total occupation of the territory of the contracting parties and gave protection to persons who, found themselves in case of a conflict or occupation in the hands of a Party to the conflict or Occupying Power of which they were not nationals.
In the case of occupied territory the Convention applies under article 6 for a period of one year after the general close of Military operations, but during the period of occupation the Occupying Power is bound by certain Articles including, inter alia, articles 1 12, 47 and 49.
By article 47 protected persons in occupied territory can not be deprived of the benefits of the Convention despite any change introduced as a result of the occupation or even annexation of whole or part of the territory by the Occupying Power.
article 49 forbids the deportation of protected persons 'from the occupied territory.
There is no definition of the term 'occupied ' in the Geneva Conventions but the Hague Regulations to which the Conventions are made supplementary defined a territory as occupied when it finds itself 'in fact placed under the authority of a hostile Army '.
The territory of Goa was a Portuguese colony for about 450 years, having been seized by force of arms.
On December 19, 1961 Goa was occupied by Indian Armed Forces following a short military action.
It then came under Indian Administration from December 20, 1961 and was governed under the Goa, Daman and Diu (Administration) Ordinance 1962 promulgated by the President of India.
The Ordinance was replaced on March 27, 1962 by Act 1 of 1962.
The same day the Constitution (Twelth Amendment) Act 1962 was enacted and was deemed to have come into force on December 20,, 1961.
By this amendment Goa was included in the Union Territories and a reference to Goa was inserted in article 240 of the Constitution.
Indian laws including the Citizenship Act of 1955, the and the were extended to Goa.
The Central Government also promulgated under section 7 of the , the Goa, Daman and Diu (Citizenship) Order 1962.
The second paragraph of the order conferred Indian Citizenship on certain classes of persons in these terri tories, giving an option to those desirous of retaining their previous citizenship or nationality of another country to make a declaration to that effect within one month of the Order.
88 The appellant who was a resident of Goa made pursuant to the above order his declaration of Portuguese nationality.
He was allowed to stay in India under a temporary residential permit till November 13.
, 1964.
After that date he did not ask for a renewal of the permit.
The Lt. Governor of Goa empowered under article 239 of the Constitution ordered him to leave India.
For disobeying the order he was prosecuted under section 14 read with section 3 (2) (c) of the .
Being convicted he appealed unsuccessfully to the Court of Session.
His revision petition being rejected by the Judicial Commissioner, he appealed by special leave to this Court.
The contention on behalf of the appellant were based on the Geneva Conventions which it was said had become a part of the law of India under Act 6 of 1960.
It was urged that after the United Nations Charter the acquisition of territory in International Law by 'force of arms could not confer title.
The amendment of the Constitution only legalised the annexation so far as India was concerned but in International Law the territory remained occupied because it had neither been ceded, nor had the Occupying Power withdrawn.
As a result, it was contended, the protection of articles 47 and 49 continued to be available to the appellant and by disobeying the deportation order he did not commit any offence.
HELD : (i) The appellant 's argument overlooked the cardinal principle of international law that the reception and residence of an alien is a matter of discretion and every State has by reason of its own territorial supremacy not only the legal right but also the competence to exclude aliens from the whole or any part of its territory.
Accordingly every country has adopted the passport system which document certifies nationality and entry into any State is only possible with the concurrence of the State.
Again a State exercises territorial supremacy over persons in its territory, whether its own subjects or aliens, and can make laws for regulating the entry, residence and eviction of aliens.
Therefore the application of the , the and Orders passed under them, to the appellant who had chosen Portuguese nationality was legally competent.
There is authority for the proposition that an alien excluded from the territory of a State cannot maintain an action in a Municipal Court to enforce his right.
[92 H 93 C] Oppen them International Law (Vol. 1) pp.
675/676, Brierly Law of Nations p. 217, and Musgrove vs Chun Teeong Toy, , referred to.
(ii)The Geneva Conventions Act also gives no specific right to anyone to approach the Court.
By itself it gives no special remedy.
It does give indirect protection by providing for penalties for breach of Convention.
The Conventions are not made enforceable by Government against itself, nor does the Act give a cause of action to any party, for the enforcement of the Conventions.
Thus there is only an obligation undertaken by the Government of India to respect the Conventions regarding the treatment of civilian population but there is no right created in favour of protected which the court has been asked to enforce.
If there is no provision of law which the courts can enforce the court may be powerless and has to leave the matter to the 'indignation of mankind '.
[97 B C] (iii)The Geneva Conventions too did not support the appellant 's claim to the benefit of article 49 of the Fourth Convention on the basis that Goa continued, even after its annexation by India, to be occupied territory B within the meaning of article 47.
(a)In the Hague Regulations to which the Geneva Conventions were supplementary the definition of 'occupation ' shows that a territory is con 89 sidered as occupied when it finds itself in fact placed under the authority of a hostile army.
This means that occupation is by military authorities i.e. belligerent occupation.
Under belligerent occupation, which is a de facto situation, the Occupied Power is not deprived of its sovereignty or its statehood.
All that happens is that pro tempore the Occupied Power cannot exercise its rights, its Government cannot function and authority is exercised by the occupying force.
In this connection the courts must take the Facts of State from the declaration of the State authorities.
[99 C F] United States vs Attstoctter et tit, (1947) U.S. Military Tribunal, Nuremburg L.R. 3 T.W.C. vi, 34, referred to.
(b) Annexation as distinguished from belligerent occupation occurs when the Occupying Power acquires and makes the occupied territory its own.
Annexation gives a de jure right to administer the territory.
Annexation means that there is not only possession but uncontested sovereignty over the territory.
[99 F G] Greenspan, The Modern Law of Land Warfare, p. 215; referred to.
There is however difference between true annexation on the one hand and premature annexation or 'anticipated annexation ' on the other.
Annexation is premature so long as hostilities are continuing and there is an opposing army in the field even if the Occupied Power is wholly excluded from the territory.
Anticipated annexation by unilateral action is not true annexation.
True annexation is only so when the territory is conquered and subjugated.
[99 C H; 100 A B] Oppenbeim : International Law (7th Edn.) pp.
846 847 (Vol. 1), 566 (Vol. 1), pp. 846 847 (Vol. 11), 430 439 (Vol. 11) and 599 et seq (Vol. 11); Greenspan pp.
215 et seq 600 603, Gould : Introduction to International Law pp.
652 656, 662 663; Brierly : Law of Nations, p. 155, referred to.
(c) When Conventions lays down that annexation has no effect they speak of premature or anticipated annexation.
It was so held by the Nuremburg Tribunal and the experts who drafted the Convention were inclined to add the word 'alleged ' before 'annexation ' in article 47 to distinguish between annexation following conquest and subjugation and annexation made while hostilities were going on subjugation puts an end to the State of war and destroys the source of authority of the existing Government.
In subjugation which is recognised as one of the modes of acquiring title not only the de facto but also the de jure title passes to the conqueror.
After subjugation the inhabitants must obey the laws such as they are and not resist them.
[10C D] (d) Under article 6 the Convention continues to apply to occupied territory for one year after the general close of hostilities for the reason that if the Occupied Power turns victorious the land would be freed in one year, and if the Occupying Power remains victorious, as hostilities cease, strong measures against the civilian population are no longer necessary.
Otherwise also, occupation, which means belligerent occupation comes to an end when hostilities cease and the territory becomes a part of the Occupying Power.
[100 F G] (e) Title to new territory is not dependent on recognition.
Despite the Stimson doctrine the conquest of Abyssinia by Italy was recognised because it was though that the State of affairs had come to stay.
Even after the adoption of the United Nations Charter events since the Second 2Sup.
CT/69 7 90 World War have shown that transfer of title to territory by conquest is still recognised.
If cession after defeat can create title, occupation combined with absence of opposition must lead to the same result.
[100 H 101 B] (f)In the present case the military engagement was only a few hours duration and there was no resistance at all.
It was hardly necessary to try to establish title by history traced to the early days nor any room for Schwarzenburger 's thesis that title is relative and grows with recognition.
True annexation followed here so close upon military occupation as to leave no real hiatus.
True annexation by conquest and subjugation was complete on December 20, 1961 and the Geneva Convention ceased to apply 'from that date.
It was not disputed that the annexation was lawful.
Therefore since occupation in the sense used in article 47 had ceased the protection must cease also.
[101 C F] Minquiers and Ecrenos, 1953 (I.C.J.) 47 and Schwarzenburger : A Manual of International Law, 5th Edn.
p. 12, referred to.
(iv)The national status of subject of the subjugated State is a matter for the State and courts of law can have no say in the matter.
Having chosen Portuguese nationality the appellant could only stay in India on taking out a permit.
He was therefore rightly convicted under the law applicable to him.
[101 H 102 B] Oppenheim International Law, Vol.
1 p. 573, referred to.
[On the view taken it was not considered necessary to.
decide the question whether deportation was an Act of State and the Municipal Courts could therefore give no remedy.] [101 G]
