The appellant instituted two suits in the Court of Assistant Collector (a Revenue, Court) against the respondent under sections 60, 61 and 180 of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939.
The suits were decreed, and the appellant took symbolical possession of the lands.
The Assistant Commissioner.
affirmed the decrees, and during the pendency of the respondent 's second appeals in the High Court, the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Rules, 1952 came into force.
The Board of Revenue held that in view of the Rules.
the pending appeals as also the suits had a ate.
The respondent filed applications for 'restitution of the lands under section 114 C.P.C. in the Court of Assistant Collector.
The Assistant Collector referred the issue whether the appellant had acquired Bhumidari rights to the civil court.
He refused to recall the 'reference in spite of the respondent 's Plea that he had no power to pass the order as no question of pro prietary title bad arisen.
The civil court answered the issue in the negative, and the Asstt.
Collector allowed the applications for restitution.
As the appellant was not certain about the proper forum of appeals against these orders of the Assistant Collector, he filed anneals in the revenue court as also in the civil court.
The Assistant Commissioner held that the revenue court had no Jurisdiction to entertain appeals and the appeals lay to the civil court under sections 286(4) and 265(3) off the U.P. Tenancy Act.
The appellant filed revision petitions against the orders before the Board of Revenue.
In the meantime the appeals filed before the civil court came up for hearing:.
The respondent submitted to the jurisdiction of the civil court, and did not contend that the civil court had no Jurisdiction to entertain the appeals.
The Civil Judge allowed the anneals and dismissed the application for restitution.
Because of this decision.
the appellant did not proceed with the pending revision petitions 'before the Board of Revenue and there the petitions were dismissed.
The respondent filed second appeals in the High Court against the appellate orders of the civil court, without taking the plea that the civil court 'had no Jurisdiction to entertain the anneals.
but later on he took the plea by adding a new ground.
The High Court held that the appeals lay to the revenue court and the respondent was not estopped from raising the contention.
In appeals to this Court the appellant contended that the anneals lay to the civil court and not for the revenue court and in the circumstances of this case, and in view of section 289(2) of the U.P. Tenancy Act.
the respondent was precluded from raising the objection that the appeals did not lie to the civil court.
Allowing the appeals this Court.
HELD : In this case the doctrine of approbate and reprobate could not be pressed into service to preclude the respondent from raising the objection that the appeals did not lie to the civil court as the court in which the proceeding were originally filed suo motu raised the objection.
232 But the effect of upholding his objection would be that the, appellant would be deprived of his right of appeal altogether, and section 289(2) of the U.P, Tenancy Act is intended to prevent such grave miscarriage of justice.
[237 F] Section 289(2) applies whenever any suit, application or appeal having been rejected either by the civil court or revenue court on account of want of jurisdiction is subsequently filed in the court of the other description and the latter court disagrees with the finding of the former.
In such a case,, a reference to the High Court is compulsory and the conflict of opinion is resolved by a decision of the High Court which is binding on all courts.
A court subordinate to the Collector cannot make the reference without the previous sanction of the Collector under section 289(3).
It is implicit in section 289(3) that if the Collector refuses to give the sanction, the case will proceed as if there is no disagreement with the finding of the former court.
[237 H] In a case falling within section 289(2), only the court in which the proceeding is subsequently instituted can disagree with the finding of the former court on the question of jurisdiction.
If it so disagrees, it must refer the matter to the High Court; and only the High Court on such a reference can override the finding.
No other court can disagree with the finding and make the reference.
If no such reference is made, the finding of the former court on the question of jurisdiction becomes final and conclusive; and the objection that it is erroneous cannot be entertained by the appellate or revisional court or any other court.
[238 D] Having regard to the circumstances of this case, it was not open to the respondent to raise the objection in the High Court that the civil court was not competent to hear the appeals.
In view of the fact that no reference under section 289(2) was made, the finding of the revenue court that the civil court was competent to entertain the appeals could not be challenged in the High Court.
The case must be decided on the footing that the Civil Judge was competent to entertain the appeals.
[238 F] On the merits the respondent had no case.
The Civil Judge found that the appellant was in possession of the lands on the dates of the institution of the suits.
The High Court agreed with this finding.
No ground has been made for setting aside this concurrent finding of fact.
The appel lant did not obtain possession of the lands by executing the decrees passed in the two suits.
Even assuming that the suits had abated and the decrees passed therein had been set aside or reversed, no case for restitution of the lands under section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure was made out.
The applications under section 144 C.P.C., were rightly rejected.
Nathan vs Harbans Singh, A.I.R. 1930 All. 264, Mohammad Mehdi Khan vs Mussammat Sharatunnissa, 3 Oudh Cases 32, 35 37, Mahadeo Singh vs Pudal Singh, A.I.R. 1931 Oudh 123 and Saira Bibi vs Chandrapal Singh, I.L.R. 4 Luck.
150, 166, referred to.
