By section 3 of the Madras Urban Land Tax Act, 1963, a tax was levied on every owner of urban land at the rate of 0.4 % of the average market value of the urban land as determined under section 6(2) of the Act.
The vires of the Act was challenged by a writ petition and the impugned Act.
was struck down on the ground that it violated article 14 of the Constitution because the charging section levied the tax on urban land not on the market value of such land but on the average value of the land in a sub zone .
Thereafter the State Legislature passed the Madras Urban Land Tax Act 12 of 1966 which omitted the provisions relating to fixation of average market value in the sub zone, and instead provided in section 5 for the levy of a tax on urban land from the owner at the rate of 0.4% of the market value of 'such urban land.
The validity of the new Act was again challenged in a group of writ petitions before the High Court which held that the Madras Legislature was competent to enact the new Act but that it was violative of articles 14 and 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
In appeals to this Court it was contended, inter alia, on behalf of the petitioners (1) that the impugned Act fell under Entry 86, List I and not under Entry 49 of List 2, so that the State Legislature was incompetent to pass the Act; furthermore as Entry 49, List 2 provides for taxes on land and buildings, the impugned Act which imposed tax on land alone could not be held to fall under the Entry; (ii) that the machinery was provided for determining the market value and the matter having been left to the arbitrary determination of the Assistant Commissioner, the provisions of the new Act were violative of article 14 of the Constitution (iii) that the Act was an unreasonable restriction on the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property and as 'such was violative of article 19 (1) (f) of the Constitution; furthermore together with the existing property tax under section 100 of the City Municipality Corporation Act the tax under the impugned Act exhausted an unreasonably high proportion of income and on this account also it was an unreasonable restriction; it was also contended that the giving of retrospective operation to the Act from July, 1963 made it unreasonable.
HELD: The Madras Urban Land Tax Act 12 of 1966 was constitutionally valid.
(i) In pith and substance the new Act in imposing a tax on urban land at a percentage of the market value is entirely within the ambit of 269 Entry 49 of List II and within the competence of the State Legislature, it does not in any way trench upon the field of legislation of Entry 86 of List 1.
[280 G H] There was no conflict between Entry 86 of List I and Entry 49 of List II.
The tax under Entry 86 proceeds on the principle of aggregation and is imposed on the totality of the net value of an assets.
Entry 49 of List II, contemplates a levy of tax on lands and buildings or both as units; it is not concerned with the division of interest or ownership in the units of land or buildings which are brought to tax.
[278 E F] The legislative entries must be given a large and liberal interpretation, the reason being that the allocation of the subjects to the Lists is not by way of scientific or logical definition but by way of a mere sixplex enumeratio of broad categories.
[277 G H] Ralla Ram vs Province of East Punjab, , Sudhir Chandra Nawn vs Wealth Tax Officer, A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 59; Gallahagher vs Lynn, at p. 870; and Subrahmanyan Chettiar vs Mittuswami Goundan, [1940] F.C.R. 188 at 201; referred to.
The legislative history of Entry 49, List II, does not lend any support to the argument that Entry 49 of List if relating to tax on land and, buildings cannot be separated.
On the other hand Entry 49 "Taxes on lands and buildings" should be construed as taxes on land and taxes on buildings and there is no reason for restricting the amplitude of the language used in the Entry.
[281 G] Raja Jagannath Baksh Singh vs The State of U.P., ; ; and H. R. section Murthy vs Collector of Chittoor and Anr., ; ; referred to.
(ii) The provisions of section 6 of the new Act were not violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
Having regard to the language and context of section 6 of the new Act, the opinion which the Assistant Commissioner has to form under that section is not subjective but should foe reached objectively upon the relevant evidence after following the requisite formalities laid down in sections 7 to 1 1 of the new Act.
The proceeding before the Assistant Com missioner is judicial in character and his opinion regarding the market value is reached objectively on all the materials produced before him.
[282 F] (iii) The new Act was also not violative of article 19(1) (f) of the Constitution.
It is not possible to put the test of reasonableness into the straight jacket of a narrow formula.
The, objects to be taxed, the quantum of tax to be levied; the conditions subject to which it is levied and the social and economic policies which a tax is designed to subserve are all matters of political character and these matters have been entrusted to the Legislature and not to the Courts.
In applying the test of reasonableness it is also essential to notice that the power of taxation is generally regarded as an essential attribute of sovereignty and constitutional provisions relating to the power of taxation are regarded not as grant of power but as limitation upon the power which would otherwise be practically without limit.
[284 E] Rai Ramakrishna vs State of Bihar, ; at 1673; referred to.
270 The charge under the City Municipality Corporation Act was a tax .,on the annual letting value whereas the charge under the Act of 1966 was .on the market value of the urban land.
The basis of the two taxes being different, it was not permissible to club the two together and complain of the cumulative burden.
As a general rule, so long as a tax retains its character as a tax and is not confiscatory or extortionate, the reasonableness of the tax cannot be questioned.
In so far as the new Act of 1966 was concerned, it could not be said that the levy at 0.4% of the market value of the urban land was confiscatory in effect [285 F] (iv) In view of the legislative background of the new Act of 1966, which replaced the earlier Act of 1963, it could not be said that the imposition of the tax retrospectively 'from July, 1963, was an unreasonable restriction.
[289 B]
