The appellant originally joined the service of the State of Junagadh in 1934 and was after the merger of that State in Saurashtra confirmed in September, 1956 as an executive engineer in the service of the latter State.
Rule 3(i) of the Saurashtra Covenanting States Servants (Superannuation age) Rules 1955 provided : "A Govt.
servant shall, unless for special reasons otherwise directed by Govt.
retire from service on his completing 55 years of age.
" After the merger of Saurashtra in the bilingual State of Bombay the old Bombay Civil Service Rules were applied to Saurashtra area with effect from January 7, 1957.
On July 1, 1959 the Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959 were promulgated.
Accord ing to r. 161 (c) (2) (ii) (1) the age of retirement for class 1 Engineers in the State Service was fixed at 55 years but it was further laid down that they "may be required by the Government to retire on reaching the age of 50 years, if they have attained to the rank of Superintending Engine.
" On the formation of the State of Gujarat the appellant 's 'services were transferred to that State but the Bombay Rules continued to apply.
Under the Bombay Rule aforesaid, namely, r. 161(c)(2)(ii)(1) the Government of the State of Gujarat retired the appellant at the age of about 53 years.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court took into account section 115(7) of the but held that since the Saurashtra Rule 3(i) also empowered the 'State Government to retire the appellant at an age earlier than 55 years there was no variation of conditions of service to his disadvantage under the Bombay Rule and therefore the latter rule was not invalid for want of Presidential assent.
The High Court took the view that the expression "unless for special reasons otherwise directed by Government" in r. 3 (i) of the Saurashtra Rules meant that the Government could for special reasons retire a Government servant before he had attained the normal superannuation age of 55 years.
Against the High Court 's judgment dismissing his writ petition the appellant came by special leave, to this Court.
HELD : Rule 3(i) of the Saurashtra Rules, if construed of interpreted in the manner in which it had been done by the High Court, would bring it into direct conflict with Moti Ram Deka 's case as well as other cases decided by this Court.
In Moti Ram Deka 's case it was laid down that if any rule permitted the appropriate authorities to retire compul sorrily a civil servant without imposing a limitation in that behalf that such 245 civil servant should have put in a minimum period of service.
that rule would be invalid and the so called retirement ordered under the said rule would amount to removal of the civil servant within the meaning of article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The principle is that the rule relating to compulsory retirement of a Government servant must not only contain the outside limit of superannuation but there must also be a provision for a reasonably long period of qualified service which must be indicated with sufficient clarity.
For example if 55 years have been specified as the age of superannuation and if it is sought to retire the servant even before that period it should be provided in the rule that he could be retired after he has attained the age of 50 years or he has put in service for a period of 25 years.
[248 G 249 G] On the above principle rule 3 (i) of the Saurashtra Rules would have to be declared invalid if the expression "unless for special reasons otherwise directed by Government" is so construed as to give a power to order compulsory retirement even before attaining the 'age of 55 years.
A statutory rule, however, should be so interpreted as to make it valid and not invalid.
The correct interpretation of Rule 3(i) is that it gives power to the Government to allow a Government servant to remain in service even beyond the age of 55 years for special reasons; so construed the Rule would not be invalid and the appellant could not under it have been retired before be had attained the age of 55 years.
By applying the Bombay Rule his conditions of service were varied to his disadvantage because he could then be compulsorily retired as soon as he attained the age of 50 years.
As the previous approval of the Central Government was not obtained in accordance with the proviso to section 115(7) of the , the Bombay Rule could not be made applicable to the appellant.
[249 G 250 C] The appellant was thus entitled to remain in service until he attained the age of 55 years and the impugned order directing his retirement was invalid and ineffective.
[250 E F] Bholanath J. Thaker vs State of Saurashtra, A.I.R. (1954) S.C. 680, referred to.
Moti Ram Deka etc.
vs General Manager N.E.F. Railways Maligaon, Pandu etc.
; , State of Bombay vs Saubhag chand M. poshi; , , P. Balakotaiah vs Union of India; , , Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab, and Gurdev Singh Sidhu vs State of Punjab & Anr. ; , applied.
