The respondent, who was an occupant of agricultural land applied to the Collector, under section 65 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879, for permission to convert the land to non agricultural use.
The Collector gave the permission in July 1960 on condition that the land shall be used exclusively for constructing residential houses.
The Municipal Committee, which had objected to the grant of permission before the Collector, moved the Commissioner for exercising his powers under section 211 of the Code.
The Commissioner, in October, 1961, passed an order in which, after reciting the objections of the Municipality and the arguments of counsel he boldly stated his conclusion that the land did not belong to the respondent and set aside the Collector 's order without giving any reasons.
The Com missioner 's order was quashed by the High Court on the ground that the Commissioner had no authority to pass the order under section 211 of the Code.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The Commissioner 's order was rightly quashed.
(a) Under section 65 of the Code, if the Collector does not inform an applicant of his decision on the application, within a period of 3 months, the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been granted Though no such period is prescribed by section 211, reading the two sections together it must be held that the Commissioner also must exercise his revisional powers within a reasonable time of the Collector 's order.
What is reasonable would depend on the facts of the case.
In the case when the permission is for building purposes, the Commissioner should exercise his power within a few months of the Collector 's order, because, after the grant of the permission the occupant is likely to spend money on building operations within a few months of the date of permission.
Since the order of the Commissioner in the present case was passed more than a year after the Collector 's order, the order should be set aside.
[343 E H] (b) The order should also be quashed on the ground that the Commissioner had not given any reasons for his conclusions.
[343 H] (c) The Commissioner also erred in going into the question of title, because, when there was a serious dispute regarding title, he should have referred the parties to a competent court and not decide it himself.
[344 D]
