According to r. 7 of the United Provinces Legislative Department Rules recruitment to the post of Superintendent shall be made by promotion from 'the grade of superior service assistants in the Council Department '.
While regard was to be shown to seniority full authority was reserved to appoint the assistant most fitted for the post and when no suitable assistant was available recruitment might be made from outside.
The appellant entered the service of the U.P. Legislative Assembly in 1954 through a competitive examination held by that Public Service Commission of the State.
In 1955 he was confirmed in the post of Upper Division Assistant.
In September, 1961 a vacancy occurred in the post of a Superintendent in the Legislative Assembly Secretariat.
The first respondent who was working as a Treasurer in the same office in the same scale of pay as the appellant was appointed to the said post by the Speaker of the Assembly.
Being aggrieved by the rejection of his claim as the senior qualified superior service assistant the appellant filed a suit in the court of the Munsif.
The Munsif decreed the suit in his favour but the District Judge in first appeal and the High Court in second appeal decided against him.
According to the view taken by the High Court the word 'grade ' in r. 7 meant the scale of pay, and therefore all persons on the same scale of pay as a superior service assistant were qualified for the post of Superintendent in whichever department and under whatever designation they might be working.
In appeal by special leave before this court, HELD : The post of Superintendent was a selection post and seniority by itself was not a sufficient qualification.
The Speaker had taken into consideration the claims of the senior Upper Division Assistants but under the rules his choice was not limited to the Upper Division Assistants.
He could consider the claims of others who were in the same grade, that is to say, enjoying the same scale of pay and pick out the person considered by him to be qualified in all respects to perform the duties of a Superintendent.
The High Court bad rightly held that all officials of the U.P. Legislative Assembly Secretariat holding posts in the same scale of pay as Upper Division Assistants were eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent.
[423H 424B] The danger that on the above interpretation persons like book binders and chauffeurs, if they were getting a salary in the game grade as the senior service assistants would be eligible for the post, was imaginary, for in making appointment to a selection post the qualifications of a person would certainly have to be considered.
[424D] The fact that the appellant entered service through a competitive examination while the respondent had failed to pass such a test was not one SupCI/69 13 422 which could be taken into consideration by this Court because the appointment was made after thorough scrutiny of representations received and after consideration of the recommendation made by the Secretary of the Legislative Department.
[424E]
