The respondent was carrying on the business of purchasing, handling and selling tobacco.
In 1962, it was maintaining 21 depots where the principal work was handling tobacco and the work of purchasing was done on a small scale.
In 1963, it gave notice that 8 out of the 21 depots would be closed down.
An industrial dispute was raised by the workmen and the demands off the workmen, namely: (1) that no depot worked during 1962 should be closed; and (2) no workman who worked in 1962 should be retrenched, were referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the stoppage of work at the 8 depots and the closure was genuine and real, that there was no transfer of the work that was being carried on at those depots to other buying points established by the respondent, and repelled the suggestion of the appellants that it was a mala fide device adopted for carrying on the same business in a different manner, and decided both the issues against the workmen.
In appeal to this Court, HELD ': (1) A genuine closure of depots or branches, even though it did not amount to.
closure of the business could not be interfered with by an Industrial Tribunal, and therefore, the issue was incorrectly referred by the Government for adjudication by the Tribunal.
The closure is stoppage of p.art of the activity or business of the respondent.
Such stoppage is an act of management which is entirely in the discretion of the respondent and n0.
Industrial Tribunal can interfere with the discretion exercised in such a matter, or can have the power to direct the respondent to continue a part of the 'business which it had decided to shut down.
or direct it to reopen a closed depot or branch.
[284 G H; 285 A C] (2) On that finding, no question could arise of the retrenchment being set aside by the Tribunal, because, there was no business for which the workmen would be required.
All that the workmen could claim was compensation for loss of the service, and, in a case where a dispute may arise as to whether workmen discharged are entitled t0 compensation under section 25F or section 25FFF, of the , it may become necessary to decide whether the closure amounts to closure in law or not.
But, in the present case, the workmen have all been paid retrenchment compensation at the higher rate laid down in section 25F and therefore, received adequate compensation.
[287 F H; 288 A]
