In pursuance of the Indian Forest Service (Initial Recruitment) Regulation, 1966, framed under r. 4(1) of the Indian Forest Service (Recruitment) Rules made under the All India Services Act, 1951, a Special Selection Board was constituted for selecting officers to the Indian Forest Service in the senior and junior scales from officers serving in the forest department of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
One of the members of the Board was the Chief Conservator of Forests of the State, as )required by the Regulations.
He was a Conservator of forests appointed as Acting Chief Conservator superseding another Conservator of Forests whose appeal to the State Government against his supersession was pending at the time the selections by the Board were made.
The Acting Chief Conservator was also one of the candidates seeking to be selected to the Indian Forest Service.
The Board made the 'selection of officers in the senior and junior scales.
The Acting Chief Conservator 's name was at the top of the list of selected officers, while the names of three conservators, (including the officer who was superseded), who were the Acting Chief Conservator 's rivals, were omitted.
The Acting Chief Conservator did not sit in the Selection Board at the time his name was considered, but participated in the deliberations when the names of his rivals were considered.
He also participated in the Board 's deliberations while preparing the list of selected candidates in order of preference.
The list and the records were sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Home Affairs forwarded the list with its observations to the Union Public Service Commission, as required by the Regulations, and the U.P.S.C. examined the records of the officers afresh and made its recommendations.
The Government of India thereafter notified the list.
The three conservators, whose names were not included in the list, and other aggrieved officers filed a petition in this Court under article 32 for quashing the notification.
On the questions : (1) Assuming that the proceedings in the present case were administrative proceedings, whether principles of natural justice applied to them; (2) Whether there was a violation of such principles of natural justice in the present case; (3) Since the recommendations of the Board were first considered by the Home Ministry and the final recommendations were made by the U.P.S.C., whether there was any basis for the petitioners ' grievances; (4) Whether there were grounds for setting aside the selection of all the officers including those in the junior scales, HELD : (1) The rules of natural justice operate in areas not covered by any law validly made, that is, they do not supplant the law of the land but supplement it.
They are not embodied rules and their aim is to secure justice or to prevent miscarriage of justice.
If that is their purpose, there is no reason why they should not be made applicable to administrative proceeding also, especially when it is not easy to draw the line that 458 demarcates administrative enquiries from quasi judicial ones, and an unjust decision in an administrative enquiry may have a more far reaching effect than a decision in a quasi judicial enquiry.
[468F G; 469B D] Suresh Koshy George vs The University of Kerala, ; , State of Orissa vs Dr., (Miss) Binapani Dei ; and In re : H. K. (An Infant) , 630, referred to.
(2) The concept of natural justice has undergone a great deal of change in recent years.
What particular rule of natural justice should apply to a given case must depend to a great extent on the facts and circumstances of that case, the framework of the law under which the enquiry is held and the constitution of the Tribunal or the body of persons appointed for that purpose.
Whenever a complaint is made before a court that some principle of natural justice had been contravened, the court has to decide whether the observance of that rule was necessary for a just decision on the facts of that case.
The rule that enquiries must be held in good faith and without bias, and not arbitrarily or unreasonably, is now included among the principles of natural justice.
[468G H; 469D L ] In the present case.
at the time of selection, the other members of the Board did not know that the appeal of the superseded conservator was pending before the State Government and hence there was no occasion for them to distrust the opinion of the Acting Chief Conservator.
There was a conflict between his interest and duty and he was a judge in his own cause.
Taking into consideration human probabilities and the ordinary course of human conduct, there was reasonable ground for believing that the Acting Chief Conservator was likely to have been biased.
He did not participate in some of the deliberations of the Board, but the facts that he was a member of the Board and that he participated in the deliberations when the claims of his rivals were considered and in the preparation of the list, must have had its impact on the selection, as the Board, in making the selection, must necessarily have given weight to his opinion.
In judging the suitability of the candidates the members of the Board must have had mutual discussions and though the other members filed affidavits stating that the Acting Chief Conservator in no manner influenced their decision, in group discussions, each member was bound to influence the others in a subtle manner and without their being aware of such influence.
[466D G; 467A D] In the circumstances of the case, the selection by the Board, could not be considered to have been taken fairly and justly as it was influenced by a member who was biased.
[470 C E] (3) The Selection Board was undoubtedly a high powered body, and its recommendations must have had considerable weight with the U.P.S.C.
The recommendation made by the U.P.S.C. could not be dissociated from the selection made by the Selection Board which was the foundation for the recommendations of the U.P.S.C.
Therefore, if the selection by the Selection Board was held to be vitiated, the final recommendation by the U.P.S.C, must also be held to have been vitiated.
[462 G H; 469G H] Regina vs Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, Ex Parte Lain, , 881, applied.
Sumer Chand Jain vs Union of India W.P. No. 237 of 1966, dated 4 5 1967, distinguished.
459 (4) The selections to both senior and junior scales were made from the same pool and so, it was not possible to separate the two sets of Officers.
Therefore, it was not sufficient to merely direct the Selection Board to consider the cases of the three conservators who were excluded, but all the selections had to be set aside.
[470 G H; 471A]
