The Constitution of India, article 31 A, proviso 2, guarantees to a person for compulsory acquisition of his land, the right to compensation which is not less than the market value when the land is within the ceiling limit applicable to him under a law for the time being in force.
Section 1(3) of the Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960, provided that the Act was to come into force in whole or in part on such dates as the Government may from time to time by notification appoint.
Certain provisions of the Act were brought into force by notifications.
But Chapter IV of the Act dealing with ceiling of holdings of land was not brought into force.
The Act was amended by Act 13 of 1965.
The amending Act deleted Chapter IV and substituted fresh provisions.
Chapter IV as amended dealt with ceiling and disposal of excess land and provided for compensation at fifteen times the fair and equitable rent.
In the High Court the respondent land holders urged that when Act 16 of 1960 was enacted it became law in force and the ceiling limit prescribed thereby became effective even though Chapter IV was not brought into force by notification under section 1(3) of the Act that since the Amending Act 15 of 1965 sought to restrict the ceiling limit and to vest the surplus land in the government there was compulsory acquisition of land which could be valid only if the law provided for payment to the land holder the market value of that part of the surplus land which was, within the ceiling limit under Act 16 of 1960.
The High Court accepted the contention and struck down Chapter IV of the Act as unconstitutional and invalid.
It was of the view, relying on this Court 's decision in Thangal Kunju Mudaliar 's case, that the expression "law in force ' had to be "construed only in the constitutional sense and not in the sense of its actual operativeness." In appeal by the State, HELD : Allowing the appeal ' A law cannot be said to be in force unless it is brought into operation by legislative enactment or by the exercise of authority by a delegate empowered to bring it into operation.
The theory of a statute being " operation in a constitutional sense" has no validity.
The decision of this Court in Thangal Kunju Mudaliar ends no support to the view expresse by the High Court.
There this Court held that section 1(3) of Travancor Act 14 of II 24 (M.E.) was an "existing law" on the date of the merge of the States of Travancore and Cochin and the power to bring into fore the provisions of the Travancore Act was exercisable by the successor State It was not held that the other provisions of the Act were in force eve before an appropriate notification was issued.
[599 B C; 600 C D] 594 In the present case the law relating to the ceiling limit, viz., Chapter IV of Act 16 of 1960 was never operative by a notification and was repealed by Act 15 of 1965.
Therefore there was no ,ceiling limit applicable to the land holders under any "law for the time being in force" which attracted the application of the second proviso to article 3 1 A. [600 E] Thangal Kunju Mudaliar vs M. Venkitachalam Potti, ; ; explained.
