As a result of a notification dated December 30, 1967 under section 59(1) of the Madras General Sales Tax Act and later by Act 2 of 1968 sales of jaggery became liable to tax.
But while by notification under section 17 'palm jaggery was exempted from tax 'cane jaggery ' was not.
The appellants who were dealers in 'cane jaggery ' challenged the levy by writ petitions in the High Court which were, however, dismissed.
In appeal before this Court it was contended (i) that the tax on 'cane jaggery ' while exempting 'palm jaggery ' was ,discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution; (ii) that taxation of 'cane jaggery ' was restrictive of trade and commerce and therefore violative of article 301; (iii) that the impugned legislation constituted a colourable exercise of power.
HELD: (i) The evidence on record clearly showed that 'cane jaggery ' and 'palm jaggery ' were commercially different commodities.
The methods of production of 'palm jaggery ' and 'cane jaggery ' were different; they reached the consumers through different channels of distribution; the prices at which they were sold differed and they were consumed by different sections of the community.
'Cane jaggery ' and 'palm jaggery ' did not thus belong to the same class and in differently treating them for the purpose of taxation there was no unlawful discrimination.
[620 B E; 621 C D] It was incorrect to say that the State Legislature had always treated the two products on the same footing.
For nearly three years before April 1, 1958 sales of 'palm jaggery ' were exempt from tax but sales of 'cane jaggery ' were not.
[620 B] Further, it is for the legislature to determine the objects on which tax shall be levied.
The courts will not strike down an Act as denying equal protection merely because other objects could have been but are not taxed by the legislature.
[621 B C] N. Venugopala Ravi Varma Rajah vs Union of India, ; , applied.
(ii) Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse guaranteed by article 301 of the Constitution is protected against taxing statutes as well as other statutes, but by imposition of tax on transactions of sale of 'cane jaggery ' no restriction on the freedom of trade or commerce or in the course of trade with or within the State.
was imposed.
[621 D F] State of Madras vs N. K. Nataraja Mudaliar. ; , referred to.
(iii) The plea of colourable exercise of power had no substance because the legislature had power in the present case to.
levy the tax.[621 G] 4 Sup.
C.I./69 616 K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo & Ors.
vs State of Orissa, [1954] S.C.R.1, applied.
