The predecessor of respondents 2 to 4 executed a wake al al aulad providing for the benefit of the family and after the extinction of all thefamily a scheme for feeding the poor.
The appellant filed a suit claiming share in the property after the death of her husband, and for a declaration that the wakf was invalid and void and its enrolment in the wakf office was wrongly done.
This claim was made against respondents 2 to 4 who were the Mutawalis, and the Commissioner of Wakfs, West Bengal was joined as defendant to the suit.
The Commissioner appeared in answer to the notice of the suit and filed written statement and characterised the suit as collusive.
The parties to the suit, other than the Commissioner filed an application of compromise and an application was made forstriking off the name of the Commissioner from the array of defendants.
The counsel for the Commissioner was present at the hearing and he did not object to the name being struck off.
The name of Commissioner was struck off, and the suit was decreed on compromise declaring the wakf invalid and void and granting a perpetual injunction.
The Commissioner made an application under section, 70 (4) of the Bengal Wakfs Act, 1934 for declaring the decree void as no notice was given to him under 70(1) of the Act.
The Munsif allowed the application and declared the decree to be void.
On appeal, the Subordinate Judge held that the application under section 70(4) was incompetent as the Commissioner was present in the suit and the decree was passed with the knowledge of the Commissioner and there was no need for a fresh notice to him under section 70(1) of the Act.
The High Court, in revision, reversed the decision of the Subordinate Judge and restored that of the Munsif.
In appeal by special leave, this Court, HELD : The appeal must be allowed and the judgment of the Subordinate Judge must be restored.
Section 70 speaks of several special notices, such as, in sub section
(2) before any wakf property is notified for sale in execution of a decree or in sub section
(3) before any wakf property is notified for 'sale for the recovery of any revenue, cess, rates or taxes, but it does not provide for any special notice of a petition for compromise of a suit except the first notice that a suit had been filed in the court.
In section 69 although compromise cannot be made without the sanction of the trying court, there is no mention of any special notice to the Commissioner.
It follows, therefore, that the Commissioner was entitled to a notice of the suit.
That may be by a letter from the court giving him this notice, or, if he was made a party, by a summons to attend the court.
In the present case the second course was followed and a copy of the plaint must have accompanied the summons and this was sufficient compliance with the provisions of the first sub section of section 70.
[589 F 590 A] 586 The Commissioner had notice of whole of the suit and of the claim made by the plaintiff in the case.
He was afforded an opportunity to resist the suit and, in fact, resisted it but later gave up the fight and agreed to go out of the suit.
In these circumstances, it will be wrong to bold that the decree was void because the Commissioner was not given a notice of the compromise petition.
[592 C] State Wakf Board, Madras vs Abdul Azeez Sahib & Ors.
A.I.R. , distinguished.
Muzafar Ahmed vs Indra Kumar Das & Ors.
77 C.L.J., 159, Benoy Kumar Acharjee Choudhury & Ors.
vs Ahamma Ali & Anr.
and The Commissioner of Wakfs, Bengal vs Shahbzada Mohammed Zehangir Shah, , referred to.
