A bank, of which the appellant was the Manager, had an overdraft account with another bank which later merged with the respondent.
The appellant 's father had executed from time to time letters of guarantee holding himself liable for the amount under the overdraft arrangements.
The appellant 's father executed a deed giving away his properties to the appellant, and other members of the family.
The deed recited that he had executed the letters of guarantee at the request of the appellant, and that the amount due to the Bank was to be paid by the appellant; but if any amount had to be, paid by him (father) as per the letter of guarantee, the appellant and the properties allotted to him were to be answerable for that amount.
The creditor bank filed a suit against the debtor bank and also against the appellant and his father 's other heirs and legal representatives for the amount due under the overdraft arrangement; and claimed that a charge was created on the properties to which the deed executed by the father of the appellant related.
The trial court decreed the suit against the debtor bank and also 'against the appellant limited to the property received by him fro.m his father under the deed but held that the claim to enforce the personal liability of the father against his legal representatives was barred by the law of limitation.
The High Court confirmed the decree.
On the questions (i) whether under the deed a charge was created in favour of the creditor bank to satisfy the debt arising under the letter of guarantee, and (ii) whether the charge, assuming that a charge arose, was enforceable by the creditor bank when, it was not a party to the deed, HELD: (i) In order that a charge may be created, there must be evidence of intention disclosed by the deed that a specified property or fund belonging to a person was intended to be made liable to satisfy the deed, In the present ease the recitals in the deed did not evidence any intention of the donor to create a charge in favour of the creditor bank; they merely set out an arrangement between the donor and the members of his family that the liability under the letter of guarantee if and when it arose, will be satisfied by the appellant out of the property allotted to him under the deed.
The letter of guarantee Created merely a personal obligation and an intention tO convert a personal debt into a secured debt in favour of the Bank, a third person, could not be inferred from the recitals in the deed.
Akalla Suryanarayana Rao & Ors.
vs Dwarapudi Basivireddi 659 (ii) Even if it be granted that there was an intention to create a charge the creditor bank, not being a party to the deed could not enforce its covenants.
It must be taken as well settled that except in the case of a beneficiary under a trust created by a contract or in the case of a family arrangement to right may be enforced by a person who is not a party to a contract.
[662 H] Krishna Lal Sadhu vs Pramila Bain Dasi, I.L.R. , referred to.
