The appellants were the office bearers of a sugar concern.
A complaint with the police was registered against them under sub rule 3 of Rule '3 of the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955 read with section 7 of the , On the ground that they had failed to pay to the sellers within the time prescribed the price of the sugarcane purchased by them.
Objecting to the investigation of the alleged offence the appellants filed a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution but the High Court ' refused to interfere.
By special leave they came to this Court.
The contentions urged on behalf of the appellants were (i) that sub rule 3 of rule 3 could not have been validly issued under section 3 of the because the latter section applied only to foodstuffs and not to food crops (ii) that the regulation of the price of sugarcane being expressly dealt with by the Bihar Sugar Factories Control Act, 1937 the same power could not by implication be spelt out from the provisions of the Order and the Act, (iii) that Parliament had no competence to enact any law relating to the control of sugarcane as that subject was within the exclusive legislative jurisdiction of the State, the same being a part of agriculture.
(iv) that there was violation of the fundamental right under article 19(1) of the Constitution by the impugned order.
(v) that in view of section 11 of the Act no cognizance could have been taken of the offence, (vi) that the complaint made before the police did not disclose a cognizabIe offence and as such the police was not empowered to investigate the complaint.
HELD: (i) In view of the scheme of sections 2 and 3 of the Act and the judgment of this Court in Ch.
Tika Ramji 's case the contention that food crops were outside the purview of section 3 of the Act must be rejected.
[675 B G] Ch.
Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs State o/U.P. & Ors. , applied.
(ii) The power sought to be exercised in the present case was not implied one for sub rule (3) of rule 3 gives a specific mandate that unless there is an agreement in writing to the contrary between the parties the purchaser shall pay to the seller the price of the sugarcane purchased within 14 days.
[676 G H] 674 Even if the Bihar Sugar Factories Control, Act, 1937 provides anything to the contrary it must be held to have been altered by a competent authority namely Parliament, under Art, 372 of the Constitution.
[677 A B] (iii) Parliament was competent to enact the and to confer power on the Government under section 3 of the Act as Entry 33 of List III of the Constitution empowers Parliament to legislate in respect of production, supply and distribution of foodstuffs.
[677 C D] (iv) There was no contravention of article 19(1) because no fundamental right is conferred on a buyer not to pay the price of the goods purchased by him or to pay the same whenever he pleases.
[677 E] (v) The plea based on section 11 of the Act was premature because no ,court had yet taken cognizance of the case.
[677 F] (vi) The offence complained of was punishable with three years ' imprisonment and fell within the 2nd Schedule of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
It was therefore a cognizable offence as defined in section 4(1)(f) of the Code.
[677 G]
