Section 126 of the Calicut City Municipal Act 30 of 1961 provided for the levy of a timber tax on timber brought into the city.
The proviso to the section exempted from the levy any timber brought into the city in the course of transit to any place outside the city and directly removed out of the city by rail, road or water.
On a petition filed by the appellants, a single bench of the Kerala High Court held that the legislature was incompetent to enact section 126.
But this decision was reversed in appeal by a division bench.
It was contended in the appeal to.
this Court the High Court had wrongly considered that entry of timber into the Municipal area could only be for consumption, use, or sale within the Municipality or in the course of transit through the limits of the Municipality; such entry could be for storage or other purposes and a provision levying tax on goods entering the area.
of the Municipality without specification of the purpose was beyond the legislative powers of the State under entry 52, List II of the 7th schedule to the Constitution.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, If the State Legislature was competent under Entry 52 List II to levy a tax only on the entry of goods for consumption, use or sale into a local area, the Municipality could not under legislation enacted in exercise of the power conferred by that Entry have power to levy tax in respect of goods brought into the local area for purposes other than consumption, use or sale.
The authority of the State Legislature itself being subject to a restriction in that behalf, section 126 may reasonably be read as subject to the same limitations.
When the power of the Legislature with limited authority is exercised in respect of a subject matter, but words of wide and general import are used, it may reasonably be presumed that the Legislature was using the words in regard to that activity in respect of which it is competent to legislate and no other; and that the Legislature did not intend to transgress.
the limits imposed by the Constitution.
[632 B E] In re Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937, ; referred to.
The expression "brought into the city" in section 126 was rightly interpreted by the High Court as meaning brought into the municipal limits for purposes of consumption, use or sale and not for any other purpose.
