Under section 132 of the Income tax Act, 1961, the Commissioner of Income tax or the Director of Inspection may, after recording reasons, order the search of premises if he has reason to believe that one or more of the conditions in section 132(1) exist.
The officer authorised may enter any place and make a search where he has reason to believe that books or documents relevant to any proceeding under the Act may be ,found.
He may seize any books or documents and place marks of identification on them, and may remove them to the income tax office.
By the express terms of the Act and the Income tax Rules, the officer designated to make the search may obtain the assistance of the police.
The Income tax Officer issued notice to the respondent firm that its income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment and that it was proposed to reassess the income.
He also gave information to the Commissioner of Income tax that the respondent was maintaining duplicate records for evading assessment of the true income and requested the Commissioner for authorisation under section 132 to enter and search the premises where the respondent was carrying on business.
The Commissioner recorded his reasons and issued an order in the prescribed form authorising two Income tax Officers to enter the premises, to search for and seize such books and documents as may be considered relevant or useful for the purpose of reassessment, and to place identification marks thereon and to convey them to the income tax office.
The premises were accordingly searched and the account books and certain documents found therein were seized and carried to the income tax office.
Petitions were filed in the High Court for writs of certiorari for quashing the proceedings of the Income tax authorities, and consequential reliefs.
The High Court granted the writs on the grounds: (1) that the order of search was made by the Commissioner at the direction of the Directorate of Inspection and without satisfying himself about the existence of circumstances justifying search; (2) that besides the documents belonging to the respondent the Income tax Officers seized documents relating to the transactions of their allied concern which documents were irrelevant to the process of reassessment of the respondent; (3) that marks of identification were not placed on certain documents at the time they were seized; (4) that the documents seized were detained by the Income tax Officer for more than two months; and (5) that the police force employed during the raid was excessive.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The Commissioner stated in his counter affidavit that before issuing the authorisation he was satisfied that it was necessary to take action under section 132 and that the authorisation was not issued at the 602 direction of the Directorate of Inspection.
The Deputy Director of Inspection also stated in his affidavit that he never gave any direction to the Commissioner to issue authorisation for search and seizure.
Therefore, in reaching the conclusion that the Commissioner acted at the behest of the Director of Inspection, the High Court was in error, because, having held that the correctness of the opinion formed by the income tax authorities was not open to scrutiny in a writ petition the High Court acted on mere affidavits and accepted the assertions of the respondents which were specifically denied by the Revenue authorities.
[612 B C; 613 D; 614 A B] (2) Since the power conferred, though not arbitrary, is a serious invasion upon the rights and privacy of the tax payer, the power must be strictly exercised in accordance with law and only for the purposes for which the law authorises it to be exercised.
If the action of the officer issuing the authorisation or of the officer designated to make the search is challenged, they must satisfy the court about the regularity of the action taken.
If the action is maliciously taken or for a collateral purpose it is liable to be struck down.
But where the power is exercised bona fide and in furtherance of the statutory duties of the Revenue Officers any error of judgment on the part of the officers will not vitiate the exercise of the power.
The Act and the Rules do not require that the authorization should specify the particulars of documents and books of account; a general authorisation to search for and to seize documents and books of account relevant to or useful for the proceeding under the Act complies with the requirements of the Act and the Rules.
It is for the officer making the search to exercise his judgment and seize or not to seize any documents or books of account.
An error committed by the officer in seizing documents which may ultimately be found not to be useful for or relevant to the proceeding will not by itself vitiate the search, nor will it entitle the aggrieved person to an omnibus order releasing all documents seized.
[608 G H; 609 A F] In the present ease, therefore, merely because a large number of documents, some of which related to the concerns allied to the respondent firm, were seized, it could not lead to the inference that the search and seizure were for a collateral purpose.
On the contrary, the books of account and the documents in respect of other businesses carried on by the partners of the respondent firm through the allied firms would be relevant, because, they would show inter relation between the dealings and supply materials having a bearing on the case of evasion of income tax by the respondents.
Therefore, the search and seizure were not illegal or mala fide.
[609 G; 612 F ]H Income tax Officer, A ward, Agra vs Firm Madan Mohan, , approved.
(3) Assuming that marks of identification were not placed On some documents, it was a mere irregularity and, unless the documents were shown to be tampered with, would not make the search and seizure mala fide.
[612 H] (4) A delay of two months in issuing a notice calling for explanation is also not a ground for holding that the action was taken for a collateral purpose.
[613 A B] (5) Keeping police officers present at the time of search in the house of influential businessmen to ensure the protection of the officers and the record, would not be a case of excessive use of force.
[613 B C]
