P held, on April 1, 1953, three deposit receipts with the State Bank of Bikaner.
At her instance the receipts were renewed in the joint names of herself and S (son of her adopted son) payable to either or survivor.
On August~16, 1953 P executed a deed of gift in favour of S in respect of the three receipts.
The gift deed contained a confirmation by S 'section father that he had accepted the gift for and on behalf of and as the natural guardian of S "to the effect that the said S shall be the absolute owner of the sum gifted".
P addressed a letter to the Bank enclosing a copy of the declaration of gift and intimated the Bank that S was the sole owner of the amount of the receipts and till S attained the age of majority the receipts should remain in the joint names.
From time to time P presented the receipts for renewal when they matured and obtained fresh receipts in the joint names of herself and section On August 25, 1955, the third receipt was encashed and out of the amount realised a part was invested in the name of S in National Savings Certificates and the balance was deposited ' in the name of S alone with a firm.
The other two receipts were renewed in the joint names of P and section After the death of P on February 15, 1956, the two receipts were encashed by section The Assistant Controller of Estate Duty held that possession and enjoyment of the gifted property was not assumed, by the donee to the entire exclusion of the donor and on that account under section 10 of the , the amount of the two receipts and interest thereon formed part of the estate of P and was liable to estate duty.
Regarding the third receipt it was held that even though the earlier receipt was discharged on August 25. 1955, i.e. within 2 years of the death of P and the amount was invested in the name of section by virtue of the provisions of the Act the amount held in the name of S alone was for assessment of Estate Duty liable to be included in the estate of P.
The Central Board of Revenue and the High Court confirmed this order.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that P did everything possible 10 divest herself of her interest in the money held by her in deposit with the Bank and retained no interest therein and that in obtaining renewal of the receipts in the joint names of herself and of S,P was merely a benamidar and in any event was acting on behalf of section HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (i) The question whether the amount of deposit receipts was liable to estate duty must be determined on the true effect of section 10 of the .
The section clearly means that if in respect of any 713 property which is gifted, bona fide possession and enjoyment is not immediately assumed by the donee and thenceforward retained by him to the entire exclusion of the donor of any benefit to him therein the property gifted shall not be excluded from the estate subject to estate duty.
[718 B] In the present case P retained important benefits in herself in the fixed deposit receipts.
There was also no evidence that in obtaining the receipts in the joint names P acted as a guardian of S nor that she was a benamidar of section [718 F] (ii) Though the third receipt was encashed during the life time of P, and the amount was invested in the name of S .alone, the encashment and reinvestment were within two years of the death of P and the amounts so reinvested were liable to be included in the estate of P. [718 G]
