The appellant, a dealer in pulses in Vijayawada in Madras State made certain sales outside the State during the assessment year 1949 50.
The appellant claimed exemption from sales tax of sales effected outside the State during the year but the Deputy Commercial Tax Officer disallowed the claim.
A first appeal and a revision petition to the Board of Revenue were unsuccessful.
The appellant thereafter brought a suit for the recovery of tax collected from him with interest contending that part of sales effected outside the State could not be taxed under article 285(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The Trial Court held that the assessment to tax of the sales during the period from April 1, 1949 to January 25, 1950 ' could not be impeached but the sales from January 26 to March 31 outside the State were not liable to sales tax; as there was a single order of assessment 'for the whole year, the entire assessment was illegal.
In appeal to the High Court, and upon a direction from that Court, the Trial Court gave a finding that deliveries of the goods were not made for purposes of consumption within the delivery State only.
The High Court.
therefore.
allowed the appeal holding that the appellant could not claim the benefit under Article 286(1)(a) in the absence of evidence as to how the whole sales disposed of the goods after obtaining delivery and therefore the entire turn over for the year 1949 50 would be assessable to tax.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended inter alia (i) that the High Court was in error in holding that the burden of proof was on the appellant to show that there was not only delivery of goods for consumption within the delivery States but there was actual consumption of goods in those States: (ii) the assessment must be treated as an indivisible one and if a part of the assessment was illegal, the entire assessment must be deemed to be infected and treated as invalid.
HELD: Allowing the appeal, (i) The part of the turnover which related to sales from January 26, 1960 to March 31.
1960 was not liable to sales tax and the levy of sales tax from the appellant to this extent was illegal.
It was rightly contended that the appellant did not carry the burden of showing that there was not only delivery of goods for consumption within the States but that the goods were actually consumed in those States.
[749 C] India Copper Corporation Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, 12 S.T.C. 56 relied upon.
744 (ii) In the present case though there was a single order of assessment for the period from April 1, 1949 to March 31, 1950, the assessment could be split up and dissected and the items of sales separated and taxed for different periods.
It was possible to ascertain the turnover of the appellant for the pre Constitution and post Constitution periods from the figures furnished in the plaint by the appellant himself.
It was, therefore.
open to the Court in these circumstances to sever the illegal part of the assessment and give a declaration with regard to the illegal part alone instead of1 declaring the entire assessment void.
[752 B] Case law referred to.
