Between the years 1954 and 1959 the appellant company was erecting its factory buildings and other ancillary constructions through buildings contractors.
The appellant arranged for the manufacture of bricks and sold those bricks to the building contractors for the purpose of the appellant 's constructions.
The appellant also supplied for the same purpose steel, cement and other materials which it procured and stored.
The difference between the sale price and the appellant 's cost price was a flat percentage of the cost price varying with the material.
The sale price was agreed to be adjusted against the dues under the contract between the appellant and the building contractors.
Treating the appellant as a dealer in the building materials the sales tax authorities under the Orissa Sales Tax Act.
1947, directed the appellant to pay sales tax for ten quarters ending with December 31, 1958, and a penalty.
in addition to the tax, for failure to register itself as a dealer.
The Tribunal agreed on the liability to pay tax, reduced the penalty, and the High Court, on reference, confirmed the Tribunal 's order.
In appeal to this Court on the questions: (1) Whether the appellant sold building materials to the building contractors; (2) Whether the imposition of penalty for failure to register as a 'dealer ' was justified; and (3) Whether the appellant was a 'dealer ' in respect of the building material supplied by it, HELD: (1) The supply of building material belonging to the appellant for 'an agreed price constituted a 'sale ' as defined in section 2(g) of the Act as the definition stood at the relevant time.
[756 E] (2) Under sections 9(1) and 25(1)(a) of the Act a penalty may be imposed for failure to register as a dealer.
But the discretion to impose a penalty must be exercised judicially.
A penalty will ordinarily be imposed in cases where the party acts deliberately in defiance of law, or is guilty of contumacious or dishonest conduct, or acts in conscious disregard of its obligation; but not, in cases where there is a technical o; venial breach of the provisions of the Act or where the breach flows from a bona fide belief that the offender is not liable to act in the manner prescribed by the statute.
[756 E H] In the present case, those in charge of the affairs of the appellant, in failing to.
register it as a dealer, acted in the honest and genuine belief that the company was not a dealer; and therefore, assuming the appellant to be a 'dealer ' no case for imposing penalty was made out.
[757 A] (3) Under the terms of the tender submitted by the building contractors and the schedule annexed thereto, the appellant was to charge 754 certain rates for the materials supplied by it.
The excess percentage over the specified rate in the case of building materials other than bricks was agreed to be paid by the contracto:rs as storage charges.
There was nothing to show that the excess price charged by the appellant to its contractors for bricks was also for storage charges.
But neither the Tribunal nor the High Court had referred to this aspect of the sale price namely whether the excess price was for storage or for profit with respect to any of the building materials.
Therefore, merely because the price charged to the contractors exceeded the price paid by the appellant for procuring the building materials it cannot be inferred that the motive of the appellant was to carry on business in building materials for profit.
[761 B E]
