The assessee firm used to promote companies.
It purchased all the shares of a Company at the ruling rates with borrowed money and very soon thereafter disposed of all of them at a profit.
Before the Income tax authorities the assessee claimed that it had taken over the shares with a view to secure the managing agency of that Company and had thereafter distributed the shares to its allied concerns, that the transaction was only to facilitate acquisition of a capital asset and the profit realised from the sale of such a capital investment was a capital gain.
It was, found by the Departmental authority and the Tribunal that the shares were not merely 'distributed to the assessee 's associates, but that, some of the shares were sold to its allied concerns and others to strangers, through brokers, in small lots and at a profit.
Also, the interest which the assessee had to pay for the amount borrowed for purchasing the shares was debited in its revenue account and was claimed before the Income tax authorities as a revenue allowance.
The assessee also purchased shares of two other Companies which were its allied concerns, and commenced selling them soon after at a profit.
It was claimed before the Income tax authorities, with respect to these transactions that when a part of the new issue of capital of those two Companies was not taken over by the public, the assessee, as the financiers of those two companies took over the shares, that the were in the nature of a capital investment and the shares were sold on account of 'financial embarrassment ' and not with the object of earning income and so the profit realised by the sale did not attract income tax.
The Departmental authorities and the Tribunal found that the first lot of shares in one of these two Companies was purchased in January, 1945 and the firm went on purchasing and selling the shares of that Company thereafter from February, 1945 and hence, there could not have been any 'financial embarrassment '.
As regards the shares in the second company they were purchased in February, 1945 and sold in August, 1945.
The sales were all through brokers and at a profit.
On the question whether the total profits realised by the assessee was a capita1 gain or revenue income, HELD: Whether a transaction is or is not an adventure in the nature of trade is a mixed question of law and fact: in each case, the legal effect of the facts found by the Tribunal on which the tax payer could be treated as a dealer or an investor in shares has to be determined.
[724 C D] In the present case, on the facts found, there was a well planned scheme for earning profit.
Therefore, all the transactions were impressed with the character of a commercial transaction entered into with a view to earn profits and were not capital investments and hence were liable to tax [724 D; 725 A B] 721 Ram Narain Sons (P) Ltd.
T., Bombay, C.) explained.
