The K company, who.
were the managing agents of the F Company, entered into an agreement on May 21, 1952, with the M Company, whereby the entire share holding of the K Company consisting of certain preference and ordinary shares were to be sold to the M Company or their nominees.
The appellant was a public limited company carrying on the business of dealing in shares and securities.
Some of the preference shares were purchased, amongst others by the appellant at Rs. 185 per share and for this purpose the appellant had to overdraw on its bank account.
The market price of the preference shares at the time was about Rs. 119.
After the agreement was implemented, the M Company became the managing agents, of the F Company.
On December 23, 1953, the appellant sold the preference shares to the M Company thereby incurring a loss of Rs. 1,11,816.
In its assessment to income tax the appellant claimed this loss as arising in the ordinary course of its business.
The Income tax Officer and Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the appellant 's claim on the ground that the shares were purchased as a contribution to the scheme of acquisition of the managing agency of the F Company by the M Company.
The Appellate Tribunal found however that there was no evidence that the appellant had been made a pawn in the scheme of acquisition of the managing agency; but in view of the treatment of the loss by the appellant as a loss in investment and not a loss on its stock in trade in its own profit and loss account, the tribunal held that the shares were not acquired in the course of the appellant 's share dealing business and therefore rejected its claim.
The High Court, upon a 'reference, also held against the appellant, 'but expressed the opinion that the tribunal had not properly considered the primary facts found by the Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner which clearly showed that the appellant, an associate of the M Company, had entered into the transaction relating to preference shares at the bidding of the M Company and for the purpose of helping them.
In appeal to this Court it was contended (i) that the High Court was not entitled to reverse the findings of fact of the tribunal which were in favour of the appellant since the department had not challenged these by means of appropriate proceedings; and (ii) that where a question is one of mixed 'facts and law, the facts as found by the tribunal ran.st be accepted as correct; the tribunal had negatived the finding that the preference shares were acquired by the appellant as a pawn in the scheme of transfer of the managing agency of the F Company and it was not open to the High Court to come to the same conclusion by not treating the findings of the Tribunal as final.
773 HELD: Dismissing the appeal: (i) The question which was referred to.
the High Court was couched in general terms and was not limited to or circumscribed by the reasons which had been given by the Tribunal against the appellant.
The question of law on which reference can be made must arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
Although certain reasons which had appealed to the Incometax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were not accepted by the Tribunal, it had come to the conclusion which was material for the disposal of the appeal.
namely,.
that the loss in question was not a loss that arose in the course of the appellant 's business in share dealing.
The question which was referred to the High Court was framed in the light of this final conclusion and it was not necessary for the department to apply for and obtain a reference on a question arising from the reasons given by the Tribunal in support of its conclusion in favour of the department.
[777 D G] (ii) Even if the conclusion of the High Court on the facts relating to the appellant 's role in the scheme for transfer of the managing agency to the M Company was not taken into consideration, the question which was referred to it had to be answered against the appellant.
This was clear on admitted and proved facts which had some extraordinary features and led to the irresistible conclusion that whatever the motives which entered into the appellant 's acquisition of the shares, they were not bought and sold in the ordinary course of the business of the appellant as a dealer in shares.
[778 F] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City Iv.
Greaves Cotton & Co. Ltd., and Oriental Investment Co. P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; referred to.
