The first respondent entered into an agreement to sell his properties to the appellant.
Disputes relating to completion of the sale were referred to arbitration.
An award was made directing the first respondent to execute the documents in respect of the transfer by him within one month from the date of the receipt of the confirmation or approval according to law, failing which the appellant was at liberty to get it executed and registered through court.
The award was made a rule of the court on November 30, 1949 and a decree on the basis of the award was granted.
The first respondent left India 'for Pakistan so.me date after November 22, 1969.
The appellant moved the Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property for confirmation of the transfer under section 38 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Ordinance, 1949 or under section 40 of the .
The Deputy Custodian accorded confirmation, but the Additional Custodian set aside the order of the Deputy Custodian.
The appellant filed an application for execution of the decree on the 'basis of the award to which objections were filed by the Custodian.
The District Judge held that on the date of the decree transfer of properties could not be effected unless confirmed by the Custodian, The appellant 's appeal to the High Court was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that there could be No. bar to.
the execution of the decree based on the award, since the respondent 's properties were never declared to be evacuee properties either under Central Ordinance 27 of 1949 or Central Act 31 of 1951 and that they did not vest in the Custodian unless they were so declared after appropriate proceedings.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: Under the provisions of section 38(1) of Central Ordinance 27 of 1949 and section 40(1) of Central Act 31 of 1951, transfer of property was ineffective unless confirmed by the Custodian even if a person became an evacuee after the date of transfer.
It was not necessary that the property should have been declared or notified to be evacuee property before those provisions were attracted.
[800 D] In the present case the respondent had become an evacuee within the meaning of section 2(d) of the Ordinance and the Act.
The Additional Custodian declined to confirm the transfer made by the respondent and therefore the condition precedent for a valid transfer remained unsatisfied.
Further, even according to the award the confirmation or approval of the Custodian had to be obtained before the transfer of documents were to be executed and completed in accordance with law.
It was incumbent on the 797 appellant to obtain the confirmation order before he could ask for any further steps to be taken by the courts in the matter of execution and registration of the transfer deed.
[800 H]
