The respondent was assessed to sales tax in the State of Kerala for the year 1962 63 in March, 1964.
In December, 1965 the Sales Tax Officer issued notice under R. 33 of the Travancore Cochin General Sales Tax Rules, 1950 in force at that time for reopening the original assessment on the ground that certain turnover had escaped assessment.
According to the relevant portion of the said rule the assessing authority "may at any time within three years next succeeding that to which the tax relates determine to the best of his judgment the turnover which has escaped assessment and assess the tax payable on such turnover after issuing a notice to the dealer and after making such enquiry as he considers necessary".
The respondent 's objection to the notice having failed it filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The learned Single Judge who heard the writ petition felt that it was due to the orders of the court that the Sales tax authorities had been prevented from completing the assessment within the time allowed by Rule 33.
While disposing of the writ petition he observed that the Sales Tax Authorities would be at liberty to complete the proceedings initiated by the notice within a further period of 59 days.
The respondent preferred an appeal to the division bench which set aside the direction granting 59 days extension for completing the assessment.
The Revenue appealed.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that on a true construction of Rule 33 it should be held that the proceedings under that rule: have to commence within three years next succeeding that to which the tax relates and that it is not necessary that the entire proceeding.s relating to the escaped assessment should be completed within that period.
On behalf of the respondent it was urged that the word 'determine ' in Rule 33 meant that the final determination of the turnover which had escaped assessment and the assessment of the tax have to be done within three years.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD: In view of the previous decisions of this Court in which provisions similar to Rule 33, namely, sub clauses (2), (4) and (5) of section 11 of the PUnjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 came up for consideration, the principle is firmly established that assessment proceedings under the Sales Tax Act must be taken to be pending from the time the proceedings are initiated until they are terminated by a final order of assessment.
In these cases the initiation o.f proceedings within the prescribed period was considered sufficient.
The fact that the word used in Rule 33 is 'determine ' whereas in sections 11(4) and (5) of the Punjab Act the words 'proceed to assess ' are used, cannot, in the context of sales tax legislation lead to a different result.
r862 H 863 C] The words which follow the word 'determine ' in Rule 33 must be accorded their due signification.
The words 'assess the tax payable ' cannot be ignored and it is clearly meant that the assessment has to be made within the period prescribed. 'Assessment" is a comprehensive word and can 860 denote the entirety of proceedings which are taken with regard to it.
It cannot and does not mean a final order of assessment alone unless there is something in the context of a particular provision which compels such a meaning being attributed to it.
Rule 33 must not be so interpreted that it may be defeated by taking certain collateral proceedings and obtaining a stay order as was done in the present case or by unduly delaying assessment proceedings beyond a period of three years.
It must be interpreted like the analogous provisions considered in earlier cases.
This must particularly be so when there is no provision in the Rule in question analogous to.
sub section
(3) of section 34 of the Income tax Act, 1922 by which the Income Tax authorities were debarred from completing the assessment beyond the period prescribed.
[863 D G] The State of Punjab vs Tara Chand Lajpat Rai, 19 S.T.C. 493 and The State of Punjab vs Murlidhar Mahabir Prashad, 21 S.T.C. 29 applied.
Ghanshyam Das vs Regional Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Nagpur, ; , referred to.
