The first respondent, an elector, challenged the election of the appellant to the Lok Sabha.
He alleged inter alia, in the election petition that: (1) only one counting agent of the defeated candidate was permitted at each table where three persons were counting simultaneously, and hence, it was impossible 'for the counting agent to detect the wrong acts of the counting staff who had adopted an attitude hostile to the defeated candidate; and (2) several votes of the defeated candidate were improperly rejected ignoring the protests of the election agent of that candidate, while invalid votes and votes of the defeated candidate were counted in favour of the appellant.
The Schedule to the petition gave some figures of such improper rejection and improper acceptance.
In the verification to the petition it was stated that the allegations were made on the basis of information 'received from the workers and the counting agents of the defeated candidate and that the election petitioner believed the information to be correct.
It was however not stated in the petition who the workers were and what was the basis of their information.
No written objection was flied during the counting, either to the acceptance or the rejection of any vote, nor was any such application made for a recount.
Before the trial of the election petition the election petitioner filed an application for permission to.
inspect the packets.
of ballot papers containing the accepted as well as rejected votes of the candidates.
In the affidavit in support of the petition he averred that on one of the days of counting.
he was the counting agent of the defeated candidate and had personal knowledge of Such improper rejection and acceptance.
No other affidavit of persons who could have had personal knowledge of the matter was flied.
The High Court allowed the application and permitted scrutiny solely on the basis of the allegations in the election petition and the affidavit in support of the application seeking scrutiny.
In appeal to this Court, HELD.
: In view of the importance of maintaining the secrecy of the ballot papers, scrutiny can only be ordered if the election petition contains an adequate statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies, that is, the material facts disclosed must afford an adequate basis the allegations; and, the election tribunal must be prima facie satisfied that in order to decide the dispute and to do complete justice between the parties inspection of the ballot papers is necessary.
[855 G H; 856 A] In the present case, the High Court stated that it was so.
satisfied on the mere statement of 'some figures in the petition and affidavit.
It also did not give any reason in support of its satisfaction as to the need for inspection.
[857 G H] (1) The petitioner had not stated that any.
of the counting agents appointed by the defeated candidate or his election agent, in accordance 853 with the rules, had been refused admission to the place of counting.
Therefore, the allegation that enough number of counting agents were not permitted was not supported by any statement of material facts.
[857 B C] (2) Similarly, with regard to the rejection of the votes polled in favour of the defeated candidate, under the rules, before a vote is rejected the agents of the candidates must be permitted to examine the concerned ballot paper, and therefore, the serial numbers of the concerned ballot papers could have been noted.
The election petition, however, is silent as to the inspection and notes of the ballot papers and other material facts such as raising objections and asking for a 'recount.
[857 C E] Therefore, the scrutiny of the ballot papers was sought on the basis of mere assertions and allegations which were neither accompanied by a statement of material facts nor were they supported by any evidence; and hence, the High Court should have rejected the application for scrutiny.
[857 F] Ram Sewak Yadav vs Hussain Kamil Kidwai, [1964] 6 S.C.R. 238 and Dr. Jagjit Singh vs Giani Kartar Singh, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 773, followed.
