S who was employed as a deck hand on a ship was found missing on board.
The respondent filed an application under section 3 of the Workmen 's Compensation Act claiming compensation for the death of S which according to him occurred on account of a personal injury caused by an accident arising out of and in the course of employment.
The Additional Commissioner held that there was no evidence to show that the seaman was dead and there was in any event no evidence to justify the inference that the death of the seaman was caused by an accident which arose out of employment.
The High Court reversed the judgment of the Additional Commissioner.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The Additional Commissioner did not commit any error of law in reaching his findings and the High Court was not justified in reversing them.
To come within the Act the injury by accident must arise both out of and in the course of employment.
The words "in the course of employment" mean in the course of work which the workman is employed to do and which is incidental to it.
The words "arising out of the employment" are understood to mean that during the course of the employment, injury has resulted from some risk incidental to the duties of the service, which, unless engaged in the duty owing to the master, it is reasonable to believe the workman would not otherwise have suffered.
The expression is not confined to the mere nature of the employment but applies to the employment as such to its nature, its conditions, its obligations and its incidents.
[872 H] Although the onus of proving that the injury by accident arose both out of and in the course of employment rests upon the applicant these essentials may be inferred when the facts proved justify the inference.
On the one hand the Commissioner must not surmise, conjecture or guess; on the other hand he may draw an inference from the proved facts so long as it is a legitimate inference.
The evidence must be such as would induce a reasonable man to draw the inference.
[873 H] Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway Co. vs Highley, , Lancaster vs Blackwell Colliery Co. Ltd. 1918 W.C. Rep. 345, Kerr or Lendrum vs Ayr Steam Shipping Ca.
Ltd. , Bender vs Owners of S.S. "Zeni" [1909] '2 K.B. 41, Marshall vs Owners of S.S. "Wild Rose", , Rice vs Owners of Ship "Swansea Vale", [1912] A.C. 238, Gatton vs Limerick Steamship Co. , Rourke vs Hold & Co. [1917] 2 Ir.
Rep. 318 at 321 and Simpson vs L.M. & section Railway Co. , referred
