A first information report to the police was lodged against the appellants and some others ten persons in all, for having taken part in an assault and causing hurt to the victim of the assault.
On the police report, the Magistrate took cognizance of the case.
More than six were after the incident, the victim filed a complaint before the Magistrate naming thirty one persons (including the ten persons against whom the first in formation was given) as: his assailants, and the Magistrate took cognizance of the case against the other twenty one accused as a separate case.
On the application of the complainant (victim), the two.
cases, one on the police report and the other on the private complaint, were clubbed and tried together.
The Magistrate, on an examination of the evidence, held that there was no proof beyond reasonable doubt that the accused persons committed the assault and acquitted all of them.
The complainant then filed an appeal under section 417(3), Criminal Procedure Code, to the High Court.
The appellants, against whom cognizance of the case was taken on the police report, challenged the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that the appeal against their acquittal was maintainable only if preferred by the State Government under section 417(1).
The High Court overruled the objection, reappraised the evidence of the witnesses, upset the finding of the Magistrate and convicted the appellants.
In appeal to this Court, on the questions: (1 ) As to the maintainability of the appeal by the complainant; and (2) Whether the matter should be sent back to the High Court for disposal under section 439 of the Code, HELD: (1 ) Though the two.
cases could be clubbed together for convenience of trial under section 239 of the Code the nature and identity of the cases in relation to their appealability under section 417 were not altered.
In the case started against the appellants on the police report the appeal against acquittal could have been filed only by the State Government, and if No. such appeal was filed, the complainant could only invoke the revisional powers of the High Court under section 439 if proper grounds were present.
[883 A C] (2) The High Court can exercise its revisional powers under section 439 when invoked by a private complainant against an order of acquittal against which the State has a right of appeal under 'section 417, only in exceptional cases when there is some glaring defect in the procedure and there is a manifest error on a point of law and consequently there has been a flagrant miscarriage of justice.
The present case however is one of mere appraisal of evidence.
In such a case the High Court under section 439, could not re examine the evidence or order a retrial.
Therefore, the case was no.t a fit one for sending back to the High Court.
[883 E F; 884 E G; 885 A. F H] D. Stephens vs Nosibolla, ; , Logendranath jha vs Polailal Biswas ; and K. Chinnaswamy Reddy vs State A. p.
; , 418, followed.
