The respondents being Ryots of the appellants were granted over sixty years ago a village site by the ancestors of the appellants on which they built their residential houses.
During the 1947 riots the respondents in order to seek safety fled from the village temporarily and came back in 1949.
They found that their residential buildings on the aforesaid site had been demolished and that in their place the appellants had raised a cow shed.
The appellants refused to give back possession of the site and building to the respondents whereupon on January 9, 1951 the respondents filed a suit for possession.
The appellants based their defence on the provisions of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Act 1 of 1951) which came into force on January 26, 1951.
According to section 4 of the Act, with effect from the notified date i.e. July 1, 1952, all Estates became vested in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
The lands and buildings enumerated ' in sections 6 and 9 were however settled on the persons who 'held ' them.
The contention of the appellants was that they 'held ' the buildings on the relevant date and therefore the buildings were deemed to be settled on them by the State Government.
In the Allahabad High Court there was conflict of opinion as to the meaning of the word 'held ' in section 9.
In Pheku Chamar 's case a Division Bench of the Court held that the word 'held ' in section 9 connotes the existence of a right or title in the holder.
However in Bharat 's case another Division Bench of the Court declined to follow Phekhu Chamar 's case and came to the conclusion that the legislature used wide language in section 9 and it covers the case of buildings belonging to persons who constructed them whether lawfully or unlawfully.
When the present case came up in second appeal before the High Court it was referred to a Full Bench.
The majority of judges adopted the view taken in Phekhu Chamar 's case and decided against the appellants; the dissenting judge took the view that since the buildings constructed by the respondents did not exist on the date of vesting they were not entitled to the benefit of section 9.
In appeal to this Court by certificate, HELD: (1) Though in fact the vesting of the Estate and the deemed settlement of some rights in respect of certain classes of lands or buildings included in the Estate took place simultaneously, in law the two must be treated as different transactions; first there was a vesting of the Estates in the State absolutely and free of all encumbrances.
Then followed the deemed settlement by the State of some rights with the persons mentioned in sections 6 and 9.
Therefore in law it would not be correct to say that what vested in the State are only those interests not coming within sections 6 or 9.
[13 B C] Rana Sheo Ambar Singh vs Allahabad Bank Ltd. Allahabad, ; and Shivashankar Prasad Shah & Ors.
vs Vaikunth Nath Singh & Ors., C.A. No. 368/66 decided on 3 7 1969, referred to.
(ii) It was unfortunate that the Division Bench in Bharat 's case should have thought it proper to sit in judgment over the correctness of a decision rendered by a Bench of co ordinate jurisdiction.
Judicial propriety requires that if a bench of a High Court is unable to agree with the decision already rendered by another co ordinate bench of the same High Court the question should be referred to a larger bench.
Otherwise the decisions of High Courts will not only lose respect in the eyes of the public, it will also make the task of the subordinate courts difficult.
[15 E] (iii) Justice and reason constitute the great general legislative intent in every piece of legislation.
Consequently where the suggested construction operates harshly, ridiculously or in any other manner contrary to prevailing conception of justice and reason in most instances it would seem that the apparent or suggested meaning of the statute, was not the one intended by the law makers.
[16 B] In the present case it was hard to believe that the legislature in enacting section 9 intended to ignore the rights of persons having legal title to possession and wanted to make a Rift of any building to a trespasser howsoever recent the trespass might have been if only he happened to be in physical possession of the buildings on the date of vesting.
It is difficult to discern any legislative policy in support of that construction.
[16 D] According to Webster 's New Twentieth Century Dictionary the word 'held ' is technically understood to mean to possess by legal title.
Therefore by interpreting the word 'held ' as 'lawfully held ' there was no addition of any word to the section.
According to the words of section 9 and in the context of the scheme of the Act it is proper to construe the word 'held ' in the section as 'lawfully held '.
The appellants contention in this regard must be rejected.
[17 B D] Pheku Chamar & Ors.
vs Harish Chandra &, Ors.
A.I.R. 1953 All. 406, approved.
Bharat and Anr.
vs Ch.
Khazan Singh & Anr.
A.I.R. 1958 All. 332, disapproved.
K.K. Handique vs The Member, Board of Agricultural Income tax Assam, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1191 and Eramma vs V, Verrupanna & Ors. , applied.
(iv) When the respondents left the village owing to communal disturbances they could not be said to have abandoned their residential buildings.
The appellants unlawfully demolished them and entered the land as trespassers.
The cow shed they erected on the land was not greater in value than the respondents residential buildings.
On equitable considerations it must be held that when the respondents came back to their village in 1949, they were entitled to recover not only the site but also the building constructed on it by the appellants.
Hence it should be held that on the date of vesting, the respondents were the owners of the building in question for in law they were holding the same.
[14 A E] [Question whether if a stranger constructs a building on the land of another, the true owner of the land is entitled to recover the land with the building on it, left open.] [14 D] 12
