The appellant 's suit against the respondent for rendition of account and other reliefs was valued at Rs. 5,930/ for purposes of court fee and jurisdiction.
The suit was decreed in part and the amount decreed was less.
than the amount at which he stated his tentative valuation.
He filed an appeal to the District Court stating the valuation for purposes of appeal at Rs. 4,880 '/ .
The memorandum of appeal showed the valuation in the original suit and the court fee paid was the same amount as in the trial court.
The District Court returned the memorandum of appeal for presentation to the proper court because, under section 39 '(1) of the Punjab Courts Act appeals above the value of Rs. 5,000/ had to filed before the High Court.
The appeal was filed in the High Court the same day, but it was out of time.
The appellant also filed a revision against the order of the District Court.
His counsel placed reliance on r. 4 in Ch.
3 B of Vol.
1 of the Rules of the High Court which states that "in a suit for the amount found due after taking accounts it is not the tentative valuation of the plaintiff but the amount found to be due and decreed by the court that determines the forum of appeal.
" The High .Court held that there was no ground for extending time under section 5 of the Limitation Act and dismissed the appeal and also the revision.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: The High Court should have extended time under section 5 of the Limitation Act.
[9 '4 A B] (i) The appellant did not have any underhand motive in filing the appeal before the District Court, the filing had to be attributed entirely to the advice of his counsel.
[93 A B] There is no general proposition that mistake of counsel by itself is always a sufficient ground for condoning delay.
It is always a question whether the mistake was bona fide or was merely a device to cover an ulterior purpose.
[92 F G] In the present case the original valuation determined the court of lowest denomination before which the appeal from the suit had to go and that forum was the High Court.
The counsel seems to have been misled by r. 4 in Ch.
3 B of Vol. 1 of the Rules and Orders of the High Court.
This rule is applicable in a case where the amount decreed is larger than the amount for which the original suit was brought.
It does not apply where the amount decreed is below the valuation in the original court.
There is nothing in the case to show that the error committed by the counsel was tainted by any mala fide motive.
[93 C F; 94 A]
