After the land in suit was sold in June, 1957, for an ostensible sum of Rs. 1,35:000/ , the appellants and respondents 1 to 3 instituted two separate suits for pre emptions in which the sale price inserted in the sale deed was also questioned.
The two suits were consolidated and the plaintiffs in each suit were joined as defendants in the other suit under section 38 of Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913.
The vendees thereafter admitted the rights of preemptors in both the suits conceding that a decree may be passed in their favour.
The appellants accepted the sale price of Rs, 1,35,000 on or before 30th July 1958 and although respondents 1 to 3 wanted this issue to be decided on the merits, the trial court passed a decree in both the ,suits granting respondents 1 to 3 the right to preemption in the first instance on payment of Rs. 1,35,000 and, on their failure to so pay, holding the appellants entitled to exercise the right to pre emption on payment of the said amount on or before 30th October 1958.
In an appeal to the High Court, respondents 1 to 3 challenged the correctness of the amount of the deposit to be made.
Allowing the appeal, the High Court reduced the amount of deposit to Rs. 1,05,800/ and directed respondents 1 to 3 to deposit the amount within three months.
In an appeal by the appellants to this Court against the decision of the High Court, a preliminary objection was taken challenging the appelants right to appeal it was contended that the appellants had based their right to pre emption in their suit on the ground of their being proprietors of the village where the land was situated.
They were deprived of that right by the amendment of section 31 of the Punjab Pre emption Act by Punjab Act 10 of 1969 which amendment was retrospective in its operation and prohibited the Courts from passing any decree inconsistent with the amended Act.
On the other hand it was contended inter alia for the appellants that they had already secured a decree in their favour by the trial court which had become final 'and with the terms of which the had complied: in the present appeal they were merely seeking modification of the decree of the High Court in favour of respondents 1 to 3 by getting the amount of pre emption money enhanced t0 Rs. 1,35,000/ without claiming any rights of pre emption in their own favour furthermore, the only appeal preferred by respondents 1 to 3 to the High Court was from the decree in 'heir own suit and for this reason also the decree in favour of the appellants by the trial court had become conclusive and unassailable.
130 HELD: Upholding the preliminary objection, It was not open to this Court to pass a decree of pre emption in favour of the appellants who were deprived by the Amendment Act of 1960 of their right to secure such a decree.
[133 C D] The contention that the decree in the appellants ' suit had become final and the High Court 's order was only in relation to the suit of respondents 1 to 3 ignored the scheme of section 28 of the Act read with O.20, r. 14, C.P.C. which does not postulate decrees of pre emption in favour of rival preemptors on payment of different amounts of purchase money in respect of the same sale.
Such a course may lead to conflicting decisions on the question of value of the property sought to be pre empted for the purposes of a pre emption suit.
Besides., the appellants ' right to pre empted the sale under the unamended law was admittedly inferior to that of respondents 1 to 3 and the appellants could only be held entitled to exercise their right after the failure of those respondents to comply with the terms of the decree in their favour.
[133 E G] Ram Swarup vs Munshi and Others, ; ; referred to.
