A Hindu, owning his self acquired properties, died in 1947 leaving five sons and a widow.
In 1950, an arbitrator was appointed for dividing the assets and liabilities among the heirs.
The arbitrator gave his award and a decree was passed in terms of the award.
Under the award, the widow was allotted her share of the properties and it was stated that she was to have a widow 's estate in those properties.
On the question whether, on the coming into.
force of the , she became a full owner of the. properties under section 14(1) or only had a restricted estate in such properties under section 14(2).
HELD: The words 'possessed ' and 'acquired ' in section 14( 1 ) are used with the widest possible: meaning, so that, the 'possession ' may be either actual or constructive and the 'acquisition ' can be in any manner whatsoever.
Hence, where a female Hindu has a share in joint properties which are later on partitioned by metes and bounds and she gets possession of the properties allotted to her, before the coming into force of the , she was not only 'possessed ' of that property at the time of the coming into force of the Act but had also 'acquired ' it before its commencement.
The mere fact that the partition was by means of an arbitration award would not bring the matter within section 14(2) as section 14(1) had already become fully applicable.
Section 14(2) is in the nature of a proviso.
or an exception to section 14(1) and comes into operation only if acquisition in any of the methods indicated therein is made for the first time without there being any preexisting right in the female Hindu to the property.
[98 F H; 99 A C, F] In the present case, the widow inherited the property under section 3 (1 ) of the Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937, and was therefore in 'possession ' of it within the meaning of that word in section 14(1), and, when the award separated her share by metes and bounds, she 'acquired ' the property within the meaning of that section.
Therefore, she had become full owner of the property in her possession under section 14(1) on the coming into force of the , even though previously she: was a limited owner.
[97 G H; 98 D E; 99 E F] Gummalapura Taggina Matada Kotturuswami vs Setra Veerayya, [1959] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 968, Munnalal vs RaI Kumar [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 418 and Sukhram vs Gauri Shankar, ; , followed.
