The respondent by a deed executed in 1951 took on lease from the appellant certain premises in Bangalore.
It was stipulated in the deed that the lease would be for a period of 10 years in the first instance with an option to the lessee to renew the, same every ten years so long as desired.
When in 1961 the first period of ten years was about to expire the respondent asked for a renewal of the lease.
On the appellant refusing to do so, the respondent filed a suit for specific performance, The suit was decreed by the trial court, the first appellate court and the High Court.
Appeal in this Court was filed by special leave.
The contention of the 'appellant was that the lease in question being in the first instance for ten years only was not a lease in perpetuity as contemplated by section 105 of the Transfer of Property Act; however the clauses relating to renewal which were covenants that ran with the land offended the rule against perpetuity in section 14 of the Act.
HELD: The 'appeal must be dismissed.
(a) Section 14 of the Act is applicable only where there is transfer of property.
Even if creation of a lease hold interest is a transfer of a right in property and would fall within the expression 'transfer of property ' the transfer was for a period of ten years only by means of the indenture in the present case.
The stipulation relating to renewal could not be regarded as transferring property or any rights therein.
[143 B] (b) The option of renewal given to the lessee did not contain a covenant which created an interest in the property of the nature that would fail within the ambit of section 14.
[143 F] Ganesh Sonar vs Purnendu Narayan Singha & Ors.
(1962) Pat.
201, applied.
Woodall vs Clifton, [1905]2 Ch.
257, referred to.
(c) In English law the, court would give effect to a covenant for perpetual renewal so long as the intention is clear and it will not be open to objection on the ground of perpetuity.
In India the equitable rule that the burden of a covenant runs with the land is to be found in section 40 of the Transfer of Property Act, but that section its.elf expressly says that the right of the covenanted is not an interest in the land bound by the covenant nor an easement.
It is not 'an interest because the Act does not recognise equitable estate.
[143 G; 144 F] Thus even on the footing that the clauses relating to renewal in the lease, in the present case, contained covenants running with the land the 141 rule against perpetuity contained in section 14 of the Act would not be applicable as no interest in property had been created of the nature contemplated in the provision.
[144 G] Muller vs Trafford, [1901]1 Ch. 54, Weg Motors Ltd. vs Hales & Ors. , 188 and London & South Western Rly.
vs Goreto, , 580, referred to.
