Entry 54 of the Union List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution confers power for the regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
The corresponding entry in the Federal List I under the Government of India Act, 1935 was entry 36 which besides mines and mineral development dealt with oilfields also.
Entry 23 of List II of the Constitution gives power for regulation of mines and mineral development to the States subject to entry 54 of List I. The corresponding entry under the Government of India Act was entry 23 of List Il.
The Central Assembly in exercise of its power under entry 36.
of List I in the Government off India Act enacted the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 53 of 1948 which dealt with mines, mineral development as well as oilfields.
Rule 4 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1948 made under the Act which came into force on October 25, 1949 gave power to the State Government to frame rules for the regulation and development of 'minor minerals ' as defined in the Rules.
In 1957 Parliament passed the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act 67 of 1957.
The Act of 194 8 was adapted to deal with oilfields and gas only.
In Act 67 of 1957 the provisions relating to regulation of mines in s.s. 4 to 13 were by section 14 made inapplicable to 'minor minerals ' as defined in the Act.
Rules relating to minor minerals were under section 15 to be made by State Governments and till such rules were made any rules enforce at the commencement of the Act were to continue.
The appellant purchased in 1963 a lease for quarrying minor minerals as defined in Act 67 of 1957 from a vendor who had taken the original lease from the then landlords in 1955.
When under section 10(1) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950) the rights of the intermediary landlord vested in the State of Bihar the said State became lessor of the appellant 's lease.
The lease was confirmed on behalf of the State and rent under the terms of the original lease was paid by the appellant up to September 1965.
The Bihar Government had not framed any rules relating to minor minerals under Act 53 of 1948 but it framed the Bihar Minor Mineral Contession Rules, 1964 under section 15 of the Act 67 of 1957.
Also, in 1964 the Bihar legislature amended section 10(2) of the Reforms Act.
A second pro viso was added to sub el.
(2) whereby the terms and conditions of and pubsisting leases of minor minerals would be substituted by the terms and 101 conditions laid down in the Bihar Minor Mineral Concession Rules to the extent that the former were inconsistent with the latter.
Rule 20 of the said Bihar Rules as originally framed provided for realisation of dead rent, royalty and surface rent in 'respect of leases granted or renewed.
In terms the rule was prospective only.
But in December 1964 it was amended by the addition of a second sub rule according to which the provisions as to dead rent etc.
would also apply to leases granted or renewed prior to the date of the commencement of the Act and subsisting on such date.
On the strength of the amended section 10(2) of the Reforms Act and the amended r. 20 the Bihar Government demanded from the appellant, dead rent, royalty and surface rent contrary to the terms of his lease.
The appellant thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court.
Dissatisfied with the judgment of that court the appellant came to this Court.
It was contended on behalf of the: appellant: (i) that the subject of regulation of mines and mineral development came within the exclusive jurisdiction of Parliament as a result of the passing of Act 67 of 1957 with the result that the State Legislature was left with no power to pass the second proviso to section 10(2) and the said proviso was therefore ultra vires, (ii) that r. 20(2) being without legislative support could not touch a lease granted, in 1955.
On behalf of the respondent State it was urged that (a) the 2nd proviso to section 10(2) of the Reforms Act fell not under entry 23 but under entry 18 of List II which dealt with land and land tenures; (b) Act 67 of 1957 did not result in control of the union as contemplated by entry 54 in List I and therefore the State 's jurisdiction under entry 23 List II was not ousted; (c) modification of leases was not covered by section 15 of the said Act and since Parliament was silent on that subject the field remained open for legislation by the State.
HELD: (i) Entry 54 of the Union List speaks both of regulation of mines and mineral development and entry 23 is subject to entry 54.
It is open to Parliament to declare that it is expedient in the public interest that the control should vest in Central Government.
Once: this declaration is made and the extent laid down the subject of the legislation to the extent laid down becomes an exclusive subject for legislation by Parliament.
Any legislation by the State after such declaration and touching upon the field disclosed.
in the field is extracted from the legislative competence of the State.
[113 B D] The declaration contemplated by entry 54 is contained in section 2 of Act 67 of 1957 and the Central Government is given control as to regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent provided in the Act.
Thus what is left within the competence of State Government has to be worked out from the terms of the Act itself.
[113 F] The Act deals with minor minerals separately from other minerals.
In respect of minor minerals it provides in section 14 that sections 4 to 13 do not apply to prospecting licences and mining leases.
It goes on to state in section 15( 1 ) that the State Government may by 'notification make 'rules for regulating the grant of prospecting licences and mining leases in respect of minor minerals and for purposes connected therewith, and in section 15(2) that till such rules. are framed any rules already in force would continue.
No 'rules existed in the State of Bihar which could be preserved under section 15(2).
Therefore the whole subject of legislation was covered in respect of minor minerals by section 15(1).
Whether rules under that section were made or not the topic was covered by Parliamentary legislation and to that extent the powers of the State Legislature were wanting.
[114 G 115 B] It must accordingly be held that by the declaration in section 2 and by the enactment of section 15 the whole of the field relating ' to minor minerals came 102 within the jurisdiction of Parliament and no scope was left 'for the enactment of the second proviso to section 10(2) of the Land Reforms Act.
The second proviso was therefore ultra vires.
Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. & Ors.
vs State of Orissa & Ors.
; and State of Orissa vs
M.A. Tulloch (ii) Vested interests cannot be taken away except by law made by a competent legislature.
Mere rule making power is not sufficient.
In view of Act 67 of 1957 the Bihar Legislature had lost jurisdiction to legislate about minor minerals.
The power of the Central Government; to modify existing mining leases was confined under section 16 of the Act to leases granted before October 25, 1949.
For modifying leases granted after that date legislation by Parliament on the lines of section 16 was necessary.
Rule 20(2) of the Bihar Minor Concession Rules, 1964 was ineffective 'for the purpose.
It could not derive sustenance from the 2nd proviso to section 10(2) of the Reforms Act as that proviso was not validly enacted.
There was also no other legislative support since section 15 of the Act of 1957 did not contemplate alteration of terms of leases already in existence before that Act was passed.
[116 B E; 116 G; 117 D] (iii) The contentions raised on behalf of the State must be rejected: (a) The abolition of the rights of intermediaries in the mines and vesting of these rights as lessors in the State Government was a topic connected with land and land tenures.
But after the mining leases stood between the State Government and the leases, any attempt to regulate those mining leases will fall not in entry 18 but in entry 23.
The pith and substance of the amendment to section
