Under section 28 of the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehousing) Corporation Act, 1956, the appellant was established as the Warehousing Corporation of the State of U.P. Section 54 of the Act gives power to 'a Warehousing Corporation to make regulations not inconsistent with the Act and the Rules made thereunder and the regulations are to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act.
Regulation 11 deals with termination of the service of an employee other than by way of punishment, while regulation 16 deals with penalties.
Under regulation 16(3) an employee, on whom the punishment of dismissal is to be imposed, has to be given an opportunity, of tendering his explanation in writing, for cross examining the witnesses against him, and for producing evidence in his defence.
The respondent was a warehouseman in the employment of the appellant.
Certain charges were framed against him and he was suspended pending enquiry into.
the charges.
After receiving his explanation, the Enquiry Officer did not take any evidence in respect of any charge.
Instead, he met various persons and collected information, and gave his findings on the various charges on the basis of the enquiries made by him and the records.
Even the information so collected was not put to the respondertl.
On the basis of those findings of the Enquiry Officer the respondent was dismissed from service.
He. filed a suit challenging the order of dismissal on the ground that there was a violation of regulation 16(3) and prayed for a declaration that the order 'was null and void and that he was entitled to be reinstated with full pay and other emoluments.
On the questions whether: (1) the dismissal was not in accordance with regulation 16(3); and (2) the relationship being one of personal service the respondent was entitled to the declaration for reinstatement.
HELD: (1) The termination of the respondents service was not under regulation 11, but under regulation 16; and the procedure prescribed by regulation 16(3) was not followed by the Enquiry Officer in the present case.
(2) A declaration to enforce a contract of personal service will not normally be granted.
The! exceptions are: (i) appropriate cases of public servants who have been dismissed from service in contravention of article 311; (ii) dismissed workers under industrial and labour law; and (iii) when a statutory body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by a statue.
[267 G] 251 In the present case, a breach has been committed by the appellant of regulation 16(3) as the procedure indicated therein was not followed.
The order of dismissal however was passed by the authority who could pass the order. ' Such an order made in breach of the regulations would only be contrary to the terms and conditions of relationship between the appellant (employer) and the respondent (employee), but, it would not be in breach of any statutory obligation, because, the Act does not guarantee any statutory status to the respondent, nor does it impose any obligation on the appellant in such matters.
Therefore, the violation of regulation 16(3) as alleged and established in this case, could only result in the order of dismissal being held to be wrongful, and in consequence making the appellant liable for damages, but could not have the effect of treating the respondent as still in service or entitling him to reinstatement.
[271 B E] Dr. S, B. Dutt vs University of Delhi, [1959] S.C.R. 1235 and S.R. Tewari vs District Board, Agra, [1964]3 S.C.R. 55, followed.
Life Insurance Corporation of India vs Sunil Kumar Mukherjee, ; , distinguished.
Vine vs National Dock Labour Board, [1956] Barber vs Manchester Hospital Board, [1958] 1 All E.R.322 and Francis vs Municipal Councillors etc.
[1962] 3 All E.R.633, referred to.
