In 1946 the trade mark 'PROTOVIT ' was registered for one of the vitamin preparations manufactured by the appellant company.
In 1957 the respondent company applied for registration of its mark 'DROPOVIT ' in respect of "medical and pharmaceutical preparations and substances".
The application was granted.
When the appellant came to know about this trade mark it asked the respondent to alter it.
On the respondent 's refusal to do so, the appellant in 1959, applied to the Registrar for rectification of the Register of Trade Marks by removal thereform of the respondent 's trade mark.
Later the appellant amended its application by adding the ground that DROPOVIT ' was not an invented word.
The Joint Registrar by letter dated August 5, 1961 rejected the appellant 's application for rectification.
The appellant went in appeal to the Bombay High Court.
During the hearing of the appeal the respondent restricted the designation of goods covered by the mark 'DROPOVIT ' to "medical preparations and, substances containing principally vitamins.
" The Single Judge as well as the Division Bench decided in favour of the respondent.
The appellant came to this Court with certificate.
The questions that fell for consideration were: (i) whether the word 'DROPOVIT ' was deceptively similar to the word 'PROTOVIT ' and thus offended the provision of section 12(1) of the Trade and Merchandise Act, 1958; (ii) whether the word 'DROPOVIT ' was an invented or a descriptive word for the purpose of section 9(1) of the Act.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
(i) In order that a trade mark may be found deceptively similar to another it is not necessary that it 'should be intended to deceive or intended to cause confusion.
It is its probable effect o.n the ordinary kind of customers that one has to consider.
For this purpose it is necessary to apply both the visual and phonetic tests.
It is also important that the marks should be compared as wholes.
It is not right to take a portion of the word and say that because that portion of the word differs from the corresponding portion of the word in the other case there is no sufficient similarity to cause confusion.
The true test is whether the totality of the trade mark is such that it is likely to cause deception or confusion or mistake in the minds of the persons accustomed to the existing trade mark.
[216 H; 217 G H; 218 E] Parker Knoll Ltd. vs Knoll International Ltd., at 274, Pianotist Co. Ltd. 's application , 777, Aristoc Ltd. vs Rysta Ltd., at 72 and Toklon Ltd. vs Davidson & Co., at 136, applied.
The terminal syllable 'VIT ' in the two marks 'DROPOVIT ' and 'PROTOVIT ' was both descriptive and, as the evidence showed.
common to the trade.
If greater regard was paid to the uncommon ejement in Jp CI/70 2 214 the two words it was difficult to, hold that one would be mistaken for or confused with the other.
The letters 'D ' and 'P ' in DROPOVIT ' and.
the corresponding letters 'P ' and 'T ' in 'PROTOVIT ' could not possibly be slurred over in pronunciation and the words were so dissimilar that there was no reasonable probability of confusion between the words either from the visual or phonetic point of view.
This was all the more so because the preparations from their very nature were likely to be purchased on the prescription of doctors, and under r. 61(2) of Drug Rules, 1945 could be sold only by licensed ' dealers SO that the possibility of confusion would be reduced to a considerable extent.
[219 A C, E] (ii) It could not be accepted that the Word 'DROPOVIT ' would strike an ordinary person knowing English as meaning 'DROP OF VITAMINS '.
The appellant 's original application for rectification did not contain the ground that the word 'DROPOVIT ' was descriptive.
It was therefore reasonable to presume that it did not strike even the legal advisers of the appellant as descriptive.
It was true that the word 'DROPOVIT ' was coined out of words commonly used by and known to ordinary persons knowing English.
But the resulting combination produced a new word, a newly coined word which did not remind an ordinary person knowing English of the original words out of which it was coined unless he was so told or unless at least he devoted some thought to it.
It followed that the word 'DROPOVIT ' being an invented word was entitled to be registered as a trade mark and was not liable 'to be removed from the Register on which it already existed.
[220 H 221 D]
