The appellants, an 'association of rubber chappal manufacturers who were using rubber in their manufacturing process, filed a petition in the High Court challenging the levy and collection from the manufacturers of chappals, of a duty under section 12 of the aS amended by Rubber Amendment Act, 1960.
The grounds of challenge were: (1) that the imposition on the appellants was outside the ambit of Entry 84 of List I of VII Schedule of the Constitution, which deals with the duties which can be levied on goods manufactured or produced in India; (2) Section 12(2) which provides the machinery for levy and collection has given uncontrolled and unbridled discretion to the Rubber Board and no guiding principle or policy was laid down in the Act to enable the Board to choose between the owners of estates of rubber or the users of the rubber; and (3) the rules framed under the section do not indicate with sufficient clarity and precision on whom the levy was to be made.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) (a) The excise duty could be imposed at the stage which was found to be most convenient and lucrative as that is a matter relating to the machinery of collection and did not affect the essential nature of the tax.
Therefore, merely because the incidence of tax is shifted to the users of rubber under section 12(2) which provides for the method of collection, the tax would not cease to be one falling within Entry 84.[73 B C;F G] R.C. fall vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 436, followed.
Re: the Central Provinces and Berar Act, 14 of 1938, , applied.
(b) If the duty is not excise duty because it is imposed on the user Parliament would even then have legislative competence to provide for its collection from users, whatever be its nature, under Entry 97 of List I read with article 248 of the Constitution.
[73 H; 74 A B] (2) The task of subordinate legislation necessary for implementing the purpose and objects of an enactment can be delegated, so long as the law has provided the method by which the.
delegate can be controlled, there is a guidance for fixing rates of tax and there is a provision to see that reasonable rates are fixed.
[74 D F] Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Birla Cotton, Spinning and Weaving Mills, ; , followed.
In the present case, the Act was enacted for the purpose of development of rubber industry under the control of the Union Parliament has 69 enacted that the Rubber Board can levy and collect the duty either from the owner of the rubber estate or the user of the rubber.
But the Board is enjoined to do so in accordance with the Rules made by Central Government under section 25(1) (a) of the Act and which are placed before each House of Parliament for approval.
The Board itself is a high powered body and all interests are represented among its members 'and all its acts are subject to the control of the Central Government under section 22.
[74 H; 75 Ii; 78 C] Further.
the Board is vitally interested in the collection of the duty and it has to see that such duty is collected without undue delay and proper expedition.
The objects and reasons of the Amending Act (which can be taken into consideration for the purpose of seeing if there is any alleged infringement of article 14) show that the Board was finding it difficult to levy and collect the duty from the owners and it was considered that it would be much more easy to collect it from the users, in accordance with the rules.
Thus it is necessary that it should be left to the rule making authority to indicate the cases and the circumstances in which the duty was to be collected from the owner or user.
[75 C; 77 H; 78 A B] Since the policy of the Act has been enunciated with sufficient clarity, and guidance has been furnished as to how the Board should exercise its powers in the matter of levy, there is no discrimination and article 14 is not violated.
Ipoh vs
C.I.T. Madras; , and Raghubar Dayal Jai Prakash vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
(3) A combined reading of rr.
33, 33A and 33D indicates that a definite provision is made with regard to the category of persons on whom the collection of the duty is to be made, namely, the users of rubber.
