For the infringement of its registered trade mark "RUSTON" by the respondent 's trade mark "RUSTAM", the appellant filed a suit for permanent injunction.
The respondent pleaded that "RUSTAM" was not an infringement of "RUSTON" and stated that the words "RUSTAM INDIA" were used.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that there was no visual or phonetic similarity between "RUSTON" and "RUSTAM".
The High Court in appeal, held that there was deceptive resemblance between the words "RUSTON" and "RUSTAM", but held that the use of "RUSTAM INDIA" did not constitute an infringement because the appellant 's engines were.
manufactured in England and the respondent 's in India, and the suffix 'INDIA ' was sufficient warning that the engine sold was not the engine manufactured in England.
Allowing the appeal this Court, HELD: In an action for infringement when the defendant 's trade mark is identical with the plaintiff 's mark, the court will not enquire whether the infringement is such as is likely to deceive or cause confusion.
But where the alleged infringement consists of using not the exact mark on the Register but something similar to it, the test of infringement is the same as in an action for passing off.
In other words, the test as to the likelihood of confusion or deception arising from similarity of marks is the same both in infringement and, passing off actions.
[225 H] In the present case the High Court found that there was deceptive resemblance between the word "RUSTON" and the word "RUSTAM" and therefore the use of the bare word "RUSTAM" constituted infringement of the appellant 's trade mark "RUSTON".
The respondent did not prefer an appeal against the judgment of the High Court on this point and it was, therefore, not open to him to challenge that finding.
If the respondent 's trade mark was deceptively similar to that of the appellant the fact that the word "INDIA" was added to the respondent 's trade mark was of no consequence and the appellant was entitled to succeed in its action for infringement of its trade mark.
[226 B] Millington vs Fox, 3 MV & Cr. 338 and Savillo Perfumery June Perfect Ltd., at 161, referred to.
