The great grandfather of the appellant executed a trust deed in respect of certain properties.
The trustees were enjoined to.
apply the income of the trust towards charities as also for the benefit of the settlor and his family and descendants.
The appellant filed a suit to enforce his rights under the trust and the trial court granted him maintenance to the extent of Rs. 50/ per mensem out of the trust properties instead of the sum of Rs. 10/. allowed under the trust deed.
In appeal, however, the High Court dismissed the appellant 's suit and reversed the order of the trial court granting him the said increased maintenance.
In this Court The contentions of the appellant which fell for consideration were: (i) whether the dominant purpose of the trust was the maintenance of the settlor 's family, the grant to.
the charities being only secondary; (ii) whether the cy pres doctrine applied to the case, justifying the payment of maintenance money as decreed by the trial court to the appellant.
HELD: (i) The provisions in the deed of trust and the direction to the trustees, first to accumulate the income after meeting the expenses of assessment, quit rent and maramath and the monthly and annual expenses and secondly to purchase properties therewith were to provide income only for the aforesaid charity.
The words "for the aforesaid charity" were of important significance.
The entire accumulation was for charity.
The provisions regarding maintenance and education were subordinate to the provisions for meeting the expenses of the Utsavam to be celebrated in the specified Devasthanams.
[303 E F] Further the provisions regarding maintenance and education were to be at the sole discretion of the trustees who could stop the same.
This power of the trustees was a complete negation of the appellanT 's contention that the intention of the settlor was that education and maintenance expenses were the dominant purpose of the settlement.
The settlor could never have allowed his dominant intention to be repelled by a discretion conferred on the trustees to stop such expenses.
[303 G H] The tenor of the document thus pointed to the inescapable conclusion that the predominant and over whelming intention of/he settlor was to benefit the charities and provide for the same.
[304 A] (ii) The cy pres doctrine applies where a charitable trust is initially impossible or impracticable and the court applies the property cy pres.
viz. to some other charities as nearly as possible.
resembling the original trust.
In the present case, the maintenance and education expenses were neither charitable trust nor similar objects of charity and the High Court therefore rightly interfered with the trial court 's order granting increased maintenance at Rs. 50/ per mensem to the appellant.
[304 C D]
