The appellant, as well as.
Respondents 1 to 5 and 8 to 16, applied to the Regional Transport Authority, Nagpur, on various dates in the. years 1964 65, under s: 46 of Act IV of 1939 for grant of stage carriage permits on certain routes.
After notification of the applications and considering objections of and hearing the parties, the Regional Transport Authority passed orders granting permits in favour of the appellant.
Respondents 1 to 5 filed appeals before the Appellate Committee of the transport authority of Maharashtra challenging the permits granted to the appellant on the ground that in the appellant 's application, mandatory information required to be submitted under section 46 read with the form prescribed under Rule 80 of the relevant rules had not been furnished by the appellant.
The Appellate committee upheld the challenge and remanded ' the matter to the Regional Transport Authority for re consideration with a direction that the appellant should be asked to furnish complete information and, after the receipt of such information in the prescribed form as well as compliance with the normal procedure the entire matter be re heard and decided afresh.
Respondents 1 to 5 challenged this order of the Appellate Committee before the High Court trader articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution contending that the Committee should have rejected the applications of the appellant on the ground that the mandatory provisions of section 46 had not been complied with and that the order of the Committee really amounted to allowing the appellant to convert a defective.
application so as to bring it in conformity with the provisions of the Act and the form, which was not permissible in law.
The High Court accepted this contention holding that the Appellate Committee had no jurisdiction to give the appellant a fresh opportunity to.
furnish the necessary particulars.
It therefore remanded the matter with a direction that the applications of all parties excepting that of the State.
Road Transport Corporation be considered and a decision reached on the grant of permits between the rival applicants.
In appeal before this Court it was contended inter alia that the.
High Court was in error in interfering in a writ petition under articles 226 and 227 with the order of the Appellate Committee; that the form prescribed by the State Government for an application for a permit had ' gone beyond the rule making power of the State.
Government under section 68 of the Act; and that the provisions of section 46 of the Act are not mandatory and there is no jurisdiction in the authorities functioning under the Act to reject an application summarily on the ground that it was not in conformity with the Act or the Rules framed thereunder.
320 HELD: Allowing the appeal: (i) Since the impugned order of the Appellate Committee was challenged on the ground ' of lack of jurisdiction, it was not possible to hold that the High Court could not have entertained the writ petition under Ars. 226 and 227.
C] Nagendra Nath Bora vs The Commissioner of Hills Division (ii) The form prescribed by the State Government requiring the furnishing of information on the various particulars and matters referred to.
therein was not beyond the rule making power of the State: Government under section 68 of the.
Section 46, rule 80, and the form prescribed, have.
to be read together, and so read it follows that an applicant for a permit must comply, at any rate, substantially with the various matters mentioned therein.
Section 68 is not controlled by section '46 of the Act.
In fact it specifically enables the State Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying into.
effect the provisions of Chapter IV.
The Chapter itself is entitled 'Control of Transport Vehicles ' and if, with a view to carrying into effect the object of control of transport vehicles, the form requires information on various matters over and above those enumerated in cls.
(a) to (d) of section 46, it cannot be stated that the State Government has acted beyond its rule making powers when prescribing such a form.
The form so prescribed, forms an integral part of rule 80 which the State Government is authorised to make.
, under section 68 of the Act.
[330 A D] C.K.M. Services vs Mys.
Revenue Board, A.I.R. 1960 Mys. 72; and Sethuramachar vs Hirannayya, A.I.R. 1960 Mys. 90; referred to.
(iii) The order of the High Court treating the appellant 's applications as invalid and excluding them from the consideration of the Transport Authority, was not warranted by the provisions of the Act.
There is no provision in the statute giving a power to the transport authorities to reject an application summarily on the ground that it does not give some information on certain particulars required under section 46.
It is needless to state that an applicant must furnish full and complete information that is within his knowledge or possession in his application for the grant of a permit.
It is in the interest of the applicant himself to give such full and complete information because he stands the risk of the permit not being granted to him for lack of information on certain matters.
But this is quite a different thing from the power of the authority to reject an application forthwith on the ground that the application is defective.
D F] S.H. Motor Transport Company vs The State Transport Appellate Authority.
Petition No. 6 of 1969, decided on 3 3 1969 by the Madhya Pradesh High Court, disapproved.
