The Raja of an impartible Estate in U.P. executed certain Gujaranama deeds in 1949 including one in favour of the respondent, his younger brother.
After the U.P. Zamindari and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (U.P. Act 1 of 1951) came in force the respondent made an application before the Rehabilitation Grants Officer under section 79 of the Act.
The Rehabilitation Grants Officer held that the respondent was entitled to the Grant and the order was upheld by the higher courts including the High Court.
In appeal by the State of U.P. before this Court it was contended that the Gujaranama executed by the Raja in favour of the respondent was.
a transfer by way of sale or gift within the meaning of section 23(1 ) of the Act and therefore could not be recognised for purposes of assessing the amount of Rehabilitation Grant.
HELD: (i) After the decision of the Privy Council in Shiba Prasad Singh 's case it must be taken to be well settled that an estate which is impartible by custom cannot be said to be the separate or exclusive property of the holder of the estate If the holder has got the estate as an ancestral estate and he has succeeded to it by primogeniture it will be a part of the joint estate of the undivided Hindu family.
In the case Of an ordinary joint family property the members o.f the family can claim four rights: (1) the right of partition; (2) the right to restrain alienations by the head of the family except for necessity; (3) the right of maintenance; and (4) the right of survivorship.
It is obvious from the very nature of the property which is impartible that the first of these rights cannot exist.
The second is also incompatible with the custom of impartibility.
The right of maintenance and the right of survivorship, however, still remain and it is by reference to these rights that the property, though impartible has, in the eve of law, to be regarded as joint family property.
The right of survivorship, unlike mere spes successionis can be surrendered.
The right of maintenance to junior members out of an impartible estate is based on joint ownership of the junior members of the family.
[361 H 362 D] Shiha Prasad Singh vs Rant Prayag Kumari Devi, 59 I.A. 331, Rani Sartaj Kuari vs Deoraj Kuari, 15 I.A. 51, First Pittapur case.
26 I.A. 83, Collector of Gorakhpur vs Ram Sunder Mal, 61 I.A. 286 and Baijnath Prasad Singh vs Tej Bali Singh, 48 I.A. 195, applied.
Raja Yarlagadda Mallikarjuna Prasad Nayadu vs Rain Yarlagadda Durga Prasad Nayadu, 27 I.A. 151 and Protap Chandra Deo vs Jagadish Chandra Deo, 54 I.A. 289, referred to.
(ii) In the present case there was the statement of the Raja in the Gujaranama deed that according to the law and custom of the estate the 356 eldest son of the Raja becomes the owner of the estate on the death the earlier Raja and that the "younger sons have right to maintenance and they are given reasonable share of the estate in lieu of right of maintenance.
In view of this admission of the Raja it was not possible to hold that the transfer of the properties in the Gujaranama deed was a transfer by way of gift.
It was also not a sale of the properties for there is no money consideration.
It was manifest that the transaction was by way of a settlement to the respondent by the Raja in lieu of the right of maintenance of the respondent which was obligatory upon the holder of impartible estate.
The Gujaranama was therefore not hit by the pro vision of section 23 of the Act.
[363 D F] (iii) The plea on behalf of the appellant that the case must be remanded to the Rehabilitation Officer because no issues were framed or evidence taken in the case had no force because there were no questions of fact raised in the written statement on which evidence could be taken.
[364 A]
