Govan Brothers were since 1943, the managing agents of the Rampur Company.
In May 1964 criminal proceedings which are still pending were lodged against V.H. Dalmia, the managing director of Govan Brothers, pursuant to the report of the Bose Inquiry Commission that V.H. Dalmia was in the year 1946 47 guilty of grossly improper conduct in relation to several companies of which he was a director.
In September 1964 the company applied for approval under section 326 of the Companies Act of the reappointment of Govan Brothers as managing agents.
The Company Law Board approved the extension of the tenure for three years.
When approval was sought for another extension till 1970 the Board rejected the application.
In considering whether Govan Brothers were "fit and proper" within the meaning of section 326(2) (b) of the Act to be reappointed managing agents the Board restricted itself to the findings recorded by the Bose Commission relating 'to the dealings of V.H. Dalmia with the companies of which he was a director between the years 1945 and 1947.
The company moved the High Court by a Writ Petition for an order quashing the decision of the Board 'and for an order directing the Board to extend the managing agency till 1970.
The High Court set aside the Board 's order and directed it to take into consideration the entirety of the "acts and activities" of V.H. Dalmia in forming the requisite opinion under section 326(2) (b).
The Board and the company preferred appeals to this Court.
On the question: (i) whether the decision of the Board under the section based on its satisfaction is immune from the scrutiny of the court and (ii) whether the High Court should have given a direction to the Board to extend the period of the managing agency, HELD: Dismissing the appeals (i) By sub section
(2) of section 326., the Central Government is invested with power to decide whether it is against the public interest to allow the company to have 'a managing agent, whether the person proposed is fit and proper to be appointed managing agent, whether the conditions of the managing agency agreement proposed are fair and reasonable, and whether the managing agent proposed has fulfilled the conditions which the Central Government has required him to fulfill.
The scheme of the section implies investigation and a decision on the matters set out therein.
The power is a quasi judieial power and not administrative: it necessarily implies a duty arising from the nature of the act empowered to be done, the object for which it is to, be done, the conditions in which it is to be done and its repercussion upon the power of the company, the shareholders the creditors and the general public for whose benefit the power is to be 178 exercised.
The satisfaction contemplated by section 326 must therefore be the result of on objective appraisal of the relevant materials because, exercise of the power conferred upon the Central Government is restrictive of valuable rights of the company and of the proposed managing agent and severely restricts their liberty of contract.
The courts are not concerned with the sufficiency of the grounds on which the satisfaction is reached.
The enquiry before the court is whether the Central Government was satisfied as to the existence of the conditions in els.
(a), (b) and (c) of sub section
(2) of section 326.
The existence of the satisfaction cannot be challenged except probably on the ground that the authority acted mala fide.
But: if in reaching its satisfaction the Central Government misapprehends the nature of the conditions or proceeds upon irrelevant materials or ignores relevant materials the jurisdiction of the courts to examine the satisfaction is not excluded, [182 F H; 183 A E H; 184 A B] Barium Chemicals vs The Company Law Board.
[1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 311, Rohtas Industries vs
S.D. Aggarwal, A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 7Q7, referred to.
Ridge vs Baldwin, ; and Padfield vs Minister of Agriculture; , , applied.
The observations of the Judicial Committee in Nakuda Ali vs Jaya Ratne, that the duty to act judicially arises only from an express provision to that effect disapproved.
The section uses the present tense '.
The satisfaction must be with reference to the conditions existing in praesenti, but in adjudging whether a person is fit and proper to be appointed managing agent past actings and conduct cannot be ignored.
The Board is not restricted to a consideration of his acts, conduct 'and activities proximate to the date of the application; it has to consider his acts and activities past and present, the interest of the shareholders and the general interests of the public in allowing the management to be continued by the directors of the company and other circumstances which have a bearing on the question.
[181 G H; 182 A] (ii) In dealing with a petition against an order made by the Board under section 326 the High Court is not constitute.d a court of appeal.
The Court has merely to consider whether in arriving at its decision the Board has restricted itself to the enquiry contemplated to be made and has taken into consideration all the relevant circumstances and that its decision is not vitiated by irrelevant or extraneous matters.
[186 B D]
