The appellant was charged under section 379/34 I.P.C. for committing theft of a parcel containing diamonds along with the, two other persons.
ln the course of investigation the police went to a newspaper office where they learnt that one of the.
co accused had come to put in advertisement respecting the recovery of the diamonds, stating that it was in his possession, and left 'an address with the newspaper.
The police could not trace that co accused, but later, as a result of information furnished by the appellant to the police and the panchas the police were taken to a place where the diamonds were discovered from that other co accused.
On the question whether the statement of the appellant was admissible in evidence against him under section 27 of the , HELD: The statement was not admissible.
Under section 25 of the Evidence Act no confession made by an accused to a police officer can be admitted in evidence against him.
An exception to this is however provided by section 26 which makes a confessional statement made before a Magistrate admissible in evidence against an accused notwithstanding the fact that he was in custody of the police when he made the incriminating statement.
Section 27 is a proviso to s, 26 and makes admissible so much of the statement of the accused which leads to the discovery of a fact deposed to by him and connected with the crime, irrespective of the question whether it is confessional or otherwise.
The essential ingredient of the section is that the information given by the accused must lead to the discovery of the fact 'which is the direct outcome of such information.
Secondly, only such portion of the information given as is distinctly connected with the said recovery is admissible against the accused.
Thirdly, the discovery of the fact must relate to the commission of some offence.
The embargo.
on statements of the accused before the police will not apply if all the above conditions are fulfilled.
If an accused ' charged with a theft of articles or receiving stolen articles, within the meaning of section 411 I.P.C. states to the police. 'I will show you the articles at the place where 1 have kept them ' and the.
articles are actually found there, there can be no doubt that the information given by him led to the discovery of a fact i.e. keeping of the articles by the accused at the place mentioned.
The discovery of the fact deposed to in such a case is not the discovery of the articles but the discovery of the fact that the articles were kept by the accused at a particular place.
In principle there is no difference between the above statement and that made by the appellant in this case which in effect is that 'I will show you the.
person to whom 1 have given the diamonds exceeding 200 in number '.
The only difference between the two statements is that a 'named person ' is substituted for 'the place ' where the article is kept.
In neither case are the articles or the diamonds the fact discovered.
[338 C H] In the present case, the police had learnt earlier that the other accused had the custody of the diamonds.
Therefore, the statement of the appel 333 lant that the other accused had the custody of the diamonds would not be something unknown to the police so as to constitute 'a fact deposed to as discovered in consequence of information received ' from the appellant.
The discovery, if any, merely related to the whereabouts of the other accused.
There was no discovery of any fact deposed to by the appellant within the meaning of section 27.
If the police had not gone to the office of the newspaper and had not learnt of the complicity of the other accused with the crime, the statement of the appellant would amount to information received from him relating to the discovery of the diamonds in the custody of that other accused.
[343 B] Pulukuri Katayya vs King Emperor, 76 I.A, 65 and K. Chinnaswamy Reddy vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; , referred to.
