A contract was entered into between the appellant and the respondent in 1964 for sale of 200 bags of Cone yarn.
The contract inter alia conrained the condition that in case of any dispute arising out of the contract "the matter in dispute shall be referred to the arbitration of the Indian Chamber of Commerce whose decision shall be binding on both the parties".
The appellant was not a member of the said Chamber of Commerce; the respondent was On dispute arising between the parties and being referred to the Chamber for arbitration the appellant wrote to the Registrar of the Tribunal of Arbitration of the Chamber to intimate to it the names of the persons constituting the court to enable the appellant to ascertain whether they were independent and disinterested persons.
The Registrar refused to disclose the names on the ground that under the rules of the Chamber they could not be disclosed to a non member.
On persistent refusal to disclose the names the appellant filed an application under section 33 of the Indian before the Calcutta High Court the application was dismissed, whereupon appeal by special leave was filed in this Court.
It was urged that the non disclosure of the names of the arbitrators by the Registrar was violatire not only of the rules of natural justice but also infringed the provisions of the .
It was contended that there was a conflict between r. III(3) of the Rules of Arbitration of the Chamber of Commerce and sections 5 and 11 or section 30 ' of the Act.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
( i) The power given to the Registrar not to disclose names of the members of the arbitration court to non members is discretionary 'and he is not bound in every case to refuse to disclose the names.
At any rate as soon as the proceedings commence the parties will know the names of the.
arbitrators and objection can be taken at that stage.
Under section 5 of the it is not essential that the authority of an appointed arbitrator should be got revoked before the commencement of the arbitration proceedings.
Section 11 contemplates a stage subsequent to the arbitrator entering on the reference.
There is thus no conflict between r. 111(3) of the Rules of Arbitration of the Chamber and sections 5 and 11 and 30 of the Act.
These Rules do not interfere with or take away the powers and jurisdiction of the court under the aforesaid provisions.
The appellant itself had agreed to submit to the arbitration of the Chamber which meant that it was bound by all the Rules of Arbitration of the said body.
No illegality or invalidity could be projected into the agreement by the presence of r. III(3).
[434 C F].
430 (ii) The statement in Russel on Arbitration (17th Edn.
p. 207) that the appointment of an arbitrator by a party is not complete without communication hereof to the other party could be of no avail to the appellant since in the present case the appointment of the arbitrator, namely, the Chamber of Commerce, was in every sense complete.
[434 G H] (iii) The rule objected to by the appellant is part of the long standing practice of Chambers of Commerce in this country its justification being the elimination of all possibility or chance of a party trying to influence the members of the Arbitration court before they enter upon or proceed with the reference.
[435 C D] Unreported judgment of Calcutta High Court in Suraj Ratan Birany vs Hindustan Motors Ltd. decided onApril 10, 1964, disapproved.
