By section 7(2) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, "the District Magistrate may require a landlord to let or not let to any person any accommodation which is or has fallen vacant" and section 16 of the Act provides that "no order made under this Act by the State Government or the District Magistrate shall be called in question in any court.
" The first appellant applied for an order in ejectment of the first respondent on the plea that he had committed default in paying rent.
The District Magistrate held that the respondent was not in occupation of the shop, declared the shop vacant and allotted it to another person.
The respondent brought an action in the civil court for a declaration that he was an allottee of the shop and was in possession in that capacity.
The trial court held that the appellant never vacated the shop, nor was his tenancy terminated, and was therefore entitled to remain in occupation of the same.
An appeal to the District Court and a second appeal to the High Court were unsuccessful.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that the suit filed by the respondent was not maintainable, for the Act set up a complete machinery for determining after enquiry whether any premises governed by the Act had fallen vacant.
and that by express enactment in section 16, the order of the District Magistrate was declared final.
Rejecting the contention.
HELD: The Legislature while investing the District Magistrate with power to allot the premises to another person on the existence of a vacancy has not made his determination of the preliminary state of facts conclusive.
There is nothing in section 7 or section 7A which confers jurisdiction upon the District Magistrate to conclusively determine the facts on the existence of which his jurisdiction arises.
Whether there is a vacancy is a jurisdictional fact which could not be decided by him finally.
By reaching an erroneous decision, he cannot clothe himself with jurisdiction which he does not posses 'section It is only when the order is with jurisdiction that the order is not liable to be challenged in a civil court by virtue of section 16 of the.
[368 H 369 C] Reg vs Commissioner of Income tax, , and Ebrahim Aboobakar & Anr.
vs Custodian General of Evacuee Property, ; , referred to.
