A first information report was lodged on Sept. 11, 1967 regarding the loss of life of a person when two groups of people clashed.
On Sept. 20, 1967 the first appellant made a statement charging one of the groups being guilty of deliberate conspiracy to commit the murder and alleging that a prominent member of that party had given instructions for this.
The respondent along with his two brothers was arrested on Sept. 23, 1967 and on the next day the Magistrate remanded the accused to police custody.
In its issue dated Sept. 23, 1967 a newspaper of which the second appellant was the editor printed the statement of the first appellant.
Later on all the three accused were produced before the Magistrate.
The respondent filed a petition under sections 3 and 4 of the against the first appellant, second appellant and the printer of the newspapers.
The High Court found all the persons guilty of contempt of court.
In appeal by certificate obtained by the first and second appellants this Court, HELD : (Per Full Court): The second appellant was guilty of contempt of court, as proceedings in a court were imminent on Sept. 23, 1967 when the statement was published in the newspaper.
When the accused had already been arrested on September 23, 1969 in connection with a serious cognizable case proceedings in a court were imminent on that date.
The fact that the police might, after investigation, come to the conclusion that the accused was innocent.
would not make the proceedings any the less imminent.
To advance the day of imminence to the day when the police makes a report under section 173 Cr.
P.C. would do untold harm to those who may actually be ultimately prosecuted.
[418 B D] (Per Sikri and Jaganmohan Reddy, JJ.) : The first appellant was not guilty of contempt of court as there was no evidence that any proceedings in a court were imminent on the date when the statement was made.
The lodging of a first information report does not by itself establish that proceedings in a court were imminent.
It would depend on the facts proved in a particular case whether the proceedings are imminent or not As far as the first appellant was concerned the relevant date was Sept. 20, 1967 when he made the statement and not Sept. 25, 1967 when the newspaper published the statement.
There was no evidence that the first appellant was instrumental in getting this statement published on Sept 25, 1967.
Even the accused were not arrested till September 23, 1967, and ordinarily until an accused is arrested it cannot be said that any proceedings in a court are imminent against that person because he may never be arrested or he may be arrested after a lapse of months or years.
[416 E, F; 4 17 A C] 411 Surendra Mohanty vs State of Orissa Cr.
A No. 107 of 1956 dt.
23 1 1961.
relied on.
It would be an undue restriction on the liberty of free speech to lay down that even before any arrest has been made there should be no comments on the facts of a particular case.
In some case no doubt, especially in cases of public scandal regarding companies, it is the duty of a free press to comment on such topic so as to bring them to the attention of the public.
[417 D] R.v.
Savundranayagan and Walker, , referred (Per Mitter, J. dissenting) : A contempt of court may be committed by a person when he knows or has good reason to believe that criminal proceedings are immigrant.
The test is whether the circumstances in which the alleged contemnor makes the statement are such that a person of ordinary prudence would be of opinion that criminal proceedings would soon be launched.
The first appellant must have realised on September 20, 1967 that the investigation by the police was sure to lead to cognizance of the offence being taken by a Magistrate and prosecution of some persons for the offence of culpable homicide.
The first appellant was not an illiterate person who could not be reasonably expected to know that Criminal proceedings were bound to be launched in respect of the affair; whether anybody would be successfully prosecuted is a different matter.
but that would depend upon the evidence which would be brought before the court.
But no person with any experience of worldly affairs, much less a person of the standing of the first appellant, a member of Parliament and a leader of a political group could be ignorant of the fact that a murder in broad day light when two group of people clash is sure to be investigated into and made the subject of criminal proceedings.
His statement suggested that he had some personal enquiries in the matter and had come to gather therefrom that certain members of a particular political party had entered into a conspiracy to murder and had actually carried their plan into execution.
There, can be no doubt that the first appellant 's motive and object was not only to further the cause of a particular political party but also to create an atmosphere of prejudice against members of that party and charge some of them with one of the most serious offences known to law, namely, that of conspiracy to murder folio.wed by actual homicide.
[422 H 423G] Surendra Mohanty vs The State of Orissa, Cr. A. No. 107 of 1956 dr. 23 1 1961, distinguished.
Rex vs Parke, , R.V. Daily Mirror. , 851, Ragina vs Odhams Press Ltd. at 81, R.V. Savundaramareyagan and Walker, at 441, Tuljarama Rao vs Sir James Tavlor.
I.L.R. at 476, In the matter Tribune, Lahore.
25 Lahore 111, and Attorney General vs Butterworth & Ors. , referred to.
