In August, 1935 the owner of a piece of land mortgaged a part of it without possession to M.
In November 1914 he mortgaged the entire area of the land to A.
Thereafter he sold his rights in the land (except in a small area) in May. 1943 to the plaintiffs.
In May, 1951 the plaintiffs applied under section 4 of the Redemption of ' Mortgages (Punjab Act 2 of 1913) for redeeming the mortgage in favour of M but this application was rejected by the Assistant Collector on June 29, 1951.
A suit filed by the plaintiffs in August, 1960 in a civil court for redemption of the mortgage was resisted, inter alia, on the ground that it was time barred by virtue of article 14 of the Limitation Act, 1908 as it was not filed within one year of the rejection of the application by the Assistant Collector.
The trial court dismissed the suit for redemption of the mortgage in favour of M and granted a decree for redemption of the second mortgage of November, 1941.
The District Court, allowing an appeal, ordered redemption of the land including the mortgage in favour of M and this decision was confirmed in second 'appeal by the High Court.
There was a concurrent finding by the courts below that the petition for redemption was not tried by the Assistant Collector on the merits but that he rejected it holding that the application raised complicated questions of fact and law and on that account was not triable in exercise of ' the summary jurisdiction prescribed under Act 2 of 1913.
On appeal by special leave to this Court.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal.
The suit for redemption filed by the plaintiffs was not barred by the Law of Limitation.
The Assistant Collector merely ordered that the case raised complicated questions of fact and law which could not be tried in a summary proceeding. 'Such an order does not fall within the terms of section 9 of Act 2 of 1913.
Even if by the order the petition was dismissed, not the form of the order, but its substance will determine the application of the period of limitation prescribed by article 14 of the Limitation Act.
An order relegating the mortgagor to a civil suit for obtaining an order of redemption even if it becomes final does not bar a suit for redemption.
for it raises no cloud on the title of the mortgagor arising out of the mortgage.
Such an order is not one which is required to be set aside.
An order required to be set aside is one which the officer making it has jurisdiction to make it and has the effect of barring the claim for relief unless it is set aside.
[410 F H] L2Sup(CI)/70 14 406 Tulsi Das vs Diala Ram, I.L.R. [1944] Lab. 1 (F.B.) and Dewan Chand vs Raghbir Singh, I.L.R. [1966] 1 Punjab 193; referred to and approved.
