The first respondent company opened a cash credit account with the appellant bank and on June 7, 1953 to secure repayment of the balance due at the foot of the account the first respondent company executed three documents through its managing agents i.e. a promissory note, a deed of hypothecation and a letter assuring the appellant bank that the company would remain solely responsible for all loss, damage or deterioration of the stocks hypothecated with the bank.
On the same day R a Director of the managing agents executed a bond called "agreement of guarantee ' agreeing to pay on demand all monies which may be due as the "ultimate balance" from the company to the bank.
In December, 1953 the company closed its business.
The stocks pledged were disposed of by the bank and the amount realised was credited in the company 's account.
A balance of approximately Rs. 2.56 lakhs remained due at the foot of the account.
Some creditors of the company in the meantime filed a petition for winding up the company.
On February 22, 1956 a scheme of composition was settled among the creditors and was later sanctioned by the High Court On May 21, 1956 under section 391 of the after rejecting the opposition of the appellant bank.
The bank then filed a suit against the company and R for a declaration that on the date of the suit a sum of over Rs. 2.56 lakhs was due against the company and for a decree for payment of the amount against R.
The trial court dismissed the suit and on appeals filed by both the parties the High Court held that the scheme having been confirmed by the court, had statutory operation and was binding on all creditors including the bank; the bank had become an unsecured creditor for the amount remaining due after sale of the pledged goods and it was for the board of trustees under the Scheme to determine the amount for payment to the bank.
The court also held that the suit against the company without obtaining leave of the court was not maintainable.
It further held that R had executed an indemnity bond and that even assuming he was a surety under the terms of the bond he was only responsible for ensuring payment of the "ultimate balance" which still had to be determined.
The High Court accordingly confirmed the decree of the trial court and held that the suit against R was premature.
On appeal to this Court, HELD: (i) The suit must be remanded to the trial court to determine "the ultimate balance" and for disposal according to law.
463 The appellant bank was entitled to claim at any time the money due from the company as well as from R. under the promissory note and the bond.
The suit could not therefore be said to be premature.
The High Court instead of dismissing the suit should have stayed it till "the ultimate balance" due to the bank from the company was determined.
[471 E F] (ii) The binding obligation created under a composition under section 391 of the , 'between the company and its creditors does not affect the liability of the surety unless the contract of suretyship otherwise provides.
[471 F G] Halsbury 's Laws of England, Vol.
63 rd.
Edn., article 1555 at p. 771; Re.
Garner 's Motors Lid,. ; referred to.
(iii) The bond executed by R was one of the four documents executed on the same day and was part of the scheme to ensure payment of the amount found due to the Bank.
Although the bond was not also executed by the company, the 'fact that it was executed simultaneously with the other documents and the conduct of R as well as the company indicated that R agreed to guarantee payment of the debt due by the company.
It must be held, therefore that the Bank, the company and R were parties to the agreement under which for the dues of the company, R became a surety.
[470 A C]
