Under section 22A(2) of the Saurashtra Ordinance No. 2 of 1948, an appeal lay to a Division Bench of the Saurashtra High Court Tom a judgment of a single Judge of that High Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, if the Judge certified that the, case was a fit one for appeal.
The , merged the Part 'B ' State of Saurashtra into the State of Bombay, abolished the High Court of Saurashtra as from November 1, 1956, and transferred the proceedings pending before the High Court of Saurashtra to the High Court of Bombay.
Section 52 of the Act conferred upon the High Court of Bombay, after November 1, 1956, the original, appellate and other jurisdiction which was exercised by the High Court of Saurashtra immediately prior to that date in respect of the territories in the State of Saurashtra.
The Saurashtra Ordinance No. 2 of 1948 was repealed with effect from November 1. 1956.
by the Saurashtra (Adaptation of Laws on Union Subjects Order, 1957.
and the Rules and orders relating to practice and procedure framed by the High Court of Saurashtra were abrogated as from November 1, 1956 by rules of the High Court of Bombay made under section 54 of the State Reorganisation Act.
The effect of section 57 of the is that the powers of a Division Bench of the High Court for the new State of Bombay shall be the same as the powers of the Division Bench under the law in force immediately before November 1, 1956, in the State of Bombay.
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court of Bombay, which was law in force immediately before November 1.
1956, in the State of Bombay, provides that an appeal from the judgment of a single Judge of the Bombay High Court, in a first appeal from a judgment of the Subordinate Court, could be filed without a certificate of the Judge hearing the first appeal.
Clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the Bombay High Court applied also to the Gujarat High Court which was established as a result of the Bombay Reoganisation Act.
A first appeal against a decree of a subordinate court in Saurashtra, pending in the Saurashtra High Court on November 1, 1956, was transferred to the High Court of Bombay, and disposed of by a single Judge of the Bombay High Court. 'An appeal to the Division Bench under CI.
15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court of Bombay, was transferred to the Gujarat High Court after its establishment, but the Gujarat High Court held that the appeal was incompetent under section 22A of the Saurashtra Ordinance No. 2. of 1948 without a certificate from the single Judge.
435 In appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) It was only in the absence of any provision to the contrary, that a right attached to the action when it was commenced in the subordinate court in Saurashtra that an appeal against the decision of the single Judge of the High Court of Saurashtra in appeal, shall lie only if the single.
judge certified that it was a fit case for appeal to a Division Bench.
Garikapatti Veerayya vs
N. Subbiah Choudhury; , , referred to.
[443 A B].
(2) But, from November 1, 1956, the Saurashtra High Court was abolished, the Saurashtra Ordinance No. 2 of 1948 was repealed, and the jurisdiction of the High Court of Saurashtra was conferred upon the Bombay High Court.
Therefore, the single Judge of the High Court who heard the first appeal, heard it not as a Judge of the Saurashtra High Court, but as a Judge of the Bombay Court.
[443 B C] (3) Section52 of the does not mean that the jurisdiction conferred upon the Bombay High Court in respect of the territories within the State of Saurashtra was to be regulated with reference to the law which was in force on November 1, 1956 in Saurashtra.
Therefore, it does not incorporate either expressly or by implication the limitations prescribed by section 22A(2) of the Saurashtra Ordinance into the Letters Patent of the High Court.
[443 G H; 444 C D] (4) Since the restriction placed by section 22A of the Ordinance applied only to a judgment of a single Judge of the High Court of Saurashtra and could not apply to a judgment of a single Judge of the Bombay High Court, and could not operate to restrict a right of appeal exercisable under CI.
15 ' of the Letters Patent, the judgment of the single Judge of the Bombay High Court was, under section 57 of the , subject to appeal to a Division Bench without a certificate of the single Judge.
[443 D F]
