A Hindu widow in the Dravida country, who had no authority from her husband to adopt, adopted a son with the consent of two out of three her nearest male sapindas in 1955.
The two sapindas gave their written consent in response to her letters asking for their consent wherein she stated that the object of the adoption was the proper performance of ceremonies for the benefit of her husband and his ancestors.
They also signed the adoption deed which mentioned the purpose of the adoption.
The widow, however, did not obtain the consent of her husband 's grandmother, who was nearer in degree than these two sapindas.
On the question of the validity of the adoption, HELD: (1) The validity of an adoption has to be judged by spiritual rather than temporal considerations.
But, in a case where the widow makes an adoption after obtaining her sapindas ' consent, her motive need not be inquired into because, the very fact that the sapindas had given their consent was a guarantee that the adoption was being made for proper reasons.
[505 G H] (2) It is only when a sapinda refuses consent that it becomes relevant to see whether the refusal was justified on the ground that the adoption was not for proper objects.
Where a sapinda gives consent, the very fact that the consent was given implies that the adoption 'was considered desirable and was being resorted to by the widow for spiritual considerations.
[509 C E] In the present case, the consenting sapindas had no personal motives in giving the consent, spiritual benefit of her husband was in fact one of the considerations for the widow making the adoption, and the sapindas had not merely an implied but express knowledge that the adoption was being resorted to by the widow for spiritual considerations.
Though one of them was not examined as a witness, his consent letter was proved by a witness in whose presence he signed the letter.
[508 A B; 510 A B] (3 ) The consent of the majority of the nearest sapindas would be sufficient to satisfy the requirement that a widow should consult the nearest sapindas.
Therefore, the consent given by two out of three equally near sapindas, was sufficient to support the adoption.
[508 G H] (4) The consent of a sapinda for adoption by a widow, who has no authority from her husband, was required under Hindu law, because, a woman is considered incapable of exercising independent judgment in the matter.
In the present case if the grandmother of the deceased husband were to desire to adopt a son herself would have to obtain the consent of her sapindas in the absence of her husband 's authority, because of her incapacity to exercise independent judgment: and it would follow that she could hardly be a competent adviser to another widow, namely, her grand 500 son 's widow on the same matter.
Therefore, even if she happens to be the nearest sapinda there could be no requirement that her consent must be obtained for validating the adoption.
[511 E F; G H; 512 B] (5) The reference in The Collector of Madura.
vs Mootoo Ramalinga Sethupatty, 12 M.I.A. 397, to 'kindred or kinsmen, whose consent is to be obtained by a widow for a valid adoption, is to male agnates only.
In that case, the opinion of the mother in law regarding the adoption by her daughter in daw was considered important by the Judicial Committee only because of the special authority granted to the mother in law by her son and not because, in every case, the consent of a mother in law was necessary to make an adoption by the daughter in law valid, or that her consent must be obtained on the ground that she is the nearest Kindred alive.
B C; 514 H] V.T.S. Chandrasekhara Mudaliar vs Kulandai Velu Mudaliar ,40, followed.
Raghanadha vs Brojo Kishoro, [1876] LR.
3 I.A. 154, Veera Basavaraju vs Balasurya Prasada Rao, [1918] L.R. 45 I.A. 265 and Ghanta China Ramasubbayya vs Maparthi Chenchuramayya, L.R. 74 I.A. 162, applied.
Varadamma vs Kanchi Santkara Reddi A.I.R. 1957 A.P. 933, approved.
Observations Contra in Rajah Damara Kumara Venkatappa Nayanim Bahadur Varu vs Damara Renga Rao I.L.R. and Maharajah Kolhapur vs
section Sundaram Avyar, I.L.R. 48 Mad. 1, 204, disapproved.
