The appellant Committee was constituted under the Punjab Municipal Act 1911, and was running a number of municipal schools, for some of which it was getting grant in aid from the respondent State.
The respondent took an administrative decision, without any statutory authority, to provincialise all the schools run by the local bodies in the State with effect from October 1, 1957, and till June 1959, various steps in the process of provincialisation were taken.
In June 1959.
the Punjab Local Authorities (Aided Schools) Act, 1959.
was passed after obtaining the assent of the President.
The Act was deemed to have come into force with effect from October 1, 1957.
The scheme of the Act is that it is initially left to the local authority to pass a resolution to transfer the management and control of aided schools to the State Government.
In order to employ compulsive persuasion the State Government can withdraw the grant in aid in respect of the aided schools if such authority does not pass a resolution in terms of .s. 3 within a period of 3 months from the date of the enactment of the statute.
Section 5 gives power to the State Government to take over aided schools where the local authority neglects to perform its duty or if it is considered necessary in public interest to take over the management for a period not exceeding ten years, but only after giving the local authority a reasonable opportunity for showing cause.
The proviso to the section arms the State Government with powers, in case of emergency and in the interests of students, to take over the management straight away after publication of a notification to that effect.
There is no provision, however, for an automatic retransfer of the property after lapse of the period o.f 10 years.
Section 6 introduces amendments in sections 52 and 59 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
Clause (g), introduced in section 52(1), enables the State Government to get an annual contribution from the local bodies, and the amendments to section 59, vest in the State not only the management of the schools taken over but also the interests in the movable and immovable properties pertaining thereto.
As the appellant decided no.t to.
pass the resolution under section 3 the respondent issued a notification on September 26, 1960.
taking over for a period of 10 year 's, the management of the aided schools specified in the schedule tO the notification.
On the question of payment of the contribution it was resolved on January 3, 1962, that the payment be made with effect from October 1, 1957, while retaining the proprietary rights in the schools; but the appellant subsequently passed several resolutions practically rescinding this resolution with respect to the payment of any 376 contribution.
On April 10, 1964, the appellant was required by order to pay about Rs. 53 lakhs on account of the contribution for the maintenance of the provincialised schools for the period 1957 58 to 1963 64.
Thereupon, the appellant filed a petition under articles 226 and 227 in the High Court, challenging the orders and the constitutional validity of the Act.
The petition was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended: (1 ) The taking over of the movable and immovable property of the appellant did not fall within article 31A(1)(b) and the action was in direct contravention of article 31(2); (2) The notification dated September 26, 1960, was not protected by the proviso to section 5, because, there was no question of any emergency, nor was such emergency pleaded or proved by the respondent; (3) The notification could not and did not validate the action prior to the date when it was issued; (4) Section 6 of the Act which effected amendments of the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act could not be attracted; and (5) Section 3(2) and the amendments which would become operative under section 6 in respect of sections 52(1) and 59 of the Punjab Municipal Act, are void and unconstitutional.
HELD: (1) Under article 31A(1)(b) it is only the management and control of the aided schools, that could be taken over for a limited period in the public interest or in order to secure their proper management, but proprietary interests in movable and immovable properties pertaining to the schools and belonging to the appellant could not be acquired.
In the present case in view of the terms of the resolution of January 3, 1962 and the subsequent resolutions of the appellant it could not be said that the resolution fell within the first part of section 3 and that action was taken by the State pursuant to such resolution.
The action was taken by the respondent only under section 5 and when once action was so.
taken all the properties, movable and immovable, belonging to the local body pertaining to the schools taken over, became the property of the State, by virtue of the amendments made in section 59 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
When the proprietary interest in the movable and immovable property pertaining to the schools and belonging to the Committee is thus acquired, the action is not protected by article 31A(1)(b) as it is nothing short of compulsory acquisition within the meaning of article 31(2) of the Constitution and is in violation of that .Article when there is no provision for payment of compensation.
[386; A F; 387 F G] (2) In the notification there was no indication that the management of the schools was being taken over because any emergency existed.
The State could not show by placing material before the court that it was a case of emergency justifying the action under the proviso, to section 5.
when no foundation in that behalf had been laid, in the writ petition.
[388 B C; D E] (3) The mere fact that the Act in terms was retrospective would not make the notification issued under the proviso.
to section 5, retrospective, in the absence of express words or appropriate language from which retroactivity would be implied.
The notification only meant that the management was taken over from the date of the notification and not from any prior date.
Therefore.
whatever was done before the date of the notification regarding the assumption of management and vesting of the Committee 's property was void and illegal.
[389 A C] (4) Under section 6 of the Act it is only after the local authority has passed a resolution under section 3 or the State Government has taken over management of the aided schools under section 5, that sections 52 and 59 of the ' Punjab Municipal Act would be deemed to have been amended in the 377 manner specified in the Schedule with effect from October 1, 1957.
If the notification in the present case, could.
not be given retrospective operation, the amendments in the Punjab Municipal Act would be effective only after the date of the notification and not for the prior period.
Thus, even on the assumption that the provisions of the Act are valid the State could not ask for any contribution from the Committee for the period prior to the date of the notification.
[389 D F] (5) By asking the Committee to make contributions from its funds under the newly introduced el.
g in section 52(1), to the cost of the schools which have been taken over by the State, part of its funds are being compulsorily acquired by the State, which could not be done except in accordance with the provisions contained in article 31(2).
[390 C D, E F] When the State Government makes a direction under section 3(2) that the aided schools shall be taken over, the proprietary and ownership rights of the Committee also vest in the State Government.
Further, section 6 comes into operation as soon as a local authority has passed a resolution under section 3 or the State Government has taken over management under section 5, and the provisions relating to acquisition of property of the Committee as also of its funds by way of contribution, come immediately into operation by virtue of the amendments effected in sections 52(1) and 59 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
[391 A D] Since there is No. provision for compensation in the Aided Schools Act or section 59 of the Municipal Act, section 3(2).of the Aided Schools Act and the amendments in sections 52(1) and 59 of the Punjab Municipal Act are void and unconstitutional.
[391 D] Hence, the order by which, the movable and immovable property of the Committee has been transferred to the State contribution was sought be recovered, and the sum of Rs. 53 lakhs was demanded, is illegal, [391 D E] Municipal Committee, Amritsar vs State o! Punjab; , , followed.
