The State of Bihar filed a number of suits in this Court under article 131 of the Constitution in connection with the delayed delivery of iron and steel materials for its Gandak project.
In six of the suits the defendants were: The Union of India (Defendant No. 1 ) and Hindustan Steel Ltd. (Defendant No. 2).
In six other suits the defendants were: The Union of India (Defendant No. 1) and The Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. (Defendant No. 2).
The prayers in all the suits were that decrees for specific sums of money be passed either against the Union of India or the second defendant.
Identical preliminary issues were set down for consideration in all the suits, namely: (1) whether the cause or causes of action in this suit are within the scope of article 131 of the Constitution? (2) Whether the suit is within the scope of article 131 of the Constitution in view of a non State viz. defendant No. 2, having been made a party to the suit ? (3) Whether the suit is barred by the provisions of section 80 C.P.C. for want of notice to defendant No. 1.
HELD: (i) The specification of the parties in article 131 is not of the inclusive kind.
The express words in cls.
(a), (b) and (c) of the Article exclude the idea of a private citizen, a firm or a corporation figuring as a disputant either alone or even along with a State or with the Government of India in the category of a party to the dispute.
The contents of the corresponding section, of the Government of India Act, 1935 namely section 204, and the legislative history culminating in the adoption of article 131 of the Constitution support the conclusion that so far as the parties to a dispute are concerned, the framers of the Constitution did intend that they could only be the constituent units of the Union of India and the Government of India itself arrayed on one side or the other either singly Or jointly with another unit or the Government of India.
For other types of controversies or disputes special provision has been made in the sonstitution e.g. in article 143 257, 262 and 290 A dispute in which a private party, is involved must be brought before a court other than this Court having jurisdiction over the matter.
[52.6 D F; 530 B; 531 C, F, H; 532 C] The United Provinces vs The Governor General in Council, and State of Seraikella and Others vs Union of India and another, [151] S.C.R. 474, referred to.
The enlarged definition of 'State ' given in Parts III and IV of the Constitution is not attracted to article 131 of the Constitution and a body like the Hindustan Steel Ltd. could not be considered to be "a State" for the purpose of article 131 of the Constitution.
[532 G] Rajasthan State Electricity Board vs Mohan Lal, ; , distinguished.
523 In view of the above finding on issue No. 2 the suits did not lie in this Court under article 131 of the Constitution and the plaints must be returned; it was accordingly unnecessary to decide issues Nos. 1 and 3.
[532 H] Article 131 does not prescribe that a suit must be filed in the Supreme Court for the complete adjudication of the dispute envisaged therein or the passing of a decree capable of execution in the ordinary way as decrees of other courts are.
Once this Court has given a declaration of its rights to the aggrieved party the function of the Court under article 131 is over.
[525 C F]
