Section 11 A(2) of the lays down in part that the maximum period of detention under section 3 should be 12 months and no more, and after the expiry of that period, that order.
of detention would lapse.
A fresh detention order under section 13(2) can be made on the revocation or expiry of a previous detention order only in cases where fresh facts have arisen after the date of revocation or expiry.
The petitioner, was put in detention in pursuance of an order dated August 29, 1968.
He presented a petition under article 32 of the Constitution for the issue of a write of habeas corpus, while this petition was pending, another order of detention was issued on August 28, 196.9, a day before the expiry of the previous order.
The grounds of detention in this latter order was identical to that of August 28, 1968 excepting the charge that the petitioner, though in preventive custody was maintaining links with certain named hostile persons through friends and relatives and that his liberty would jeopardise the security of the State and public order in the region.
The petitioner challenged the latter order of detention by adding additional grounds.
: The order of detention dated August 28, 1969 was not justified under section 13(2) of the Act, being in violation of the provisions of the Act, and was invalid.
Under sec.
13(2) what is required is that fresh facts should have arisen.
after the expiry of the previous detention.
Facts arising during the period of detention, are, therefore, not relevant when applying the provisions of section 13(2).
In the present case, the fresh order was passed on 28th August, 1969, a day before the expiry, and it was obvious that no fresh facts could by that date arise and yet be held to have arisen after the date of expiry.
It is very difficult to appreciate how a person in preventive custody could continue to maintain links with his associates outside jail, who had gone underground, even through his friends and relatives.
If the petition was able to maintain such links, it cast a sad reflection on the persons in charge of him while he was in custody and, in any case, it would appear that his detention could serve no useful purpose.
Even if it be accepted that such links were maintained, this additional ground mentioned did not satisfy the requirements of section 13(2) of the Act, because the only allegation was that the links were maintained during the period of preventive detention.
