In computing the income of the appellant 's father for the assessment year 1959 60 the Income tax Officer included Rs. 75,000 received under an agreement for cutting and removing trees from 500 acres of forest land in Madras State.
The Income tax Officer held that the income was taxable because the land was leased for clear felling by the father of the appellant.
What the expression 'clear felling ' meant was not investigated by the Income tax Officer.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the assessment order.
But the Tribunal held that the receipt was of a capital nature and deleted it from the taxable income.
In reference the High Court differed from the Tribunal.
In appeal 'against the High Courts order this Court directed the Tribunal to submit to this Court a supplementary statement of case setting out the terms of the agreement between the father of the appellant relating to the rights conveyed to the lessees and especially about the import of the ' term relating to 'clear felling.
The Tribunal in its supplementary statement of case set out the relevant terms of the agreement and observed that the import of the expression 'clear felling ' is that 'all trees except casurina are to be felled at a height not exceeding six inches from the ground, the barks being left intact on the stump and adhering to it all round the stump without being torn off or otherwise changed.
" It was not suggested that there were any casurina trees in the forest land let out to the lessees and it was common ground that the trees in the forest were of spontaneous growth.
HELD: The appeal must be dismissed.
the finding in the present case it was clear that the trees were not removed with roots.
The stumps of the trees were allowed to remain in the land so that the trees may regenerate.
If a person sells merely leaves or fruit of the trees or even branches of the trees it would be1 difficult (subject to the special exemption under section 4(3)(viii) of the Income tax Act, 19 '22) to hold that the realisation is not of the nature of income.
It is true that the tree is a part of the land.
But by selling a part of the trunk, the assessee does not necessarily realise a part of his capital.
[553 B C] Commissioner of Income tax, Madrs, vs
T. Manavedan Tirumalpad, I.LR. , In re: Ram Prasad, I.L.R. 52 All.
419, Maharaja of Kapurthala vs Commissioner of Income tax, C.P. & U.P. , Raja Bahadur Kamkshya Narain Singh vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & Orissa, , Fringford Estate Ltd., Calicut vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, , Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay South vs
N.T. Patwardhan, ,State of Kerala vs Karimtharuvi Tea Estate Ltd. and Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore vs
H.B. Van Ingen, , referred to.
548 [Question whether in case of sale of trees with the roots so that there is no possibility of regeneration the realisation may be said to be, in the nature of capital, left open.] [553 D]
