The mortgagee of a property in which a cinema was run.
leased it to the first appellant on a monthly rental of Rs. 250/ for a period of 5 years renewable for 10 years by yearly renewals on the same terms.
The lessee was given the full right to use the property whether by itself or through.
agents or in partnership or by sub leasing.
The lessee sublet the premises after equipping the house with cinema machinery on a monthly rental of Rs. 1,250/ .
The property had been declared evacuee property, and the lessee applied under the for separation of his interest.
The Competent Officer ordered sale of the property, which was purchased for Rs. 65,000/ by the respondent.
Then (before the expiry of the term of the lease) the respondent filed a suit against the head lessee and the sub lessee for possession of the property.
On the questions (i) whether the respondent was entitled to possession before the expiry of the full term of the lease; and (ii) whether the subleases were protected under the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
HELD: (i) No person can confer on another a better title than he himself has.
A mortgage is a transfer of an interest in specific immovable property for the purpose of securing repayment of a loan.
A mortgagee 's interest lasts only as long as the mortgage has not been paid off.
Therefore on redemption of the mortgage the title of the mortgagee comes to an end.
A derivative title from him must ordinarily come to an end with the termination of the mortgagee 's title.
The mortgagee by creating a tenancy becomes the lessor of the property, but his interest as lessor is coterminous with his mortgage interest.
The relationship of lessor and lessee cannot subsist beyond the mortgagee 's interest unless the relationship is agreed to by the mortgagor or a fresh relationship is recreated.
This the mortgagor or the person succeeding to the mortgagor 's interest may elect to do.
But if he does not, the lessee cannot claim any rights beyond the term of his original lessor 's interest.
[584 F] The exception to the above propositions is the one that flows from section 76(a) which lays down liabilities of a mortgagee in possession.
It is provided there that when during the continuance of the mortgage, the mortgagee takes possession of the mortgaged property, he must manage the property as a person of ordinary prudence would manage it if it were his own.
From this it is inferred that acts done bona fide and prudently in the ordinary course of management, may bind even after the termination of the title of the mortgagee in possession.
This principle applies ordinarily to the management of agricultural lands and has seldom been extended to urban property so as to tie it up in the hands of lessees or to confer on them rights under special statutes.
To this again there is an exception.
The base will continue to bind the mortgagor or persons deriving interest from him if the mortgagor had concurred to grant it.
[585 C] 582 The present case was not covered by the exception because such a long lease on a small rent could not be said to be an act of prudence, whether it was a bona fide act or not, and whether the exemption can apply to urban property.
Mahabir Gope and Ors.
vs Harbans Narain Singh, [1952] S.C.F. 775 and Asaram & Ors.
vs Mst.
Ram Kali, [1958] S.C.R: 986, followed.
(ii) A landlord means a person entitled to receive rent and a tenant means any person by whom or on whose account rent is payable.
These definitions apply if the tenancy, either real or statutory, could be said to survive after the termination of the mortgage.
The scheme of section 10 of the is that in the case of a mortgagor or a mortgagee, (a) the Competent Officer may pay to the Custodian or the claimant the amount payable under the mortgage debt and redeem the property or (b) the Competent Officer may sell the mortgaged property for satisfaction of the mortgage debt and distribute the sale proceeds thereof, or (c) the Competent Officer may partition the property between the mortgagor and the mortgagee proportionate to their shares, or (d) adopt a combination of any of these measures.
It is obvious that method (b) was followed.
The property was sold and the mortgage was satisfied.
This led to the extinction of the mortgagee 's interest and the purchaser acquired full title to the property.
The termination of the mortgagee interest terminated the relationship of landlord and tenant and it could not, in the circumstances, be said to run with the land.
There being no landlord and no tenant, the provisions of the Rent Restriction Act could not apply any further.
Nor could it be said that when the mortgagor cancelled the rent note and authorised the mortgagee to find any other tenant, the intention was to allow expressly a tenancy beyond the term of the mortgage.
[586 E]
