The appellants were the transferees of lease hold rights granted by the proprietor of an impartible estate in respect of lands in the estate.
The estate was notified and abolished in 1948 under the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948.
The Manager who was appointed collected the rent as reduced under the Madras Estates Land (Reduction of Rent) Act.
direct from the tenants in possession of the lease hold lands from the fasli year 1357, but did not pay it over to the appellants.
Ryotwari settlement was introduced in the lands in 1959 (fasli 1369), and in 1960 (fasli 1370), the lease, which was covered by section 20 of the Abolition Act, was terminated, the unexpired portion of the lease period being 26 years.
The appellants were paid in 1961: (1) certain sums towards the amount collected as rent till the termination of the lease, and (2) compensation.
No interest was paid on the rent collected by the Manager.
On the question regarding the correctness of the basis of the calculations made by the respondent, HELD: (1) The respondent was right in holding that the appellants were entitled only to the rents collected, under section 3(4) of the Rent Reduction Act, and not to the assessment made by way of ryotwari settlement under section 22 of the Abolition Act.
That assessment was a matter between the Government and the tenant and if, by virtue of it, the Government was entitled to more amount as land revenue than the rent payable under the Rent Reduction Act, the appellants had no right to such excess amount.
[542 F H] (2) (a) Under section 20(2) of the Abolition Act rules for determining compensation had to be framed having regard to the value of the right and the unexpired portion of the period for which the right was created.
Rule 1 (ii) framed under the section, provides that in the case of a right which was created for a specified number of years, the compensation shall be limited either to twenty times.
the net annual income or the net annual income multiplied by the unexpired portion of the period of such right, whichever is less; and, under r. 2, net annual income is the average net income during 3 lash years preceding the lash year in which the right was terminated.
Since the rule is framed having regard to the unexpired period, there is no repugnancy between the section and the rule.
[543 B G; 544 E H; 545 A] 539 (b) The settlement rates under the ryotwari settlement represent what is payable to the Government as revenue and do not represent what is due as rent to the appellants from their tenants.
Therefore, the respondent was right in determining the net annual income under r. 1 (ii) by taking into account only the rent as fixed under the Rent Reduction Act in the three preceding fasli years 1367 1369 and not the settlement rate for the fasli year 1369.
[544 D E] (c) The definition of rent in the Madras Estates Land Act, 1908, incorporated into the Abolition Act, and the sections of the Abolition Act show that 'rent ' includes any local tax, eess etc.
The original patta granted by the proprietor of the impartible estate provided that the lessees should pay the cesses.
Hence, the net income could only be arrived at by taking into account the eesses payable by the lessee.
Therefore, the respondent was justified in deducting from the annual gross income the cesses, for arriving at the net annual income which is the basis of compensation.
[54 5 E G] (3) On general principles of equity as well as under the Interest Act, 1839, the appellants were entitled to interest on the amount of rents collected by the Manager on behalf of the Government and not paid to the appellants, even though, under the statute, there is no provision for payment of interest.
[546 E G] National Insurance Co. Ltd. Calcutta vs
L. I. C. India, [1963] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 971, followed.
