The respondent gave the highest bid at an auction for the sale of license for a country liquor shop in Delhi for the year 1949 50.
Under cl. 31 of the conditions of sale for that year, the Chief Commissioner was under no obligation to grant a license until he was assured of the financial status of the bidder.
Under el.
33 all final bids were made subject to confirmation by the Chief Commissioner who could reject any bid assigning any reasons.
However under cl. 21 of r. 5.34 of the Delhi Liquor License Rules a person to whom a shop had been sold had to pay one sixth of the annual fee within seven days of the auction.
The respondent not having paid one sixth of the annual fee as required by the said cl. 21, the Chief Commissioner did not confirm his bid.
Resale of the excise shop was ordered.
At the new auction it was sold at a lower price.
The Collector Delhi thereupon held the respondent liable to pay the difference between his bid and the bid for which the shop was later sold, and commenced proceedings for the recovery of the sum.
The respondent filed a suit in the Court of the Senior Subordinate Judge, Delhi praying for a permanent injunction restraining the appellants (Union of India & Ors.) from taking any proceedings for the recovery of the amount.
The trial judge decreed the suit.
The decree was upheld by the first appellate court.
In second appeal the Single Judge decided against the respondent.
The Division Bench decided in his favour.
The appellants came to this Court with certificate.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the respondent was under a legal obligation to pay one sixth of the annual fee within seven days of the auction under el.
21 of r. 5.34; it was due to his default that a resale of the excise shop was ordered; and under cl. 22 of r. 5.34 the respondent was liable for the deficiency in price and all expenses of such resale which was caused by his default.
HELD: (i) An acceptance of an offer may be either absolute or conditional.
If the acceptance is conditional the offer can be withdrawn at any moment until absolute acceptance has taken place.
[H 597] From cl. 33 of the conditions of sale it is clear that the contract of sale is not complete till it is confirmed by the Chief Commissioner and till such confirmation the person whose bid has been provisionally accepted is entitled to withdraw his bid.
If the bid is so withdrawn before the confirmslion of the Chief Commissioner the bidder will not be liable for damages on account of any breach of contract or for the shortfall on resale.
[G H 597] Hussers vs Horne Payne, , 676, referred to.
595 (ii) The phrase "person to whom a shop has been sold" in el.
21 r. 5.34 cannot be accepted to mean a "person whose bid has bern provisionally accepted".
The first part of el.; 21 deals with a completed sale and the second part with a situation where the auction is conducted by an officer lower in rank than the Collector.
In the latter case the rule makes it clear that if any person whose bid has been accepted by the officer presiding at the auction fails to make the deposit of one sixth of the annual fee, or if he refuses to accept the licence.
the Collector may resell the licence either by public auction or by private contract and any deficiency in price and all expenses of such resale shall be recoverable from the defaulting bidder.
[F G 598] In the present case the first part of d. 21 was applicable.
If the Chief Commissioner had not disapproved the bid offered by the respondent under el.
33 of the conditions of sale, the auction sale in favour of the respondent would have been a completed transaction and he would have been liable for any shortfall on the resale.
As the essential prerequisites of a completed sale were lacking in this case there was no liability imposed on the respondent for payment of the deficiency in the price.
[598 H; 599 A B]
