The appellants filed a suit claiming a sum of Rs. 30,000 as damages under sections 1A and 2 of the for the death of their son aged 8 years.
The boy had stood first in Standard III and his future was claimed to be bright.
The trial court computed the damages under sections 1A and 2 at Rs. 5,000.
In appeal the High Court determined the damages under section 1A at Rs. 5,000 and under section 2 at Rs. 1,000.
In appeal by certificate before this Court.
HELD : Compulsory damages under section IA of the Act for wrongful death must be limited strictly to the pecuniary loss to the beneficiaries and under section 2 the measure of damages is the economic loss sustained by the estate.
There can be no exact uniform rule for measuring the value of human life and the measure of damages cannot be arrived at by precise mathematical calculations but the amount recoverable depends on the particular facts and circumstances of each case.
The life expectancy of the deceased or of the beneficiaries whichever is shorter is an important factor, Since the elements which go to make up the value of the life of the deceased to ' the designated beneficiaries are necessarily personal to each case in the very nature of things, there can be no exact or uniform rule for measuring the value of human life.
In assessing the damages the court must exclude all considerations of matter which rest in speculations or fancy though conjecture to some extent is inevitable.
As a general rule parents are entitled to recover the present cash value of the prospec tive service of the deceased minor child.
In addition they may receive compensation for loss of pecuniary benefits reasonably to be expected after the child attains majority.
In the matter of ascertainment of damages, the appellate court should be slow in disturbing the findings reached by the courts below, if they have taken all the relevant facts into consideration.
[695 F 696 A] Davies and Anr.
vs Powell Dufleryn Associated Collieries Ltd. , Franklin vs South East Railway Company, ; H. & N. 448, Taff Vale Railway Company vs Jenkins, , Bartlett V. Cohen & Ors. , Nance vs British Columbia Electric Rly.
Co. Ltd. and Gobald Motor Service Ltd. & Anr.
vs R.M.K. Veluswami & Ors.
; , applied.
(ii) In the present case although the deceased was a bright child, it was uncertain how much assistance he would have given after growing up to his parents.
The father was a prosperous business man and hardly needed assistance.
There was no material on record as to the age of the parents and their state of health.
On the basis of the evidence on record it could not be said that the damages ordered by the High Court were inadequate.
[696 C]
