In an application under section 15 of the the respondents claimed that they were workers within the meaning of section 2(1) of the .
The Additional District Judge found that some of the respondents were time keepers who maintained attendance of the staff.
job card particulars of the various jobs under operation and the time sheets of the staff working on various shops dealing with the production of Railway spare parts and repairs etc.
and that other respondents were head time keepers entrusted with the task of supervising the work of other respondents.
He, therefore, came to the conclusion that the work done by the respondents was "incidental to" or "connected with" the manufacturing process.
The High Court in revision affirmed this order.
On the question whether the respondents fell within the purview of the definition of "worker" in section 2(1) of the .
HELD : (ii) The conclusion of the Additional District Judge on the nature of the work of the respondents being one of fact must be held to be binding on the High Court on revision and also not open to reassessment on the merits in this Court on special leave appeal from the order of the High Court.
(ii) The definition in section 2(1) is fairly wide because it takes within its sweep not only persons employed in manufacturing process but also in cleaning any part of the machinery or premises used for a manufacturing process and goes far beyond the direct connection with the manufacturing process by extending it to other kinds of work which may either be incidental to or connected with not only the manufacturing process itself but also the subject of the manufacturing process.
The definition therefore does not exclude those employees who were entrusted solely with clerical duties, if they otherwise fell within the definition of the word " worker".
All legislation in a welfare state is enacted with the object of promoting general welfare, but certain types of enactments are more responsive to some urgent social demands and also have more immediate and visible impact on social vices by operating more directly to achieve social reforms.
The belongs to this category and, therefore.
demands an interpretation liberal enough to achieve the legislative purpose, without doing violence to the language.
[728 C D; 731 B D]
