The respondents were tried jointly and acquitted by a common judgment.
State of Gujarat filed a Joint appeal against their acquittal in.
the High Court.
Rule 6 of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules, 1960 (which were applicable to the proceedings in the Gujarat High Court) provided for joint appeals by persons aggrieved by a common judgment or order.
There was however no, rule specifically providing for similar joint appeals by the State.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the joint appeal by the State against the respondents on the ground that such an appeal was not maintainable.
The Division Bench held that the decision by a Full Beach of the High Court in Lalu lela 's case in which a contrary view had been taken was not binding on the Division Bench.
In appeal to this Court against the judgment of the Division Bench.
HELD : (i) The Division Bench was in error in not treating as binding the earlier decision of a Full Bench of the same court on the same question.
1877 A F] Mahadeolal Kanodia vs The Administrator General of West Bengal, ; , Jai Kaur & Ors.
vs Sher Singh etc. , Atma Ram vs State of Punjab & Ors. , Jaisri Sahu vs Rai Dewan, [19621 2 S.C.R. 559 and Budha Singh vs Laltu Singh, I.L.R. 37 All. 604 (P.C.), applied.
(ii) Rule 6 of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules does not in terms cover the case of an appeal by the State against several accused persons jointly tried and acquitted by the trial court by a common order, but if an appeal by persons jointly tried and convicted is competent, then on principle it is difficult to negative the maintainability of one appeal by the State against a common order acquitting several persons tried jointly.
Like all rules of procedure this rule demands a construction which would ' promote the cause of justice and not obstruct it.
(878 D F] A joint appeal by the State against several accused persons acquitted at a joint trial is not contrary to any provision of the Code of Criminal Procedure and is therefore not legally prohibited.
Sections 258, 410, 417, 419 or 423 of the Code do not indicate any bar as was suggested by the order of the High Court.
Indeed the plain reading of section 417 which pro%ides for an appeal in a case and not against an accused person, seems to be wide enough to permit ,A joint appeal.
The matter being one of mere form it calls for a liberal approach requiting the appeal to be beard on its merits.
The order of the High Court must accordingly be set aside.
[878 G H; 879 C F] 876 Rabari Ghela jadav V. State of Bombay, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 748, ,explained.
Lalu Jela.
vs State of Gujarat, A.I.R. 1962 Guj. 125, approved.
