Disputes between the State of Rajasthan and a company were referred to arbitration and the Government Advocate was appointed to represent the State.
Another advocate was appointed to assist the Government Advocate but as the advocate was table to appear, the appellant was no appointed under 0.27, r. 8B of the Civil Procedure Code, as Special Government Pleader.
The appellant then stood for election to the State Legislative Assembly and was declared elected.
The election was challenged and one of the grounds of challenge was that the appellant held an office of profit within the meaning of article 191 of the Constitution.
The High Court set aside the election.
While the appeal was pending in this Court, Rajasthan Act 5 of 1969 was passed declaring among others that the holder of the office of a Special Government Pleader was not disqualified from being chosen or for being a member of the State Legislative Assembly; and by section 2(2), the Act was made retrospective removing the appellant 's disqualification retrospectively.
On the questions : (1) Whether the appellant was holding an office of profit and hence was disqualified; (2) Whether the disqualification was removed by Act 5 of 1969; and (3) Whether the election petition was in accordance with law, because, another candidate from another constituency, again t whom corrupt practices were alleged, was not impleaded as a party, HELD : (1) (Per Sikri, Ray and Jaganmohan Reddy, JJ.) : The appellant was not holding an office of profit.
(a) Before a person becomes subject to the disqualification in article 191(1) there must be an office which exists independently of his being the holder of the office.
The word 'office ' means an office or employment which was a subsisting, permanent, substantive position which had an existence independent of the person who filled it, which went on and was filled in succession by successive holders; but if a person was engaged on whatever terms to do the duties which were assigned to him, his employment to do those duties did not create an office to which those duties were attached.
Hence an office does not come into existence every time a pleader is asked by the Government to appeal, in a case on its behalf.
A B; 850 G H]
Cl/70 8 836 (b) A reading of section 2(7) and 0.27, r. 8B of the Civil Procedure Code A shows, that even an advocate who is.
acting under the directions of the Government Pleader could be deemed to be a Government Pleader.
Therefore, the notification of the appellant 's name under r. 8B as Special Government Pleader did not amount to the creation of an office.
[850 F G] (c) Assuming that a Government Pleader is an agent of the Government for purposes of receiving processes against the Government, the fact that processes could be served on an advocate, would not mean that the advocate was holding an office under his client.
[851 A B] (d) It is not necessary to give a wider meaning to the word 'office ' because, if Parliament thinks that a legal"practitioner who is being paid fees in a case by the Government should not be qualified to stand for an election as a member of the Legislative Assembly, it can make that provision under article 191 (1) (e) of the Constitution.
[851 C D] Great Western Railway Co. vs Bater, 8 Tax Cases 231 and McMillan vs Guest (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) 24 Tax Cases 190, applied.
Mahadeo vs Shantibhai & Ors.
[1969]2 S.C.R. 422 distinguished.
Sakhawat Ali vs State of Orissa, , referred to.
(Per Hidayatullah, C.J. and Mitter, J. dissenting) : The High Court was right in holding that the appellant held an office of profit.
[842 C] It was not a case of the appellant merely being briefed as a lawyer and given the Government litigation.
On the other hand an office, that of Special Government Pleader was created, and since the office of a Government Pleader is an office of profit, the office of Special Government Pleader will equally be an office of profit.
It was an office which could be successively held, it was independent of its holder, it was a substantive position and as permanent as other supernumerary offices.
[841 FG; 842B] Mahadeo vs Shantibhai & Ors.
and The Statesman (P.) Ltd. vs H. R. Deb & Ors. ; applied.
McMillan vs Guest, and Great Western Railway Co. vs Bater, 8 Tax Cases 231, 235, referred to.
(2) (By Full Court) : The Act 5 of 1969 has removed the disqualification retrospectively.
Per Hidayatullah, C.J. and Mitter, J. : It is well recognised that Parliament and the Legislature of a State can make their laws operate retrospectively subject to limitations, if any, in the Constitution.
Any law that can be made prospectively may be made with retrospective operation except those which cannot operate retroactively.
In article 191 itself, power is reserved to the State Legislature to make a declaration that the holder of an office shall not be disqualified and there is nothing in the words of the Article to indicate that such a declaration cannot be made with retrospective effect, therefore, whatever may be the propriety of such legislation regard being had to legislative practice and the absence of a clear prohibition, express or implied.
the Act must be declared to have retrospective effect.
[843 B C, D F] 837 Per Sikri, Ray and Jaganmohan Reddy, JJ. : Parliament and the State legislatures can legislate retrospectively subject to the provisions of the Constitution.
No limitation on the powers of the Legislature to make a declaration validating an election, effective from an earlier date, is expressly stated nor could it be implied in article 191(1). ]851 F G; 852 D E] The apprehension that it may not be a healthy practice and might be abused is no ground for limiting the powers of the State Legislature.
[852 B] The impugned Act does not amend or alter the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in any respect whatsoever.
By enacting the impugned Act, the disqualification if any, which existed in the 1951 Act has been removed, but that is what the State Legislature is entitled to do under article 191 so long as it does not touch the wording of the 1951 Act.
[852 F G] (3) (By Full Court) : The words 'any other candidate ' in section 82(b) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, who should be impleaded, refers to a candidate in the election for the constituency which is the subject matter of the petition, and not to a candidate from another constituency.
[843 G H; 853 D E]
