A mortgagor applied to the Claims Officer under section 19 of the Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals and Alienated Lands) Act 1 of 1951 for determination of the debt due to the mortgagee and for scaling down the debt.
The mortgagee contended that the debt, by adjudication of court, had been merged into a decree and there was no secured debt which could be determined or scaled down.
The Claims, Officer held that there was a debt due to the mortgagee, that it was a secured debt and that he had jurisdiction for "determining the debt" and directed the mortgagee to submit a statement of the claim under section 22 of the Act.
On appeal by the mortgagee, the Board of Revenue, following the judgment of the High Court in Ramkishan vs Board of Revenue, Madhya Pradesh I.L.R. , held that the Claim Officer had 'no jurisdiction to decide whether the debt was a secured debt.
Upon the High Court overruling Ramkrishna 's case in Jethalal Bhawanji vs Prabhakar Sadasiv I. , the mortgagee field a statement of his claim before the Claims Officer.
The mortgagor contended that the debt stood discharged under section 22 of the Act as the mortgagee had failed to file a statement of his claim as originally directed by the Claims Officer.
The Claims Officer upheld the contention.
The Commissioner in appeal set aside the order of the Claims Officer discharging the debt and a petition in the High Court against the Commissioner 's order was summarily dismissed.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : Section 22 enacts a penal provision and unless the conditions precedent are satisfied, the debt could not by operation of the statute be discharged.
In the present case the order of the Claims Officer was reversed by the Board of Revenue, and all directions given by the Claims Officer, pursuant to his order calling upon the mortgagee to file a statement of his claim, stood annulled.
Thereafter the Claims Officer did not pass any order under section 22 of the Act 1 of 1951 directing that the proceeding shall continue and further directing that a notice shall issue calling upon the mortgagee to file a statement of the claim.
Until a notice, valid in law, directing that a statement be filed was served upon the mortgagee and he failed to comply with it, the debt could not be discharged.
[179 G 180 B]
