The appellant filed a suit for redemption of a mortgage.
The lower courts decreed the suit.
The High Court held that in view of the provisions of the Madha Bharat Zamindari Abolition Act XIII of 1951 the appellants were entitled to redeem the mortgage but disentitled to get possession of the mortgaged land since under the Act the proprietary rights including the right to possession vested in the State.
In appeal to this Court it was urged that High Court did not afford the appellants an opportunity to show that the land in question was Khud kasht and, therefore in according with section 4 they were entitled to remain in possession thereof.
HELD : The precise question requiring decision by the High Court in the present case was lost sight of and not properly adverted to.
Under the Act the proprietor, notwithstanding any other consequences of the vesting in the State, is entitled to continue to retain possession of his Khud kasht land which is so recorded in the annual village papers before the date of vesting. ' In the present case both the contesting parties claim for themselves actual possession of the land in dispute as Khud kasht and also assert that the relevant entries in the annual village papers before the date of vesting showed them in such possession.
On this basis they both claim right to retain possession even against the State.
These rival controversial claims pressed by both the parties was the central question involving proper appraisal of the material on the record and this basic dispute had to be first adverted to and judicially determined and thereafter the Court had to consider the applicability of the relevant provisions of Act XIII of 1951 to the facts found.
As the question of vesting of title in the State was also of vital importance it was fit and proper for the Courts below to have issued notice to the State as well thereby enabling it to be impleaded as a party, if it so desired.
[25D 26B] Haji Sk.
Subban vs Madho Rao, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 123, distinguished.
[The case was remitted to the High Court for a fresh decision].
