Section 188 of the , provides for an appeal against any order of an officer of customs and the order passed in the appeal is made final subject to the. revision under section 191 of the Act.
The respondent claimed refund of customs duty paid by him under protest.
The claim was rejected.
An appeal to the Collector of Customs and a revision to the Central Board of Revenue= were unsuccessful.
The respondent instituted an action in the Civil Court for refund of the amount.
The trial court decreed the suit but the first appellate court held that the civil court had No. jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
The High Court, in further appeal, restored the decree of the trial court.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The civil court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
[146 G H] Where a statute creates a new right or liability and it provides a complete machinery for obtaining redress against erroneous exercise of authority, jurisdiction of the Civil Court.
to grant relief is barred.
Where however a statute reenacts a right or liability existing at common law, and the statute provides a special form of remedy, exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to grant relief in the absence of an express provision will not be readily inferred.
[149 ' D F] Liability to pay duty of customs is not a common law liability; it arises by virtue of the .
In respect of any grievance arising in consequence of enforcement of that liability, machinery has been provided by the Act.
Having regard to the complicated nature of the questions which arise in the determination of liability to.
pay duty of customs, the legislature has invested the power of determining liability and the manner of enforcement thereof upon a specially authorised hierarchy of tribunals.
[149 ' F G] (ii) A civil suit will lie for obtaining appropriate relief in cases where the customs authority has not complied with the provisions of the statute, or the officer of customs has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial procedure or the authority has acted in violation of the fundamental principles of judicial procedure or has made an order which is not within his competence or the statute which imposes liability is unconstitutional or the order is alleged to.
be mala fide.
[149 F G] (iii) The exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to entertain a suit does not exclude the jurisdiction of the High Court to issue high prerogative writs against illegal exercise of authority by administrative or quasi judicial tribunals.
[150] Dhulabhai etc.
vs State of Madras Pradesh & Anr.
A.I.R. , followed.
Secretary of State for India vs Mask & Co. L.R. 67 I.A. 222, referred to. 146
