The second respondent Bank filed a complaint against the appellant alleging against him misappropriation of moneys and goods contrary to the Packing Credit Agreement entered into between the appellant 's firm and the Bank.
The Magistrate framed only one charge against the appellant, viz., 'for misappropriation of moneys, under section 406, Penal Code.
Against his conviction the appellant appealed to the High Court and when the case had been argued for a considerable length the learned Judge allowed an oral application for amendment of the charge to include one of misappropriation of goods.
Allowing the application the learned Judge directed that the case be sent back "for a new trial on the amended charge so as to enable the appellant to have full opportunity to meet the case till which time the appeal is kept pending." In appeal to this Court against this order.
HELD : Dismissing the appeal, The Code of Criminal Procedure gives ample power to the courts to alter or amend a charge whether by the trial court or by the appellate Court provided that the accused has not to face a charge for a new offence or is not prejudiced either by keeping him in the dark about that charge or in not giving a full opportunity of meeting it and putting forward any defence open to him, on the charge finally preferred against him.
Especially, cl.
(d) of sub section
(1) of section 423 empowers the appellate court even to make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper.
Further, section 535 provides that no finding or sentence pronounced or passed shall be deemed to be invalid merely on the ground that no charge has been framed unless the court of appeal or revision thinks that the omission to do so has occasioned failure of justice and if in the opinion of any of these courts a failure of justice has been occasioned by an omission to frame a charge, it shall order a charge to be 'framed and direct that the 'trial be recommended from the point immediately after the 'framing of the charge.
[748 A E] Thakar Sahab vs Emperor, , referred to.
In the present case the learned Judge of the High Court did not intend nor did he direct a new trial; only an opportunity was given to the accused to safeguard himself against any prejudice by giving him a opportunity to recall any witness and adduce any evidence on this behalf.
[749 C] The offence with which the appellant was charged alternatively was the same, namely, under section 406; but as the entire transaction was one and indivisible he was not only required to answer the charge of misappropriation of money but in the alternative misappropriation of goods which the complainant Bank contended became their 's as soon as the accused purchased them with the moneys it advanced.
Therefore no prejudice was 743 caused, nor was likely to be caused to the accused by the amendment of the charge as directed by the High Court.
[749 E F]
