The services of the appellant as Assistant Surgeon in the Hindustan Steel Ltd., Ranchi were terminated purportedly in terms of his contract of employment.
In a petition under article 226 he claimed that the termination was wrongful inasmuch as it was really by way of punishment and article 311 of the Constitution had not been complied with.
The company resisted the ground by saying that article 311 was not applicable to the appellant since he was employed by a corporation and neither belonged to the civil service of the Union nor held a civil post under the union.
The High Court dismissed the ' appellant 's petition.
In appeal before this Court by certificate, the appellant contended that since Hindustan Steel was entirely financed by the Government and its management was directly the responsibility of the President, the post was virtually under the Government of India.
HELD : (i) The protection of article 311(2) is available to the categories of persons mentioned in cls. (a)(b) and (c) of article 311(l).
The appellant did not fall in the categories mentioned in cls, (a) and (b).
He did hold a civil post as opposed to a military post but cl.
(c) further required that it must be under the Union or a State.
In view of the existence of shareholders, of capital raised by the issuance of shares, and the lack of connection between the finances of the corporation and the Consolidated Fund of the Union, it must be held that Hindustan Steel Ltd. was not a department of the Government nor were the servants of it holding posts under the State.
It had its independent existence and by the law relating to corporations it was distinct even from its members.
In these circumstances the appellant, as an employee of Hindustan Steel Ltd., did not answer the description of a holder of 'a civil post under the Union ' as stated in article 31 1.
The High Court was therefore right in not affording him the protection of that Article.
[367 D; 369 C E] State of Bihar vs Union of India, C.A. Nos.
512 513/69 dt.
19 9 1969 and Praga Tools 'Corporation vs C. V. Imanual & Ors.
C.A. No. 612 1966 dt.
19 2 1969, applied.
Subodh Raman Ghosh vs Sindhri Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. A.I.R. 1957 Pat. 10, approved.
M. Verghese vs Union of India & Ors.
A.I.R. 1963 Cal.
421, Lachmi and Ors.
vs Military Secretar to the Government of Bihar, Ram Babu Rathaur vs Divisional Manager, Life Insurance Corporation of India, , Damodar Valley Corporation V. Provat Roy, ILX C.W.N. 1023 and Tamlin vs Hannaford, [1950] 1 K.B.D. 18, referred to.
364 (ii)The contentions sought to be raised by the appellant regarding the validity of the departmental enquiry against him were not touched upon in the High Court 's judgment nor mentioned in the proposed grounds filed with the application for certificate.
The appellant could not be allowed to urge them for the first time in this Court.
