The appellant was the owner of 5 buses.
The Vehicles stood in the name of the respondent, appellant 's benamidar, and the stage carriage permits were also obtained in the respondent 's name.
The appellant, who was running the buses, flied a suit claiming the buses along with their permits.
It was decreed by the trial court, and the lower appellate court confirmed the decree in respect of 4 buses.
The High Court, in further appeal, held that the appellant and the respondent together practised fraud in contravention of as.
41(1) and 60(1)(c) of the in as much as the respondent representing himself to be the owner falsely obtained the permits in his own name, and allowed the true owner, who had no permit to conduct the actual business and dismissed the suit in toto.
In appeal this Court, HELD: There is nothing in the , which expressly or by implication bars benami transactions or persons owning buses benami and applying for permits on that basis.
Section 42(1) does not require that the owner himself should obtain the permit; it only requires the owner to see that the transport vehicles shall not be used except in accordance with the conditions of the permit.
The definition of 'permit ' itself shows that all permits need not be in the name of the owner because the latter part of the definition shows that it is only in the case of a private earner or a public carrier that a permit has to be in the owner 's name.
The same inference follows from the definitions of 'private carrier ' and 'public carrier '.
[899 H] The amended section 60(1)(c) provides for one of the contingencies in which permit can be cancelled.
According to it, it is permissible for the Transport Authority to cancel a permit if the holder of it ceases to own the vehicle covered by the permit.
It is only a permissive clause and the Transport Authority has only been g/yen a discretion to cancel the permit in that contingency.
It may or may not cancel it, even if the holder of the permit ceased to own the vehicles covered by it.
But it is by no means necessary that cl.
(c) should be applicable to the case of every permit holder.
There may be permit holders who own the vehicle covered by the permit and there may be permit holders who do not own the vehicle.
This clause appears to apply only to the former case and not to the latter.
[900] Veerappa Pillai vs Raman & Raman, ; , followed.
Khallil ul Rahman Khan vs State Transport Appellate Tribunal, A.I.R. 1963 All. 383, Gut Narayan vs Sheolaf Singh, and C.I.T. Gujarat vs Abdul Rahim & Co., , approved.
Varadarajulu Naidu vs Thavasi Nadar, (1963) 2 M.LJ. 20 and Chavali Venkataswami vs Chavali Kotayya, (1959) 2 and W.R. 407, disapproved.
