With respect to a kunta, which was government property, certain persons who had occupied a part of the land in the kunta and the accused, were asserting their respective claims, the former to the use of the land in the kunta for cultivation and latter, to the use of the kunta as a source of irrigation.
The occupiers and accused belonged to opposite political factions.
A suit was filed by the occupiers and the civil court passed two orders of injunction, one restraining the accused from interfering with the occupiers ' possession, and the other, restraining the occupiers from opening sluices in the bund of the kunta.
While the suit was pending the occupies raised corps on their land and the accused raised a new bund.
Since their crops were being damaged as a result of the raising of the new bund, the occupiers approached the police 'authorities and tahsildar for the removal of the bund, but they did not give any effective help.
The accused were not willing to allow the removal of the bund without any Government order.
Thereupon, the occupiers and their supporters, numbering not less than twenty went to the spot to remove the bund by force, but the accused were present at the spot determined not to allow the bund to be removed.
In the fight that ensued, the first accused, aged about 60 years, received ten injuries on the vital parts of his body and the Civil Assistant Surgeon who attended on him thought it was neces sary to take a dying declaration from him.
The second accused who was about 50 years old, was also subjected to severe beating.
Some of the other accused also received injuries.
The tenth accused, who had a gun in his hand, and who was the son in law of the first accused, shot at the actual aggressors and killed three of them and injured another.
The party of the occupiers asserted that they went to the scene of occurrence unarmed and with the intention of peacefully persuading the accused to remove the bund and that when beaten by the: accused they snatched the sticks and spears from them and retaliated.
The tenth accused put forth a plea of alibi.
The other accused asserted that the party of the occupiers were the aggressors and that they acted in self defence.
Holding that it was not material to consider whether the occupiers 'and their supporters had brought with them sticks or snatched them from the accused, that the accused had attacked first, and that the injuries to the accused did not give rise to any right of private defence, the High Court convicted some of the accused for the offence under sections 147 I.P.C., to, the offence under section 148 I.P.C., and the tenth accused for the offences of murder and grievous hurt with a dangerous weapon.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1 ) When they went to the scene, the occupiers knew that determined not to allow the removal of the bund without an order from determined not to allow the removal of the bund without an order 'from the Government authorities.
In the circumstances the occupiers and their 424 supporters must have gone to the kunta fully armed, and it was not possible to accept their version.
[434 E G] (2) The occupiers moved in the matter only after the new bund was raised by the accused.
They had ample opportunity of approaching public authorities to have the bund removed.
When the occupiers and their supporters found that the police were guilty of a grave dereliction of their duty, they could have approached the higher authorities or the civil court in which the suit was pending.
Instead of having recourse to those steps they decided to go to the scene in large numbers fully determined to remove the bund by force.
When that attempt was foiled by the accused with show of force, the members of occupiers ' party mercilessly beat up some of the accused persons who were advanced in age.
In such a situation it was not possible for an average person placed in the position of the tenth accused, to take a calm and objective view and calculate with arithmetical precision as to how much force would effectively serve the purpose of self defence and when to stop.
He only used the gun against the real aggressors from whom he apprehended grave danger to the lives of the other accused persons and to himself.
Therefore, he was fully justified in using his gun in the exercise of the right of private defence against the party of the occupiers.
[438 C D, E H; 439 A E] Except as against acts of public servants acting in good faith and when there is time to have recourse to the protection of public authorities, under section 97 I.P.C., every person has a right to defend : (1) his own body and the body of any other person against any offence affecting the human body, and (2) the property of himself or of any other person against theft, robbery, mischief, of criminal trespass.
Such a right is basically preventive and not punitive, and, nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the right.
Under section 100 one of the circumstances in which the right of private defence of the body extends to the voluntary causing of death of the assailant, is, if the assault, which occasions the exercise of the right, reasonably causes the apprehension that death or grievous hurt would otherwise be the consequences thereof.
[437 B D, E F] (3) When there is evidence proving that a person accused of killing or injuring another acted in the exercise of the right of private defence, the court would not be justified in ignoring that evidence and convicting the accused merely because he had set up a defence of alibi and set forth a plea different from the right of private defence.
Courts are expected to administer the law of private defence in a practical way with reasonable liberality so as to effectuate its underlying object.
Therefore, the Court was not precluded from giving the tenth accused the benefit of the right of private defence.
[439 F H]
