D who was one of eight partners in a firm, died on February 20, 1957.
By virtue of a provision in the partnership deed, the business of the firm was continued by the surviving partners.
The respondents, being the widow and son of D commenced an action for an account of the partnership between D and the surviving partners, praying for an order for the payment of the amount determined to be due to D at the time of his death.
A single judge of the High Court passed a preliminary decree directing that an account be taken of the partnership as on February 20, 1957.
A Division Bench, in appeal, modified the decree holding that the respondents were entitled only to interest at 6 % p.a. on.
the amount of D 's share in the assets of the partnership, including good will.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the respondents as legal representatives of D were not entitled to a share in the value of the good will of the firm because good will may be taken into account only when there is a dissolution and not otherwise; and.
furthermore, because D had agreed that his interest in the good will would cease after his death and the business shall be continued by the _surviving, partners.
HELD : Dismissing the appeal, It could not be held that in interpreting a deed of partnership, business.
whereof, it is stipulated shall be continued by the surviving I partners after the death of a partner, the Court will not award to the legal representatives of the deceased partner a share in the goodwill in the absence of an express stipulation to the contrary.
The good will of a firm is an.
asset of the firm.
In interpreting the deed of partnership, the Court will insist upon, some indication that the right to a share in the assets is, by virtue of the agreement that the surviving partners are entitled to carry on the business on the death of the partner, to be extinguished.
In the absence of a provision expressly made or clearly implied, the normal rule that the share of a partner in the assets devolves upon his legal representatives will apply to the good will as well as to other assets.
[693 F H] There is no indication in section 55 of the Partnership Act that goodwill may be taken into account only when there is a general dissolution of the firm,.
and not when the reprensentatives of a partner claim his share in the firm, which by express stipulations is to continue not with standing the death of a partner.
Nor do sections 39, 42 and 46 of the Act support such a contention.[691 F] Hunter vs Dowling, [18951 ; Smith vs Nelson 96 Law Times Reports 313; Bachubai and L. A. Watkins vs Shamji Jadowji, I.L.R. ; referred to.
Cl/70 14. 690
