Investigation in this case was started on the 20th April, 1951, under the City of Bombay Police Act (Bombay Act IV of 1902), the provisions of the , Code of Criminal Procedure being then inapplicable to Bombay City Police by virtue of section I (2)(a) of the Code.
In 1951, the Bombay Police Act (Bombay Act XXII of 1951) was passed by 'which both the Bombay Act IV of 1902 and the provision in section 1(2)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure in so far as it made the Code inapplicable to Bombay City Police. were repealed.
This Act came into force on 1st August, 1951, and after that date the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure became applicable to investigations by the Bombay City Police.
Under section 63 of the City of Bombay Police Act (Bombay Act IV of 1902), no statement made by a person to a Police Officer during investigation, reduced to writing, may be need in evidence, while under section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure the ban applies also to oral statements made to a Police Officer during investigation, not reduced to writing.
Held, that section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure by its very context and terms, applied to investigations conducted under Chapter XIV of the Code, and could not operate retrospectively and apply to investigations conducted prior to 1st August, 1951, by the Bombay City Police, as they were not investigations conducted under Chapter XIV of the Code.
The test identification parades in regard to accused I and 2 having been held prior to the 1st August, 1951, section 162 of the Code did not apply to the evidence 904 received in regard to these parades, but the section applied to the evidence relating to the test identification parades in regard to accused 4 as these were held after 1st August, 1951.
Banwari Gope vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1943 Patna 18) and Delhi Cloth Mills vs Income tax Commissioner, Delhi (A.I.R. , referred to.
The purpose of identification parades being to enable witnesses to identify the properties involved or the persons concerned in the offence under investigation, the very process of identification involves a statement by the identifying witness that the particular property or person identified was concerned in the offence.
This statement may be express or implied.
Such a statement, whether express or implied, including signs and gestures, would amount to a communication of the fact of identification by the identifier to another person, and where the identifications are held in the presence of the Police, such communications are tantamount to statements made by the identifiers to a Police Officer in the course of investigation and come within the ban of section 162 of the Code.
The physical fact of identification has no separate existence apart from the statement involved in the very process of identification, and in so far as a Police Officer seeks to prove the fact of such identification, such evidence would be inadmissible under section 162 of the Code, the only exception being the evidence sought to be given by the identifier himself in regard to his mental act of identification which he would be entitled to give by way of corroboration of his identifi cation of the accused at the trial.
Where the Police Officers arrange the parade, produce the parsons who are to be mixed up with the accused, and withdraw, leaving the actual parade solely and exclusively in charge of Panch witnesses, and the process of identification is carried out under the exclusive direction and supervision of the Panch witnesses, the statements involved in the process of identification would be state ments made by the identifiers to the Panch witnesses and would be outside the purview of section 162 of the Code.
Khabiruddin vs Emperor (A.I.R. ; Surendra Dinda vs Emperor (A.I.R. ; and Daryoo Singh vs State (A.I.R. 1952 All. 59), approved.
In re Kshatri Ram Singh (A.I.R. 1941 Mad. 675); Guruswami Thevan vs Emperor and Bamdhin Brahmin vs Emperor (A.I.R. , disapproved.
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh vs State of Vindhya Pradesh ([1954] S.C.R. 1098) and Abdul Kader vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1946 Cal.
452), referred to.
Per JAGANNADHADASJ.
Differentiation between the evidence of a Police Officer and that of Panch witnesses and identifying witnesses relating to the fact of prior identification in a parade held by a Police Officer on the ground of the latter being corroborative evidence, is unsound and inadmissible, and the evidence of the 905 Panch witnesses and identifying witnesses relating to the fact of prior identification would be inadmissible even as corroborative evidence.
Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act is based on the view that if a fact is actually discovered in consequence of information given, some guarantee is afforded thereby that the information was true and accordingly can be safely allowed to be given in evidence.
But clearly the extent of the information admissible must depend on the exact nature of the fact discovered to which such information is required to relate.
Kottaya vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1947 P.O. 67), referred to.
Where evidence was given by a Police Officer that "in conse quence of a certain statement made by the accused" and "at the instance of the accused", a tin box was dug out of a mud house, and the nature of the statement made or information given by the accused was not sought to be proved, section 27 was not attracted and prima facie there was nothing to prevent the evidence being admitted against the accused concerned.
Durlav Namasudra vs Emperor ([1931] I.L.R. , referred to.
Per JAGANNADHADAS J.
There is considerable force in the objection that when a Police Officer speaks to a discovery being made "at the instance of the accused" or "in consequence of information given by the accused", the prosecution cannot be permitted to rely on such evidence without placing the admissible portion of the information on record.
The information given by the accused in such a situation may be such as, on scrutiny, might show only his remote connection and not direct connection with the objects recovered.
In such a situation, evidence of the bare fact of information having been given may cause serious prejudice.
Summing up to the Jury does not mean merely giving a summary of the evidence.
The Judge should marshall the evidence so as to bring out the lights and the shades, the probabilities and improbabilities, so as to give proper assistance to the Jury who are to decide which view of the facts is true.
The charge should not consist of along rambling repetition of the evidence, without any attempt to marshall the facts under appropriate heads, or to assist the Jury to sift and weigh the evidence so that they may be in A. position to understand which are the really important parts of the evidence and which are of secondary importance.
Ilu vs Emperor (A.I.R. and Nabi Khan vs King Emperor (A.I.R. , referred to.
Held, that as regards accused 4 there had been an error of law in admitting evidence of the test identification parades relating to him.
The admission of such inadmissible evidence would amount to a misdirection; but misdirection by itself would not be a ground for reversal under a. 537 of the Code unless such misdirection had in fact occasioned a failure of justice, nor is reception 906 of evidence inadmissible under section 162 of the 'Code necessarily fatal.
The Appellate Court has to see whether the reception of inadmissible evidence influenced the mind of the Jury so seriously as to lead them to a conclusion which might have been different but for its reception.
What the Appellate Court should do is to exclude the inadmissible evidence from the record and consider whether the balance of evidence is sufficient to maintain the conviction.
The Court of Appeal should take the whole case into consideration and determine for itself whether the verdict of the Jury was justified or whether there had in fact been a failure of justice.
The Court of Appeal is entitled to substitute its own verdict for the verdict of the Jury if on examining the record for itself it comes to the conclusion that the verdict of the Jury was erroneous or that there had been a failure of justice in the sense that a guilty man has been acquitted or an innocent man his been convicted.
Abdul Rahim vs King Emperor ((1946) L.R. 73 I.A. 77, Mushtaq Hussain vs State of Bombay ([19531 S.C.R. 809), Ilu vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1934 Cal, 847); Nabi Khan vs Emperor (A.I.R. ; Khabiruddin vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1943 Cal. 644) ; Surendra Dinda vs Emperor (A.I.R. and Mathews vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1940 Lahore 87), referred to.
