L had two sons G and M. L. and his elder son G were granted a Jagir by the then Ruler of Kotah jointly in their names, in lieu of a debt which the Ruler owed to them.
This property was treated as property of the joint family of L.
The name of M, the second son born after the grant, was also mutated against the Jagir villages.
The names of the descendants of G and M were from time to time similarly mutated against the Jagir and this Jagir as well as other property of the joint family was managed for some time by the eldest member belonging to either branch of the family.
The respondent C was a descendant of G and claimed in 1937 before the Revenue Commissioner that as the eldest son in the eldest branch he alone had the right over the Jagir according to the custom and usage in Rajputana and, consequently, mutation in the records should be in his name alone.
On a report by the Revenue Commissioner, the Ruler passed an order on 22nd January, 1938, directing that the Jagir, like all other Jagirs in the State should be given the status of an impartible estate and should be liable to render 'Chakri ' and 'Subchintki ' to the Ruler.
It was further ordered that the Jagir would be governed by the rule of primogeniture, so that C alone would be held to be jagirdar.
The appellants, who were the descendants of M, sought partition of all the family properties including the villages in the Jagir.
Although the Trial Court dismissed the suit, on appeal, the High Court granted a decree in respect of other properties but upheld the dismissal of the suit in so far as the appellants had claimed a share in the Jagir.
The appellants claimed that the jagir having been joint Hindu property, their rights as successors in interest of M could not be defeated by the order of Ruler dated 22nd January, 1938, and consequently, the appellants were entitled to their proper share in the Jagir.
It was contended that all orders passed by an independent and sovereign Ruler do not have the force of law.
It is only those orders which purport to lay down a law for the State which cannot be challenged and which would remain in force even after the merger of the Kotah State in India and, after the enforcement of the Constitution, under article 372 of the Constitution.
It was submitted that, when passing the Order dated 22nd January, 1938, the Ruler was only exercising executive powers of directing mutation of names and was not exercising any legislative powers.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal.
(i) The High Court was right in holding that the villages in the Jagir, at the time when the suit for partition was ' instituted, were impartible 838 property governed by the law of primogeniture and C alone could be treated as the owner of these villages.
(ii)The very nature of the Order, which changed the law applicable to the Jagir, indicated that it was a legislative act and not a mere executive order.
The Ruler did not purport to lay down that the Jagir was already governed by the 'rule of primogeniture; what he did was to apply the rule of primogeniture to this Jagir for future.
Such an order could only be made in exercise of his prerogative of laying down the law for the State.
The mere fact that it was laid down for one single Jagir and was not a general law applicable to others in the State was immaterial, because it does not appear that there were any other similar Jagirs which also required alteration of the law applicable to them.
L843 B D] (iii)Although no special procedure of law making was adopted by the Ruler when making this Order, that circumstance could not change the nature of the Order specially when there was nothing to indicate that there was any recognised procedure of law making in the Kotah State at that ,time.
[844 F G] Rajkumar Narsingh Pratap Singh Deo vs State of Orissa and Another ; ; referred to.
State of Gujarat, vs Vora Fiddali Badruddin Mithibarwala ; and Major Ranjit Singh Rao Phalke vs Smt.
Raja Bai Sahiba (dead) by her legal representatives and Vice Versa Civil Appeal Nos.
982 :and 983 of 1964 decided on 18th July, 1967 ; distinguished.
