The appellants companies set up their factories within an "Industrial Area", No octroi duty was payable in respect of goods imported by the appellants into the Industrial Area for use in the manufacture of its products.
The State of Maharashtra constituted a Municipality for certain villages including the Industrial Area.
On representations made by the appellants and other manufacturers, the State proclaimed the exclusion of the Industrial Area from the Municipal Jurisdiction.
The Municipality made representations to the State requesting that the proclamation, be withdrawn, agreeing to exempt the factories in the Industrial Area from payment of octroi for seven years from the date of the levy.
The State acceeded to the request of the Municipality.
The appellants claimed to expand their activities relying upon the Municipality 's assurance and undertaking.
The Maharashtra Municipalities Act was enacted and the respondent Municipality took over the administration of the former municipality as its successor.
Thereafter, the respondent Municipality sought to levy octroi duty on the appellant amounting to about Rs. 15 lakhs per annum.
The appellants filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution to restrain the respondent Municipality from enforcing the levy of the Octroi.
The High Court dismissed the petition in limine.
In appeal by special leave, HELD : The case must be remanded to the High Court for being readmitted to its file and dealt with and disposed of according to law.
The High Court may, in exercise of its discretion, decline to exercise its extra ordinary jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution.
But the discretion is judicial; if the petitioner makes a claim which is frivolous, vexatious, or prima facie unjust or which may not appropriately be true in a petition invoking extraordinary jurisdiction, the Court may decline to entertain the petition.
But a party claiming to be aggrieved by the action of a public body or authority on the plea that the action is unlawful, highhanded, arbitrary or unjust is entitled to a hearing of its petition on the merits.
Apparently the petition filed by the Company did not raise any complicated questions of fact for determination, and the claim could not be characterised as frivolous, vexatious or unjust.
The High Court has given no reason for dismissing the petition in limine, and on a consideration of the averments in the petition and the materials placed before the Court the appellants were entitled to have its grievance against the action of the Municipality, which was prima facie unjust, tried.
Merely because a question of fact is raised, the High Court will not be justified in requiring the party to seek relief by the somewhat lengthy, dilatory and expensive process by a civil suit against a public body.
The questions of fact raised by the petition in this case are elementary.
[858 C F] Public bodies are as much bound as private individuals to carry out representations or facts and promises made by them, relying on which 855 other persons have altered their position to their prejudice.
The obligation arising against an individual out of his representation amounting to a promise may be enforced ex contractu by a person who acts upon the promises when the law requires that a contract enforceable at law against a public body shall be in certain form or be executed in the manner prescribed by statute and if the contract be not in that form the obligation may still be enforced against the body in appropriate cases, in equity.
[859 D] If our nascent democracy is to thrive different standards "of conduct ,for the people and the public bodies cannot ordinarily be permitted.
A public body is not exempt from liability to carry out its obligation arising out of representations made by it relying upon which a citizen has altered his position to his prejudice.
[860 D] There is undoubtedly a clear distinction between a representation of an existing fact and a representation that something will be done in future.
The former may, if it amounts to a representation as to some fact alleged at the time to be actually in existence, raise an estoppel if another person alters his position relying upon that representation A representation that something will be done in future may result in a contract, if another person to whom it is addressed acts upon it.
A representation that something will be done in future is not a representation that it is true when made.
But between a representation of a fact which is untrue and a representation express or implied to do something in future there is no clear anti thesis.
A representation that something will be done in future may involve an existing intention to act in future in the manner represented.
If the representation is acted upon by another person it may, unless the statute governing the person making the representation provides otherwise, result in an agreement enforceable at law; if the statute requires that the agreement shall be in a certain form, no contract may result from the representation and acting thereupon but the law is not powerless to raise in appropriate cases an equity against him to compel performance of the obligation arising out of his representation.
[858 H 859 C] Union of India & Ors.
vs M/s. Indo Afghan Agencies Ltd., ; Robertson vs Minister of Pensions, ; Falmouth Board Construction Co. Ltd. vs Howell, , referred to.
