On search of the appellant 's premises foodgrains above quantities permitted under the Bihar Foodgrain Dealer 's Licensing Order 1966 were found.
He was prosecuted under section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act for violation of cl. 3 of the Order.
The appellant produced oral and documentary evidence to show that he was an agriculturist and therefore the presumption tinder cl.
3(2) of the order that he had stored the foodgrains for sale could not be drawn against him.
The documentary evidence aforesaid consisted of lease deeds executed by the appellant and his brother in favour of lessees.
The oral evidence showed that he, and his brother were in possession of 80 90 bighas of land on which the foodgrains found in his possession were grown.
The documentary evidence was rejected by the trial magistrate on the ground that the lease deeds not being registered were not admissible in evidence under section 49 of the Registration Act.
The Sessions Judge in appeal did not 'rely on the lease deeds for the reason that such documents could be brought into existence at any time.
Both the trial magistrate and the Sessions Judge rejected the oral evidence as unreliable because it was given by persons who were next door neighbours and as such interested in the appellant.
The appellant 's revision petition before the High Court was summarily rejected.
By special leave he appealed to this Court.
HELD : (i) Cl.
3(2) of the Order expressly excludes bona fide consumers and agriculturists from the presumption to be drawn from proof of storage only.
It is obvious that the sub clause speaks of storage for sale as a dealer although the words 'as a deal& ' are not there because storage has reference to business as a dealer and that is the essence of the order.
The fiction in the second sub clause must be carried to its, logical conclusion.
[902 B] ii) No doubt the lease deeds were not registered but in a criminal case it had to he seen whether they were genuine or not and whether, an inference of innocence could be based ' on them They served the collateral purpose of showing that the lands about which the witnesses spoke orally were held by him for purposes of cultivation.
[902 D] (iii) There is no reason why the evidence of a next door neighbour should be rejected unless there is something intrinsically wrong with it.
[902 E F] (iv)The total circumstances in the case showed that the appellant was in fact carrying on agricultural operations.
He executed a number of lease deeds, produced receipts and proved by or a evidence that he 900 was an agriculturist.
In his case therefore the presumption under cl.
3(2) could not be drawn.
If that presumption was not drawn, the case against him stood unproved because of the exemption which agriculturists enjoy.
[902 F G] The appeal must accordingly be allowed.
Manipur Adminisration vs M. Nila Chandra Singh, [1964] 5 S.C.R.574.
referred to and explained.
