As condition precedent to the applicability of section 10 A of the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, it must be proved that during the chargeable accounting period the assessee was carrying on the kind of business to which the Act applies by virtue of section 5 of the Act.
Section 2(5) of the Act states what is included in the word "business".
It is not possible to lay down a general definition which would cover all cases of business.
Business involves the fundamental idea of a continuous activity.
It connotes some real, substantial and systematic or organised course of activity with a set purpose.
Single isolated transaction may also bear the clear indicia of trade or an adventure in the nature of trade which is included in the word "buisiness" mentioned in section 2(5) of the Act.
Hence whether a particular source of income is business or not must be decided on the facts and circumstances of each case according to our ordinary conception of business.
Since 1935 the assessee firm carried on the business of manufacturing ribbons and laces and for this purpose owned buildings, leasehold rights, plant, machinery etc.
On April 7, 1940, a public limited liability company was incorporated with the object of acquiring and taking over the buildings, leasehold rights, plant, machinery etc.
, from the assessee firm.
The company purchased leasehold rights in the lands and buildings where plant, machinery etc. were installed.
The assesses firm as such ceased to manufacture ribbons and laces and was left with plant and machinery etc.
which it did not require and which ceased to be commercial asset in the hands of the firm.
The land and the buildings having been sold the assessee firm put it out of its power to use the plant, machinery etc.
In these circumstances the company took and the assessee firm granted a lease of the plant, machinery etc., at an annual rent of Rs. 40,000.
Held, that this lease of the plant, machinery etc., given by the assesses firm could not be "business" within the meaning of section 2(5) of the Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940.
953 Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, Bombay City vs Shri Lakshmi Silk Mills Ltd. ([1952] S.C.R. 1), distinguished.
Inland Revenue Commissioner vs Broadway Car Co., Ltd. ([1946] 2 A.E.R. 609), relied upon.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace & Co., ([1932] I.L.R. , referred to.
