The appellant filed a suit in 1946 claiming to be the nearest heir to his maternal uncle G, who died in 1934.
S defendant No. 1 (the predecessor of the respondents) resisted the suit on the ground that he had been adopted by G on the very day he was born in 1892.
Close relations of the wife of G deposed that after the birth of S, the wife of G took him to her paternal home where Paon Pheri ceremony was performed, as was customary in that family.
The application for admission to the school recited that S was the son of G, and it was signed by G. G deposed before courts that S was his son.
S filed a nomination paper, proposed by G mentioning that his father was G.
In income tax assessment which proceeded on the basis that G and S formed a H.U.F. of which G was the karta, the professional income of S was added.
Then there were admissions of the appellant in Courts after the death of G that S was the proprietor of the firm of G.
In other application for transfers, the appellant described S as son of G.
But there was a decree of a Court in 1990 where S was described as son of his natural father.
The trial court decreed the suit, but the High Court reversed that decree.
The High Court held on the evidence that S was validly adopted by G, though S had not been able to establish the custom pleaded by him, nor was he able to adduce any satisfactory evidence about the actual adoption but he has produced considerable documentary evidence to show that G was treating him for over a quarter of century as his son; then there was also plenty of reliable evidence to show that close relations including the, appellant treated S as the son of G both during the life time of G and also, thereafter till about the time the suit was instituted.
HELD : A person who seeks to displace the natural succession to property by alleging an adoption must discharge the burden that lies upon him by proof of the factum of adoption and its validity.
In order that an adoption may be valid under the Hindu law, there must be a formal ceremony of giving and taking.
This is true of the regenerate castes as well as of the Sudras.
Although no particular form is prescribed for the ceremony, the law required that the natural parent should hand over the adoptive boy and the adoptive parent must receive him, the nature of the ceremony varying according to the circumstances.
[105 A D] Although the person who pleads that he had been adopted is bound to prove his title as adopted son, as a fact yet from the long period during which he had been received as an adopted son, every 'allowance for the absence of evidence to prove such fact was to be favourably entertained.
The case was analogous to that in which the legitimacy of a person in possession had been acquiesced in for a considerable time, and afterwards impeached by a party, who had a right to question the legitimacy, where the defendant, in order to defend his status, is allowed to invoke against the claimant every presumption which arises from long recognition of his 102 legitimacy by members of his family.
In the case of a Hindu long recognition as an adopted son, raised even a stronger presumption in favour of the validity of his adoption, arising from the possibility of the loss of his rights in his own family by being adopted in another family.
In the absence of direct evidence much value has to be attached to the fact that the alleged adopted son had without controversy succeeded to his adoptive 'father 's estate and enjoyed till his death and that documents during his life and after his death were framed upon the basis of the adoption.
[106 B F] On the evidence, S was the adopted son of G and there was nothing to show that the said adoption was invalid for any reason.
While considering the question of the proof of adoption pleaded, the 'fact that the suit was filed nearly 54 years after the alleged adoption had taken place must be borne in mind.
Therefore, naturally it was extremely difficult far the adopted son to adduce any oral evidence in proof of that adoption.
Addagada Raghavamma and anr.
vs Addagada Chenchamma and anr.
2 S.C.R. 933; Lakshman Singh Kothari vs Smt.
Rup Kanwar ; ; applied.
Rajendrao Nath Holder vs Jogendro Nath Banerjee and ors.
14, Moore 's Indian Appeals p. 67, approved.
