The respondent Municipality, which at the time was governed by the Bombay District Municipal Act 3 of 1901 levied a tax on lands and buildings situated within its municipal limits at 4 per cent of the annual rental value.
However, no such tax was levied on the buildings and lands of the G.I.P. Railway situated within its limits in view of section 135 of the Indian Railways Act, 9 of 1890.
In 1914,the Government of India issued a notification under section 135 persuant to which the G.I.P. Railway administration was required to pay house tax to the respondent.
Upto 1916 the respondent municipality used to draw water from the Railway 's reservoir but constructed its own reservoir during that year.
Both prior to and after this date, no water rate was charged by the respondent municipality from the railway.
On 4th May, 1916 the respondent promulgated new rules for taxation and instead of charging separate house tax under section 59(1)(i) or a general water rate under section 59(1) (viii) of the Act of 1901, it decided to charge a consolidated tax assessed as a rate on buildings and lands in accordance with clause (c) of the proviso to section 59(i).
Although the respondent demanded this consolidated tax from the railway in respect of its lands and buildings, the railway resisted payment contending that under the notification of 1914, house tax only was payable by it.
On 26th July, 1917, the Government of India issued a fresh notification under section 135 of the Railways Act whereby the railway administration was rendered liable to pay what was described as "tax on lands and buildings".
Thereafter the respondent charged the railway the consolidated tax until some time in 1927 when the G.I.P. railway was taken over by the Government.
In the rules promulgated on 4th May, 1916, the consolidated tax was not chargeable on Government property.
Relying on this provision, an objection was raised that the charge of tax was illegal when the railway had become Government property.
The respondent Municipality amended its rules and promulgated fresh rules on 6th October, 1931 under the provisions of the Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act 18 of 1925 under which enactment the respondent municipality had by that time been constituted into a Borough.
Under these rules the exemption in respect of Government property was deleted.
In pursuance of these amended rules the respondent started collecting from the railway the consolidated tax assessed as a rate on its buildings and lands which was by then being levied under the provisions of s.73 of the Act of 1925 that were similar to those of s.59 of the Act of 1901.
In 1940 the railway administration preferred an appeal under section 110 of the Act of 1925 against one of the demand notices.
Although the 921 First Court set aside the demand notice, an appeal was eventually dismissed by the High Court with the remark that the proper remedy to be sought was by means of a suit.
The Union of India which had become the owner of the railway, field a suit in November 1954 for refund of the entire amount which was collected by the respondent from the railway in pursuance of the rules of 1931.
The, Trial Court granted a decree holding that the levy of this tax was void inasmuch as, under the notification issued on the 26th July, 1917, only the rate on lands and buildings was payable by the Railway Administration.
On appeal, the High Court disagreed with the trial court and set aside the decree.
, Oil appeal to this Court by a certificate under article 133 of the Constitution.
HELD : Dismissing the appeal, On the proper interpretation of the language used in two Acts, the Rules, the notification, and taking into account the circumstances under which the notification of 1917 was issued, the only conclusion that could be arrived at was that the Railway was made liable to the consolidated tax.
It is true that all taxes are not rates; but all rates are taxes.
A rate on buildings and lands is a tax on buildings; so also any other tax assessed as a rate on buildings and lands becomes a tax on buildings and lands.
It was not possible to accept the submission of the appellant that the expression "tax on buildings and lands" used in the notification of 26th July, 1917 could only refer to a rate on buildings and lands under clause (i) of section 59(1) and would not cover the consolidated tax referred to in clause (c) of the second proviso.
Although the tax under clause (c) of the second proviso is not identical with and is different in nature from,the rate on buildings and lands imposed under clause (i), that circumstance does not imply that it is not a tax on buildings and lands.
The mere use of the word "consolidated" cannot make any difference to this interpretation.
The intention appears to be that, though the Municipality was empowered to impose four different kinds of taxes, it was permitted under clause (c) of the second proviso to simplify matters by having a single tax on buildings and lands in lieu of those multiple .axes.
Such single tax had to be assessed as a rate on buildings and lands.
This being the nature, it obviously becomes a tax on buildings and lands, so that the notification of 26th July, 1917 clearly makes the Railway liable to payment of this tax.
The position under the Act of 1925 is exactly the same where also the language of clause (c) to the second proviso is identical with that contained in the Act of 1901, so that the liability imposed on the Railway by the notification of the Government dated 26th July, 1917 under section 135(1) of the Railways Act continued even under the Act of 1925.
[927 B H] Borough Municipality, Ahmedabad vs Ahmedabad Manufacturing and Calico Printing Co. Ltd., ; Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. Rampur vs Municipal Board, Rampur, A.I.R. 1962 Alld.
83, Municipal Council, Cuddappah vs M.,& S.M. Ry.
Co. Ltd., A.IR and Patel Gordhandas Hargovindas vs Municipal Commissioner, Ahmedabad, ; ; referred to.
