The appellants were charged with the offences of criminal conspiracy and criminal breach of trust in respect of 80 bags of wheat.
They were ,convicted by the High Court for various offences under the Penal Code and the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The evidence disclosed that there were some irregularities in the matter of keeping the records relating to storage of stocks at the storage sheds.
It was therefore contended in .appeal by special leave, to this Court, that the evidence should be reviewed to see if the prosecution had established by unimpeachable evidence that the 80 bags were in fact not received at the storage shed and, that no presumption should be drawn against the appellants for their failure to give evidence as to where and to whom the bags were delivered.
HELD : Non appearance of an accused as a witness in his own defence does not give rise to any presumption against him.
[141 C] HELD, also : Negative onus can also be discharged by circumstantial evidence if it is trustworthy and with unerring certainty establishes facts and circumstances, the combined effect of which leads to the only safe inference of guilt.
The court has, however, to be watchful to ensure that conjectures or suspicions do not take the place of proof.
The chain ,of circumstantial evidence must be complete and admit of no reasonable conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused.
[141 E F] HELD further : under article 136 this Court does not normally proceed to review the evidence in criminal cases unless the trial is vitiated by some illegality or material irregularity of procedure or the trial is held in violation of rules of natural justice resulting in unfairness to the accused or the judgment or order under appeal has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice.
This Article reserves to this Court a special discretionary power to interfere in suitable cases when for special reasons it considers that interference is called for in the larger interests of justice.
[145 A C] HELD further : This Article cannot be so construed as to confer ,on a party right of appeal where none exists under the law.
[145 C] In the present case there were irregularities in the storage records and the evidence was looked into see if the charge as framed was proved.
[145 C D] [An examination of the entire evidence, oral and documentary, however, showed, that there was enough evidence to support the conviction and that the irregularities were unimportant.] [145 A] Chidda Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, Cr. A. No. 125 of 1967 dt. 12 1 1968, referred to.
