In September, 1953, the first respondent applied for a mining lease for over 900 acres in the then Hyderabad State.
He was granted a lease of about 57 acres in January, 1954 by an order of the State Government which was silent as regards the other areas included in his application.
While the respondent kept pressing ' for a lease of the remaining areas, the State Government began to grant, some of these areas to other persons including the appellant.
Meanwhile,, on December 8, 1955, the respondent moved the Central Government under Rule 57 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1949, seeking a direction to the State to grant to him the lease of the areas sought by him and to stop granting further areas to other applicants.
This review petition was dismissed on the basis that the order of the State Government granting only 57 acres by implication amounted to a rejection of the respondent 's claim for the balance area.
On September 15, 1956, the Mineral Concession Rules were amended and a new sub rule 28(1) (A) was introduced which provided that every application under Rule 27 shall be disposed of within 9 months from the date of its receipt.
The amended Rule 57 provided that the failure of the State Government to dispose of an application within the prescribed period would be deemed to be a refusal to grant a lease and that the aggrieved person may, within two months, apply to the Central Government for a review.
A further amendment of Rule 57(2) provided that any application pending with the State Government an 14th September, 1956 and remaining undisposed of on the 24th August, 1957, shall be disposed of by the State Government within 6 months from the latter date.
Prior to this amendment the respondent had filed another review petition before the Central Government and on September 26, 1957, that petition was dismissed by the Government as being premature; this was on the basis that the respondent 's original application was pending on 31st August, 1957, and the period of 6 months from that date, as prescribed by the amended Rule 57(2) had not yet expired.
The respondent then moved the High Court by a petition under Article 226.
making the State Government alone party and seeking a writ of mandamus to the Government to dispose of his application of September, 1953, expeditiously.
The High Court allowed this petition and did not accept the contention, on behalf of the State Government that in view of section 57(2) the respondent 's application must be L11Sup CI/11 154 deemed to have been rejected.
it held that section 57(2) was intended to be for the benefit of the applicant and did not relieve the State Government from performing the statutory function imposed on it under rule 17 of granting or refusing the licence.
During the pendency of the first petition, the respondent had also filed a second petition seeking the same relief and this was disposed of in August, 1959 on the basis of a statement by the Government Advocate that the State Government was prepared to dispose of the first respondent 's application on the merits without relying on rule 57(2).
By an order on May 27, 1961, the State Government granted on.
mining lease to the, respondent all the areas for which he had applied in September, 1953 excluding those areas which had been earlier leased to others.
, However.
the Central Government allowed a review petition under Rule 57 filed by the appellant and set aside the order on the ground that the application made by the appellant, the first respondent, as well as others which were pending before the State Government 'should be deemed to have been rejected on 1st March, 1958 in view of rule 57(2).
The 1st respondent then challenged this order by a writ petition in the High Court which was allowed and the order was quashed.
The court held that rule 57(2) was enacted only for the benefit of the applicants and did not take away the power of the State Government to dispose of applications even after expiry of the prescribed period; that in view of the Government Advocate 's concession the State Government Was stopped from contending that the respondent 's application of September, 1953 must be deemed to have 'been refused; and furthermore that in view of the writ of mandamus issued in the first writ petition, the State Government was bound to consider the application of the 1st respondent and the decision of the State Government taken in obedience to the order of the High Court could not have been set aside by the Central Government.
HELD : (Per Hedge and Grover, JJ); The appeal must be allowed (By the Court) (1) Reading rule 28 (1 A) and rule 57 (2) together, there is no doubt that after the period prescribed, the State Government is incompetent to deal with the applications ' pending before it.
The High Court was, therefore, wrong in holding that even if an application stands rejected for failure to pass an order within the time prescribed, the State Government has power to issue a licence.
[164 C] Dey Gupta & Company vs State of Bihar A.I.R. 1961 Pat. 487; referred to.
(2) There can be no estoppel against a statute.
Rule 28(1 A) and rule 57(2) are statutory rules.
They bind the Government as much as they bind others.
The requirement of those rules cannot be waived by the State Governments.
Therefore the fact that the Government Advocate represented to the Court that the 1st respondent 's application was still pending could not change the legal position nor could it confer on the State Government any power to act in contravention of those rules.
[165 A B] (3)Per Hegde and Grover JJ.); As far as the State Government was concerned the writ issued was binding whether the decision rendered by the Court was correct in law or not; but that decision could not bind the appellant or the Central Government who were not parties to that writ petition.
It was not a judgment in rem.
In obedience to the writ issued by the court, the State Government did consider the 155 application of the 1st respondent and granted him the lease asked for by him.
The Central Government had been constituted as the revisional authority under rule 57.
That authority is a quasi judicial body created by statutory rules.
It is bound by law to discharge the duties imposed on it by rule 57.
Therefore it had to obey the mandate of rule 57.
In so doing it cannot be said that it had infringed the mandamus issued by the High Court.
[165 D F] (Per Shah J, dissenting) : The appeal must be dismissed, Granting that the High Court erroneously issued a writ of mandamus directing the State Government to perform its functions it was, not open to the Central Government in effect to exercise appellate authority over the judgment of the High Court.
To accede to the contention that the executive has the power, when exercising quasi judicial functions, to sit in appeal over the decision of the High Court is to destroy the scheme of division of powers under our Constitution.
There was no distinction between the effect of an order made by the High Court and carried out by the State, and an order made by the High Court and confirmed in appeal by this Court and carried out by the State.
Article 141 of the Constitution has no bearing on that question.
If this Court decided a question of law or of fact or a mixed question of law and fact arising in an appeal against an order passed by the High Court in a writ petition against the action of the State Government granting or refusing to grant a licence, it would not be open to the Central Government, hearing a review petition against the order of the State Government in compliance with the order of this Court, to set aside the order so as to upset the order of this Court.
[156 H] It is well settled that a person who has not been made a party to a proceeding may still appeal with leave of the Appellate Court provided he might have properly been made 'a party to the proceeding.
The appellant could undoubtedly have been made a party to the petition before the High Court.
He could, therefore, challenge the correctness of the order and no objection could be raised against the granting of leave to him to appeal on the ground that he was not a party to the writ petition.
C] Re.
"B" an Infant C.A., The Province of Bombay vs Western India Automobile Association I.L.R. ; Ponnalagu vs State of Madras I.L.R. [1953] Mad. 808; Pullayya vs Nagbhushanain I.L.R. F.B.; referred to.
