Gift tax was levied under the Gift Tax Act, 1958, on gifts, of coffee plantations, paddy and other agricultural lands and buildings, made by the respondents.
The Gift Tax Act was enacted by Parliament but there is no entry in the Union or Concurrent Lists mentioning such a tax.
The High Court held that Parliament was not competent to enact a law impos ing a gift tax on lands and buildings, because, entries 18 and 49 of the State List reserved the power to State Legislatures.
On appeal to this Court.
HELD : The Constitution divides the topics of legislation into three broad categories : (a) entRies enabling laws to be made, (b) entries enabling taxes to be imposed, and (c) entries enabling fees and stamp duties to be collected.
The taxes are separately mentioned and contain the whole of the power of taxation, except entry 97 of the Union List under which, Parliament ha, , exclusive power to make a law in respect of any matter not enumerated in the Concurrent or State Lists and the power includes the power of making a law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of the Lists.
[199 G H] Entry 18 of the State List dealing with 'land ', though very wide, does not therefore confer any power of taxation and cannot authorise a tax not expressly mentioned.[199 H] Entry 49 of the State List contemplates a tax directly levied bY reason of the general ownership of lands and buildings.
But the pith and substance of the Gift Tax Act,is to place the tax on the gift of property which may include land, and buildings.
It is not a tax imposed directly upon lands and buildings but is a tax upon the value of the total gifts made in a year which is above the exempted limit.
The lands and buildings are valued only as a measure of the value of the gift and what is taxed is the gift.
A gift tax is thus not a tax on lands and buildings as such but is a levy upon a particular use, namely, the transmission of title by gift.
[200 A E] There being no other entry in the State List which might cover a gift tax, the residuary powers of Parliament under article 248, and entry 97 of the Union List, could be exercised by Parliament to enact the law.
[200 E F] Sudhir Chandra Nawn vs Wealth Tax Officer, Calcutta & Ors. followed.
section Dhandapani vs Addl.
Gift Tax Officer, Cuddalore, , Shyam Sunder vs Gift Tax Officer, A.I.R. 1967 All. 19, Jupadi Sesharatnam vs Gift Tax officer, Palacole, and Joseph vs Gift Tax, Officer, , approved.
