On 4th January, 1969 the Joint Registrar, Cooperative Societies issued a notice under section 72 of the Madras Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 to the committee of the North Arcot District Cooperative Supply and Marketing Society Ltd.
After examining the representation made by the committee in reply to the notice, the Registrar recorded an order on 11 th April, 1969 holding that the committee had not been functioning properly and had failed to perform its duties and discharge its responsibilities as required under the Act.
The committee was ordered to be suspended for a period of one year and the Deputy Registrar of Cooperative Society ties was appointed to work as Special Officer to manage its affairs.
The matter was taken in appeal to the Registrar, who affirmed the order of the Joint Registrar.
Thereafter the President and Director of the Co operative Society moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The writ petition was allowed by a Single Judge on the view that an order under section 72(1) can be passed only after the procedure under sections 64, 65 & 66 of the Act has been followed.
The Full Bench to which the matter was referred in Letters Patent Appeal took the same view.
In appeal before this Court against the judgment of the High Court the questions that fell for consideration were : (1) Whether the Registrar before taking action under section 72 must have an audit made under section 64 and an inquiry held under section 65 and an inspection made under section 66 of the Act and must also give an opportunity for rectification of the defects which may come to light as a result of such audit, inquiry or inspection ? (2) What is the scope of interference by the High Court with the order of a Registrar made under section 72 of the Act ? HELD,:(1) (a) If the intention of the Legislature was that the supersession of the Committee under section 72 can be ordered by the Registrar only after recourse to sections 64, 65 & 66 there is no reason why language analogous to section 70(1) which expressly mentions sections 64 to 67 and section 85(1) which refers to sections 65 to 67 should not have been employed.
[234 B] All that is required by section 72(1) (a) is that the Registrar should form an opinion that the Committee of any Registered Society is not functioning properly or has wilfully disobeyed or 'failed to comply with any lawful order or direction issued by him.
The section cannot be read to mean that before forming an opinion as to the proper functioning of the society the Registrar must in the first instance issue a direction to remedy the defects disclosed as a result of the audit, inquiry or inspection, The functioning of the society may be so irregular and the defects so blatant and prejudicial to the society that no question can arise of any direction 228 being made in the first instance for their being remedied by the persons of officers concerned.
[234 D F] It may be that the opinion which the Registrar has to form must be based on some objective facts but those objective facts in the absence of any clear indication in section 72 cannot be confined to what may be disclosed after the Registrar has exercised his powers in the matter of audit, inquiry and inspection under the provisions of sections 64, 65 & 66.
The requisite opinion has indisputably to be formed honestly and after applying his mind by the Registrar to the relevant material before him.
The only condition precedent for taking action under section 72(1) is that provided in sub section (6), namely, that the Registrar must consult the financing bank to which the society is indebted.
No other requirement or condition precedent is laid down by the legislature,.
it was accordingly not possible to concur with the view taken by the High Court.
[235 A D] (b) The fact that one third of the members of the committee retire every year and new members have to be elected in their place could not lead to a different conclusion.
Section 72 is meant for superseding the committee as a whole.
Even if the operation of section 72 in certain circums tances is likely to operate harshly so far as the newly elected members of the committee are concerned, it is not possible to read into it other provisions of the Act which are not incorporated in the section expressly or by necessary implication.
[235 F H] (ii) There were no infirmities in the orders of the Joint Registrar or Registrar in the present case which could justify the interference by the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court could not act as an appellate court and reappraise and re examine the relevant facts and circumstances which led to the making of the orders of supersession.
[236 B]
