For a number of years prior to 1952 cycle bells manufactured by Lucas And other foreign concerns bearing the numbers '50 ' and other numerals were in the Indian market.
After 1952, the import of foreign bells was prohibited, and though foreign made bells with the numerals '50 ' were being sold as late as 1958, the sales were from the stock remaining out of the earlier imports and were few and far between.
In 1953, the respondent company got registered two trade marks in respect of cycle bells being the numeral '50 ' and the figure 'Fifty '.
The appellant companies were manufacturers and also dealers in cycle bells and were selling their cycle bells with the numeral '50 ' inscribed on them.
The respondent therefore, filed suits in 1959, against the appellants, alleging infringement of its trade marks.
In 1961, the appellants applied for stay of trial of the suits and filed applications in the High Court for rectification of the register by cancelling the trade marks of the respondent under section 56 of the .
A single Judge of the High Court, refused to expunge the trade mark 'Fifty ' but ordered the cancellation of the trade mark '50 '.
In appeals to the Division Bench of the High Court, the order cancelling the trade mark '50 ' was set aside.
In appeals to this Court, it was contended that : (1) the trade marks in question were common and not distinctive at the date of their registration as required by section 9(3), and therefore, ought never to have been registered; (2) that the numeral '50 ' is not distinctive; (3) that the use of the trade mark was likely to deceive or cause confusion and hence the registration should be cancelled under section 32(b) and section II (a); (4) that the respondent had imitated the use of the marks by Lucas and other foreign concerns that therefore they would be disentitled to protection under section 11(e) and hence the registration should be cancelled under section 32(h); and (5) that the trade marks were not, at the commencement of the proceedings, distinctive 'and hence liable to be cancelled under section 32(c).
HELD : (1) Under section 32(b) and (c) the original registration of the trade mark has, after the expiration of 7 years from the date of registration to be taken to be valid in all respects including in rectification applications under section 56 unless it is proved : (1) the trade mark was registered in contravention of the provisions of section 11 or offends against the provisions of that section on the date of the commencement of the proceeding or (2) that the trade mark was not, at the commencement of the proceedings distinctive of the goods of the registered proprietor.
Section 11(a) prohibits the registration of trade mark which would be likely to deceive or cause confusion, and section 11(e) prohibits the registration of trade marks if they were such that they were otherwise disentitled to protection in a court.
Section 71 56(2) confers a right on any person aggrieved by an entry made in the register without sufficient cause or by an entry wrongly remaining in the register, to apply for expunging or varying such an entry.
Since 'an aggrieved person ' includes a person who has, before registration, used the trade mark, and a person against whom an infringement action is taken, and the words 'without sufficient cause ' relate to the time of original registration,.
the appellant could apply for cancellation on the ground that the trade mark in question was not distinctive within the meaning of section 9(3).
But in view of the language of section 32, no contention could be raised in the present case, that the trade mark '50 ' and 'Fifty ' were not distinctive under section 9(3), that is, adapted to distinguish the cycle bells of the respondent, at the date of registration, as, seven years had elapsed since the date of the Registration.
[78 D F; 79 B H] Paine & Co. vs Doniells & Sons" Breweries Ltd. (1893) R.P.C. 217, 232, referred to.
(2) It is not an inflexible rule that except in the case of textile goods.
a mark consisting of a numeral is necessarily not distinctive and is not registerable.
[80 E] Kerly on Trade Marks, 9th End.
p. 284, and Reuiter vs Hublens, , referred to.
(3) Section 32(b) relates to facts existing both at the time of and after registration.
If the mark at the time of registration was likely to deceive or cause confusion or would otherwise be disentitled to protection of a court, and therefore, was, under section 11 (a) and (e) prohibited from being registered, the rule as to conclusiveness of the validity of the registration in section 32 cannot be invoked and that would also be so, if the trade mark at the date of commencement of rectification proceedings was such as to offend against the provisions of section 11.
[80F H] The sales of foreign bells with numeral '50 ' after 1953 were 'so few that they could hardly be considered as evidence for showing a likelihood of confusion or deception.
In fact the purchasers used to call those bells, not by the numerals, but by the manufacturers ' names.
As regards bells said to have been manufactured by one of the appellant companies since 1947 and bearing the numeral '50 ', no evidence was led to show either the extent of manufacture or sale between 1947 1953 or thereafter from which the High Court could be asked to draw any inference as to the likelihood of deception or confusion.
As against the voluminous sales of the respondent for the years 1949 1962, there was no corresponding evidence on behalf of the appellants indicating sales of their bells with number '50 ' from which any likelihood of confusion or deception could be deduced.
Therefore, section 11(a) was not attracted.[816 C, G H; 82 D F] (4) The true construction of section 11(e) is that even assuming that the trade marks in question were not distinctive and for that reason not registerable as not falling within section 9, that fact, by itself, would not mean that they became disentitled to protection in a court.
That is, although a mark cannot be registered because it is not distinctive as provided by section 9, such a mark is not for that reason only one, the registration of which is prohibited by section 11, because, the section lays down positive objection to registration, and not mere lack of qualification, by using the words disentitled to protection.
Therefore, unless the trade 'mark offends the provisions of section II, that is, offends any of the matters in cls.
(a) to (d) of section 11, or is disentitled to protection in a court under section 11(e), the rule 72 as to conclusiveness of the validity of registration embodied in section 32 applies.
In the present case, in fact, there was no evidence of any, fraud having been committed by the respondent at the time of the registration.
There was neither averment by the appellants nor evidence, that Lucas or any ,other foreign concern had obtained registration of trade marks of '50 ' or 'Fifty '. 'nose concerns merely used various numerals for distinguishing one type of bell from another manufactured by them and there was no question of any piracy by the respondent.
The trade mark had also be,come distinctive with respective to the respondent.
[82 F H; 84 D F] Imperial Tobacco Co. Ltd. vs De Pasquali & Co. 35 R.P.C. 186, referred to.
(5) The principle underlying section 32(c) is that property in a trade mark exists so long as it continues to be distinctive of the goods of the registered proprietor in the eyes of the public or a section of the public.
If the proprietor is not in a position to use the mark to distinguish his goods from those of others or has abandoned it or the mark has become so common in the market that it has ceased to connect him with his goods then there would be no justification for retaining the mark on the register.
Under section 32(c) the marks have to be distinctive at the 'commencement of the proceedings ', that is the proceedings in which the conclusive character of the ' Registration arises.
Therefore, it may be the date when a suit for infringement is filed by the proprietor of the trade mark or the date on which the rectification proceedings ;ire filed as a result of the suit.
Rights in a trade mark could be abandoned by the owner, but when such abandonment is sought to be inferred from the proprietors neglect to challenge infringement the character and extent of the trade of the infringers and their position would have to be reckoned in considering .whether the registered proprietor was barred by such neglect [84 F H; 85 A C, D E] In the present case, the progressive increase of the sales of the respondent 's bells from 1949 together with the evidence of witnesses of the respondent shows that the said trade marks distinguished the goods of the respondent from those of other manufacturers.
Also, whether the crucial date is taken as 1959 or 1961, the date of suit or the date of rectification proceedings, the evidence on record indicates that the trade marks were distinctive.
The respondent has all along been zealously trying to maintain its right, against all infringements.
There were no repeated breaches which went unchallenged by the respondent when known to the respondent.
Mere neglect in a few cases to proceed did not necessarily constitute abandonment, because, it was in respect of infringements which were not sufficient to affect the distinctiveness of the mark.
There was no .evidence to show that the use by others of the word 'Fifty ' or the numeral '50 ' was substantial and the plea that there was common use of the trade marks must fail.
Therefore, it is impossible to sustain the contention founded on section 32(c).
[86 A E] Re.
Farina, and Rowland vs Mitchell, , applied.
(6) The power to rectify under section 56 is discretionary and when such .discretion was properly exercised, a court of appeal would refuse to interfere.
But, in the present case, the single Judge did not appreciate the principles of sections, 11 and 32, and hence, the Division Bench was justified in setting aside his order.
