The appellant was convicted of the offence under section 302 I.P.C. Being a pauper he was defended by counsel at State expense.
The entire evidence was circumstantial and the dead body, when it was recovered, was in a, decomposed state and was incapable of identification.
Therefore, this Court, examined the evidence afresh, contrary to its settled practice and came to the conclusion that the evidence on record established the appellant 's guilt beyond all reasonable doubt.
With respect to three items of evidence, namely, (1) an extra judicial confession by the appellant to his nephew; (2) the 'recovery of the dead body as a result of the appellant 's statement; and (3) the conduct of the appellant in absconding immediately after the police suspected his complicity in the crime, HELD : (1) An unambiguous confession if admissible in evidence, and free from suspicion suggesting its falsity, is a valuable piece of evidence.
which possesses a high probative force because it emanates directly from the person committing the offence.
The Court, must however be satisfied that it is voluntary and was not the result of inducement, threat or promise as contemplated by section 24 of the Evidence Act and that the surrounding circumstances do not indicate that it was inspired by improper or collateral considerations.
For this purpose, the court must scrutinise all the relevant factors, such as the person to whom the confession is.
made, the time and place of making it, the circumstances in which it was made and finally, the actual words used.
[224 C] In the present case, the person to whom the extra judicial confession.
was made was not a person in authority and there was no question of any inducement, threat or promise.
Nor has any cogent reason been suggested as to why the appellant should have made an untrue confession within 24 hours of the disappearance of the deceased.
The appellant appears to have been impelled by some inner urge to take the assistance of his nephew to go to the place of occurrence and see what happened to the dead body, Such behaviours cannot be considered unnatural.
The confession is free from any taint which would throw suspicion on its voluntary character and it has a ring of truth in it.
The fact that during the investigation the nephew was also suspected of being involved in the murder would also not cast any doubt on the voluntary character of the confession or on its true nature, because, it was his knowledge derived from the confession that invited suspicion on him.
Further, though the evidence of the nephew does not require corroboration, the finding of the dead body and other articles and other evidence on record corroborate it in material particulars.
Therefore the confession to, the nephew is admissible in evidence and being true, deserves to be acted upon.
[224 E H] (2) When the nephew was suspected of complicity he would have in all probability, disclosed to the police the existence of the dead body and 216 the other articles at the place where they were actually found.
Therefore, it would, in the circumstances of the case, be unsafe to rely upon the information given by the accused, leading to the discovery of the dead body, for proving his 'guilt.
[225 D F] (3) Evidence of absconding is relevant as evidence of conduct under section 8 of the Evidence Act but the guilty mind of the accused is not the only conclusion that could be drawn by the Court, because, even innocent persons when suspected of grave crimes are tempted to evade arrest.
[225 G H]
