The appellant Corporation assessed the immovable properties of the respondents to property tax for the year 1964 65 and 1965 66 on the basis of the 'flat rate ' method under the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation Act, 1949.
The assessments were challenged in the High Court but the petitions were dismissed.
While appeals were pending in this Court, the appellant initiated proceedings for the recovery of the taxes and attached the properties of the respondents.
The respondents challenged the attachment proceedings but their petitions were again dismissed.
In appeals against those orders in this Court the respondents prayed for interim stay, but this Court did not grant stay because the appellant undertook to return the amounts if the respondents succeeded.
This Court thereafter allowed the appeals by the respondents.
Meanwhile an amending Act entitled the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation (Gujarat, Amendment) Act, 1968, was passed introducing section 152A into the 1949 Act, but that provision was not brought to the notice of this Court.
However, when.
the respondents demanded refund of the amounts illegally collected from them the appellant did not comply and hence the respondents moved the High Court again.
Those petitions were allowed and the appellant appealed to this Court.
While the appeals were pending, the Bombay Provincial Municipal Corporation (Gujarat Amendment and Validity Provisions) Ordinance, 1969, was passed and sub section
(3) was introduced in s 152A. HELD : Under section 152A before a Corporation can retain any amount collected as property tax, there must be an, assessment according to law.
But in the present case there Were no 'assessment orders in accordance with the provisions of the 1949 Act and the rules as amended by the, Amending Act, 1968.
Therefore, the appellant was not entitled to retain, the amounts collected as the section does not authorise the Corporation to retain amounts illegally collected.
[293 G; 294 D] (2) Sub Section (3) of section 152A, commands the Corporation to refuse to refund the amount illegally collected despite the orders of this Court and the High Court.
It markes a direct inroad into the judicial powers of the State.
The Legislatures under the Constitution have, within prescribed limits, powers to make laws prospectively as well as retrospectively.
By exercise of those powers the legislature can remove the basis of a decision rendered by a competent, court thereby rendering the decision ineffective.
But, no legislature in this Country has power to ask the instrumentalities of the State to disobey or disregard the decisions given by courts.
Therefore, section 152A(3), introduced by the Ordinance is repugnant to the Constitution.
1294 H; 295 A C; 297 F] Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Broach Borough Municipality [1970] 1 S.C.R. Mahal Chand Sethia vs State of West Bengal Cr.
No. 75/69 dt.
289 10 9 69 and Janpada Sabha, Chhindwara vs Central Provinces Syndicate Ltd. and State of Madhya Pradesh vs Amalgamated Coal Fields Ltd. ; , followed.
The apart it authorises the Corporation to retain the amounts illegally collected and ' treat them as loans, that is, authorises the collection of forced loans which is impermissible under the Constitution.
State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ranojirao Shinde, [1968] 3 S.C.R. 489, followed.
