The Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Wealth Tax confirmed an orde Passed by the Wealth Tax Officer as regards the method adopted by the latter in dealing with a claim for depreciation allowance made by the appellant company in the course of its assessment to wealth tax.
The appellant company thereafter moved revision applications before the Com, missioner under section 25 of the Wealth Tax Act and the Commissioner rejected these applications on the basis of certain directions issued by the Board of Revenue.
On appeal to this Court by special Leave, HELD : The order passed by the Commissioner must be, set aside and 'the revision applications must be heard and disposed of according to law and uninfluenced by any instructions or directions given by the Board of Revenue.
[307 G H] It Was clear, on the facts, that from the inception of the proceedings, the Commissioner put himself in communication with the Board of Central Revenue and sought instructions from that authority 'as to bow the, revision applications filed before him should be decided.
He had exercised no independent judgment.
The Commissioner appeared to have misapprehended the true character of the jurisdiction with which he is by the Act entrusted and surrendered his judgment to the directions of the Board of Revenue.
[306 F G; 307 E G] The power conferred by section 25 is not administrative : it is quasi judicial.
In exercise of this power the Commissioner must bring to bear an unbiased mind.
consider impartially the objections raised by the aggrieved party.
and decide the dispute according to procedure consistent with the principles of natural justice; he cannot permit his judgement to be influenced by matters not disclosed to the assesseee, nor by dictation of another authority.
Any orders or instructions given by the Board and required to be followed under section 13 by officers employed in the, execution of the Act may control the exercise of their power in matters administralive but not quasi judicial.
Although the proviso to section 13, which.
is somewhat obscure in its import, enacts that no orders shall be given by the Board so as to interfere with the discretion of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner in the exercise of his appellate functions, it does not thereby imply that the Board may give such orders to the Wealth Tax Officer or to the Commissioner in exercise of his quasi judicial function, Such an interpretation would be plainly contrary to the scheme of the Act and the nature of the power conferred upon the authorities invested with quasijudicial power.
[306 B F] 305
