D. B and J were partners in a firm which carried on the business entitled the Ambala Flour Mills.
On April 29, 1948 J filed a suit for the dissolution of the firm.
The litigation ended with the judgment of the Panjab High Court delivered on September 25, 1951.
According to the judgment the partnership stood dissolved with, effect from the date of the filing of the suit, but since the firm had continued to use J 's share in the property of the firm after that date he was held entitled to a corresponding shares in the profits of the firm after that date, or at his option, to interest at six per cent on the value of his share in the property of the firm.
During the pendency of the suit B also served his connection with the business which was thereafter carried on by D alone.
In the assessment year 1950 51 D filed three returns of income : (i) on 4 10 50 in the status of a firm; (ii) on 14 4 51 in the status of an individual; and (iii) on 1 7 51 in the status of a firm consisting of J and D partners.
For the assessment year 1951 52 D filed a return in the status of an unregistered firm.
For the assessment year 1952 53 D submitted a return in the status of a Hindu Undivided Family.
The income tax Officer assessed the Ambala Flour Mills in the three years of assessment in the status of an association of persons.
In appeals by D the Appellate Assistant Commissioner annulled the orders of assessment and remanded the case to the Income tax Officer with a direction that the income be assessed as the income of the family of D.
In appeals by D the Income tax Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order of annulment but ordered that the direction to assess the income in the hands of D be deleted.
The Tribunal 's order was based on the view that D was a stranger to the assessment proceedings.
At the instance of the Commissioner of Income tax the following questions were referred to the High Court : (i) Whether D was a stranger in respect of the income tax proceedings against Ambala Flour Mills ? (ii) Whether the Appellate Assistant Commissioner could give a direction in the case of Ambala Flour Mills to the effect that the income should be assessed in the hands of D after annulling the assessment in the case of the Ambala Flour Mills ? (iii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case the appeals filed by D were maintainable in law? 'Me High Court answered the first question in the negative, the second in the affirmative with the rider that the assessment against D 'could only be in his individual capacity '; and the third question in the affirmative.
Appeals were filed in this Court by both the parties.
In this appeal the Commissioner of Income tax questioned the order of the High Court by which they sought to modify the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
389 HELD : (i) The first and third of the questions referred to it were correctly answered by the High Court.
(a) D was competent to maintain the appeals filed by him to the Tribunal because by the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner it was directed that he may be personally assessed by the Income tax Officer in respect of the income of the Ambala Flour Mills.
[391 C D] (b) In making a direction against 'D ' the Appellate Assistant Commissioner did not exercise his powers qua a stranger to the assessment proceeding.
D had submitted returns and had also appealed against the orders of the assessment.
The income earned by the assessee was assessed to tax as income of an association of persons of which on finding of the Income tax Officer 'D ' was a member.
:Since the Appellate Assistant Commissioner set aside the order assessing the income in the status of association of individuals, he had to give directions with regard to the assessment of the income.
He was competent to give the directions in view of the provisions of section 31 read with section 34(3) of the Income tax Act, 1922 and the interpretation placed on the litter section by this Court in the cases of Murlidhar Bhagwan Das and Kanpur Coal Syndicate.
[392 G E; 394 D F] Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. vs Kanpur Coal Syndicate, and Income tax Officer, 'A Ward, Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwan 'Das, , applied.
section C. Prashar and another vs Vasantsen Dwarkadas and others, , referred to.
(ii) The High Court exercising advisory, jurisdiction was incompetent to amend the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
On the question referred to the High Court, no inquiry into the power of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner to make the impugned direction was competent.
The second question only related to the assessment of the income in the hands of D after annulling the assessment of the Ambala Flour Mills.
it was not contended before the Tribunal that the income of the Ambala Flour Mills could not be assessed in the hands of the family of 'D The competence of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner to make the direction could not be and was not referred to the High Court.
[395 ,k C]
