The Income tax Officer, while assessing the respondent to tax discovered an undisclosed bank account of the 'respondent for a large sum.
He did not accept the explanation of the respondent as to the source of the amount and held that it represented income from an undisclosed source.
Thereafter he initiated penalty proceedings under section 28 and imposed a penalty which was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
In appeal, the Tribunal held that penalty proceedings were of a criminal nature and that the burden lay on the department to show that the amount concealed was of a revenue nature and was assessable as income and that the onus was not discharged in the present case by merely showing that the assessee 's explanation was not accepted in the assessment proceedings.
The High Court agreed with the Tribunal.
In appeal to this Court, HELD.
(1) Penalty proceedings are included in the expression "assessment" and the true nature of a penalty is the imposition of an additional tax.
But, one of the principal objects of section 28 is to provide a deterrent against recurrence of default on the part of the assessee.
There fore, the section is a penal provision and the proceedings were of a penal nature.
[450 B C] C. A. Abraham vs Income tax officer, , explained.
Commissioner of Income tax, Ahmedabad vs Gokuldas Harivallabhdas , Commissioner of Income tax Gujarat vs L. H. Vora, and Commissioner of Income Tax Bihar and Orissa vs Mohan Mallah, , approved.
Moman Rain Ram Kumar vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P., and Lal Chand Gopal Das vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P., , not approved.
Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs State of Orissa, C.As.
883 892/66 dt. 4 8 1969 and Fattorini (Thomas) (Lanchashire) Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioner, (1943) (11) I.T.R. Supp. 50, referred to.
(2)The gist of the offence under section 28(1)(c) is that the assessee has concealed the particulars of his income or deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars of such income, and therefore, the department must establish that the receipt of the amount in dispute constitutes income of the assessee.
If there is no evidence on the record except the explanation has been found to be false, if does not follow that the receipt constitutes his taxable income.
[450 E G] 447 Commissioner of, Income tax, Ahmedabad vs
Gokuldas Harivallabhdas, , approved.
(3) 'Since the proceedings under section 28 are of a penal nature and the burden is on the department to prove that a particular amount is a revenue receipt, the finding given in the assessment proceedings that the assessee 's explanation is false and that the disputed amount represents income is evidence but is not conclusive.
Before penalty could be imposed the, entirety of circumstances must reasonably point to the conclusion that the disputed amount represented income and that the assesses , had consciously.
concealed the particulars of his income or had deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars.
[450 451 A C]
