Two accused father and son were convicted of the offence of murdering a young boy of 15 and the offences of house breaking and theft next day, of articles from the house of the grand father of the deceased in which the deceased was living alone at the time of his murder.
The evidence mainly consisted of that of the approver, The corroboration of the approver 's evidence as against one of the accused (the son) consisted of the following : (i) on the day of the occurrence, two witnesses saw the accused the approver and another (a young boy of 15) wearing khaki shorts and a white shirt; (2) a few days later another witness saw a dead body at the scene of the crime a field, with khaki shorts and a white shirt; (3) the grand father discovered the theft and the disappearance of his grandson when he returned to the house a week after the occurrence; (4) the approver, on the date of his arrest pointed out to the police the scene of the crime where, among other things a shirt, a chain, and some bones were found the shirt and chain were identified to be those of the deceased and according to the medical evidence the bones were those of a human being, possibly male; (5) the accused, after his arrest, produced to the police, a piece of cloth stolen from the house; (6) the evidence of pledge of a cycle and sale of a cycle carrier belonging to the grand father of the deceased; (7) sale of some utensils belonging to the grand father of the deceased, by the accused, after scrapping off the name; and (8) the finding of a cloth belonging to the grandfather of the deceased in a tailor 's shop.
which the accused hastened to take away, when he learnt that the grand father was questioning the tailor about the cloth.
As regards the other accused (the father) the corroborating evidence consisted of the following : (1) there were civil and criminal proceedings between him and the grand father of the deceased over the possession of the house : (2) he gave and sold several, articles and pieces of silver to a witness who was traced by the police as a result of the, statement of the accused (son).
The articles were produced before police.
and all of them except one lump of silver, were identified by ' the grandfather of the deceased as his articles; (3) it was this accused who gave the piece of cloth to the approver who gave it to the, tailor and which was hastily taken away by his son; and (4) he joined his son in the sale of cycle carrier.
On the question whether the corroboration was sufficient in law, HELD : In Sarwan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and in Lachi Ram vs State of Punjab, ; , it was held that the court should be satisfied : (1) that the approver or accomplice was a reliable witness; (2) there must be reliable corroboration of the approver 's evidence; and (3) there must be sufficient corroborative evidence in material particulars to connect the accused with the crime.
The nature of 618 corroboration is that it is confirmatory evidence and may consist of the evidence of another witness or of circumstances, like conduct of the accused.
When it is said that corroborative evidence must implicate the accused in material particulars it means that it is not enough that a piece of evidence tends to confirm the truth of a part of the testimony to be corroborated.
It must confirm that part of the testimony which suggests that the crime was committed by the accused.
[622 E F; 625 A B] In the present case, apart from the relationship between the two accused, there was also close association in the disposal of the articles.
The close proximity of time between the murder and theft points to the inescapable conclusion that they formed part of the same transaction.
Since the transaction was one composite unit of murdering and committing theft, and it was found that the approver was a reliable witness, all the pieces of evidence afforded sufficient corroboration of the approver 's evidence in material particulars and proved that the accused were guilty ' of the offences with which they were charged.
[624 C D; 625 D, E]
