In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution of India the petitioners challenged the validity of the Maharashtra Industrial Development Act, 1961.
In support of the petition it was contended : (i) that the Maharashtra legislature was incompetent to enact the Act because the Act was for the incorporation, regulation and winding up of the Maharashtra Development Corporation which was a trading corporation; accordingly the impugned legislation fell within Entry 43 of List I (.Union List) or the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution; (ii) that there was a special procedure designed by the land Acquisition Act for acquisition of land for the companies whereas in the present case under the provisions of the impugned Act the State was acquiring land for companies without adopting the procedure of the Land Acquisition Act and thus there was procedural discrimination; (iii) that the proviso to section 33 of the impugned Act providing that no compensation exceeding such amount as the State Government may by general order specify to be paid for acquisition shall be determined by the Collector without the previous approval of the State Government or its nominee, was restrictive of the judicial power of the Collector.
HELD : (i) It is the true intent of the Act i.e. its pith and substance which will determine the validity of the Act.
Industries come within Entry 24 of the State List subject to the provision of Entry 7 and Entry 52 of the Union List of the Constitution.
Entry 7 of the Union list relates to industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war.
Entry 52 of the Union List relates industries the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
The establishment, growth and development of industries in the State of Maharashtra does not fall within Entry 7 and Entry, 52 of the Union List.
Establishment growth and development of industries in the State is within the State List of industries.
The, pith and substance of the Act is establishment growth and development of industries, and acquisition of land in that behalf carries out the purposes of the Act by setting up the Corporation as one of the limbs or agencies of the Government. 'Me powers and functions of the Corporation show in no certain terms that these are all in aid of the principal and predominant purpose of establishment and growth of industries.
When the Government is satisfied that the Corporation has substantially achieved the purposes for which the Corporation is established, 720 the Corporation will be dissolved because the raison d 'etre is gone.
It must, therefore, be held that the Act is a valid piece of legislation.
[725 F 726 D] The contention that the Corporation was a trading one, or that it Was a Government company within the meaning of section 617 of the could not be accepted.
[Reason dissussed] The true character of the Corporation in the present case is to act as an architectural agent of the development and growth of industrial towns by establishing and developing industrial estates and industrial areas.
[727 B 728 F] (ii) The contention that there was procedural discrimination is between the present Act and the Land Acquisition Act could not be accepted.
The Maharashtra Industrial Development Act is a special one having the specific and special purpose of growth, development and Organisation ,of industries.
That Act has its own procedure.
Under the Land Acquisition Act acquisition is at the instance of and for the benefit of a company whereas under the present Act acquisition is solely by the State for public purposes. 'Me two acts arc dissimilar in situation and circumstances.
[728 H 729 E] (iii) The proviso to section 33 no doubt provides that where the amount of compensation determined by the Collector is higher than what the State Government may by general order specify the approval of the State Government is necessary, But sub section (5) of section 33 states that in determining the compensation the Collector shall be guided by the provisions contained in sections 23 and 24 and other relevant provisions of the Land Acquitition Act.
There is no ceiling fixed by the Government.
Further there is an appeal to the Court from the decision of the Collector.
The decision of the Court will finally determine the amount of compensation.
There is thus no restriction on the powers of the Collector in the matter of determination of compensation, although the approval of Government may be necessary in the Government interest.
[729 F 730 C]
