The appellant challenged the election of the first respondent to the State Legislative Assembly on the grounds : (1) the respondent was disqualified under section 8(2) of the Representation of the People Act, because, on the date of his election he stood convicted 'for offenses under .the Penal Code, though later, he was acquitted by the High Court and (ii) the Returning Officer rejected some ' ballot papers cast in the appellant 's favour holding that the marks made on those ballot papers were made otherwise than with the instrument supplied for the purpose and that those ballot papers were therefore liable to rejection under r.56(2) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (1) In a criminal case, acquittal in appeal does not take effect merely from the date of the appellate order setting aside the conviction, it has the effect of retrospectively wiping out the conviction and sentence awarded by the lower court.
The opinion whether a successful candidate was disqualified on the date of his election is to be formed by the High Court .at the time of pronouncing judgment in the election petition.
When the High Court had before it the order of acquittal which had taken effect retrospectively, it was impossible for the court to arrive at the opinion that on the date of election the respondent was disqualified.
The High Court was therefore, right in holding that the respondent was not disqualified and that his election was not void on the ground.
[800 F] (2) For rejection under r. 56(2)(d) there must be a definite finding that the ballot papers bore marks made otherwise than with the seal supplied for the purpose.
In the present case, the finding recorded by the High Court amounted to holding that the marks made could not be identified with the seal which was supplied for marking the, votes.
On this finding the High court was right in not upsetting the order of Returning Officer for rejecting these votes, and consequently an inference follows that they must have been made by some other means.
If these votes were not to be counted in favour of the appellant the appellant 's case had to fail, because, on the evidence recorded and the issues framed on the basis of the pleadings in the election petition the respondent had still a majority of valid votes.
[803 A]
