Seven persons including S (the appellant) and T were tried together, five under section 396 I.P.C. and the appellant and T under section 396 read with section 109 I.P.C. The prosecution case depended only on circumstantial evidence and mainly on the testimony of two witnesses.
The trial court convicted six accused, including the appellant and acquitted one.
On appeal to the High Court by the convicted persons additional evidence was recorded and section and T were also reexamined as accused for explaining the prosecution evidence.
In the High Court prosecution relied on the following five circumstances against S and T : 1.
Bitter enmity between G and C on the one side and S and T who were fast friends on the other; 2.
The nature of the incident suggests that the primary object of the culprits was to commit the murder of G and C and having failed to kill C his property was looted as incidental venture; 3.
On the evening preceding the night of dacoity S and T were seen in the company of five or six persons including the accused Gajju armed with kanthas, ballas and lathis, 4.
S, who was inimical to G and C, raised false alarm at the time of dacoity to show false sympathy; and 5.
On the following morning after dacoity S lodged F.I.R. by way of Peshabadi for putting the police on wrong track.
The appeal was dismissed by the High Court.
According to both the courts below S and T were, not amongst the dacoits.
They were only stated to have assembled at the time of the dacoity.
S is a first cousin of G and C, two victims of the dacoity.
G was killed during the course of the dacoity.
On appeal by special leave in the Supreme Court counsel for the respondent State contended that it should not interfere with the conclusions of the two courts below holding the appellant guilty.
Disagreeing with this contention.
HELD: This Court undoubtedly does not normally proceed to review and reappraise for itself the evidence in criminal cases when hearing appeals under article 136.
But when the judgment under appeal has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice by some misapprehension or mistake in the reading of evidence or by ignoring material evidence then this Court is not only empowered but is expected to interfere to promote the cause 827 of justice.
Article 136 is worded in very wide terms and the power conferred by it is not hedged in by any technical hurdles.
This over riding and exceptional power has been vested in this Court to be exercised sparingly and only in furtherance of the cause of justice.
In the present case which depends only on circumstantial evidence.
the courts below have completely ignored the warning given by this Court in Hanumant vs The State of Madhya Pradesh [1952 S.C.R. 1091] against the danger of conjectures and suspicions taking the place of proof.
Evidence on basic or primary facts has of course to be approached in the ordinary practical way but the conclusions in the case of circumstantial evidence must necessarily point only to the guilt of the accused excluding any reasonable possibility of innocence.
[832 B].
After considering the evidence on the record, HELD : None of the five circumstances were established on the record; nor could they be considered either singly or collectively to be sufficiently cogent to bring home to the appellant abetment of the offence charged beyond the possibility of reasonable doubt.
The evidence in the case did not satisfy the test required in cases founded on circumstantial evidence.
The appeal was allowed.
