The appellant, who was the Chief Minister of Kerala at the time.
, at ' a press conference held by him on November 9, 1967, made various critical remarks relating to the judiciary referring to it inter alia as "an instrument of oppression" and the Judges as "dominated by class hatred, class prejudices", "instinctively" favoring the rich against the poor.
He also stated that as part of the ruling classes the, judiciary "works 'against workers, peasants and other sections of the working classes" and "the law and the system of judiciary essentially served the exploiting classes".
These remarks were reported in the newspapers and thereafter in proceedings commenced ' in the High Court the appellant was called upon to show cause why he should not be committed for contempt.
In an affidavit in reply the appellant stated that the reports were "substantially correct", though incomplete in some respects.
He supplied some omissions and pleaded want of intention to show disrespect to the judiciary and justification on the ground that the offence charged could not be held to be committed, in view of the guarantees of freedom of speech and expression under the Constitution.
He claimed that his observations did no more than give expression to the Marxist philosophy and what was contained in the programme of the Communist Party of India.
By a majority judgement the appellant was convicted for contempt of court and fined Rs. 1000/ or simple imprisonment for one month.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the law of contempt must be read without encroaching upon the guarantee of freedom of speech and expression in Article 19(1)(a) : and that the intention of the appellant in making his remarks at the press conference should be examined in the light of his political views which he was at liberty to put before the people; he sought to justify the remarks as an exposition of his ideology which he claimed was 'based on the teachings of Marx and Engels and on this ground claimed protection of The first clause of article 19(1).
HELD : Upholding the appellant 's conviction The law punishes not only act which do not fact interfere with the courts and administration of justice but also those which have that tendency, that is to say, are likely to produce a particular result.
, Judged from the angle of courts and administration of justice" there was no doubt that the appellant was guilty of contempt of court.
Whether he misunderstood the teachings of Marx and Engels or deliberately distorted them was not to much purpose.
The likely effect of his words must be seen and they clearly had the, effect of lowering the prestige of judges and courts 698 in the eyes of the people.
That he did not intend any such result may be a matter for consideration in the sentence to he imposed on him but could not serve as a justification.
It was obvious that the appellant had misguided himself about the true teachings of Marx, Engles and Lenin.
He had misunderstood the attack by them on state and the laws as involving an attack on the judiciary.
No doubt the courts, while upholding the laws and enforcing them, do give support to the state but they do not do so out of any impure motives.
They do not range themselves on the side of the exploiting classes and indeed resist, them when the law doe.
not warrant an encroachment.
To charge the judiciary as an instrument of oppression, the judges as guided and dominated by class hatred, class interests and class prejudices, instinctively favoring the rich against the poor is to draw a very distorted and poor picture of the judiciary.
It was clear that the appellant bore an attack upon judges which was calculated to raise in the minds of the people a general dissatisfaction with, and distrust of all judicial decisions.
It weakened the authority of law and law courts.
[712 E] While the spirit underlying Art 19)(1)(a), must have due play, the Court could not overlook the provisions of the second clause of that Article.
Its provisions are to be read with articles 129 and 215 which specially confer on this Court and the High Courts the power to punish for contempt of themselves.
Although article 19(1)(a) guarantees complete freedom of speech and expression, it also makes an exception in respect of contempt of court.
While the right is essential to a free society, the Constitution has itself imposed restrictions in relation to contempt of court and it cannot therefore be said that the right abolishes the law of contempt or that attacks upon judges and courts will be condoned.
[704, C] Samuel Roth vs United States of America, I L.Ed.2d 1489 at 1506; Arthur Terminiello vs City of Chicago.
; at 1134; Charlotte Anita Whitney vs People of the State of California, ; , New York Times Company vs L. B. Sulivan, 686; and Kedar ' Nath Singh vs State of Bihar, [1962] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 769, referred to.
While it is true that Lord Morris in Mcleod vs St. Aubyn at p. 561 observed that the contempt of court known from the days of the Star Chamber as Scandalum Justiciae Curiae or scandalising the Judges, had fallen into disuse in England, as pointed out by Lord Atkin in Andre Paul Terence Ambard vs The Attorney General of Trinidad, and Tobago, A.I.R. 1936 P.C. 141 at 143, the observations of Lord Morris were disproved within a year in The Queen vs Gray.
at 40.
Since then many convictions had taken place in which offence was held to be committed when the act constituted scandalizing a Judge.[703 D] The Government Pleader, High Court, Bombay vs Tulsidas Subhanrao Jadhav, I.L.R. ; explained.
In re : Basudeo Prasad, Cr. Appeal No. 110 of 1960 decided on May 3, 1962; distinguished.
