An air parcel declared by the consigner to contain rasogollas and other edibles was found to contain Rs. 51,000 worth of Indian currency notes.
The parcel was booked to be sent from Calcutta to Hong Kong.
The consignor 's name as given.
on the parcel was found to be false and on investigation the suspicion of the customs authorities fell on the appellants two of whom were partners in a firm, the third being an employee of the firm.
The office of the firm was searched.
Certain incriminating documents including account slips and cash books of the firm were seized.
In a complaint filed by the Assistant Collector of Customs against the appellants and their firm it was alleged that sending out money in Indian currency was prohibited by section 8(2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation 7 of 1947 and any attempt to do the same was punishable under section 23B of the Act.
The trial court acquitted the appellants but the High Court in appeal convicted them under section 23(1A).
By special leave appeals were filed in this Court.
Judgment was delivered on August 18, 1970.
Thereafter review petition No. 37 of 1970, was filed.
A further judgment in respect of the contention raised therein as to the interpretation of section 23C(i) was delivered on February 18, 1971.
HELD : (i) The proposition that if an investigating officer conducts a search his evidence cannot be relied on unless it is corroborated is a novel one with no principle or authority to support it.
It all depends on the facts of each case.
In the present case there was the corroborative evidence of P.W. 8 who signed the search document and also the entries themselves in the account books and their tallying with the slips.
[755 G] (ii) There was no substance in the argument that the account slips could not be taken into consideration because they were not evidence.
These were part of the things discovered during search and if the entries therein were carried into the account books there was no reason why they could not be looked at [755 H] (iii) In the context of section 23C(1) a person 'in charge ' must mean that the person should be in over all control of the day to day business of the company or firm.
The inference follows from the wording of section 23C(2).
It mentions director who may be a. party to the policy being followed by 749 a company and yet not be in charge of the business of the company.
Further it mentions manager who usually is in charge of the business not in over all charge.
Similarly the other officers may be in charge of only some part of the business.
[758 G 759 A] State vs section P. Bhadani, A.I.R. 1959 Pat. 9, R. K. Khandelwal vs State and Public Prosecutor vs R. K. Karuppian, A.I.R. 1958 Mad.
183, referred to.
In the present case the appellant G had himself stated that he alone looked after the affairs of the firm.
This meant that he was in charge within the meaning of the section though there may be a manager working under him [760 C D] When a partner in charge of a business proceeds abroad it does not mean that he ceased to be in charge, unless there is evidence that he gave up charge in favour of another person.
Therefore it must be held that the appellant was in charge of the business of the firm within the meaning of section 23C(1).
[760 E F].
In view of the fact that G was abroad at the time of contravention it was possible that the contravention took place without his knowledge or lack of diligence.
He was being vicariously punished.
In such a case a. sentence of imprisonment may not be imposed but a sentence of fine only would meet the ends of justice.
[760 G] (iv) As regards appellant P the prosecution had been unable to prove by any reliable evidence that he took any active part in the conduct of the business of the firm.
He must therefore be given the benefit of doubt and acquitted.
[757 A] (v) The case was fit for review because at the time of arguments the attention of the court was not drawn specifically to sub section 23C(2) and the light it throws on the interpretation of sub s.(1).
[761 A]
