The appellant was an advocate from Maharashtra.
He was convicted by a Summary Court in London on a charge of pilfering from a Departmental Store and was sentenced to pay a fine.
The State Bar Council called upon him sou motu to show cause why he should not be held guilty of misconduct.
he submitted his explanation and the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council was satisfied that there was no reason for holding him guilty of professional misconduct.
The Advocate General of the State who was sent a notice of the proceedings as required by section 35(2) of the , and bad appeared before the Disciplinary Committee, filed an appeal to the Bar Council of India under section 37 of the Act, under which, any person aggrieved by an order of the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council made under section 35 of the Act, may prefer an appeal to the Bar Council of India.
The appellant objected that the Advocate General had no locus standi to file the appeal.
The objection was overruled by the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India and the appellant was found guilty of professional misconduct.
in appeal to this Court, on the question of the competency of the Advocate General to file the appeal under section 37.
HELD : (Per Hidayatullah.
C.J., Shelat and Mitter, JJ.) The was not a person aggrieved, within the meaning of 37 and therefore, the appeal filed by him was incompetent and hence, finding of the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India should be get aside.
[887 H; 904 E] (Per Hidayatullah C.J.) (1) The expression person aggrieved ' must be construed by reference to the context of the enactment in which it and all the circumstances.
Under the Act, disciplinary proceedings before a State Bar Council commence on a complaint to it or suo motu and are referred to its Disciplinary Committee.
The Disciplinary Committee can reject the matter summarily; but if it proceeds to hear it further, notice thereof is sent to the concerned advocate and to the advocate General of the State.
The Advocate General may appear personally or by counsel.
If the Disciplinary Committee after giving the Advocate and the Advocate General an opportunity to be heard holds hat the Advocate is not guilty of any misconduct it makes an order it her dismissing the complaint, or where the proceeding was started by in Bar Council makes an order that the matter may be filed.
If it finds the advocate guilty it may either reprimand the advocate or suspend 864 the advocate from practice for a specified period or remove his name from the roll of Advocates.
From the decision of the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council an appeal lies to the Bar Council of India at the instance of a person aggrieved '.
The appeal is heard by the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India and from its decision an appeal lies to this Court.
[884 E H; 885 A B] (a) In these proceedings before the disciplinary committee the Advocate General is not in the nature of a party having independent rights which lie can claim nor is he injured by the decision.
The decision does not deny him anything nor does it ask him to do anything.
He is also not intended to be bound by the decision.
He does not represent the Bar nor has he a right to speak on behalf the body of the advocates.
Such a privilege is neither expressly conferred on him nor can it be implied from the provisions of the Act.
[885 C D; 886 A B] (b) In the State Bar Councils (except in Delhi), the Advocate General of the State is an ex officio member, but his functions are not different from those of other members.
He has a right of pre audience, but the does not confer any other right on him.
When the Committee considers in limini to decide whether the matter should be proceeded with at all, the Advocate General 's presence is not considered necessary.
Therefore, the Advocate General is not a prosecutor on behalf of the Bar Council.
He is noticed and brought before the Committee because he is the Chief Counsel of the State and therefore his assistance at the hearing is useful.
He is generally a lawyer of some standing having made a mark in the profession and his contribution to the deliberations of the Disciplinary Committee is welcome, because, thus the Disciplinary Committee is helped to reach a proper conclusion.
The fact that he can appear through counsel shows that the intention is merely to have his opinion as an amicable curiae who is neither siding with the complainant nor with the Advocate and who will thus have an unbiased and impartial approach to the case.
He must after he has done his duty leave the matter to the complainant and the advocate or the Bar Council to take the matter further if they choose.
[883 C, E F; 885 E H; 886 A] (c) If he is not a person summoned to be bound by the order but a person who is heard in a dispute between others merely to be of assistance in reaching the right conclusion he can hardly have a grievance.
Any person who feels disappointed with the result of a case is not a person aggrieved '.
He must be disappointed of a benefit which he would have received if the order had gone the other way.
The order must cause him a legal grievance by wrongfully depriving him of something or must have a tendency to injure him.
That the order is wrong or that it acquits some one who he thinks ought to be convicted does not by itself give rise to a legal grievance.
[876 A C] Therefore, it cannot be said that by reason of the provisions of the , the Advocate General of the State enjoys such a position that be must necessarily be treated as a person aggrieved ' entitling him to file an appeal.
[882 H; 886 G] In re.
Sidebotham exhibit Sidebotham, (1880) 14 Ch. D. 458(C.A.).
In re.
Lamb Exp.
Board of Trade, [1894] 2 O.B.D. 805, 812, In re.
Kitson,, Exp.
Sugden (Thomas) & Sons, Ltd. , 112 114.
Brown Exp.
Debtor vs official Receiver Ellis Exp.
Ellis (1876)2 Ch.
D. 779, In re.
Words Exp.
Dalton (1874)40 L.T. 297(C.A.), R. vs London County Keepers of Peace and Justice , Jennings vs Kelly, In 865 re.
Reviere , Robinson vs Currey , 470 (C.A.); Seven Oaks Urban District Council vs Twynham , ' 443, Eating Corporation vs Jones L. R. , B. M. Madani vs Commissioner of Workmen 's Compensation Bombay, C.A. 877 of 1968 decided on October 10, 1968 and Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay vs Chandulal Shamldas Patel, C.A. 1716 of 1967 decided on August 1, 1970, referred to.
(2) It could not be said that in the present case there were several points of general public interest which needed to be solved and therefore, if the decision of the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council was wrong, the Advocate General, in public interest, could take the matter further.
[886 G H] Unlike the position of an Attorney General in a Crown Colony, the Advocate General of a State in India does not represent the Executive or the Legislature or the Judiciary, or the Central Government in disciplinary proceedings before the Disciplinary Committee.
The magniloquent phrases such as Leader of the Bar, Keeper of the, Conscience of the Bar have no meaning neither under the nor under the Bar Councils Act, 1926.
They are just honorific titles given by the courtesy but are not grounded on law, the keepers of the conscience of the Bar being the Bar Councils.
[883 F G; 886 C D] In the present case,the appellant was not precluded from questioning the charge in the disciplinary proceedings because of the decision of the Criminal Court in London.
His explanation was accepted by the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council.
They were also satisfied that the summary proceedings in the criminal trial in England offended against the principles of natural justice, and that therefore, the conviction of the appellant in England did not show any moral turpitude in the appellant.
If the Advocate General 's view on these matters were not accepted by the Disciplinary Committee he could not have any grievance.
He could not make it his own cause or a cause on behalf of others whom he did not represent.
He had done his duty and the matter should have rested there.
[887 C F] Attorney General of Gambia vs Pierre Saar N 'Jie, [1961] A.C. 617 (P.C.) referred to.
(3) (a) The facts that in Advocate General of Bombay vs Phiroz Rustamji Barucha the standing of the Advocate General to apply for special leave in a proceeding relating to professional misconduct of an Advocate was questioned before the Privy Council, but that the Privy Council refused special leave on a different ground cannot import a rejection of the objection as to the standing of the Advocate General.
[881 E] (b) The observations in B. Nageshwara Rao vs The Hon 'ble Judges of the Madras High Court, ; that in an appeal arising out of a proceeding under the Bar Councils Act, it was inappropriate to make the Judges respondent, and that the appropriate parties should be the concerned Advocate the complainant (if any), the Bar Council and the Advocate General of the State, do not advance the case of the Advocate General in this case.
[882 E] (Per Shelat and Mitter, JJ.) (1) A State Bar Council consists of a number of members including the Advocate General of the State ex officio.
Under the provisions of the , subject to a right of appeal to this Court under section 38, inquiries into charges of misconduct against L169CI/71 11 866 advocates are to be in the exclusive jurisdiction of the Bar Councils.
If a complaint is received against an Advocate it is referred to the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar, Council or the Bar Council can take such a step suo motu.
It is however not obligatory to refer each and every com plaint but only when the Bar Council is satisfied that there is a prima facie case for investigation.
if it is not so satisfied it can throw out the complaint as frivolous.
And it is only when the Disciplinary Committee does not summarily reject the complaint that a date has to be fixed for its hearing and notice there of must be given to the advocate concerned and the Advocate General of the State but it is not incumbent on the Advocate General to appear in person; he can appear through another advocate and place his view point before the Disciplinary Committee.
The Advocate and a complainant who makes allegations against an advocate are persons aggrieved entitled to file an appeal under section 37 if an order is made against the advocate, or the complaint is dismissed by the Disciplinary Committee.
But the State Bar Council cannot be such a person as the order is made by itself and acting through its Disciplinary Committee.
[889 B C; 891 B C] Generally speaking a person is said to be aggrieved by an order which is to his detriment, pecuniary or otherwise or causes him some prejudice in some form or other.
A person who is not a party to a litigation has no right of appeal merely because the judgment or order contains some adverse remarks against him.
A person who is not a party to a suit may prefer an appeal,, with the leave, of the appellate court when the judgment would be binding on him.
But because a person has been given notice of some proceedings wherein he is given a right to appear and make his submissions, he does not without more, have a right of appeal from an order rejecting his contentions or submissions.
To place the Advocate General in the company of "persons aggrieved" one must be able to say that the Disciplinary Committee committed an error which it was his duty to attempt to set right because of some function attributable to him as the Advocate General or some obligation cast upon him by the Act or the general law of the land to safeguard and maintain standards of conduct of Advocates laid down by the Bar Council of India.
[892 B F] (a) The Advocate General is entitled to a hearing if the complaint is not rejected summarily.
But it is not obligatory on him to take part in the proceedings.
It is only when he feels that a case requires a careful investigation and proper elucidation of the facts or the exposition of the law on the subject that he is called upon to render assistance.
He has to take a fair and impartial attitude and render all assistance to the Bar Council to enable it to arrive at a proper decision.
His role is not that of a prosecutor nor is he a defence counsel on behalf of the advocate.
Ms duty is to put before the Disciplinary Committee the facts in their proper perspective and to advance the proper inference to be drawn.
Once he does so there is an end of the matter so far as he is concerned; and he cannot have any grievance because the decision of the Bar Council is against his submission or not to his liking '.
[896 G H; 897 A C] (b) Article 165(2) of the Constitution epitomizes the functions and duties of the Advocate General.
It lays down that he has to discharge the functions conferred upon him by or under the Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
It is not open to the Advocate General to intervene in any suit or legal proceeding apart from the provisions of the Codes of Civil and Criminal Procedure, merely because he thinks public interest is involved in the matter.
Considering the matter 867 historically, the Legislature, while passing the Bar Councils Act, 1926, and the , thought that the Advocate General should be heard inasmuch as he occupied the position of a general referee on points of professional etiquette very much like the Attorney General in England.
Once he does this duty enjoined upon him by the statute.
of making such submissions as he thinks proper at the hearing, his functions qua the enquiry come to an end.
As a referee he has no further interest in the matter, and if the Disciplinary Committee makes an order against the advocate which the Advocate General considers harsh and unreasonable he is not called upon to file an appeal.
Neither is he interested in prosecuting the.
matter further if he takes the view that the punishment meted out is not commensurate with the misconduct of the advocate.
[897 D E, G H; 900 C F] Robinson vs Currey, , Ex parte Sidebotham.
In re Sidebotham, 465, Ex parte Official Receiver.
In re Read, Brown & Co. , 178, the Queen vs Keepers of the Peace and Justices of the County of London, , 361; Rex vs London Quarter Sessions, Exparte Westminster Corporation , Seven Oaks Urban District Council vs Twynham, , Ealing Corporation vs Jones, , 390, referred to.
(2) The Advocate General of a State in India is not a representative of the Government.
Neither the Constitution nor the holds him so nor is be a person representing public interest, unlike the Attorney General in a Crown Colony ' except as provided in statutes.
He may draw the attention of the Bar Council to any misconduct of an advocate and appear at the hearing.
Once the hearing is over and a finding is recorded he has done his duty and be cannot be said to be aggrieved within the meaning of section 37.
Every day courts of law are called upon to decide questions of law inter parties which may be of general importance to the public.
The Advocate General cannot prefer an appeal merely because the question is one of considerable importance to the public inasmuch as he is not a party to it; and he has no locus stand to do so, even in a case where the statute only gives him an opportunity of appearing at a hearing and making his submission.
A decision of the Disciplinary Committee cannot necessarily be said to raise a point of public interest merely because the Advocate General feels that it is erroneous or that he himself would have arrived at a different in India is not the guardian angel of the Bar, nor is he the champion of public interest in any matter save as specified in a statute.
[902 D G; 904 B E] Attorney General of Gambia vs Pierre Saar N ' Jie, , referred to.
(3)(a) The decision of the Judicial Committee in Advocate General, Bombay vs Phiroz Barucha, 37 B.L.R. 722 (P.C.) does not help the Advocate General, because it did not decide the point as to the maintain ability of the appeal.
[903 C D] (b) It did not appear that any argument was advanced in Nageswara Rao vs The Hon 'ble Judges of the ' Madras High Court; , , 1064 about the proper parties to the appeal before this Court arising from proceedings under the Bar Councils Act; and the point as to Whether the Advocate General was a person aggrieved was neither raised nor argued.
Therefore.
the observation in the case that 868 the Advocate General of the state is an appropriate party in the appeal should, not be accepted.
1903 G H] (Per Vaidialingam and Ray, JJ.
dissenting) : The appeal filed by the Advocate General of Maharashtra was competent as he was a person aggrieved ' under section 37 of the .
[908 B C; 920 G H] (Per Vaidialingam, J.) : (1) The question whether the Advocate General is a person aggrieve& under section 37 of the will have to be tackled with reference to the, scheme and provisions of the Act. ' Under the Act, the State Bar Councils and the Bar Council of India have been made autonomous units and various functions regarding the legal profession have been entrusted to them including taking disciplinary action against delinquent members and conducting inquires.
Barring a ,right of appeal to this Court under section 38 the courts are completely out of the picture.
Under sections 3 (2) (a), 23 (4) and 35, the Advocate General of the State is given a very important and responsible position and the Act has given due recognition to his status by virtue of his being the highest law officer in the State, and as one who may be trusted to place a dis interested and dispassionate view before the Disciplinary Committee to enable it to come to a proper decision with respect to the advocate concerned and the legal profession.
Apart from being an ex officio member of the State Bar Council, he has also a right of pre audience over other advocates.
[909 D G; 911 G H; 912 B D; 916 A] Under sections 35 and 37, (i) the State Bar Council can suo motu or on receipt of a complaint, when it has reason to believe that an advocate has been guilty of professional or other misconduct, refer the case to its Disciplinary Committee (ii) If the Committee does not summarily reject the complaint, it is bound to fix a date for its hearing and also bound to give notice to the advocate and the Advocate General of the State; (iii) The Committee is bound to give an opportunity of being heard to the Advocate and the Advocate General and there is no distinction in the opportu nity so afforded to both of them; (iv) The Advocate General may appear in person or through counsel; (v) the Committee can pass one or other of the orders enumerated in section 35(a) to (d) and the orders have to be communicated to the Advocate General also, and under section 37, any person aggrieved ' is entitled to file an appeal to the Bar Council of India.
Unlike under the Bar Councils Act, the Advocate General is associated with the disciplinary proceedings right from the stage of the inquiry by the Committee.
The notice to the Advocate General cannot be a formal and empty notice, because he should begin an opportunity of being heard.
Even though there may be no lis ' and the Advocate General may not be a party ' in the usual sense, he is also entitled, like the advocate against whom the inquiry is being conducted, to place before the Committee all aspects of the matter in favour of and against the advocate.
He is allowed to appear by counsel, because, he may not be able to appear personally and participate in all the disciplinary proceedings.
He need not be vindictive or take sides, but by virtue of his special and dispassionate role he will be able to place all relevant material to enable the Committee to come to a proper and correct finding.
[912 D H; 913 A H: 914 A B] (a) The fact that the Advocate General does not allege an infringement of any legal rights of his own is of no consequence.
It may be that in a particular case the Advocate General may feel that the finding arrived at either in favour of the advocate or against him or the punishment imposed on the advocate, is not justified by the evidence on record.
Under such and similar circumstances the Advocate General will be competent, as a person aggrieved, to bring up the matter before the Appellate Committee so that justice may be done. [914 G; 915 A C] 869 Sevenoaks Urban District Council,v.
Twynham [1929] 2 K B. 440 Ealing Corporation vs Jones [1959] 1 Q.B. 584, Madani vs Commissioner of Workmen 's Compensation, Bombay, C.A. 877 of 1968 decided on October 10, 1968.
Sidebotham , The Queen vs The Keepers of the, Peace and Justices of the County of London, , Re.
Reed, Brown & Co. 19 Q.B. 174, Rex vs London Quarter Sessions and Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay vs Chandulat Shamaldas Patel, C.A. 1716 of 1967 decided on August 1, 1970, referred to.
(b) The fact that the Legislature provided that the Advocate General should be associated with the disciplinary proceedings from the very beginning of the inquiry brings him under section 37 as a person aggrieved ' and hence the fact that the Committee decided in favour of the Advocate has no bearing on the question.
[914 G H] (c) The fact that the Advocate General is not given notice before rejecting a complaint summarily does not militate against the view that he is a person aggrieved ' because, probably, the Legislature felt that if there was a wrongful summary rejection of a complaint, it could be set right by the Bar Council of India under a. 48A by exercising its signal powers.
[916 FF] (d) In this view it is unnecessary to mention the Advocate General specifically a person aggrieved ' in a. 37.
[918 A] (2) Ile analogy of the Attorney General in a Colony representing the Crown and being the guardian of public interest as stated in Attorney General of Gambia vs Pierre Sarr N ' Jie (1961) A C. 617 cannot be brought in for interpreting s.37 of the , and the observations therein must be related to the particular legal provisions which were considered.
But even that decision recognised that the words person aggrieved ' are very wide and should not be subjected to any restrictive interpretation.
(912 A B; 920 A B, E] (3) The decisions in Advocate General of Bombay vs Pitambardas Gokuldas, 62 I.A. 235 and Advocate General of Bombay vs Phiroz Rustomji barucha, 37 B.L.R. 722(P.C.) do not decide the question one way or the other, [917 A D] (Per Ray, J.) : (1) The purpose and the provisions of the determine whether the Advocate General is a person aggrieved within the meaning of s.37 of the .
Under the Act, a State Bar Council is empowered to constitute a Disciplinary Committee.
Where on receipt of a complaint or otherwise a State Bar Council has, reason to believe that an advocate on its roll is guilty of professional misconduct it shall refer the case for disposal to its Disciplinary Committee, and if the Committee does not summarily reject it, a date of hearing shall be fixed.
The provisions relating to inquiries into professional misconduct of an advocate, establish first that the Advocate General entitled to a notice of the date of hearing, secondly, that no order can be made by the Disciplinary Committee without giving him an opportunity, and thirdly that he may appear in person or through an advocate and that he has a right of preaudience.
He may not choose to appear but if he does appear, his right is based on statute; and he does not appear as a mere friend of the court.
He is heard because he is the head of the Bar in the State and the proceedings affect the discipline and dignity of the Bar and touch the professional 870 conduct of an advocate.
Under article 165 of the Constitution the Advocate General.has to discharge the functions conferred on him by the Constitution or any other law in force.
The concerns an advocate and it is in the fitness of things that the Advocate General of the State is heard as a person representing the profession which assists the litigant public and the courts in the administration of justice.
He is usually a person of high standing and experience and will pot adopt any partisan attitude in the proceedings.
The purpose of the inquiry is not to redress the grievance of an individual complainant in fact sections 35 and 36 do not contemplate any notice to the complainant but to find out whether there is any breach of professional standards and conduct.
[926 C H; 827 F H; 928 A C] (a) It is not the intention of the statute that he would be merely a neutral observer before the Disciplinary Committee and that he would have no duty to perform.
He would have to express his views, and if in a matter of sufficient gravity a totally inadequate punishment is imposed or if the punishment is too severe the Advocate General would be a person aggrieved ', to have it corrected.
The words person aggrieved ' will be referable to the Advocate, complainant, and the Advocate General or Attorney General as the case may be.
The Advocate General and the Attorney General will be persons aggrieved because they are interested in maintaining professional rectitude.
[929 C G] (b) Further if the proceedings were held without notice to the Advocate General or without giving him an opportunity of being heard he would be a person aggrieved.
His participation in the proceedings does not alter the position.
If he has a right to be heard, he may have a grievance as to the result of the hearing.
[929 A B] Re.
Exparte Sidebotham ; Exparte Official Receiver, In re.
Reed Bowen, , Sevenoaks Urban British Council vs Twynhan (192 9) 2 K. B. 104, Queen vs Keepers of the Peace and Justices of the County of London, and Madani vs Commissioner of Workmen 's Compensation, Bombay, C.A. 877 of 1968 decided on October 10, 1968, referred to.
(2) In disciplinary proceedings there is no party in the usual sense.
The Advocate General is not a party to a lis ' and has no personal or pecuniary or proprietary interest in the matter.
That is why the Act uses the words person aggrieved ' and not party aggrieved '.
But he is heard, not because he is a party, but because he represents the interest of the profession and for the purpose of upholding its purity and the preservation of correct standards and norms.
From this point of view he will be an aggrieved person when he finds.
that the interests of the Bar, which is a matter of public interest, is not properly safeguarded by the Disciplinary Committee.
In Attorney General of Gambia vs Pierre Saar N ' Jie.
the Judicial Committee construed the words person aggrieved ' as not to be subjected to a restrictive interpretation but to include a person who has a genuine grievance because an order has been made which prejudicially affected his interest, and that the words would include the Attorney General of Gambia as representing the public interest.
[927 E F; 928 C D, G H; 929 G H] (3) The decisions of the Judicial Committee in Advocate General of Bombay vs Phiroz Barucha, 62 I.A. 235 and of this Court in B. Nageshwara Rao vs The Hon 'ble Judges of the Madras High Court, ; indicate that the Advocate General under the Bar Councils Act, 1926 had locus standi to prefer an appeal.
[925 D E, G] 871
