Section 9(6) of the Berar Regulation of Regulation of Agricultural Leases Act, 1951, read with rule 9 of the Rules made thereunder required a land holder, who terminated the tenancy of his protected lease on the ground that the land was required by him for his personal cultivation, to cultivate the land personally for a period of 2 years.
It the land holder failed to do so then the section conferred a right on the former protected lessee to apply to the Revenue Officer for being restored to possession.
On December 30, 1958, the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region and Kutch Area) Act of 1958 came into force.
Under section 132 of ' the Bombay Act.
the Berar Act was repealed but certain rights acquired or accrued before the commencement of the Bombay Act were saved.
Under section 52 of the Bombay Act, if the landlord had ceased to cultivate the land within a period of 12 years from the date of taking possession, the tenant can apply for restoration, that is, the period of 2 years Linder the Berar Act was enlarged to 12 years.
The appellant was a protected lessee within the meaning of the expression in the Berar Act, in respect of certain lands.
The landlord obtained possession of the lands on April 4, 1957 on.
the ground that he required the lands for personal cultivation.
He continued in possession of the lands till June 21, 1961, on which date he transferred the lands to the first respondent.
The tenant thereupon filed in application under section 52 of the 'Bombay, Act.
The application was dismissed but the tenant 's appeal was allowed.
The appellate order was confirmed in revision by the ' 'Revenue Tribunal.
The first respondent filed a writ petition and the High Court set aside the order of the Revenue Tribunal.
The certified copy of the judgment of the High Court, by mistake, showed the valuation of the lands ,it a very much higher value than the value given by the appellant in the writ petition.
The appellant obtained special leave from this Court mentioning the enhanced valuation in his application for special leave.
On the questions : (1) Whether the special leave granted by this Court should be cancelled on the ground that the appellant made a false statement in regard to valuation; and (2) whether section 52 of the Bombay Act applies, HELD : (1) In the particular circumstances of this case, though the appellant should have been more careful, it cannot be said that he was guilty of making any false or untrue statement on any material particulars deliberately to mislead the court.
Further, the statement regarding valua tion was lot of Much consequence in this case because the questions raised are points of law regarding the applicability of section 51 of the Bombay Act.
[81 D F] Hari Narain vc.
Badri Das ; Sita Bai vs Sonu Vanji Wani & Ors.
C.A.No. 982/65 dt. 25 4 68 and section R. Shetty vs Phirozeshah Nusserwanji Golabawalla & Anr,.
V.A., No. 1551/63 clt.
5 4 61, referred to.
L235SLtp.
CI(P)71 74 (2) Section 52 of the Bombay Act applies to the facts of this case.
[91 B] If a landlord, in pursuance of an order obtained under the Berar Act,. takes possession after the commencement of the Bombay Act, section 52 applies to him and his obligation to cultivate personally for two years under the Berar Act gets extended to 12 years period provide( ' under that section.
[90 A B] If the landlord had taken possession of the land under the Berar Act before the commencement of the Bombay Act, there was an obligation on him to cultivate personally for two years and if he had not so cultivated, the tenant would have acquired a right to be restored to possession.
That right, so acquired by the tenant or accrued to him, before the commencement of the Bombay Act, is saved under section 132(2) (i) of the Bombay Act.
Similiarly, if the landlord had cultivated the land personally for the required period before the Bombay Act came into farce the landlord would have acquired a right not to be disturbed from his possession thereafter.
That right again, which had been acquired by the landlord or accrued to him is saved Linder section 132(2(i).
[89 E H] Therefore, section 52 applies to cases in which possession was obtained by the landlord under section 9 of the Berar Act but in respect of which the period of two years disability imposed under section 9(6) read with r. 9 of the rules was not over before the coining into force of the Bombay Act.
[90 F H] The decision of this Court in Rain Chandra vs Tukaram, ; does not lay down that section 52 of the Bombay Act doe, , not apply to case , where possession has been taken after the Bombay Act had come into force in pursuance of an order 'for restoration obtained by the landlord under the Berar Act.
[85 A B] In the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in Saraswatibai Babji Tukaram Umakar vs Bhikamchand Premsukhdas, , the possession of the land was taken by the landlord from the tenant under the Berar Act and the two year, , period as required under section 9(6) of that Act had also expired before the coming into force of the Bombay Act.
The principle, that applicability of section 52 of the Bombay Act depends solely upon the date on which the landlord takes possession, that is, whether before or after the Bombay Act came into force, was to broadly stated in the decision.
[86 H; 88 G H]
