The predecessors in interest of the respondents, leased certain land at an annual rent of Rs. 199, in 1895 for 49 years.
The lease was a permissive one and gave right to the lessees to construct houses and let them out or to use the land in any manner.
The original lessees, during the currency of the lease made transfers of their rights and also granted sub leases.
A number of chawls and other buildings were constructed on the land and were let out.
The respondents terminated the lease and sued for recovery of possession in 1945.
A compromise was entered into with the appellants, who were some of the occupants, and a consent decree was passed on 8th July 1946.
Another consent decree was passed against the remaining defendants on 28th January 1949.
Under the two decrees the defendants were allowed to remain in possession for 5 years from the dates of the respective decrees and they bad also to pay monthly mesne profits which worked out to more than Rs. 7,000 per annum, and that amount was so fixed that the mesne profits due for the 5 years were to be paid in 3 years.
There was also a clause that in case of default, the defaulting judgment debtors could be immediately called upon to deliver possession In 1953, the respondents sought possession by executing the consent decree dated 8th July 1946.
On the questions : (1) Whether the decree contravened the provisions of the Bombay Rent Restriction Act, 1939, as the leased land was 'premises ' within the meaning of section 4(2)(b) of that Act; (2) whether the consent decree created a new tenancy which was protected by the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947; and (3) whether the passing of two separate decrees was illegal as the court was not competent to do so.
HELD : (1) 'Premises ' is defined in section 4(2) (b) as any land let separately for the purpose of being used principally for business or trade.
The words 'business or trade ' do not comprehend a lease which is merely for constructing houses.
The terms of the lease, in the present case, do not establish that the lease was taken principally for using the land for 'business or trade. ' [174 C D ; 175 G H] The mere fact that there was a mention in the pleadings that any structure that might have been erected would have to be removed, would in no way lead to the conclusion that the principal purpose of the lease was to build structures and that the structures should be utilised for being let out on rent and thus constitute business or trade.
Therefore tile decree did not contravene the provisions of the Bombay Rent Restriction Act.
[174 F G; 175 D E; 176 A] 172 (2)On the face of it, all that the consent decree envisaged was that though the judgment debtors were liable to immediate eviction, the decree holders agreed to let them continue in possession for a period of 5 years, and, since the concession was granted as a special case, the decree holders insisted on payment of mesne profits at a much higher rate.
The terms of the consent decree could in no way be interpreted as creating a new tenancy constituting the decree holders as landlords and the judgment debtors as their tenants.
[176 C E, F G] (3)Order 23, r. 3 and 0. 12, r. 6 of the Civil Procedure Code envisage that in the same suit there can be more than one decree passed at different stages [177 D F]
