Under section 13 of the Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 tenant was declared bhumidhar of land belonging to the respondent filed a suit in the Civil Court claiming that issued to the appellant was illegal, that he should instead bhumidhar and prayed for possession of the land.
Apart on merits, the appellant raised the issue that the Civil jurisdiction to entertain the suit in view of the bar in section The trial court held that the jurisdiction of civil court was the appellant a respondent.
The the bhumidhari be declared the from the issues Court had no 185 of the Act.
not barred, and decreed the suit.
The decree was upheld in appeal by the District Judge.
and, in second appeal, by a single Judge of the High Court.
The Letters Patent Appeal was also dismissed.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD : (i) The reliefs claimed by the respondent were within the competent jurisdiction of the Revenue Assistant and the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
Under section 84 the right to institute a suit for possession was granted only to a bhumidar or an asami, or the gaon sabha.
The Act envisaged only these three classes of persons who would possess rights in agricultural land after the commencement of the Act.
Proprietors as such having ceased to exist, could not, therefore, institute a suit for possession.
This aspect of the case has been lost sight of by the High Court and the lower courts, because it appears that their attention was not drawn to the provision of section 154 of the Act, under which all lands of proprietors, other than those comprised in their holdings, vested in the gaon sabha, thus extinguishing their proprietary rights.
[ 1 67 G H] (ii)There is no provision in the rules for giving notice to different interested parties before a declaration of bhumidari rights is made, Any person, who is aggrieved by a declaration of bhumidhari right issued in favour of another person can appropriately seek his remedy by moving an application before the Revenue Assistant under item 4 of the First Schedule, whereupon, if he succeeds, he will obtain a declaration that he is the Bhumidar.
Such a declaration will automatically supersede the declaration issued by the authorities in accordance with the Rules without any adjudication of rights and without notice to interested parties [169 B] Lai Singh vs Sardara & Anr.
I.L.R. [1964] Vol.
17, 2 Pb.
428 referred to.
(iii)It is true that the declarations made by the revenue authorities without going through the judicial procedure are subject to due adjudication of rights; but such adjudication must be by an application under item 4 of Sch.
I and not by approach to the civil court.
The jurisdiction of the civil court is already barred by section 185 of the Act read with various items of the first Schedule [169 D E] The inference contra in Lal Singh vs Sardara & Anr.
I.L.R. [1964] Vol.
17, disapproved.
164 (iv)Section 186 only envisages that question of title will arise before the Revenue Courts in suits or proceedings under the first schedule and only if such a question arises in a competent proceeding pending in a Revenue Court an issue will be framed and referred to the civil court.
Such a provision does not give jurisdiction to the Civil Court to entertain the suit itself on a question of title.
[170 B C]
