The appellant mortgaged his property bearing No. 162A West Masi Street Madurai Town for a sum of Rs. 45,000 with the respondent Bank on October 14, 1950.
In January 1952 the appellant and his wife borrowed Rs. 25,000 and jointly executed a pronote.
The wife deposited her title deeds relating to premises No. 162 West Masi Street On June 25, 1952 the appellant and his wife created a mortgage of their respective properties Nos.
162A and 162 West Masi Street to secure repayment of a sum of Rs. 8,850.
All the three mortgages were in favour of the respondent Bank.
In 1953 the Bank instituted a suit on the foot of the last two mortgages and obtained a decree against the appellant and his wife.
This decree was satisfied.
In April 1958 the Bank filed a suit on the foot of the mortgage dated October 14, 1950.
The main defence of the appellant, who was the sole mortgagor, was that the suit was not maintainable in view of the provisions of s, 67A of the Transfer of Property Act and that the stipulation of interest was penal and in contravention of the provisions of the .
The trial court decreed the suit and the High Court dismissed the appeal.
By special leave appeal was filed in this Court.
HELD : If a mortgagor has made two or more mortgages of the same property or of different properties to the same mortgagee the mortgagor may redeem each separately but the mortgagee must enforce all or none.
To attract the applicability of section 67A it is essential that the mortgagor must be the same and he should have executed two or more mortgages in respect of each of which he has a right to obtain the same kind of decree under section 67.
In the present case it was not possible to hold that the mortgagor in the suit on the foot of the mortgage dated October 14, 1950 was the same as the mortgagor in the previous suit which was filed on the foot of the mortgages in favour of the appellant and his wife.
In the other two mortgages there were two mortgagors one the appellant and the other, his wife.
There is no statutory provision or rule or principle by which the wife and the husband could be treated as one entity for the purpose of the mortgage.
Each was owner of a separate and distinct property and both joined in mortgaging their respective properties.
The bar of section 67A therefore could not possibly come in the way of the institution of the ' present suit.
[429 B F] Moro Raghunath vs Balaji, I.L.R , approved & applied.
(ii)In the light of the provisions of the mortgage deed and all the circumstances the interest rate of 12% was unfair and penal.
Rate suitably Reduced.
[429 G]
