Under section 5A of the Bihar Sales Tax Act 1959 as amended by the Bihar Finance Act, 1966 the purchase tax on goods declared under section 3A was to be levied at the point of purchase made from a person other than a registered dealer.
By a notification dated September 14, 1966 the Governor of Bihar declared jute as a commodity liable to purchase tax at the rate specified in the notification.
The appellant carried on business in jute, In the course of his business he.
purchased raw jute from producers in West Bengal, transported it to Kishenganj Railway Station in Bihar and then re exported it to purchasers in West Bengal.
He also bought raw jute in Bihar and exported it to merchants and mill owners in West Bengal by rail from Kishenganj Railway Station.
After the enactment of sections 3A and 5A the State Government issued a notification dated December 26, 1967 purporting to exercise power under section 42 of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1959 read with r. 31B of the Bihar Sales Tax Rules, 1959 notifying that no person shall tender at any railway station mentioned in Sch.
11 any consignment of goods mentioned in Sch.
I exceeding the quantity specified for transport to any place inside the State of Bihar and no person shall accept such tender in accordance with the conditions laid down in the said R. 31B. Under Sch.
I jute exceeding 800 kg.
could not be tendered for transport without a despatch Permit and Kishenganj was one of the railway stations mentioned in Sch.
In July 1967 the Superintendent of Commercial Taxes prohibited the railway authorities from loading and despatching jute goods from any railway station in Purnea district without the production of a registration certificate.
For non production of such certificate the railway authorities refused to despatch from Kishenganj the jute goods booked by the appellant.
The appellant moved a 'writ petition in the High Court of Patna challenging inter alia the validity ,of sections 3A and 5A of the Bihar Sales Tax Act and of R.31B.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
With certificate the present appeal was filed.
In support of the petition it was urged (i) that sections 3A and 5A infringed the guarantee of freedom of trade under article 301 of the Constitution and since the amendment by the Finance Act, 1966 introducing these sections did not receive the assent of the President under article 304(b) the amendment was not saved; (ii) that sections 3A and 5A were contrary to ' section 15 of the and accordingly void; (iii) that P. 31B framed by the State Government and the notification issued on December 2.6, 1967 were unauthorised and liable to be struck down.
HELD: (i) The assumption that the levy of purchase tax must be deemed in all circumstances to violate the guarantee under article 301 and 413 the levy will be valid only if the Act is enacted by the State Legislature with the previous sanction of the President cannot be accepted as correct.
Imposition of tax may in certain circumstances impede free flow of trade, commerce and intercourse.
But every tax does not have that effect.[417 G; 419 E] State of Madras vs N. K. Nataraja Mudaliar [1968] 3 S.C.R. 829, Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Assam, and The Andhra Sugars Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, 21 S.T.C. 212, applied.
In the present case the petitioner has made no averments in his petition which supported the plea that imposition of purchase tax directly and immediately restricts or impedes the free flow of trade.
Since power to impose purchase tax under section 3A was not shown to restrict or impede the free flow of trade directly and immediately, it need not seek to derive for its validity, support from article 304(b).
[419 G] (ii) By section 15 of the , tax liable in respect of declared goods on transactions of sale or purchase is restricted to 3% and is not leviable at more than one stage.
There was no dispute that the purchase tax on jute was leviable at the first point of purchase under section 3A of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, and the rate of tax was not shown to exceed the maximum prescribed by section 15 of the .
The provisions of sections 3A and 5A of the Bihar Sales Tax Act are not therefore inconsistent with the provisions of section 15 of the .
[420 E] (iii) Rule 31B of the Bihar Sales Tax Rules must however be struck down as ultra vires.
[420 F] The power of the State Legislature is restricted to legislate in respect of intra State transactions of sale and purchase and to matters ancillary or incidental thereto : it has no power to legislate for levy of tax on sales and purchase in the course of inter State transactions.
The power conferred by section 42 authorising the imposition of restriction or transport or movement of goods may only be exercised in respect of transactions which facilitate levy, collection and recovery of tax on transactions of intra State sale or purchase.
When r. 31B prohibits transport of goods to any place outside the State of Bihar unless a certificate is obtained from the appropriate authority, it seeks to prohibit transport of goods pursuant to transactions which may not even be of the nature of sale or purchase transactions; in any case it restricts transport pursuant to transactions in the course of inter State trade and commerce.
The operation of the rule is not restricted only to transactions in the course of intra State trade and commerce.
The rule authorises restrictions on inter State transactions and is on that account unauthorised.
For the same reasons the notification issued on December 26, 1967 must be regarded as also unauthorised.
[421 E G]
