In 1970 71, selection of candidates to various medical colleges in the State of Tamil Nadu was done on the 'unit wise ' basis.
Under that scheme the medical colleges in the city of Madras were constituted as ,one unit and each of the other medical colleges in the mofussil was constituted as a unit.
In respect of each one of the units, a separate selection committee was constituted.
The intending applicants were asked to apply to any one of the committees but were advised to apply to the committee nearest to their place of residence and, if they applied to more than one committee, their applications were to be forwarded by the Government to only one of the committees.
A few seats were reserved to certain special categories of students and out of the remaining seats, 41 per cent were reserved for students coming from socially and educationally backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, and the rest were placed in the general pool.
All the applicants in the general pool who secured 110 or more marks ,out of 200, calculated according to a certain formula, were called for interview and selection committees were authorised to give in addition, a maximum of 75 marks at the interview.
The award of these marks was on the basis of the following five criteria, namely, (a) Sports or NCC activities ' (b) extra curricular special services, (c) general physical condition and endurance; (d) general ability, and (e) aptitude.
The gradation list prepared by the selection committee was to be submitted to the Government.
The petitioners, who unsuccessfully sought admission to the medical colleges in the State, challenged the validity of the selections made.
They contended that : (1) The unitwise selection contravened articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution because, (a) the applicants of 'some of the units were in a better position than those who applied to other units, since the ratio between the applicants and the number of seats in each unit varied, and several applicants who secured lesser marks than the petitioners were selected merely because their applications came to be considered in ,other units, and (b) the scheme was merely intended as a device to get over the decision of this Court in Rajendran vs State of Madras, ; ; (2) the interview was a farce because it Was held for only three minutes and no guidelines we 're provided for the award of marks at the interview and earmarking for interview marks 75 out of the total of 275 was excessive; (3) the interview marks were manipulated both by the selection committee and the Government in order to pull up undeserving :applicants; (4) the list of backward classes was solely made on the basis 431 of caste and therefore did not conform to article 15(4) of the Constitution; (5) the reservation made for backward classes was disproportionately high; and (6) the division of backward classes into backward classes and more backward classes was impermissible under law.
HELD : (1) (a) The object intended to be achieved in the present case, is to select the best candidates for being admitted to medical colleges.
This object cannot be satisfactorily achieved by the method adopted.
It is admitted that the minimum marks required for being selected in some units is less than in other units.
Hence prima facie the scheme in question results in discrimination.
The plea of delay in selection on State wise basis is neither real nor substantial.
[436 F G; 437 C D] (b)The unitwise distribution of seats appears to be a different manifestation of the district wise distribution which was struck down by this Court in Rajendran 's case,.
[437 D E] (2)In the course of three minutes interview, it is hardly possible to the capability of a candidate since,the first impression need not necessarily be the best impression.
But it cannot be held that the system of interview is so defective as to make it useless, or that the Government has no power to provide such high marks for interview or that there was an arbitrary exercise of the power.
[437 G H; 438 H; 439 A] It is true that the rule did not prescribe separate marks for the separate heads, but it must be presumed that the Government considered that each of the heads mentioned as being of equal importance and that the intention was that each of those heads 'should carry 115 of the interview marks.
[440 B G] Since the marks list, as prepared in the present case, shows that the marks were given in a lump it was clearly illegal.
[440 F G] Chitralekha vs State of Mysore ; , followed.
Viswasnath vs Chief Secretary, Mysore, A.I.R., 1964 Mys.
132, approved.
The tests relating to the various matters for allotting interview marks.
are objective tests.
The aptitude referred to in the rule is aptitude for the medical profession; but in this case certain irrelevant matters were taken into consideration and relevant matters were omitted.
[439 H; 440 A, 441 A B, C D] (3)There is no material for concluding that there was any manipulation of marks.
Numerous students whose performance in the university examination was none too satisfactory nor their past records creditable have secured very high marks at the interview, and a large number of students whose performance in the University examination was very good, secured very low marks at the interview.
This circumstance is undoubtedly disturbing but the courts cannot uphold the plea of mala fides on the basis of mere probabilities [439 C F] (4)The list of backward classes appears to include castes and not classes.
But caste is a relevant circumstance in ascertaining backwardness of a class and a classification of backward classes on the basis of caste is within the purview of article 15(4) of the Constitution, if those castes are shown to be socially and educationally backward.
But the Government could not proceed on the basis once a class is considered as a backward class it should continue to be a backward class for all time, because, once a class reaches a certain stage of progress competi 432 tion is necessary for its future progress.
The Government should, therefore, always keep under review the question of 'reservation of seats and only those classes which are really socially and educationally backward should be allowed to have the benefit of reservation.
Reservation of seats should not be allowed to become a vested interest, and the fact that, in the present case, the candidate of backward classes had secured 50 per cent of the seats in the general pool does show that the time has come for a de novo comprehensive examination of the question.
The Government 's decision in this regard is open to judicial review.
[442 B C, 444 E H] Balaji vs State of Mysore, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 438, Chitralekha vs State of Mysore ; , State of Andhra Pradesh vs Sagar, , Minor P. Rajendran vs State of Madras, ; , Narayan Vasudev vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1940 Bom.
379 and Backward Classes Commission 's Report, referred to.
(5)There is no basis for, the contention that reservation made for backward classes is excessive.
While it is against the immediate interest of the Nation to exclude from the portals of our medical colleges qualified and competent students, immediate advantages of the Nation have to be harmonised with the Nation 's long range interest.
The best way of serving the Nation 's interest would to help the backward classes to march forward and take their place in line with the advanced sections of the people.
In Balaji 's case it was held that the total, reservation for backward classes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes should not ordinarily exceed 50 per cent of the available seats.
Since in the present case it was only 41 per cent, it could not be held that the reservation was excessive.
[441 E H; 442 A B] (6)For the purpose of selection there is no classification of backward classes as backward and more backward.
The list sent to the selection committee was that prepared for the purpose of fee concession.
[441 F] In the present case, however, the impugned selections already made could not be set aside because the selected candidates had already joined the course and are undergoing training and they had not been made parties to the petitions.
Since there are 24 seats yet to be filled up, the State shall immediately constitute a separate expert committee consisting of eminent medical practitioners (excluding all those who were members of previous committees) for selection to these unfilled seats.
The selection should be made on State wise basis.
The committee should interview only those candidates who are shown in the waiting list and persons who unsuccessfully moved the High Court and the petitioners before this Court.
in preparing the gradation list, the committee should allot separate marks under the five heads mentioned in the rule and the committee should take into consideration only matters laid down in the rule excluding from consideration all irrelevant matters.
[445 B H]
