The petitioner made a documentary film called "A Tale of Four Cities" which attempted to portray the contrast between the life of the rich and the poor in the four principal cities of the country.
The film included certain shots of the red light district in Bombay.
Although the petitioner applied to the Board of Film Censors for a `U ' Certificate for unrestricted exhibition of the film, he was granted a certificate only for exhibition restricted to adults.
On an appeal made to it by the petitioner, the Central Government issued a direction on July 3, 1969 that a `u ' Certificate may be granted provided certain specified cuts were made in the film.
The petitioner thereafter field the present petition seeking a declaration that the provisions of of the , together with the rules prescribed by the Central Government on February 6, 1960 in the exercise of its powers under section 5 B of the Act were un constitutional and void; he further prayed that the direction dated July 3, 1969 should be quashed.
The petitioner claimed that his fundamental tight of free speech and expression was denied by the order of the Central Government and that he was entitled to a 'U ' Certificate for the film as of right.
At the hearing of the petition the Central Government indicated it had ,decided to grant a 'U ' Certificate to the petitioner 's film without the cuts previously ordered.
The petitioner then applied for amendment of the petition so as toenable him to challenge pre censorship as offensive to freedom of speechand expression and alternatively the provisions of the Act and the Rules,orders and directions under the Act as vague, arbitrary and indefinite.
The Court allowed the amendment holding the petitioner was right in contending that a person who invests capital in promoting or producing a film must have clear guidance in advance in the matter of censorship of films even if the law of pre censorship be not violative of the fundamental right.
It was contended inter alia on behalf of the petitioner (a) that pre censorship itself violated the right to freedom of speech and expression; and (b) that even if it were a legitimate restraint on the freedom, it must be exercised on very definite principles which leave no room for arbitrary action.
HELD : (i) Censorship of films including prior restraint is justified under the Constitution.
It has been almost universally recognised that the treatment of motion ,pictures must be different from that of other forms of art and expression.
447 This arises from the instant appeal of the motion picture, its versatility, realism (often surrealism), and its coordination of the visual and aural senses.
The art of the cameraman, with trick photography, vistavision and three dimensional representation, has made the cinema picture more true to life than even the theatre or indeed any other form of representative article The motion picture is able to stir up emotions more deeply than any other product of article Its effect particularly on children and adolescents is very great since their immaturity makes them more willingly suspend their disbelief than mature men and women.
They also remember the action in the picture and try to emulate or/ imitate what they have seen.
Therefore, classification of films into two categories of 'U ' films and 'A ' films is a reasonable classification.
It is also for this reason that motion pictures must be regarded differently from other forms of speech and expression.
A person reading a book or other writing or bearing a speech or viewing a painting or sculpture is not so deeply stirred as by seeing a motion picture.
Therefore the treatment of the latter on a different footing is also a valid classification.
[458 G] (ii)Section 5 B authorises the Central Government to issue such directions as it may think fit setting out the principles which shall guide the authority competent to grant certificates under the Act in sanctioning films for public exhibition.
it cannot be said that this Section has not indicated any guidance to the Central Government.
The first sub section states the principles and read with the second clause of the nineteenth article it is quite clearly indicated that the topics of films or their content should not offend certain matters there set down.
A law cannot be declared void because it is opposed to the spirit supposed to pervade the Constitution but not expressed in words.
However it cannot be said as an absolute principle that no law will be considered bad for sheer vagueness.
The real rule is that if a law is vague or appears to be so, the court must try to construe it, as far as may be, and language permitting, the construction sought to be placed on it, must be in accordance with the intention of the legislature.
Thus if the law is open to diverse construction, that construction which accords best with the intention of the legislature and advances the purpose of legislation, is to be preferred.
Where however the law admits of Do such construction and the persons applying it are in a boundless sea of uncertainty and the law prima facie takes away a guaranteed freedom, the law must be held to offend the Constitution, This is not application of the doctrine of due process.
The invalidity arises from the probability of the misuse of the law to the detriment of the individual.
If possible, the Court instead of striking down the law may itself draw the line of demarcation where possible but this effort should be sparingly made and only in the clearest of cases.
[470 G] Judging the directions, 'rules and regulations from this angle, it must be held that there are general principles regarding the films as a whole and specific instances of what may be considered as offending the public interest as disclosed in the clause that follows the enunciation of the freedoms in article 19(1) (a).
The general principles which are stated in the directions given under section 5 B(2) seek to do no more than restate the permissible restrictions as stated in cl.
(2) of article 19 and section 5 B(1) of the Act.
They cannot be said to be vague at all.
Similarly, the prin ciples in section IV of the directions in relation to children and young persons are quite specific and also salutary and no exception can be taken.
It is only the instances which are given in Section I Clauses A to D which need to be considered.
Read individually they give ample direction as to what may not be included.
[471 B] 448 It is clear that expressions like 'seduction ', 'immoral traffic in women ', soliciting.
prostitution or, procuration ', 'indelicate sexual situation ' and scenes suggestive of immorality ', 'traffic and use of drugs ', 'class hatred ', 'blackmail associated with immorality ' are within the understanding of the average men and more so of persons who are likely to be the panel for purposes of censorship.
Any more definiteness is not only not expected but is not possible.
[471 G] Municipal Committee Amritsar and anr.
vs The State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1960 S.C. 1100; explained.
Claude C. Caually vs General Construction Co.
,,(1926) ; A. K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras, ; and State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr.
vs Baldeo Prasad, ; at 979; referred to.
(iii)A real flaw in the scheme of the directions under section 5 B(2) is a total absence of any direction which would tend to preserve art and promote it.
The artistic appeal or presentation of an episode robs it of its vulgarity and harm and this appears to be completely forgotten.
Artistic as well as inartistic presentation are treated alike and also what may be socially good and useful and what may not.
In Ranjit D. Udeshi 's case this Court laid down certain principles on which the obscenity of a book was to be considered with a view to deciding whether the book should be allowed to circulate or withdrawn.
Those principles apply miutatis mutandis to films and also other areas besides obscenity.
Although it could not be held that the directions are defective in so far as they go, directions to emphasize the importance of art to a value judgment by the censors need to be included.
[471 H] U.S., U.K. and other case law considered.
