Under the scheme of the articles of association of the Calcutta Stock Exchange Association Ltd., the Committee is authorised under article 21 to expel or suspend a member on the ground inter alia that he refused to abide by the decision of Committee in any matter which is under the articles or under the bye laws referred to the Committee.
Under article 22, a member declared a "defaulter" because he fails to fulfil any engagement between himself and any other member within six months from the date on which he has been declared a defaulter ceases to be a member of the Exchange automatically.
Upon his ceasing to be a member and upon a resolution being passed by the Committee expelling a member his share stands forfeited.
The share so forfeited is deemed to be the property of the Exchange.
Such forfeiture involves the extinction of all interest in and also all claims and demands against the Exchange in respect of the share and all other rights incidental to the share, but, not the liability of the erstwhile member to discharge his liabilities to the Exchange.
But the Committee must sell, reallot or otherwise dispose of the share for the satisfaction of the debts, which may then be due and owing by the defaulter to the Exchange or to any of its members arising out of transactions or dealings in stocks and shares.
The net proceeds of the sale shall be applied towards the satisfaction of the debts, liabilities or engagements of the shareholder and the residue, if any, paid to the member or his legal representatives.
The appellant failed to carry out a direction to pay a certain sum arising out of a share transaction and the Committee after notice, declared him a defaulter.
Six months later, after notice to the appellant, the Committee resolved that the share standing in his name shall be forfeited to the Exchange and that the appellant be expelled from the membership of the Exchange.
The Exchange thereafter disposed of the 'share for Rs. 55,000.
The appellant challenged the action taken by the Exchange but the suit was dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) It is not necessary that a resolution expelling a member and a resolution declaring him a defaulter should both be passed before his share is forfeited by the Exchange.
The word and is used to indicate an alternative and does not make the two conditions cumulative, because, it would lead to the anomalous result that a member would have to be expelled by the Committee under article 21 and would also automatically cease to be a member under article 22.
[490 A C] Surajmall Mohta vs Ballabhdas Mohta, I.L.R , approved.
484 In any event, in the present case, a resolution declaring the appellant a defaulter was passed and six months later the appellant was expelled from the membership of the Exchange and it was resolved that his share shall stand forfeited.
[490 C D] (2)(a) Regulation 24 in Table A in the First Schedule to the Companies Act, 1913, provides for the exercise of the power to forfeit a share when there is default in paying calls, but no inference follows therefrom that the share of a member could be forfeited only for non payment of a call made in respect of a share which was not fully paid up.
Subject to the provisions of the Companies Act a company and its members are bound by the Provisions contained in its articles of association.
The Articles regulate the internal management of the company and define the powers of its officers.
In the absence of any provision contained in the Act which prohibits a company from forfeiting a share for failure on the part of a member to carry out an undertaking or engagement the articles of a company which provide that in certain events membership rights of a shareholder including his right to the share will be forfeited are binding.
There ' is no provision the Indian Companies Act 1913, which restricts the exercise of the right of the Exchange to forfeit shares for non payment of a call only, and the articles of the Exchange expressly provide that in the event of a member failing to carry out the engagement and in ,the conditions specified therein his share shall stand forfeited.
[492 A E] (b) Under article 27, the terms of which are mandatory, the shares forfeited to the Exchange must be re allotted or otherwise disposed of : it cannot be retained by the Exchange.
A forfeited share is merely a shake available to the company for sale and remains vested in it for that pur pose only.
By forfeiting a share pursuant to the authority of the articles of association no reduction of capital is achieved.
[491 F, H; 492 A] Therefore, articles 22, 24, 26, 27 and 29 relating to forfeiture of shares are valid.
[492 D E] Sri Gopal Jalan & Co. vs Calcutta Stock Exchange Association Ltd., ; , followed.
Calcutta Stock Exchange Association Ltd. vs section N. Nundy & Co. I.L.R. , approved.
(3) There is nothing in the procedure followed which rendered the forfeiture of the appellant 's share illegal.
The appellant had ample notice of the proceedings and the orders were not made against him contrary to rules of natural justice.
[493 C] (4)(a) Under its articles the Exchange has authority to sell the share and to appropriate the sale proceeds towards satisfaction of the debts, liabilities or engagements.
But the balance of the amount remaining due after satisfying the liabilities of the appellant did not remain the property of the Exchange.
The appellant was entitled to the amount.
This is expressly provided for in article 33.
The expression used in article 29 'the forfeiture shall involve extinction of all interest ' is subject to the rights as by the articles saved and article 33 saves the defaulting share holder 's right lo the balance remaining with the Exchange.[493 D G] (b) Even assuming that articles 24 and 31 reserve to the Exchange two distinct powers the power to forfeit and the power to exercise a lien, and that article 33 only applies to a sale in enforcement of a lien and not to a sale after forfeiture, the balance on hand after satisfying the liability 485 of the defaulter must still be returned to the defaulter, under section 74 of the Contract Act.
The power of the Exchange to forfeit the shares arises out of the articles and its source is in contract.
On the principle underlying section 74 of the Contract Act the Exchange had no right to hold, out of the sale proceeds of the share, any amount in excess of the amount due to it or to its members.
[493 H; 494 A B] Fateh Chand vs Balkishan Das, ; , followed.
(c) The legal theory of forfeiture is that a share forfeited is only taken over by the company with the object of disposing of it to satisfy its claims to enforce which the share was forfeited and all other obligations arising against him out of his membership.
If the company is per mitted to retain the balance of the amount after satisfying the debts, liabilities and engagements of the share holder, the transaction would not be different from one purchasing the share of the defaulting shareholder for a value equal to the amount of his obligation and that would be illegal.
[495 E H]
