Under section 3 of the Imports and Exports Act, 1947, the Central Government is empowered to provide by Order published in the Official Gazette for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the import,, export, carriage or shipment etc., of goods of any specified description.
The Central Government made the Import Control Order, 1955.
Under cl. 3 of this Order the import of any goods of the description specified in Sch.
I of the Order is restricted except under and in accordance with a licence or a customs clearance permit granted by the Central Government.
Item 67(1) in Sch.
I Part V, contains printing and lithographic material, and a large number of various components of a printing press.
In Part V of the Schedule, known as ITC Schedule of the Import Trade Control Handbook, relevant for the year 1960, published by the Government of India (Ministry of Commerce and Industry) printing and lithographic material are entered at serial No. 67(1).
The I.T.C Handbook, which is published to give information of rules and procedure for the assistance of those interested in imports, emphasises the importance of correct classification with reference to the serial number and part, of the ITC Schedule.
The Government of India, Ministry of Commerce and Industry also publishes from time to time its Import Trade Control Policy.
In the publication, relevant for the period April September 1960, the policy statement shows the list of items licensable to actual users, and item 67(1)(i) dealing with printing machinery (for Newspaper Establishments and quality printers), is shown in App.
iv, Part V.
The respondents who were the Director in Charge and other officers of a company publishing a Tamil daily newspaper and others applied in Form B prescribed in Appendix III of the ITC Handbook, for a licence for importing a printing press.
This form is meant for the import of goods by actual users, when the licence is sought for import of goods other than those falling under the capital goods licensing procedure.
The respondents stated that the raw material was required by them for printing their newspaper.
The ITC number and part were specifically stated to be No. 67(1)(i), Part V. An amendment of the licence was sought by the respondents for importing one more printing press, and while the matter was pending with the Government, negotiations were entered into by the respondents with a third party for the sale of one of the printing presses.
One of the presses was ultimately sold and delivered to the third party.
According to condition (c) of the licence issued 508 to the respondents the licence bolder had to utilise the goods imported only for consumption as raw material or accessories in his own factory and their sale to or use by other parties was specifically prohibited.
Alleging that the respondents had violated cl.
(c) of the licence, the appellant, (Deputy Chief Controller of Imports and Exports) who was authorised by Statute to do so, field a complaint against them for offences under section 120B I.P.C., section 5 of the Imports and Exports Control Act and cl.
5(iv) of the Imports Control Order, 1955.
The respondents justified the sale on the contention that cl.
(c) did not cover the printing presses, that this clause postulated that the goods covered by it should be capable of being utilized for consumption as raw material or accessory in a factory, and that a complete printing press is neither raw material nor accessories and that it cannot be said that by fixing a printing press for running it the press is utilised for consumption as raw material or accessory.
The trial court convicted some of the accused.
The High Court acquitted them on appeal, and dismissed the petition for enhancement of sentence filed by the Public Prosecutor.
The Public Prosecutor applied under article 134(1) (c) of the Constitution for leave to appeal to this Court but that application was dismissed by the High Court.
Special leave to appeal under article 136 was applied for by the appellant and was granted.
On the questions: (1) Whether special leave to appeal could be granted to the appellant when he did not move the High Court; and (2) whether the respondents were guilty of the offences charged, HELD : (1) There is no provision of law which disentitles the appellant, who was the original complaint, from applying for special leave in this Court merely because the Public Prosecutor had applied in the High Court for enhanced punishment and for leave to appeal to this Court, under article 134(1) (c).
Article 136 and the Supreme Court Rules are also wide enough to empower this Court to grant special leave to the appellant in cases like the present [515 A C] Management of Hindustan Commercial Bank Ltd. Kanpur vs Bhagwandass; , , referred to.
(2) (a) The words used in the licence have to be construed in the background of the scheme of the Import Control Order, 1955, entry No. 67 of Schedule I to that Order and the Import Trade Control Policy.
What particular meaning should be attached to words and phrases in a given instrument is usually to be gathered from the context.
the nature of the subject matter, the purpose or the intention of the author, and the effect of giving to them one or the other of the permissible meanings, on the object to be achieved.
[515 F H] There is no item in any of the lists referred to in the Import Control Order, 1955, or the relevant ITC Handbook or the relevant publication regarding Import Trade Control Policy which covers printing presses as a separate item.
Printing presses are thus treated by legislative intendment as printing material or printing machinery, and the respondents also proceeded on that footing.
This is shown by their use of Form B, and by the reference in their application to serial No. 67(1)(i).
They also knew the disability imposed on them by cl.
(c) of the conditions in the licence issued to them.
The words 'utilised ', 'consumption ' and 509 raw material ', in the conditions have to be fitted into the clearly discernible statutory scheme and this is, possible without doing violence to the dictionary meaning of the words.
The word "consumption" conveys the idea of using up the goods by fixing them in the factory along with the other components, and the various articles mentioned in Item 67(1) (i) have been intended constitute 'raw material. ' [518 A B; 519 E F] (b) Further, the respondents sought as actual users the original licence and the amended licence on the ground that the imported goods were required to meet the increasing demand of circulation of their newspaper.
Had they not complied with the procedure meant for the import of goods by actual users they might not have secured the licence.
Having secured a licence expressly for the import of goods for their use they cannot be permitted to ignore the condition of actual user on the plea that cl.
(c) of the conditions is inapplicable to them.
[519 F H] Therefore, all the respondents the individual accused and the company were guilty of the offences charged.
[520 F] State of West Bengal vs Motilal Kanoria, [1966] 3 S.C.R. 933, followed.
(3) Breach of conditions for import of goods is a serious matter because it prejudicially affects the country 's national economy.
The view of the High Court is not sustainable on the statutory language and on the Import Control Policy of which the respondents were fully aware, and hence, this Court is justified in converting the acquittal into conviction, under article 136 of the Constitution.
[520 G H]
