Surinder Kumar and Virender Kumar (defendants in the suit) purchased on May 9, 1958 a plot of land in District Gurgaon.
On January 9, 1959 the plaintiffs filed a suit in the Civil Court to pre empt the sale.
On November 16, 1961 the Government of Punjab issued in exercise of the power conferred by section 8(2) of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913, a notification declaring "that no right of pre emption shall exist with respect to urban of village immovable property or agricultural land when purchased by any person for setting up or expansion of any industry in the State with the permission of the Director of Industries, Punjab.
" By order dated February 16.
1962 the Civil Court passed a decree for preemption conditionally on payment of the amount for which the property was sold.
The Civil Court found that the defendants had failed to establish that they intended to establish a factory on the land in question.
The defendants appealed to the Court of the Senior Subordinate Judge against the decree of the Trial Court.
Thereafter the Government of Punjab issued another notification on September 3,1962, that the Governor of Punjab was pleased to order that "no right of pre emption shall exist with respect to the sale of land, described in the Schedule to this Notification made on the 9th May, 1958, in favour of Messrs. Surinder Kumar and Virender Kumar, opposite Railway Station, Faridabad for the establishment of a factory for manufacture of cork products".
In the Schedule was described the property aforesaid purchased by the defendants.
The plaintiffs then moved a petition in the High Court chal lenging the validity of the Notification dated September 3, 1962 among others On the ground that in issuing the order the Government acted mala fide.
The High Court held that the notification extinguishing the right of pre emption in the property,issued during the pendency of the appeal did not disentitle the plaintiffs to maintain their claim of preemption already exercised and in respect of which a decree was granted to them.
The notification dated September 3, 1962 was held to have been issued mala fide and on that account invalid though section 8(2) of the Punjab Act 1 of 1913 was held not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
With special leave the State of Punjab appealed to this Court, HELD : The High Court rightly held on the facts that the impugned notification was issued mala fide.
The plaintiffs who claimed that they bad a right to pre empt the sale filed a suit against the defendants and obtained a decree.
On the finding of the High Court it was clear that except disclosing that the defendants intended to construct a factory, nothing more was said.
The State Government still proceeded to exclude from the operation of the Act the land so as to defeat the right of preemption exercised by the plaintiffs in respect of which a decree was passed 551 by the Civil Court.
The State Government had not in their affidavit satisfactorily explained the circumstances in which the order was passed.
The conclusion of the High Court was borne out by the evidence and no ground was made out calling for interference in this appeal by special leave.
[554 E; 556 B C] The contention on behalf of the State that the party alleging that the action of the State was not bona fide must name the officer or officers guilty of conduct which justifies an inference that the official act was done for a collateral purpose, could not be accepted.
It would be placing an intolerable burden of proof of a just claim to require a party alleging mala fides of State action to aver in his petition and to prove by positive evidence that a particular officer was responsible for misusing the authority of the State by taking action for a collateral purpose.
[5.55 F H] [The impugned notification having been held invalid the question whether section 8(2) of the Punjab Pre emption Act was ultra vires article 14 of the Constitution did not survive for consideration.] [553 B]
