section a Hindu female governed by Dayabhaga system of law, executed a sale deed.
It was recited in the agreement that she agreed to sell "on account of financial need and to pay off certain debts".
After her death her sons filed a suit for a declaration that the sale deed was not binding on them as it was executed without legal necessity.
The Trial Court held that the sale deed was supported by legal necessity.
The Court also observed that the contention that there was fraud, misrepresentation and undue influence was not seriously pressed as there was no evidence adduced to prove the same.
The High Court, in appeal, reversed the decree holding that the defendants ' case of legal necessity was not proved and on that account the sale deed was not binding upon the plaintiffs.
, The High Court, without adverting to the record, observed that the case of the plaintiffs that s was induced to execute the sale deed because of persuation and undue influence had to be accepted.
In appeal by cer tificate, this Court.
HELD : (i) The Appellants defendants had amply made out that the sale deed was supported by legal necessity.
The observations of the High 'Court were not supported by any evidence and they seriously vitiated the appreciation of the evidence on record.
(ii) Legal necessity does not mean actual compulsion : it means pressure upon the estate which in law may be regarded as serious and sufficient.
The onus of proving legal necessity may be discharged by the alienee by proof of actual necessity or by proof that he made proper and confide enquiries about the existence of the necessities and that he did all that was reasonable to satisfy himself as to the existence of the necessity.
[608 D] Recitals in a deed, of legal necessity, do not by themselves prove legal necessity.
The recitals are, however, admissible in evidence, their value.
varying according to the circumstances in which the transaction was entered into.
Where the evidence which could be brought before the Court and is within the special knowledge of the per son who seeks to set aside the sale is withheld, such evidence being normally not available to the alience, the, recitals go to his aid with greater force, and the Court may be justified in appropriate cases in raising an inference against the party seeking to set aside the sale on the ground of absence of legal necessity wholly or partially when he withholds evidence, in his possession.
In the present case the recitals in the deed about the existence of pressure upon the estate are amply corroborated by the circumstances.
[608 F] (iii) Since the plaintiffs only claimed relief against defendants 1 & 2 for declaration that the alienation in their favour was not binding on the plaintiffs and that relief cannot be granted to the plaintiffs, the circum 604 stance that the heirs of the 10th defendant are not impleaded in their appeal does not affect the right of the defendants to claim the appeal must be dismissed.
[610 C]
