Section 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, uses the term 'capital expenditure ' for which no allowance is given to the assessee.
The term 'capital expenditure ' is used as contrasted with the term 'revenue expenditure in respect of which the assessee is entitled to allowance under section 10(2) (xv) of the Act.
As pointed out by the Full Bench of the Lahore High Court in Benarsidas Jagannath, In re [(1946) it is not easy to define the term 'capital expenditure ' in the abstract or to lay down any general and satisfactory test to discriminate between a capital and a revenue expenditure.
Though it is not easy to reconcile all the decided cases on the subject, as each case had been decided on its peculiar facts, some broad principles could be 973 deduced from what the learned judges have laid down from time to time: (1)Outlay is deemed to be capital when it is made for the initiation of a business, for extension of a business, or for a substantial replacement of equipment: vide Lord Sands in Commissioners of Inland Revenue vs Granite City Steamship Company ( and City of London Contract Corporation vs Styles ( (2)Expenditure may be treated as properly attributable to capital when it is made not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade: vide Viscount Cave, L.C., in Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. ([1926] If what is got rid of by a lump sum payment is an annual business expense chargeable against revenue, the lump sum payment should equally be regarded as a business expense, but if the lump sum payment brings in a capital asset, then that puts the business on another footing altogether.
Thus, if labour saving machinery was acquired, the cost of such acquisition cannot be deducted out of the profits by claiming that it relieves the annual labour bill, the business has acquired a now asset, that is, machinery.
The expressions 'enduring benefit ' or 'of a permanent character ' were introduced to make it clear that the asset or the right acquired must have enough durability to justify its being treated as a capital asset.
(3)Whether for the purpose of the expenditure, any capital was withdrawn, or, in other words, whether the object of incurring the expenditure was to employ what was taken in as capital of the business.
Again, it is to be seen whether the expenditure incurred was part of the fixed capital of the business or part of its circulating capital.
Fixed capital is what the owner turns to profit by keeping it in his own possession.
Circulating or floating capital is what he makes profit of by parting with it or letting it change masters.
Circulating capital is capital which is turned over and in the process of being turned over yields profit or loss.
Fixed capital, on the other hand, is not involved directly in that process and remains unaffected by it.
One has got to apply these criteria, one after the other from the business point of view and come to the conclusion whether on a fair appreciation of the whole situation the expenditure incurred in a particular case is of the nature of capital expenditure or revenue expenditure in which latter event only it would be a deductible allowance under section 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The question has all along been considered to be a question of fact to be determined by the Income_ tax Authorities on an application of the broad principles laid down above and the Courts of law would not ordinarily interfere with such findings of 124 974 fact if they have been arrived at on a proper application of those principles.
The assessee acquired from the Government of Assam a lease for 20 years (with a clause for renewal) in respect of certain limestone quarries situated in Khasi and Jaintia Hills.
In addition to the rents and royalties for lease the assessee as the lessee had to pay two further sums as protection fees ' under the covenants contained in clauses 4 and 5 of the lease.
Under clause 4 the portection was in respect of another group of quarries called the Durgasil area, and the lessor undertook not to grant for this area any lease, permit or prospecting licence regarding limestone to any other party except with a condition that no limestone should be used for the manufacture of cement.
This protection was given in consideration of a sum of Rs. 5,000 annually payable by the assessee during the whole period of the lease.
Under clause 5 a further protection was given by the lessor to the lessee in respect of the whole of the Khasi and Jaintia Hills District for which lessee was to pay annually Rs. 35,000 to the lessor for 5 years.
According to these covenants the assessee in his capacity as the lessee paid the lessor a sum of Rs. 40,000 for the accounting years 1944 45 and 1945 46.
Held, that the sum of Rs. 40,000 was a capital expenditure inasmuch as it was incurred for the acquisition of an asset or advantage of an enduring nature for the whole of the business and Was no part of the working or operational expenses for carrying on the business of the assesses.
Accordingly the payment of Rs. 40,000 was not an allowable deduction under section 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
Countess Warwick Steamship Co. Ltd. vs Ogg [1924] 2 K.B. 292), City of London Contract Corporation vs Styles [18871 , Vallambrosa Rubber Co., Ltd. vs Farmer ( , Ounsworth (Surveyor of Taxes) vs Vickers Limited ( [19151 , Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables, Ltd. ([1925] , Usher 's case ( , John Smith & Son vs Moore (H. M. Inspector of Taxes), ( [19211 , Anglo Persian Oil Co. vs Dale ( , Golden Horse Shoe (New) Ltd. vs Thurgood (H. M. Inspector of Taxes), ( [1933]18 T.C. 280).
Van Den Berghs, Limited vs Clark (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) (I 19341 ; , Tata Hydro Electric Agencies, Limited, Bombay vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay Presidency and Aden ([19371 L.R. 64 I.A. 215), Sun Newspapers Ltd. and the Associated Newspapers Ltd. vs The Federal Commissioner of Taxation ([1938] 61 C.L.R. 337), Munshi Gulab Singh and Sons.
vs Commissioner of Income tax ([1945] , Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Century Spinning Weaving and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. ([1946] , Jagat Bus Service Saharanpur vs Commissioner Of Income tax, U.P. & Ajmer Merwara ([1949] , Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Finlay Mills Ltd., ([1952] S.C.R. 11), Commissioner of Income tax vs Piggot Chapman. & Co. 975 ( and Henriksen (Inspector of Taxes) vs Grafton Hotel Ltd. ( , referred to.
Benarsidas Jagannath, In re, ( , approved.
