R wanted to adopt L as his son but did not actually do so.
In accordance with R 's will executed in 1919 L inherited R 's property after his death.
In 1935 the appellant herein instituted a suit against L and the trustees appointed under R 's will.
It was the appellant 's claim that the will was supplemented by a codicil (this referred to a letter written by R to L some time after the execution of the will).
Under these documents, according to him, L inherited only a life estate.
He alleged that L was mismanaging the property and prayed for an injunction directing the trustees to take over management of the properties.
The Subordinate Judge framed four issues to the affect (1) whether the appellant was entitled to sue, (2) whether L inherited only a life interest, (3) whether L had mismanaged the property and (4) whether an injunction as prayed should be issued to the trustees.
The Subordinate Judge held that L had inherited not a life Mate but full ownership, and that the appellant had only a contingent right in the property depending on L dying without male issue, so that it was not possible to grant to the appellant the declaration he prayed for.
L adopted a son C in 1951, and died in 1957.
After his death the appellant filed another suit against L 's widow, C the adopted son and the surviving trustee.
This suit was also based on the claim that L had inherited only a life estate under R 's will and codicil.
The contesting defendants raised the plea of res judicata based on the decision in the suit of 1935.
The plea of res judicata was rejected by the trial court but accepted by the High Court.
In appeal before this Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the trial court in the suit of 1935 having held the suit to be premature and thus decided the preliminary issuability the appellant, its decision on the other issues was only obiter and could not operate as res judicata.
HELD: The appeal must fail.
There was no question of the trial of any preliminary issue in the suit of 1935 the decision of which would obviate the necessity of examining the other pleas raised and coming to a finding thereon.
The nature of the right acquired by L under the will of the testator was directly in question and the subordinate judge went elaborately into it to take the view that L had become absolutely entitled to the properties left by the ,testator.
The observation referred to in the concluding portion of the Judgment of the Subordinate Judge is not to be taken as the decision on a preliminary issue so as to render the finding on the other issues mere obiter and surplusage.
L698 G 699 Al If the final decision in any matter at issue between the parties is based by a court on its decisions on more than one point eacb of which by itself 6 92 would be sufficient for the ultimate decision the decision one these points would operate as resjudica between the parties.
question as to the nature of the estate taken by L under the will and document called codicil to the will of the testator having been in is in the suit of 1935 and the Court having been decided that L had obta an absolute estate to the property, this decision would bind the up in any subsequent litigation such as the present, in which the claim based on the will and cod cil.
[699 B C] Shankarlal vs Hiralal, A.I.R. 1950 P.C. 80, explained and distinguished Vithal Yeshwant Jathar vs Shikandarkharn Mukhtum khan (19631 2 S.C.R. 285, 290, applied.
