The petitioners are traders in foodgrains, edible oils and other articles of food.
In a petition under Art.32 they challenged the validity of sections 7, 10 and 19 of the .
They contended that: (1) sections 7 and 10 of the Act are violative of articles 14 and 19(1)(g) because, (a) section 16(1)(a) of the Act read with section 19(1) imposes an absolute liability on dealers; (b) the standards of quality and limits of variability Of quality prescribed by the Act are unreasonable and that small dealers would not be in a position to ascertain whether the goods purchased by them or in their possession are according to those standards as required by section 7 of the Act; (c) even when an article is purchased not as an article of food, but for other use, the vendor would be deemed guilty if the article did not conform to the prescribed standards; (d) if a retail seller opens a container of branded article of food he loses even the limited protection provided by section 19(2); and (e) that the penalties which may be imposed under section 16(1) (a) are unduly severe; and (2) the non availability to the vendor of the plea of his ignorance and the conclusiveness of the certificate of the Director of Central Food Laboratory under section 13(5) of the Act, violate the guarantee under article 20(3).
HELD : (a) The Act does not make mens rea an ingredient of the offence.
Ordinarily, for the protection of the liberty of a citizen, in the definition of offences, blame worthy mental condition is made an ingredient: but in Acts enacted to deal with a grave social evil or for ensuring public welfare especially in offences against health, it is often found necessary in the larger public interest to provide for imposition of liability without proof of a guilty mind.
If from the scheme of an Act, it appears that compliance with the regulatory provisions will be promoted by imposing such absolute liability and that it cannot otherwise be reasonably ensured, the court will be justified in holding that the restriction on the right of the trader is in the interest of the general public.
[172 H 173 C] Adulteration and misbranding of food is a rampant evil in our country.
The channels of supply and the movement of goods from trader to trader, and fertile sources of adulteration and misbranding, make it extremely difficult in a large majority of cases to establish affirmatively that storage or sale of adulterated or misbranded food stuffs was with a guilty mind.
Therefore, a statute calculated to control that evil is in the interest of the general public and merely because it makes a departure from the normal structure of statutes enunciating offences and prescribing punishments, the restrictions on traders will not be deemed unreasonable.
The defences set out in section 19(2) are open to the vendor and the act does not dispense with proof that the article of food is adulterated, misbranded or that its sale is prohibited : it only enacts that a vendor selling adulterated and misbranded articles of food cannot merely plead that he was ignorant of the nature and quality of the goods.
[171 G H; 173 C D] 167 (b) The schedule to the Act uses technical expressions in relation to standards of quality and an ordinary retail dealer may not be familiar, with them.
But the rules, made under section 23(1)(b) prescribe clearly the standards of quality.
The standards are arrived at after consultation.
with the Committee for Food Standards which.
consists of experts in the field of food technology and food analysis and representatives of the Central and State Governments.
Hence the standards cannot be, challenged as arbitrary or unreasonable.
[175, C] (c) What is penalised by section 16(1) is the importation, manufacture for sale or storage, sale or distribution of any article of food.
It is always open to a person selling an article capable of being used as an article of food as well as for other purpose, to inform the purchaser by clear notice that the article sold or supplied was not intended to be used as an article of food and in such cases section 16 would, not apply.
[174 G] (d) Under section 19(2) if the vendor has obtained the article of food from a licensed manufacturer, distributor or dealer or from a manufacturer, distributor or dealer With a warranty, he is protected, provided he.
has properly stored the article and sold it in the same state as he purchased it, even if it turns out to be adulterated or misbranded.
By merely opening the container the article of food does not cease to be in the same state in which the vendor purchased it.
Therefore, the vendor will not lose the protection of the sub section merely because he opens the container. [173 G H] (e) The severity of the penalty is not so disproportionate to the gravity of the offence that it may be deemed unreasonable, because, the penalties are imposed as a deterrent to prevent malpractices by traders in articles of food and to ensure the purity of articles of food.
[174 C] The Act deals with the regulation of a class of traders and in view of the widespread malpractices and the practical difficulties of controlling the malpractices, stringent provisions have been made in the Act.
The classification is founded on an intelligible differentia and has a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
[176 C] (2) Article 20(3) provides that no person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.
By providing that a plea of ignorance of the vendor wilt not be a defence and that the certificate of the Director of Central Food Laboratory, who is a disinterested and high placed official as conclusive, article 20(3) is not violated.
[176 D C]
