In the State of Madras there were :three types of inams namely: (1)those which constituted of the grant of melwaram alone; (2) thosewhichconsisted of the grant of both melwaram and kudivaram; and (3) minor inams.
By Madras Inams (Assessment) Act, 1956, full assessment was levied on all inam lands except melwaram inams granted on service tenure, without affecting in any way the rights between the inamdars and the persons in possession or enjoyment of the land.
To complete the agrarian reform initiated by the Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948, the he Madras Inam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1963 the Madras Leaseholds (Abolition and Conversion, into Ryotwari) Act, 1963, and the Madras Minor Inams (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1963, were enacted.
Under the first, acquisition of all rights of landholders in inam estates and the introduction of ryotwari settlement in such estates was provided for.
Section 18 of the Act provides that compensation shall be determind for each inam as a whole.
The second Act provides for the termination of the leases of certain leaseholds granted by the Government, the acquisition of the rights of the lessees in such leaseholds and the introduction of ryotwari settlement; and the third Act provides for the acquisition of the rights of inamdars in minor inams and the introduction of the ryotwari settlement.
The Acts contain provisions reducing the liability of the tenants in the matter of payment of arrears of rent.
On the question of the validity of the Acts, HELD : (1) The impugned Acts could not be challenged as violative of Arts 14, 19 and 3 1.
They deal with 'estates ' as defined in article 31A of the Constitution, and provide for their acquisition by the State ' They seek to abolish all intermediate holders and to establish direct relationship between the Government and the occupants of the concerned lands.
They were undertaken as a part of agrarian reform and hence, the provisions relating to acquisition or extinguishment of the rights of the intermediate holders fall within the protective wings of article 3 IA.
[795 D E] B. Shankara Rao Badami & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & Anr.
, ; , followed.
(2) Assuming that as a result of the levy of full assessment under the 1956 Act, the lands cease to be inams and the intermediaries ceased to be inamdars, the lands are still 'estate ' within the meaning of article 31A, because, they fall under one of the sub cls.
1, II or III of article 79 1 3 IA(2) (a).
If the impugned legislation can be traced to a valid legislative power the fact that the Legislature wrongly described some of the intermediaries sought to be removed does not make the law invalid.
[795 E H] (3) In the Absence of any material to the contrary, the court must proceed on the basis that the President had given his assent to the bills after duly considering the implication of the provisions contained therein.
[796 E G], (4) If the arrears of rent are treated as rent then the State Legislature has power to legislate with respect to the liability of tenants to pay the arrears, under Entry 18 of List 11, VII Schedule.
If they are considered as debts due from agriculturists then the State Legislature has competence to legislate under Entry 30 of the same list.
[796 G H; 797 A] (5) In the case of the first of the impugned Acts, assuming that for some of the properties included in the inam no compensation was provided, article, 31A bars the plet that there was contravention of article 31(2).[796 C D] (6)In regard to the inams belonging to the religious and charitable institutions, the impugned Acts do not provide for payment of compensation in a lumpsum but provision is made to pay a portion of the compensation every year as tasdik.
The method adopted is not violative of Art 31(2) and is at any rate protected by Art, 31A. [7917] A C] (7) Article 26(c) and (d) of the Constitution provide that religious denominations shall have the right to own and acquire properties and administer them according to law.
But that does not mean that the properties owned by them cannot be acquired by the State.
[797 C E] (8)It is open to the inamdars to agitate before the.
Tribunal constituted under the last Act that a particular property is not an inam at all and that the Acts do not apply to them.
[798 D E]
