The petitioner was arrested on July 17, 1970 and was produced before a first class Magistrate next day when he was remanded to judicial custody under section 167(2) Cr.
P.C. for 15 days.
He was informed at the time of remand that his arrest was in connection with a case relating to dacoity and murder and conspiracy to commit the same.
Although a charge sheet had been submitted against about 148 persons accused in the case the petitioners ' name was not among them, because as the police later explained, investigations against him had not been completed.
The petitioner objected to a second remand on August 1, 1970 but that very day the prosecution filed a supplementary charge sheet including his name.
Remand was then extended upto August 6 and thereafter upto August 20, 1970.
On the last mentioned date he was not produced before the magistrate because of alleged want of escort and the remand was extended in his absence.
In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution the petitioner challenged his detention from August 1 onwards.
The remand order of August 20 was challenged on the ground that it was made in his absence and it was urged that the law does not permit remand without actual production of the accused before the Court.
The constitutional validity of section 344(1A) and of the Explanation to the section was also challenged.
HELD : (1) In view of this Court 's decision in Rai Narain 's case it could no longer be urged that the production of an accused before the magistrate for the purpose of remand was a necessary requirement.
though as a rule of caution it is highly desirable that the accused should be personally produced before the magistrate so that he may if he so chooses make a representation against his remand.
The order of remand dated August 20, 1970 was in the circumstances not contrary to law so as to render the petitioner 's custody illegal justifying his release by this Court on habeas corpus.
It was still open to the petitioner to apply for bail to the appropriate court in accordance with law.
Rai Narain vs Supdt.
Central Jail, New Delhi, ; applied.
[826 G 827 C] (ii)Sub section (1A) of section 344 of the code vests in the court seized of a criminal case, power to postpone the commencement of or adjourn any inquiry or trial before him by order in writing stating the reasons therefore from time to time on such terms as the court thinks fit and for such time as it considers reasonable.
When the case is so postponed or adjourned the court may also by a warrant remand the accused, if in custody.
The discretion to adjourn being vested in a court of law has to be exercised judicially on well recognised principles and is therefore immune from challenge on the ground of arbitrariness or want of guidelines.
The judicial power to postpone or adjourn the proceedings is to be exer 823 cises only it from the absence of witnesses or any other reasonable cause the court considers it necessary or desirable to do so.
It has to record its reasons for so doing.
Similarly the discretion to order remand of the accused is to be exercised judicially keeping in view all the facts and circumstances of the case including the nature of the charge the gravity of the alleged offence, the area of investigation, the antecedents of the accused and all other relevant factors which may appropriately help the court in determining whether to keep the accused in custody or to release him on bail.
Reasonable cause for remand according to the explanation covers a case where sufficient evidence is obtained to raise suspicion about the complicity of an accused person in the offence and it appears likely that more evidence may be obtained by remand.
[828 C E] Further, both the order of adjournment as well as the order of remand are subject to review by the superior courts in accordance with law.
The challenge to the validity of section 344(1A) on the ground of want of guidelines must therefore fail.
[829 H 830 A] (iii)The suggestion that the explanation could not extend the substantive provisions of sub section
(1A) has merely to be stated to be rejected because the explanation merely serves to explain the scope of the expression reasonable cause.
[829 E] (iv)The argument that since section 344 falls in Ch.
24 Cr.
P.C. which contains general provisions as to inquiries and trials and therefore it cannot apply to a Case at the stage of investigation and collection of evidence is negatived by the express language of sub section
(1A) and the explanation.
Under sub section
(1A) commencement of the inquiry or trial can also be postponed.
This clearly seems to refer to the stage prior to the commencement of the inquiry.
The explanation makes it clear beyond doubt that reasonable cause as mentioned in sub section
(1A) includes the likelihood of obtaining further evidence during investigation by securing a remand.
Indeed a postponement of an inquiry on trial also seems to be within the contemplation of the general provisions as to inquiries and trials.
[829 C D] [Plea to reopen Rai Narain 's case rejected.]
