The assessee, having its registered office in Bombay and its factory in Bihar, was carrying on the business of manufacturing and selling trucks, bus chassis and spare parts to their appointed dealers and others.
Agreements were entered into between the assessee and the appointed dealers, under which, each dealer was assigned a territory in which alone the dealer could shell.
The dealers had to place the indents, pay the price of goods to be purchased and obtain delivery orders from the Bombay office.
In pursuance of the delivery orders the trucks etc.
were delivered in Bihar to be taken to the territories assigned to them for sale there.
If the dealers failed to abide by the term requiring them to move the goods outside the State of Bihar they would have committed breach of their contracts, On the question whether the turnover relating to the sales made by the assessee to its dealers for sale by them in their respective territories outside the State of Bihar, during the period 7th September 1955 to 31st March 1956, was exempt from liability to pay sales tax under the Bihar Sales Tax Act, on the ground that the sales took place in the course of inter State trade or commerce, under article 286(2) as it, then stood, HELD : Where under the terms of a contract of sale, the buyer is required, as a necessary incident of the contracts to remove the goods from the State in which he purchased the goods to another State and when the goods are so removed, the sale must be considered as a sale in the course of inter State trade or commerce.
[854 G H; 858 A 13] State of Travancore Cochin vs The Bombay Co. Ltd. ; , State of Travancore Cochin vs Shanmugha Visal Cashew Nut Factory, ; , Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, , Endupuri Narasimham & Son vs State of Orissa, ; , Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. vs section R. Sarkar, [1961] ] S.C.R. 379, The Cement Marketing Co. of India (P) Ltd. vs State of Mysore, 14 S.T.C. 175, Ben Gorm Nilgiri Plantations Co. vs Sales Tax, Officer, Special Circle, Ernakulam; , , K. G. Khosla & Co. (P) Ltd. vs Dy.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Madras, 17 S.T.C. 473 and Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs Asstt.
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Anr. ; , applied.
Coffee Board, Bangalore vs Joint Commercial Tax Officer, Madras, 25 S.T.C. 528, explained.
