The appellants were accused of an offence under, section 302 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Apart from P who was injured in the incident there were, according to the prosecution, two other eye witnesses M and D who.
knew the appellants from before.
The names of the appellants were mentioned in the First Information Report but not their parentage.
The appellants, at the stage of inquiry, made an application to the Additional District Magistrate (Judicial) requesting that a test identification parade be held.
According to the appellants P knew them from before but not the other two alleged eye witnesses.
The Magistrate rejected the application on the ground that the charge sheet had, already been filed.
The same request made at the trial stage to the Sessions Judge was again rejected on the ground it was not bona fide.
The trial court, believing the eye witnesses, convicted the appellants.
The High Court upheld their conviction and did not accept their plea that the trial had been vitiated because they had been denied a test identification parade.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, HELD: As laid down by this Court in Perkash Chand Sogani 's case the absenceof test identification in all cases is not fatal, andif the accused person is well known by sight it would be waste of time to put him up for identification.
But if there is any doubt in the matter the prosecution should hold an identification parade specially if an accused says that the alleged eyewitnesses did not know him previously.
It may be that there is no express provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure enabling an accused to insist on an identification parade but if the accused ' does make an application and that application is turned down and it transpires during the course of the trial that the witnesses did not know the accused previously, the prosecution will, unless there is some evidence,, run the risk of losing the case on this point.
[924 G 925 C] Perkash Chand Sogani vs State of Rajasthan, Cr.
92/1956 dt.
15 1 1957, applied.
Sajjan Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1945 Laj. 48, State of U.P. vs Jagnoo, A.I.R. 1962 All.
333, In re Sangish, A.I.R. 1948 Mad. 113, Awadh Singh & Ors.
vs Patna State, A.I.R. 1954 Pat 483, Provash Kumar Bose vs The King, A.I.R. 1951 Cal.
475, Kanta Prasad vs Delhi Administration ; 1221, referred to.
In the present case it could be said about D that his knowledge of the accused was very scant.
The claim of the other witness M that he had known the accused for about four years was not challenged in crossexamination.
Therefore on the facts of the case the trial of the appellants.
918 Could not be held to be vitiated because of the denial of test identification although the reason given by the Magistrate for refusing it, namely, that the cbarge sheet had already been filed, was wrong.
[925 G 926 C]
