The Director General of Disposals, through correspondence and sale notes, sold to the appellant company, United States surplus was materials consisting of vehicles and other stores.
Disputes having arisen between the parties, both as regards the contents of and the quantity of the vehicles deliverable under the contracts, they were referred to arbitration as per cl. 13 of the general conditions of the contract between the parties.
The disputes consisted of claims and counter claims and the umpire after deducting the amount of one claim allowed to the appellant, held that the appellant was liable to pay to the respondent Rs. 34,70,226.50 and costs amounting to Rs. 5,40,544,00.
The award was filed in the District Judge 's Court and the appellant applied for having it set aside on various grounds.
The Court held that with respect to certain matters claimed by the respondent the umpire had no jurisdiction and remitted the award for reconsideration of those items and also for readjustment of the amount of costs.
The High Court confirmed the judgment of the District Judge.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that the award was liable to be set aside, because : (1) the contracts of sale were misconstrued and the error appeared on the face of the award; (2) several documents bearing on the scope of the sales were not considered; (3) the umpire went beyond his jurisdiction when he awarded compensation to the respondent because the appellant removed certain vehicles; (4) that the umpire acted as a conciliator deciding matters on conjecture; (5) that the umpire fixed ground rent payable by the appellants without any evidence; and (6) that the costs awarded were totally disproportionate.
HELD : (1) When parties choose their own arbitrator to be the judge in the dispute between them, they cannot, when the award is good on the face of it, object to the decision either upon the law or the facts.
Therefore, even when an arbitrator commits a mistake either in law or in fact in determining the matters referred to him.
but such mistake does not appear on the face of the award or in a document appended to or incorporated in it so as to form part of it, the award will neither be remitted nor set aside.
Whether the contract or a clause of it is incorporated in award is a question of construction of the award.
The test is, did the arbitrator corn, ' to a finding on the wording of the contract.
If be did, he can be said to have impliedly incorporated the contract or the relevant clause but a mere general reference to the contract in the award is not to be held as incorporating it.
[288 F H; 289 A] Union of India vs Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd. ; , followed.
283 Champsey Bhara & Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. , applied.
Kelanton vs Duff Development Co. [1923] A.% ' . 395 and Giacomo Costa Fu Andrea vs British Italian Trading Co. Ltd. , 62.
referred to.
2(a) The dispute in the present case being as to what was sold and as to whether besides the sale notes, the subsequent clarifications or.
explanations given by various officers of the respondent formed part of the contract and were binding on the respondent, and both the questions having been referred to arbitration, the umpires findings on them would bind the parties unless he laid down any legal proposition such as a construction which is made the basis of the award and is on the face of the award erroneous.
The award showed that the umpire had considered besides the sale notes the oral and documentary evidence led by the parties as also the contentions urged by counsel.
It could not, therefore, be contended that the several documents were not taken into consideration by the umpire.
[291 E F; 292 E H] (b) The umpire laid down the legal proposition that the clarifications or assurances given subsequent to the dates of the sale notes were not binding on the respondent and could not affect the scope of the sales; but the fact that he answered a legal point, which he had to decide while deciding the questions referred to him, did not mean that he incorporated into the award or made part of it a document or documents, the construction of which was the basis of the award.
If there was an error in such a case it could not be said to an error appearent on the face of the award entitling the court to consider the various documents placed before the umpire but not incorporated in the award so as to form part of it, and then to make a search if they had been misconstrued by him.
[293 B E] (3) Once it was found that it was competent for the umpire to decide that the appellant company was not entitled to keep certain vehicles which it had removed, he must, to do justice between the parties, order the appellant either to return them or to pay compensation for them.
Since the first course was not possible because of lapse of time the second was the only obvious course.
Clause 13 of the general conditions provides for reference to arbitration of all questions or disputes arising, under these conditions or in connection with this co tract, and these words are wide and comprehensive.
Therefore, the umpire did not go beyond his jurisdiction in accepting the respondent 's counter claim for compensation.
[295 D E] (4) Merely because the umpire held that even though the appellant was not entitled to some vehicles claimed by it, yet the authorities had delivered a substantial number of them.
without going into details, it could not be said that he bad acted without evidence or that he behaved in the matter as a conciliator, or gave findings on conjuncture and surmises, especially when the appellant withheld relevant evidence which was in its possession.
[296 E F] (5) Under the contracts of the sale.
the appellant was bound to pay to the respondent ground rent and other charges which the respondent in its turn was liable to pay the owners; and since it was not the appellant 's case that the respondent had claimed a higher amount there was no sub stance in the contention that the arbitrator fixed the ground rent without any evidence.
[297 A C] 284 (6) Considering the huge amounts claimed by the parties, the volume of evidence, adduced and the number of days occupied in recording that evidence and in arguing the case, it could not be said that the discretion of the umpire exercised in the matter of costs was exercised in breach of any legal provision or unreasonably.
[297 C D]
