The assessee entered into an agreement with another company on November 29, 1954 for the sale of its colliery.
It was provided in the agreement that pending completion of the sale or delivery of possession, the vendor was to carry on business on behalf of the purchaser and run the colliery as on and from September 1, 1954 on the account and at the cost of the purchaser.
In the course of the appellant 's assessment to income tax for which the accounting year was from September 1, 1954 to August 31, 1955, the Income Tax Officer, after making adjustment for certain assets which according to him were not entitled to depreciation, worked out the figure of loss at Rs. 11,257.00; however he rejected a claim to set off this loss against the appellant 's other income on the view that the assessee did not carry on the business of the colliery during the year since the transfer took place with effect from September 1, 1954.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld this order and, although the Tribunal, in appeal, accepted the assessee 's contention that it carried on business till November 29, 1954, it did not allow the loss on the view that it had resulted from a closing down sale.
In respect of the same year, certain dividends on shares received by the assessee were included in its income under section 12 but its claim to set off this income against the loss in business for earlier years brought forward, was disallowed.
The High Court, upon a reference made to it, held against the appellant on both these issues.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The Tribunal had, in clear and unequivocal terms, upheld the contention of the appellant that it had actually carried on the business till November 29, 1954.
Section 10(2) (vii) provides that profits or gains shall be computed after making the allowances in respect of any such building, machinery or plant which had been sold etc.
, the amount by which the written down value thereof exceeds the amount 'for which the building, machinery or plant is actually sold or its scrap value.
The first proviso requires that such amount should actually be written off in the books of the assessee.
It is difficult to see bow all the conditions necessary for the allowance under the above provisions were , not satisfied.
The colliery business was carried on by the appellant during part of the relevant accounting year.
The machinery and plant had been used for the purpose of the business.
The sale of the colliery took place during the accounting year; and the loss of Rs. 11,237.00 was written off in the books of the appellant.
[387 C F] Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City II vs National Syndicate, ; followed.
384 Once it is accepted that the colliery business was carried on for a part of the relevant assessment year, the assessee would be entitled to get a set off under section 24(2) of the Act if the shares on account of which the dividends were received formed part of the assessee 's trading assets.
It was not disputed that the shares formed part of the stock in trade of the share dealing business of the assessee.
There could be no reason, therefore, for the assessee not being entitled to the set off claimed.
[388 B D] C.I.T., Andhra Pradesh vs Cocanada Radhaswami Bank Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax Madhya Pradesh vs Shrikishan Chandmal, and Commissioner of Income Tax, Ahmedabad vs Bhavnagar Trust Corporation (P.) Ltd., ; referred to.
