The respondent company appointed a managing director who was to retire at the age of 55.
The company arranged to provide a pension to him on retirement, or a pension to his widow if he died before attaining the age of 55.
It executed a trust deed on September 16, 1948, and paid to the trustees certain amounts to enable the trustees to take out an annuity policy to cover the pension.
On October 29, 1954, the company arranged to give enhanced pension to the director or his wife and set apart an ,additional sum on the same terms.
The director died in 1955 before attaining the age of 55, and the company claimed, in the return of its taxable income for the assessment year 1956 57, the total amount paid by it to the trustees as a permissible expenditure in the computation of the company 's business profits in the previous year.
The Appellate Tribunal, held; (i) that the setting apart of the funds amounted to expenditure Within the meaning of s.10(2)(xv), and (ii) that it amounted to revenue expenditure and not capital expenditure.
The Tribunal did not however consider whether the outgoing represented expen diture laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business and whether it was authorised under s.10(4A).
The Tribunal referred to the High Court two questions, namely : (1) whether the amounts constituted expenditure during the relevant accounting year 1955 within the meaning of the section and (2) whether it represented a revenue expenditure.
The High Court held in favour of the company.
When the Department sought to urge the plea that before the section could be called in aid, it had also to be established that the expenditure was wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business and that it was authorised by s.10(4A), the High Court did not permit the plea to be raised as it was not expressly raised before the Tribunal.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The amounts set apart became subject to the obligation to pay the pension arranged to be given, only when the director died, and since he died in May 1955, they must be deemed to have been expended only then, that is during the accounting year 1955.
[776 H; 777 A B] 774 Indian Molasses Co. (P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal, , referred to.
I I (2) An amount proved to be expended by a tax payer carrying on business is a permissible allowance under s.10(2) (iv) in the computation of the taxable income of the business if it is established; (i) that the allowance claimed is expenditure which, is not of the nature described in cls.
(i) to (xiv) of section 10(2); (ii) that it is not of the nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee; (iii) that the expenditure was laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of such business; and (iv) that it was authorised under section 10 (4A).
[778 C F] (3) The expression 'question of law arising out of such order ' in s.66(1), is not restricted to take in only those questions which have been expressly argued before and decided by the Tribunal.
If a question of law is raised before the Tribunal, even if an aspect of the question was not raised, that aspect may be urged before the High Court.
In the present case, the second question as framed and referred, does not exclude an enquirY whether the expenditure was wholly and exclusively laid out or expended for the purpose of the business of the company.
It cannot be held that, because before the Tribunal, stress was not pointedly laid upon the ingredients which enable an expenditure to be claimed and allowed, the question did not arise out of the order of the Tribunal.
Therefore the High Court was in error in refusing to allow the argument to be raised that the requirements of section 10(2) (xv) were not satisfied.
[779 H; 780 A; 781 B F] Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. ; , explained and followed.
(4) Since the Tribunal gave no finding on that part of the case, a supplementary statement could be called from it, but such a supplementary statement would be restricted to the evidence on record and may result in injustice to the parties.
[781 F] New Jahangir Vakil Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, 'Bombay North, Kutch & Saurashtra, Petlad Turkey Red Dye Works Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax and Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North.
Ahmedabad, , referred to.
(5) Therefore.
it is appropriate to decline to answer the second question on the ground that the Tribunal bad failed to consider and decide the question whether the expenditure was laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business of the company and that it had not considered all appropriate statutory provisions.
and to leave it to the Tribunal to dispose of the appeal under section 66(5) of the Act [782 A C]
