For the assessment year 1949 50 the assessee submitted a profit and loss account disclosing a certain amount as profit in a joint venture and claimed that half of this profit was paid to R under a partnership agreement.
The Income tax Officer accepted the return and included only half of the profit in the joint venture in computing the assessee 's total income.
In the next assessment year the assessee filed a return accompanied by a profit and loss account and claimed that it had transferred half the profit to R as his share.
But the Income tax Officer on examination of the transactions brought the entire amount of profit in the joint venture to tax, holding that the partnership agreement was got up a devise to reduce the profits received from the joint venture.
This order was confirmed by the Tribunal and the High Court.
Meanwhile, the Income tax Officer issued a notice under section 34 of the Income tax Act, 1922 to reopen the assessment for the assessment year 1949 50 and to assess the amount allowed in that assessment as paid to R. The Income tax Officer re assessed the income under section 34(1) (a) and added that amount to the income returned by the assessee in the assessment year 1949 50.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed that order but the Tribunal reversed.
The High Court, on reference, answered in favour of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal by the Revenue, HELD : Under section 34(1) (a,), if the assessee has disclosed primary facts relevant to the assessment, he is under no obligation to instruct the Income tax Officer about the inference which the Income tax Officer may raise 'from these facts.
The terms of the Explanation to section 34(1) also do not impose a more onerous obligation.
Mere production of the books of account or other evidence from which material facts could with due diligence, have been discovered does not necessarily amount to disclosure within the meaning of section 34(1); but where on the evidence and the materials produced the Income tax Officer could have reached a conclusion other than the one which he has reached, a proceeding under section 34(1) (a) will not lie merely on the ground that the Income tax Officer has raised an inference which he may later regard as erroneous.
The assessee had disclosed his books of account and evidence from which material facts could be discovered.
It was 'for the Income tax Officer to raise the necessary inference and if he did not do so the income which has escaped assessment cannot be brought to tax under section 34(1) (a).
[413 C] Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. vs Income tax Officer, Companies District 1, Calcutta & Anr. , 200, referred to.
