Under r. 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, made under the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 the Central Government issued a notification exempting cotton fabrics from excise duty.
The respondents owned a textile mill and factory.
They manufactured grey cloth which was removed from the mill and kept in a godown and later removed to the factory for being processed into leather cloth which was stored in another godown in the factory, from where it was taken Out as finished product.
The removal at each stage was done after filling the prescribed forms and with the permission of the Excise Inspector Incharge.
In each of the forms filled by the respondents upto July 30, 1960.
the Excise Inspector had made an assessment showing the rate of duty and the amount of total duty payable as 'nil '.
Later, the excise authorities thought the goods were not of the description exempted under the notification and on November 3, 1961, two notices were issued calling upon the respon dents to make certain payments, one under r. 10A and the other under r. 9 of the Rules.
The respondents protested and filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court held that the proper rule applicable was r. 10 but that as the demand notices were not issued within 3 months .Is required by that rule, the notices were illegal and void.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Rule 10A cannot apply when a short levy is made ,through error or misconstruction on the part of an officer as such a case is specifically provided for by r. 10, because, r. 10A deals with residuary powers and does not apply when specific provision for collection of duty is provided or by other rules.
[516 H; 517 A: 521 D] (2) The proper provision under which action should have been taken, if at all, is r. 10.
Under r. 10, when duties or charges have been shortlevied through inadvertence, error, collusion or Misconstruction on the part of an officer, the person chargeable with the duty or charge shall pay the deficiency on written demand being made within three month from the date on which the duty or charge was paid.
Though the words used are 'short levied ' and paid, in order to attract r. 10 it is not necessary that some amount of duty Should have been assessed and that the said amount should also have been actually paid.
It will apply even duty later on assessed must be considered to be the duty originally short levied.
1519 F G; 520 E F; 521 D E] (a) The expression 'levy ' is not used in the Act or the Rules as meaning actual collection, because, section 3(1) of ' the Act use.
,,, both the 'levied ' and 'collected '.
1514 G H] 507 (b) The expression 'paid ' in r. 10 should not be read in a vacuum and it will not be right to construe it literally as 'actually paid '.
The word will have to be understood and interpreted in the context in which it appears.
If the literal construction is accepted, then in a case where an assessee, in collusion, manages to have a very petty amount of duty assessed, he can, if he paid the amount, effectively plead limitation of three months, but, when no duty has been levied there would, be no period of limitation, a result which would be anomalous.
Therefore, the proper interpretation to be placed on the expression 'paid ' is 'sought to have been paid. ' (c) This interpretation will not cause any difficulty in calculating the period of three months.
The Act and the Rules provide very elaborately the stage and the time when the duty is to 'be paid and that must be considered to be the stage,or time when the duty 'ought to have been paid ', and the period of three months will be counted from that time.
[519 G H] Gursahai Saigal vs C.I.T. Punjab, ; followed, Allen vs Thorn Electrical Industries Ltd. , referred to.
(3) Rule 9 does not also apply to the facts of the case.
Rule 9(1) provides for the time and manner of payment of duty.
To attract r. 9(2) the goods should have been removed in contravention of sub r.
(1), that is, clandestinely and without assessment; but in this case there is no such clandestine removal without assessment.
Moreover, sub r.
(2) is a penal provision applicable where there is evasion of payment of duty, since the party is also made liable to a penalty and confiscation.
[520 G H; 521 A C] J. K. Steel vs Union. ; , followed.
Therefore, the demands having been made long after the expiry of the period of three months referred to in r. 10, the demands are not valid,
