On the question whether reception of secondary evidence of a written agreement to grant a lease, insufficiently stamped, is barred by the provisions of sections 35 and 36 of the Stamp Act, HELD :The first limb of Section 35 clearly shuts out from evidence any instrument chargeable with duty unless it is duly stamped.
The second liml of the section which relates to acting upon the instrument will obviously shut out any secondary evidence of such instrument, for, allowing such evidence to be let in when the original admittedly chargeable with duty was not stamped or insufficiently stamped, would have the effect of the document being "acted upon" by the person having by law or authority to receive evidence.
Proviso (a) is applicable only when the original instrument is actually before the court of law and the deficiency in stamp with penalty is paid by the party seeking to rely upon the document.
Clearly, secondary evidence either by way of oral evidence of the contents of the unstamped document or the copy of it covered by section 63 of the Indian Evidence Act would not fulfil the requirements of the proviso which enjoins upon the authority to receive nothing in evidence except the instrument itself.
There is no scope for inclusion of a copy of a document as an instrument for the purpose of the Stamp Act.
[596 D] If Section 35 only deals with original instruments and not copies, section 36 cannot he so interpreted so as to allow secondary evidence of an instrument to have its benefit.
The words "an instrument" in Section 36 must have the same meaning as in Section 35.
The legislature only relented from the strict provisions of Section 35 in cases where the original instrument was admitted in evidence without objection at the initial stage of a suit or proceeding.
[596 H] State of Bihar vs Karam Chand Thapar & Bros. Ltd. ; Raja of Bohbili vs Inuganti China Sitaramaswami Garu, 23 Madras 49.
, Thai] i Beehi vs Tirumalappa Pillai, 30 Madras 336 at 337 and Chidambaram vs Mayyappan, A.I.R. 1946 Madras 298, referred to.
Observations in Maung Po Htoo and three vs Ma Ma Gyi and one, I.L.R. 4 Rangoon 363 and Satyavati vs Pallayya, A.I.R. 1937 Madras 431 at 432, disapproved.
Ponnuswami vs Kailasam, A.T.R. 1947 Madras 422, and Alimana Sahiba vs Subbarayudu, A.T.R. 1932 Madras 693, explained.
