The respondent, who was selling Vinegar under a license granted under the Fruit Products Order, 1955, made by the Central Government under section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, was prosecuted under the , for selling adulterated vinegar.
He pleaded that vinegar, whether brewed or synthetic, being a food product and standard specification for such vinegar being tabulated in attached to the Second Schedule of the Fruit Order, persecution without the previous sanction of the licensing Officer as required by clause 15 of the said order was incompetent.
The trial judge rejected the contention.
But the High Court quashed the proceedings.
It was observed that the special provisions of the Fruit Order had overriding effect and therefore a manufacturer of fruit products could only be prosecuted under the provisions of the Fruit Order.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended for the respondent that there was an irreconcilable conflict between the two statutory provisions, and the Fruit Order being, not only of a date later than the Adulteration.
Act but also having, by virtue of section 3(6) of the Essential Commodities Act overriding effect over all other laws, it must prevail over the Adulteration Act and the rules.
On the question whether the Fruit Order impliedly repeals the Adulteration Act, HELD : The plea of implied repeal must fail and the appeals must be allowed.
To determine if a later statutory provision repeals by implication an earlier one it is necessary to scrutinise and consider the true meaning and effect both of the earlier and the later statute.
If the objects of the two statutory provisions are different and the language of each statute is restricted to its own object or subject, then they are generally intended to run in parallel lines without meeting and there would be no real conflict though apparently it may appear to be so on surface.
[611 D G] The provisions of the Adulteration Act and the Fruit Order, for effectuating their respective objects, have imposed, different restrictions in the manufacture and sale of vinegar whether brewed or synthetic.
in the interest of public health the respondent has to comply with the provisions of the Adulteration Act and Rules and in the interests of equitable distribution of essential commodities including the articles of food covered by the Essential Commodities Act and the Fruit Order they have to comply with the provisions of the fruit Order.
Both the provisions are supple 608 mentary and cumulative in their operation and no provision of the Fruit Order is shown to be destructive of or fatal to any provision of the Adulteration Act or the Rules made thereunder so as to compel the court to hold that they cannot stand together.
If the Adulteration Act or Rules impose some restrictions on the manufacturer, dealer and seller of vinegar, then they have to comply with them irrespective of the fact that the Fruit ,Order imposes lesser number of restrictions in respect of these matters.
The former do not render compliance with the latter impossible, nor does compliance with the former necessarily and automatically involve violation ,of the latter.
Even if both 'statutes to some extent overlap, section 26 of the General Clauses Act fully protects the guilty parties against double jeopardy or double penalty.
[618 C H] Om Prakash Gupta V., State of U.P.; , , T. section Baliali vs T. section Rengachari, ; , State vs Gurcharan Singh, A.I.R. 1952 Punjab 89, and Paine vs Stater, ,referred to.
