The six appellants were challenged by a police party when they were proceeding towards Pakistan territory with contraband goods.
Two of them, H and B, had fire arms with which they fired shots.
No member of the police party was injured.
There was darkness except for a temporary illumination created by the firing of two shots from a light pistol.
The police claimed to have recognised H and B, in this light even though they fled away from the scene.
The remaining four persons were arrested ,on the spot.
H and B, were arrested later and on their pointing out, two unlicensed arms were recovered.
The Sessions Judge held H and B, to be guilty under section 307 of the Indian Penal Code as well as section 25 of the Arms Act.
The remaining four appellants were convicted under section 307 read with section 149 I.P.C.
All the appellants were convicted under section 148.
The High Court maintained the convictions of the appellants though in the ,case of those without fire arms it reduced the sentences.
, With special leave the appellants filed appeals in this Court, HELD : (1) From the evidence it was quite clear that the shots which were fired by H and B, were not fired during the few seconds there was light as a result of the light pistol shots.
In other words the shots were fired in complete darkness when it was not possible for any member of police party to see the direction in which they were fired or the aim which was taken by H and B. It was not possible to say from this evidence that H and B fired the shots in the direction of the police party or at them and the possibility that the shots were fired in the air could not be excluded.
Thus the conviction under section '307 of H and B and of the other appellants under section 307 read with section 149 could not be maintained.[678 B D] (2)Rioting is defined by section 146 which provides that whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly or any member thereof in prosecution of the common object of such assembly every member of such assembly is guilty of the offence of rioting.
Section 349 gives the meaning ,of the word 'force '.
In the present incident no force or violence was proved to have been used by the appellants in prosecution of the common ,object of the unlawful assembly of which they were members.
With the exception of the firing of the shots in a direction which could not be deter mined, no attempt was made by any of the appellants to use any force or 675 violence on any member of the police party.
Accordingly, the conviction of the appellants under section 148 must also be set aside.
[678 F G] (3)The discloure statements made by H and B in respect of fire arms recovered at their instance could not be acted upon because the two witnesses produced in this connection gave statement which by their similarity appeared to be tutored and unconvincing.
These witnesses were associated with the police raids over a long period.
The other witness was proved to be inimical to H and B.
The High Court erred in ignoring these facts.
The conviction of H and B under section 25 of the Arms Act could not be sustained.
[679 B D]
