The Alloy Steel Project was an undertaking controlled and managed by a government company, namely, the Hindustan Steel Ltd. Alloy Steel was started in 1961 and went into production in 1964 65.
No profit was earned up to 1967 68.
The workmen claimed bonus at the minimum rate prescribed under the Payment of Bonus Act, 21 of 1965 in respect of the year 1965 66.
On behalf of the Alloy Steel Project exemption from payment of bonus was claimed under section 16(1) of the Act on the ground that it was a new establishment and had not made profits.
The Industrial Tribunal to which reference was made held that Alloy Steel could not be treated as a separate establishment because under the Act a company is itself an establishment so that all units of a company like Hindustan Steel Ltd. will constitute one establishment.
However, since Alloy Steel had not been earning profits the Tribunal directed payment of bonus at the minimum rate of 4% of wages as prescribed by the Act.
Aggrieved by this Award of the Tribunal the company appealed.
HELD : The Tribunal erred in holding the word 'establishment ' to be synonymous with 'company '.
In doing so it ignored the indications which are manifest from the language of the Act.
The significant words are those contained in section 2(16) which show that an establishment in a public sector has to be owned, controlled or managed by a Government company or by a corporation of the nature described in the clause.
Obviously therefore an 'establishment in private sector ' defined in section 2(15) to mean an establishment not in the public sector would be one which is owned, controlled or managed by a person or body other than a Government company or a corporation of the nature described in section 2(16).
In this view an establishment cannot be identified with a company.
It would be absurd to say that a company is owned, controlled or managed by a Government company or corporation Obviously, the word 'establishment ' is intended to indicate something different from a company as defined in the Companies Act.
[631 F 632 D] (ii) Alloy Steel was a separate establishment by virtue of the proviso to section 3 of the Act because for each of the undertakings of Hindustan Steel Ltd. including Alloy Steel separate accounts were kept though for the purpose of compliance with the provisions of the Companies Act a consolidated balance sheet and profit and loss account were also prepared.
There was no substance in the contention that the proviso to section 3 applies only to departments undertaking or branches controlled and managed by persons 630 other than companies.
It would be a strange method of construction of language to hold that the establishment referred to in the main part of section 3 will include all different departments undertakings and branches of a company, while it will not do so in the proviso to the same section.
There is no reason for interpreting the proviso to section 3 in this manner simply because in the case of separate departments, undertakings or branches of the establishment of a company, it may not be possible to make a deduction @ 8.5% of the paid up equity share capital.
[635 C D; 633 G 634 H] (iii) Sub Section (1) of section 16 grants exemption from payment of bonus to establishments newly set up for a period of six years following ,the accounting year in which the goods produced or manufactured are sold for the first time and, in the alternative; upto the year when the new establishment results in profit, whichever is earlier.
If the Alloy Steel Project was treated as an establishment newly set up for the purposes of section 16(1) the exemption claimed would be fully justified.
Section 16(2) of the Act makes it clear that the provisions of sub section
(1) are to apply even to new departments, undertakings, or branches set up by existing establishment.
Consequently, even if Alloy Steel Project was treated as a new undertaking set up by the existing establishments of Hindustan Steel Ltd. the exemption under section 16(1) would be available to it.
[637 D E] The proviso to Sub section
(2) of section 16 only comes in the way if bonus is paid in any year to the employees of all the units on the basis of the consolidated accounts.
That had never been done in the case of the Hindustan Steel Ltd. Consequently the Alloy Steel Project should have been treated as a separate establishment newly set up in the year 1961.
, It went into production in 1964 65 and did not earn any profits at all till 1967 68.
Therefore no bonus was payable to the workmen of this undertaking for the year 1965 66 in view of the provisions of section 16(1) of the Act.
[638 A B]
