Under section 110(1) of the if a proper officer has ,reason to believe ' that any goods are liable to confiscation under the Act, he may seize such goods.
Section 124 provides that no order confiscating any goods shall be made unless the owner of the goods is given notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to confiscate the goods.
Under section 110(2) where any goods are seized under sub section
(1) and no notice in respect thereof is given under section 124 within six months ,of the seizure, the goods shall be returned to the person from whose possession they were seized; provided, the period of six months may 'on sufficient cause being shown ' be extended by the Collector of Customs for a period not exceeding six months.
On March 19, 1963 goods were seized from the respondent and, on September 19, 1963 an extension for a period of four months was applied for by the customs authorises and was granted by the Collector on the , round that certain inquiries yet remained to be made by them.
On February 20, 1964, that is, one month after the extended period had expired, the Collector passed an order granting further extension for two months.
Both the extension orders were passed without giving any opportunity to the respondent.
The respondent challenged the second extension and the High Court held that the orders of extension were bad as the Colle ctor had to decide the application for extension judicially.
In appeal lo this Court, HELD : The power of extension under the proviso was quasi judicial, or at any rate, one requiring a judicial approach, and therefore, an opportunity of being beard ought to have been given to the respondent before ,ordering extension.
[811 B C] (a) The policy of the Legislature is, that in view of the extraordinary power of seizure the inquiry should ordinarily be completed within six months, but in exceptional cases, the legislature entrusted to a superior officer the power of extension on sufficient cause being shown.
The Collector is not expected to pass extension orders mechanically or as a matter of routine but only on being satisfied that there exist facts which indicate that investigation could not be completed for bona fide reasons within the time of 6 months laid down in section 110(2), [808 C E, F G] (b) Whereas section 110 (1) uses the expression reason to believe for enabling a customs officer to seize the goods, the proviso to sub section
(2) uses the expression sufficient cause being shown.
Sub Section (1) does not contemplate an inquiry at the stage of seizure, the only requirement being the satisfaction of the concerned officer that there are relevant reasons to believe that the goods are liable to confiscation by reason of illegal im 803 portation.
The words sufficient cause being shown mean that the Collector must determine on materials placed before him that they warrant extension of time.
Further, the civil right to have the seized goods restored which accrues on the expiry of the initial six months is defeated on exten Therefore, when the ' statute requires the determination being grantedtion of a sufficient cause on facts produced before the Collector it should be held to be a quasi judicial function or at least a function requiring judicial approach; and there is no, distinction between extension orders passed before and those passed after the expiry of the initial or the extended period.
[808 H; 809 A, C D; 811 C D] (c) When an order is made in bona fide exercise of power and within the provisions of the Act, which confer such power, the order is immune from interference by a court of law and therefore, the adequacy of the cause shown may not be a ground for interference, but the Collector has to hold an inquiry on facts, that is, on material placed before him, and consider the pros and cons of the question.
[809 D E; 811 E] (d) By holding such inquiry there is no danger of disclosure of facts which would be detrimental to the investigation.
The only disclosure would be about the fact that investigation at some place or places and about certain matters was still incomplete and pending.
As between the tight of the person from whom the goods were seized and the supposed danger to the investigation, the matter is not so weighted that it should he held that the Legislature could not possibly have contemplated a judicial approach by the Collector when he orders of extension of time.
[813 G H; 8 14 B D] Kraipak vs Union of India, [1970] .1
S.C.R. 457, followed.
Lakhanpal 's case; , and De Verteuil vs Knaggs, , referred to Sheikh Mohammed Sayeed vs Asstt.
Collector of Customs, A.I.R. 1970 Cal.
134, Ganeshmul Channilal Gandhi vs Collector of Central Excise, A.I.R. 1968 Mys. 89 and M/s. Prakash Cotton Mills Pvt. Ltd. vs Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise, Bombay, M.P. No. 127/1963 dt. 31 8 1970, overruled.
