The appellants obtained a decree against the respondent in the court of Sub Judge, Bankura (West Bengal) on December 3, 1949.
On March 28, 1950 they applied to the court which passed the decree to transfer the decree with a certificate of non satisfaction of the court at Morgan in the then State of Madhya Bharat.
It was ordered accordingly.
The Judgment debtors resisted the execute on the ground that the court had no jurisdiction to execute the same as the decree was that of a foreign court and that the same had been passed ex parte.
The court accepted that contention and dismissed the execution petition on December 29, 1950.
On April , 1951 the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act 2 of 1951 came into force.
By this Act the Code was extended to the former State of Madhya Bharat as well as various other places.
Meanwhile the appellants appealed against the order of the Additional District Judge Morena dismissing the execution petition to the High Court of Madhya pradesh.
The appeal was allowed.
In further appeal this Court 'restored the order of the Addl.
District Judge, Morena.
Thereafter on February 15, 1963 the appellants filed another execution case before the Bankura Court praying for the transfer of the decree to the Molrena Court for execution.
The Bankura Court again ordered the transfer of the decree of the Morena Court.
The judgment debtors resisted execute on the flowing grounds : (1) that it was barred by yes judicature in view of the aforesaid decision of this Court; (2) that it was barred by section 48 of the Code of Civil Procedure; (3) that it was barred by limitation and (4) that it was not executable because it was the decree of a foreign court.
The Addl.
District Judge rejected the objections.
The High Court in appeal agreed with the executing court that the execution petition was neiber barred by resjudicata nor was there any bar of limitation but it disagreed with that court and held that the decree was not executable as the court which passed the decree was a foreign court.
The decree holders filed the present appeal by special leave.
The questions which fell for consideration were : (i) whether the decree under execution was not executable by courts situate in the area comprised in the former State of Madhya Bharat; (ii) whether the decree was barred by section 48 of the Code.
HELD:Per Sikri C.J., Mitter, Hyde and Bhargava JJ.
(1) (a) On the date when the decree under execution was passed foreign court ' was 8 1 100 SupCII71 816 defined in section 2(5) of the Code as a court situate beyond the limits of British India which had no authority in British India and was not established or continued by the Central Government.
After the amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure in 1951. 'foreign court ' under the Code means a court situate outside India and not established or continued by the authority of the Central Government.
Whether we take the earlier definition or the present definition the Bankura Court could not be considered as a foreign court within the meaning of that expression in the Code. 'Foreign judgment ' is defined as the 'judgment of a foreign court '.
Hence the decree under execution could not be considered as a foreign decree for the purpose of the Code.
[820 D G] Accordingly the judgment debtors could not take advantage of the provision in section 13(b) of the Code under which the ex parte decree of a foreign court is not conclusive.
Nor could they take advantage of section 13(d).
They were served with notice of suit but did not choose to appear before the court.
Hence, there was Po basis for the contention that any principle of natural justice has been contravened.
Further section 13(d) was not applicable because the judgment in question was not a foreign judgment.
[821 D] (b) Under Private International Law a decree passed by a foreign court to whose juri diction a judgment debtor had not submitted is an absolute nullity only if the local legislature had not conferred jurisdiction on the domestic courts over the foreigners either generally or in specified circumstances.
Clause (c) of section 20 of the Code provides that subject to the limitations mentioned in the earlier sections of the Code a suit can be instituted in a court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the cause of action wholly or in part, arises.
This provision confers jurisdiction on a court in India over foreigners when the cause of action arises within its jurisdiction.
There was not dispute in the present case that the cause of action for the suit which led up to the decree under execution arose within the jurisdict on of the Bankura Court.
Hence, it must be held that the suit in question was properly instituted.
Accordingly the decree in question was a valid decree though it might not have been executable at one stage in courts in the former Indian States [822 B F] Sardar Gurdyal Singh vs The Rajah of Faridkot, 21 I.A. 171, referred to.
(c) A combined reading of sections 2(12), 38, 39 and 40 of the Code shows that a decree can be transferred for execution only to a court to which the Code apple .
This is what was ruled by this Court in Hansraj Nathu Ram 's case.
But by the date the transfer in the present case was made, the Code had been extended to the whole of India.
It followed that the transfer of the decree in question which was not a foreign decree, to the Morena Court, was in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
[823 B D] Hansraj Nathu Ram vs Lalii Raja & Sons of Bankura, , applied.
Narsingh Rao Shitole vs Shri Shankar Saran & Ors., ; , distinguished.
(d) Section 20(1)(b) of the Code of Civil Procedure Amendment Act, 1951 by which the Code was extended to Madhya Bharat and other areas undoubtedly protects the right acquired and privileges accrued under the law repealed by the amending Act.
But even by straining the language of the provision it cannot be said that the non executabilitv of the decree within a particular territory can be considered a privilege [824 E F] 817 Nor is it a 'right accrued ' within the meaning of section 20(1) (b) of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1950.
In the first peace in order to get the benefit of this provision the non executability of the decree must be a right, and secondly it must be a right that had accrued from the provisions of the repealed law.
It Was difficult to consider the non executability of the decree in Madhya Bharat as a vested right of the judgment debtors.
The non executability in question pertained to the jurisdiction of certain courts and not to the "rights of the judgment debtors.
Further the relevant provision of the Code of Civil Proedue in force in Madhya Bharat did not confer the, right claimed by the judgment debtors.
All that had happened in view of the extension of +he Code to the whole of India in 1951 was that the decrees which could have been executed only by courts in British India were made ' executable in the whole of India.
The change made was one relating to procedure and jury diction.
By the extension of the Code to Madhya Bharat, want of jurisdiction on the part of the Morena Court was remedied and that court was now competent to execute the decree [825 A E] Hamilton Gell vs White , Abbot vs Minister for Lands, and G. Ogden Industries Pvt. Ltd. vs Lucas, , applied.
(ii)The execution was also not barred, by section 48 of the Cod .
For considering the true impact of cl.
(b) of sub section
2 of section 48 of the Code provisions of articles 181 and 182 of the Limitation Act, 1908 have also to be taken into consideration.
These provisions clearly go to indicate that the period prescribed under section 48(1) of the Code is a period of limitation.
This interpretation is strengthened by the subsequent history of the legislation.
By the section 48 of the Code is deleted.
It , place has not been taken by article 136 of the Limtation Act of 1963 The High Courts also are now unanimous that section 48 of tile (ode is controlled by the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1908.
[828 A C] Kandaswami Pillai vs Kamappa Chetty, A I R, , Durg vs Poncham, I.L.R. [1939] All.
647, Sitaram vs Chunnilalsa, I.L.R. , Amarendra vs Manindra, A.I.R. '1955 Cal.
269, Krishna Chandra v Parovatamma, A.I.R. 1953 Orissa 13 and Ramgopal vs Sidram, A.I.R. 1943 Bom.
164 referred to.
Per Jaganmohan Reddy, J. (Concurring) No question of 'a vested right or privilege arose to entitle the respondent to challenge execution proceedings in Morena Court.
The decree granted by the Bankura Court was executable by the Courts governed by the same Code, by talk Court which passed it or by the Court to which it was transferred.
One the Code was made applicable to the whole of India by Amendment Act 11 of 1951 the decree was no longer a foreign decree qua the Morena Court which was a court under the Code to which the Bankura Court could transfer the decree for execution.
No doubt in ' Shitole 's case it was observed that section 13 of the Code creates substantive rights and not merely procedural and therefore defenses that were open to the resno dents were not taken away by any constitutional changes, but the ratio of the decision was that the Gwalior Court not being a court that passed the decree after the coming into force of Act 11 of 1951 the Allahabad Court could not execute it.
The impediment did not exist now in that the Bankura Court bad transferred the decree to a court under the Code.
the plea that section 48 Civil Procedure Code presents a bar of limitation was also not tenable.
[831 F H] 818 Kishendas vs Indo Carnatic Bank Ltd. A.I.R. 1958 A.P. 407 Sardar Gurdayal Singh V. Raja of Firidkote, 21 I.A. 171, Rai Rajendra Sardar Maloji Narsingh Rao Shirole vs Shri Shankar Saran, ; and Hansaj Nathuram Y. Lalji Raja
