At the relevant time the appellant was in the service of the State of Bihar as officiating Inspector of police.
After a departmental inquiry against him the report of the enquiry officer was submitted to the Inspector General of Police with the recommendation that the appellant should be given exemplary punishment.
Under section 7 of the the Inspector General had power to impose in suitable cases penalty of dismissal, suspension and reduction.
The Inspector General exonerated the appellant, from the charges laid against him but on the basis of certain adverse remarks in the confidential character roll of the appellant he passed an order reverting the appellant to the substantive rank of sub inspector of police for a period of one year.
These adverse remarks had never been notified to the appellant nor was,any opportunity to explain them ever offered to him before the order of reversion was passed.
In appeal the State Government set aside the order of reversion passed by the Inspector General on the ground that no opportunity had been given to the appellant to explain the adverse remarks, but the Government instead passed an order of dismissal disagreeing with the findings of the Inspector General and agreeing with the findings given by the enquiry officer by whom the appellant had been found guilty.
On further appeal to the Governor having been dismissed by the Government the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the writ petition but directed that the appellant 's appeal should go back to the government for disposal according to law.
The Government thereupon served notices on the appellant to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service.
The notice was issued oh the strength of rr.
851(b) and 853 of the Bihar and Orissa Police Manual, 1930.
The appellant thereupon gave his reply.
About a year after the High Court 's order quashing the Government 's order of dismissal, the Government issued an order reinstating the appellant but at the same time suspending him from service.
This was followed by an order dismissing the appellant from service.
The appellant once more filed a petition in the High Court which was dismissed in liming.
By special leave the present appeal, was filed.
The question for consideration was, whether it was competent for the Government, in an appeal filed by the appellant against the order of reversion passed by the Inspect(* General of Police to set aside the findings of that officer by which he exonerated the appellant from charges against him, which findings were not appealed against by the department, and then pass an order of dismissal accepting the findings of the enquiry officer.
HELD:(1) The Act itself confers on the Inspector General power to impose in suitable cases the penalty of dismissal, suspension and reduc L1100Sup.
Cl/71 864 tion,subject to the provisions of article 311 and the rules made under the Act.
The power of superintendence conferred, on the State Government by s.3 must, therefore, be read in the light of the provisions of section 7 under which the legislature has conferred specified powers to the officers mentioned therein.
Further, an appeal before the Government having been provided for under r. 851 (b), presumably both by the delinquent police officer, as also the department, if aggrieved by an order passed by the Inspector General, there would also be no question of the Government exercising its general power of superintendence under section 3 of the Act.
The exercise of such a power is ordinarily possible when there is no provision for an appeal unless there are other provisions providing for it.
[867 D 869 A] (ii)Under r. 851(b) the only question before the Government was whether the order of revision should be sustained or not.
There was no other matter by way of an appeal before the Government by the department or by anyone else being aggrieved against the order of the Inspector General by which he held that the charges against the appellant had not been established.
That being so, the Government could pass in exercise of its appellate power, under r. 851 (b) such an order as it ' thought fit in the appeal filed by the appellant i.e., either upholding the order of reversion or setting it aside.
In the absence of any other appeal, the Government could not sit in judgment over the findings of the Inspector General given by him under the power conferred on him by section 7 of the Act [868 E G] (iii)The order of the Govertunent could not also be defended under r. 853.
Assuming that under r. 853 the Government could suo moto revise the order of the Inspector General, on appeal having been filed before it, it could not so act.
The fact that the power of revision is conferred on the authority possessed of appellate power indicates that the power of revision is intended to be used when an appeal could not for some reason be filed and the appeuate authority felt that the order was so unjust or unreasonable that it should act under its revisional power.
That wae not the case of the Government in the present case.
[869 D E] [whether the order of the Government could be defended under r. 853A could not be considered because the existence of the rule was not proved.]
