The Appellant, Nagar Panchayat, Una, a local body, was constituted under the Gujarat Panchayat Act, 1961, which came into force 'from April 1, 1963.
Prior to this enactment, the Bombay Municipal Act, 190 1, as applied to Saurashtra, was in force in that region of the present State of Gujarat and under its provisions the Una Municipality was constituted.
This Municipality was collecting octroi on commodities imported into the municipal limits of Una under the Saurashtra Terminal Tax and Octroi Ordinance 1949.
Section 3 of that Ordinance empowered the State Government to impose the tax mentioned thereunder in the cities and towns specified or included later in Schedule 1.
One of these taxes was a terminal tax on goods imported into or exported from the terminal, tax limits.
Section 4 gave powers to the Government to make rules by notification for the purpose of carrying out the purposes of the Ordinance.
Rule 4, which was framed in Gujarati language, provided that collection of octroi and terminal tax would be done through the "Sudhrai" of the area entered in the schedule to the Ordinance.
After the Act of 1961 came, into force and the Nagar Panchayat replaced the Municipality, it continued to collect the actroi till 1967, when the respondent filed a petition under Article 226 challenging the competence of the Nagar Panchayat to collect the octroi.
The High Court held that since in the Rules promulgated under the Ordinance in Gujarati the collecting Agency had been described as "Sudhrai" which means Municipality, the Nagar Panchayat was not competent to collect the octroi under the Ordinance as it did not fall within the meaning or definition of the term "Municipality".
On appeal to this Court, HELD : Allowing the appeal : The High Court was in error in coming to the conclusion that the Nagar Panchayat was not entitled to carry on the work of collection of octroi under the Ordinance even though the Ordinance which imposed liability to pay remained in force.
Section 307 of the Act leaves no room for doubt that wherever a Nagar Panchayat was constituted in Place of the municipality, the municipality disappeared and all its funds including the right to realise taxes etc.
vested in the Nagar Panchayat.
In other words it was the Nagar Panchayat which was to function as the local body in the area previously constituted as a municipality.
Clause (k) of section 307 clearly saved all laws or rules which were applicable to the local area which formed a municipality and they were to continue to, apply and to remain in force in the area for which the Nagar Panchayat came to be constituted.
There was no force in the contention that the Ordinance did not become applicable to the cities and towns specified in Schedule I which came to be constituted as Grams or Nagars under the Act.
[410 C] 408 Even if in the rules framed under the Ordinance certain expression created a difficulty that could not defeat the right and the power conferred on the Nagar Panchayat by the Act of realising and collecting the octroi which was being done under the Ordinance as saved by clause (k) of section 307.
[410 H]
