The appellant was owner of immovable property situate within the limits of the municipal corporation, Ahmedabad City.
Under the power reserved to it by section 127 of the Act the Corporation served on the appellant as also on the other rate payers, bills and demand notices for payment ,of property tax in respect of the assessment year 1962 63.
These were challenged by the appellant and also certain other rate payers in writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court inter alia held (i) that section 129 of the Act did not suffer from the vice of excessive delegation by reason ,of the fact that no maximum rate of tax was laid down; (ii) that it was permissible under r. 10 to maintain only one assessment book and the levy could not be held invalid on the ground that ward wise assessment books as contemplated by rr. 13, 15 and 19 were not maintained.
In appeal to this Court by certificate, HELD : The High Court rightly held that the charging sections of the Act were not without guidelines.
The assessment and levy of the property taxes have to be in conformity with the Act and the rules.
These rules contain inter alia Taxation Rules which are part of the Act.
Section 454, no doubt, empowers the corporation to amend, alter and add to those rules but such power is made under section 455 subject to sanction of the State Government.
Under section 456 the State Government can at any time require the Corporation to make rules under section 454 in respect of any purpose or matter specified in section 457 which includes item "Municipal Taxes The assessment and recovery of Municipal Taxes.
" Although the Act did not during the relevant period prescribe the maximum rate at which the property taxes could be raised, the ultimate control for raising them was with the councillors responsible to the people, It was difficult therefore to sustain the plea that the power to levy the property tax was so unbridled as to make it possible for the Corporation to levy it in an arbitrary manner or extent.
[951 G 852 B] The proposition that when a provision requiring sanction of the Government to the maximum rate fixed by the Corporation is absent, the rest of the factors which exist in the Act lose their efficacy and cease to be guidelines cannot be accepted.
Further, if the Corporation has the flexibility of power given to it in fixing the rates, the State Legislature can at any moment withdraw that flexibility by fixing the maximum limit up to which the Corporation can tax.
Indeed the State Legislature had done so by section 4 of the Gujarat Act, 8 of 1968.
In view of the decisions of this Court it is not possible to agree with the contention that the Act conferred on the Corporation such arbitrary and uncontrolled power as to render such conferment an excessive delegation.
[954 F G] 943 Corporation of Calcutta vs Liberty Cinema, [1965] 2 S.C.R. 477, Municipal Corporation of the City of Ahmedanwd vs Zaveri Keshavia, , Western India Theatres Ltd. vs Municipal Corporation of the City Poona, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 71, Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot vs Madhya Pradesh, ; and Devi Das vs Punjab ; referred to.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Birla Mills, ; followed.
(2) The tax levied on the basis of one assessment book was not invalid, Rule 10 differs from section 157 of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888, in that, whereas, it gives an option to the Commissioner either to maintain one assessment book for the entire city or separate assessment books, Sec. 157 gave no such option and provided only for ward assessment book which collectively constituted, as in r. 10(2), "the assessment book '.
The legislature deliberately made a departure from section 157 by leaving it to the discretion of the Commissioner either to maintain one book or several books ward wise.
Such a departure was presumably made because the Act was to apply not to one city only, as did the Bombay Act of 1888, but to an unknown number of cities where Municipal Corporations might in future be set up, each having different conditions from the other and not being certain whether one assessment book or separate ward assessment books would be suitable for each of them.
[955 G; 956 A] The contention that r. 10 should be, construed as mandatory ignores (1) the permissive language of the rule and (2) the deliberate departure made by the legislature from section 1 57 of the Bombay Corporation Act, 1888.
If it intended that assessment books for each ward shoud be kept, there was no necessity for it to depart from the language of section 157 of that Act.
The fact that it made such departure is a sure indication that it did not.
Unless compelled by the context and content of the other rules, there would be no justification not to give to r. 10 the plain meaning of its language, particularly in view of the fact that the Act intended to apply not to one but to an indefinite number of cities, each differing in conditions from the other a factor which, as aforesaid, led the legislature to make a departure from the said section 157.
[958 H 959 B] Certain anomalies would arise from the High Court 's interpretation that rr. 13, 15 and 19 would not apply in the case of one assessment book.
Rule 19 was intended to enable the Corporation to proceed to makedemands so soon as entries were made as provided by cl.
(e) of r. 9 and the Commissioner had given thereafter his authentication that there existed no valid objection to the ratable values entered under the said cl.
Since the object of r. 19 was to make the entry as to the amount of tax conclusive evidence so as to enable the Commissioner to issue the bills, the legislature could not have intended to apply the rule only when ward assessment books were kept and not when, one assessment book was maintained, especially when in r. 10 it had deliberately given discretion to the Commissioner to maintain either one assessment book or several ward assessment books.
Further if r. 19 were to be so construed, rr. 13, and 15 also would have on the same reasoning to be likewise construed.
That would mean that the notice to enable the rate payers to take inspection under r. 13 and the notice under r. 15 fixing the date on or before which complaints against 'ratable value can be made, would have to be given only where ward assessment books are kept and not where one L1100 SupCI/71 944 assessment book is kept.
it goes without saying that the right to inspect provided under r. 13 and the right to file a complaint under r. 15 are vital matters.
That being so it is hardly conceivable that the legislature intended these rules to apply only where the Commissioner kept ward assessment books.
Since r. 10 has to be construed as permissive and not mandatory, and the construction adopted by the High Court in regard to rr.
13, 15 and 19 is bound to create anomalies, the conclusion must be that it was through inadvertence that the old language used in sections 157 to 168 of the Bombay Corporation Act was allowed to be retained without carrying out the change.
of language necessitated as a result of r. 10 giving discretion to the Commissioner either to maintain one book or several books ward wise.
In the result the assessment book in question must be held to be valid and no objection as to the validity of the bills and demand notices can be raised on the ground that only one assessment book and not warding books were kept.
[959 C 960 E]
