The appellant and two others were charged with the offences of murder of a woman and her three year old son by brutally stabbing them, and theft of cash and ornaments from the house of the deceased.
The offences were alleged to have been committed between 10 and 11 a.m.
About six months prior to the occurrence there was a quarrel between the deceased and the wife of the appellant who was the next door neighbor during which the deceased received an injury.
The deceased wrote about this incident to her father.
On the day of the occurrence when the husband of the deceased received information of the murder he rushed home from his shop and gave information of the occurrence to the police at about 12.40 p.m. but, as he did not suspect anyone, he merely, mentioned the circumstances in which he had come to know of the murder.
The appellant was with him till the time when the First Information Report was lodged.
Next morning one person informed the husband of the deceased that he had seen the appellant and two unknown persons entering the house of the deceased at about 10 or 10.30 a.m. on the previous day and another person gave the information that about 11.00 a.m. he had seen the appellant and two other persons coming out of his house.
The husband of the deceased passed on the information to the police.
By that time the appellant had disappeared.
Three days later, he was appellant handed.
On search of his person a spectacle case containing a pair of spectacles and a gold ring were recovered from the folds of his dhoti.
The Sessions Judge found the appellant guilty of murder and the High Court confirmed the conviction.
The other two accused were acquitted.
On appeal to this Court, HELD : The cumulative effect of circumstantial evidence in the present case falls short of the test required for sustaining a conviction.
When proof of guilt depended solely on circumstantial evidence, it was incumbent on the courts to properly consider and scruitinise all the material factors and circumstances for determining whether the chain of circumstantial evidence is so complete as to lead to the only conclusion of guilt.
[928 F H] (1) Normally this Court does not go into evidence and appraise it for itself in criminal appeals under article 136 of the Constitution, because, the Article does not confer a right of appeal.
It merely clothes this Court with discretionary Power to scrutinise and go into the evidence in special circumstances in order to satisfy itself that injustice has not been done.
In the present case the exceptional features were that it was a case of cir cumstantial evidence, the identification of the stolen articles was unsatisfactory, and the other two accused who had been charged along with the appellant, had been acquitted.
[919 F G] (2) (a) The husband of the deceased himself did not think that the appellant was inimical towards the deceased and he did not suspect him 915 of complicity in the murder.
The alleged altercation between the deceased and the appellant 's wife did not leave any serious impact on the mind of the husband of the deceased, and the appellant 's admitted presence in the house of the deceased till the lodging of the F.I.R. indicated that relations between them were not hostile or unfriendly.
[921 D F] (b) The letter written by the deceased to her father about the quarrels does not prima facie fall within the purview of section 32, Indian Evidence Act.
But even if this letter were held to be admissible the motive which it Suggested was not of such a strong and impelling nature as to induce the murder of the deceased and her infant child.
[927 H, 928 A B] (3) (a) It is unbelievable that the appellant and his companions entered the house of the deceased for the purpose of committing murder and theft in broad day light when persons who knew him were likely to see him entering the house.
The movements and behavior of the appellant did not show any abnormality.
On the contrary, the behavior and conduct of the appellant, Judged by normal standards, was not suggestive of his involvement in such a heinous crime.
In the absence of direct evidence this consideration could not be ruled out as irrelevant.
[922 A B, D E, G H] (b)The appellant 's conduct in absconding does not necessarily lead to the inference of a guilty mind.
Even an innocent person may feel panicky and try to evade arrest when wrongly suspected of a grave crime.
Normally courts are disinclined to attach much importance to the act of absconding.
of the accused, treating it as a very small item in the evidence for sustaining conviction.
[928 B D] (4) The evidence 'regarding the recovery of the articles from the appellant 's possession at the time of his arrest was not acceptable without proper corroboration from a more disinterested and dependable source.
Also, the ring said to have been recovered was of a common design and easily available.
[926 A C] (5) The identification of the ring was also unsatisfactory.
Identification tests do not constitute substantive evidence.
They are primarily meant for the purpose of helping the investigating agency with an assurance that their progress with the investigation into the offence is proceeding on right lines.
[192O F G, 926 G H] In the present case, although the articles were recovered three days after the occurrence the test identification was held by the Magistrate nearly four months later.
The reason for the delay was suggested that similar articles had to be procured for mixing up with the articles recovered; ,but in fact the delayed identification had been held in a highly unsatisfactory manner, in that the articles mixed up were dissimilar.
[926 C D] (6) The weapon with which the crime was committed was not recovered, and, no stains of blood were noticed by anyone on the, appellants clothes even though he was with the husband of the deceased right up to the lodging of the F.I.R. and even accompanied him for that purpose.
[928 E F]
