The appellant was convicted for offences under the .
He challenged the legality of his conviction on the ground that his statement to the customs authorities made on a summons issued under s, 108 of the Act and on which the conviction was substantially based was not admissible in evidence in view of section 24 of the Evidence Act.
It was contended that the statement was procured by threat in as much as the officer who recorded the statement warned the appellant that he was bound to state the truth as the officer was conducting a judicial proceeding to which sections 193 and 228 of the Penal Code applied.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD,: (i) A statement by a person against whom an inquiry is being held under section 108 is not a statement made by a person accused of an ,offence.
Therefore, the essential ingredient to attract section 24, namely that the confession must be made by an accused person, is lacking in this case.[143 D] Romesh Chandra Mehta vs State of West Bengal, and Illias vs Collector of Customs, Madras ; , relied on.
(ii) A compulsion to speak the truth emanates in this case riot from ,the officers who recorded the statement but from the provisions of the statute itself.
What is necessary to constitute a threat under section 24 of the Evidence Act is that it must emanate I e from ' the person in authority.
The officers recording the statement were only doing their duty in bringing to the notice of the appellant the provisions of the statute.
[44 C E] (iii) To be told that the law required him to tell the truth and if he did not tell the truth he was liable to be prosecuted under section 193 Penal ,Code, for giving false evidence did not constitute a threat under section 24 of the Evidence Act.
(iv) Even assuming that there was an inducement or threat, the appellant bad no basis for supposing that by making the statement he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil with reference to the proceedings in respect of which an inquiry was being conducted by the customs officers.
Therefore, even on this ground section 24 of the Evidence Act has no application.
[44 G H]
