Pursuant to the Indo Pakistan Agreement, 1958, and after this Court 'section Advisory opinion in In re the Berubari Union and Exchange and Enclaves, , Parliament enacted the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960 for cession of part of the territory of India to Pakistan.
In order to implement the provisions of the Act a physical demarcation of the portion that had to be ceaded was necessary.
The respondents filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court challenging the validity of the proposed demarcation principally on the ground that they would be deprived of their property without compensation.
A single Judge of the High Court held that the cession of the territory involved transfer of ownership and other private property rights to Pakistan through the Union of India, which, though outside cl 2A of article 31 was compulsory acquisition within the meaning of article 31(2).
The single Judge granted a certificate under article 132(1) for appeal to this Court.
HELD:(i) No question of acquisition within the meaning of Article 31(2) is involved in the present case.
The Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, makes it clear that mere deprivation of property unless it is acquisition or requisitioning within the meaning of cl.
2A will not attract cl.
(2) and no obligation to pay compensation will arise thereunder and it is essential under clause (2) that in order to constitute acquisition or requisitioning there must be transfer of the ownership or right to possession of the property to the State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State.
Cession indisputably involves transference of sovereignty from one sovereign State to another.
But, there is no transference of ownership or right to possession in the properties of the inhabitants of the territory ceded to the ceding State itself.
The effect of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, can by no stretch of reasoning be regarded as transfer of the ownership or right to possession of any property of the respondents to the "State" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
[202C F, H] Charanjit Lal Chowdhury vs Union of India, [1950] S.C.R. 869, 902, State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose & Ors.
; , Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. & Ors.
; , Saghir Ahmed vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; and Gullapalli Nageswara Rao & Ors.
vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation & Anr.
[1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 319, referred to.
245 (ii) This Court has on earlier occasions, observed that the practice of single Judge deciding the case and giving a certificate under Article 132 (1) for appeal to this Court, although technically correct, was an improper practice and that such a certificate should be given only in very exceptional cases where a direct appeal was necessary.
The present case may be of an exceptional kind; but this Court has been deprived of the benefit of the judgment of a larger Bench of the High Court on points which are of substantial importance.
[246B] R.D. Agarwala. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
C.A. Nos.
2634/69 etc.
dt. 23 2 1970 and Union of India vs J. P. Mitter; , , referred to.
