The respondent ran a hotel.
Due to failure of water supply he had to employ some persons to bring water from the tank for a short period.
Provident Fund Commissioner sought to enforce the provisions of the Employees ' Provident Funds Act, 1957, and the Provident Fund Scheme, 1952, against him.
The respondent thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court.
It was held by the High Court that employment of more than twenty persons for a short period did not bring an establishment within the proviso of section 1(3) (a) & (b) of the Act.
II It was also held, that only those employees should be taken into consideration who were in employment for the full period of one year.
While, thus laying down the legal position the High Court left it to the authorities Under the Act to apply the law to.
the facts of each case and dismissed the respondents petition.
The Provident Fund Commissioner appealed to this Court for further clarifica tion.
HELD:Considering the language of section 1(3)(b) in the light of the provisionsof s: 16 and section 1(5) as *OIL as the general scheme and object of the Act itwould appear, that employment of a few persons on account of some: emergency or for a every short period necessitated by some abnormal contingency which is not, a regular feature of the business ' of the establishment and which does not reflect its business prosperity or its financial capacity or stability from which it can reasonably be concluded that the establishment can in the normal way bear the burden of the contribution towards the provident fund under the Act, would not be covered by the definition.
The word 'employment ' must therefore.
be construed as employment in the regular course of business of the establishment, such employment obviously would not include employment of a few persons for a short period on account of some passing necessity or some temporary emer gency beyond the control of the company.
The High Court was right in holding so.
But it went wrong, in holding that the section contemplated the required number of persons to Work in the establishment continuously for one year.
It was difficult to impute to the Legislature an intention to exclude from the application of, them Act an establishment which regularly employs for its general business the required number, of persons for a major part of the year say for.
360 days every year ' the employment of the required number does not extent merely because to full one year Therefore the question must be determined in each case on its own peculiar facts.
[313C G]
