An uncle of the two respondents made a will in December, 1908 by which certain properties were endowed by him in favour of an idol which certain properties were endowed by him in favour of an idol will that he had two wives and no son had been born to either of them.
He nominated his two wives and his sister as "Mutawallies, managers and executives" to administer the endowment during their life time and also provided that in consultation with his Guru they should appoint a successor to themselves.
Upon the coming into force of the Bihar Hindu Religious Trusts Act, 1950, a notice was sent to the respondents by the Board constituted under the Act calling upon them to file certain particulars as required under the provisions of the Act on the view that the properties constituted a Public Hindu Religious Trust.
The respondents thereafter filed a suit against the Board for a declaration that the said properties were not subject to the Act and were private endowments.
After considering substantial oral and documentary evidence, the Trial Court held that the endowment was private to which the Act was not applicable.
An appeal to the High Court was dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended that it could easily be inferred from the facts and circumstances that the endowment was a public one.
The testator was childless and, therefore, there was no need for.
him to preserve the property for his family; that he had dedicated large properties for the upkeep of the idol, and the largeness of the properties indicated that it must have been for the benefit of the worshippers drawn from the public and not from the family; that on the extinction of the line of shebaits consisting of the two wives and the sister of the testator, the shebaitship was to go to a person of a different community ,on the advice of a stranger and that there was no mention in any of the ,deeds that the public were not to be admitted to the worship of the idol.
HELD: Dismissing the appeal, (i) On the facts, it was clear that the idol had been in the family for a number of years and only the family was doing its regular worship; there was nothing to show that the public ever looked after this idol or were allowed a share in the worship as of right.
Nor did the author of the dedication by his will make it clear that the public were to be admitted as of right.
The whole arrangement showed that the further looking after of the idol was to be the concern of the family, and it was only under the nomination of the family that a particular person of the Vaishavnava belief was to be in charge after the demise of the members of the family who were to become mutawallis after the death of the testator.
, It was ,obvious that in this family as there was no male issue and, therefore,, there was nobody to carry on worship and make arrangements for the seba puja 651 of the idol, as had been done in the family for a long time, some other kind of arrangement had to be made and this arrangement was made by the will.
No more can be read into it than what was said there.
[654 C] (ii) There was no force in the contention that merely because an exemption was claimed in regard to the income of the endowment as being for charitable and religious purposes, this would make the endowment a public one.
What a person does with a view to claiming exemption from income tax or agricultural income tax, is not decisive of the nature of the endowment.
The nature of the endowment is to be discovered only from the tenor of the document by which the endowment is created, the dealings of the public and the conduct and habits of the people who visit such a temple or Thakur Dwara.
The claim to exemption was with a view to saving some income of the endowed property.
It might have been motivated from other considerations and not that it was a public endowment.
[655 A C] Babu Bhagwan Din and others vs Gir Har Saroop and others, referred to.
Deoki Nandan vs Murlidhar ; ; Sivami Saligrama.
charya vs Raghavacharya and others, Civil Appeal 645 of 1964 decided on 4 11 65; distinguished.
