In 1906 the predecessor in title of the respondent leased out an open portion of land to the appellant 's father.
The lease was for building a residential structure, and the appellant constructed a house.
Though it was for 30 years certain, the lessee was entitled to remain in possession of the land so long as he paid the stipulated rent, which the lessor was not entitled to increase.
There were no express words indicating that the leasehold rights were intended to be heritable.
The deed provided for the right of the lessee to remove the structures after the lease period, meaning thereby vacating the land, if he so desired.
It gave the lessee the right to transfer by sale the leasehold interest.
In 1929, the original plot was given two numbers 94 and 93 the latter being the western portion in the possession of the respondent lessor and the former being the eastern portion leased out to the appellant.
There was a strip of land, 4 ft.
in width, immediately to the west of survey No. 94 and forming part of survey no 93.
This strip of land was used by the appellant for passage for going to a well situated in plot No. 93.
The appellant 's father had taken a portion of plot No. 93, including the strip, on lease, paying separate rent therefore and put up thereon a tin shed which stood there from 1935 to 1941.
Sometime thereafter the respondent commenced construction on survey No. 93 in close vicinity to the appellant 's plot On the questions: (1) Whether the lease was a permanent lease; (2) there was an accession in respect of the strip of land within the meaning of section 108(d) of the , and therefore, the strip of land must be deemed to be comprised in the lease; and (3) whether the appellant had acquired by prescription, rights of easement of light and air and of passage over the strip of land under section 15 of the Easements Act, 1882.
HELD: (1) The question as to whether a lease was permanent or for the life time only of the lessee, even where it was for building structures and was transferable, depends upon the terms of the lease.
The mere fact that a lease provides for the interests thereunder to pass on to the heirs of the lessee would not always mean that it is a permanent lease.
Such a provision can be made in two ways resulting in two different consequences.
The lease may provide a fixed period and then include a provision that in the event of the lessee dying before the expiry of such period his heirs would be entitled to have the benefit of the lease for the remainder 336 of the period.
In such caes, although the lease may provide for the heirs to succeed to the interests in the leased land it would only mean that such heirs succeed to the rights up. 'to the expiry of the lease period.
If the lease provided that the lessee could continue in possession of the property so long as he paid the stipulated rent, it would usually be regarded as lease for an indefinite period and as such for the lessee 's life time.
In such a case, if the lease contains a provision for the rights thereunder being heritable, then, such a lease,, though ordinarily for the lifetime of the lessee, would be construed as permanent.
[341F H; 344C E] In the present case, since the lessee was entitled to remain in possession even after the lease period it was a lease for an indefinite period.
But there was no provision in the deed making the lessee 's right heritable ' and therefore, it was not a permanent lease but only for the lifetime of the lessee.
[344A; 346D E] (a) The words, if the lessee were to remove the buildings before the expiry of 30 years he would have to pay rent for the remainder of the period, do not show an intention to create a permanent lease.
The clause providing for such removal is not that the lessee would remove the structures on default of payment of rent but on his own volition, a clause indicative of the parties not having intended the lease to be permanent.
[344B; 345E F] (b) The words 'after the lease period ' mean either at the end of 30 years or at the death of the lessee.
Therefore, the clause that after the lease period we shall, if we like, remove our buildings ', merely ensures the right to remove the structures if the lessee or his heirs so desired on the expiry of the lease period, that is, either at the end of 30 years or after the lifetime of the lessee.
The heirs are mentioned here to provide for the contingency of the lessee dying before the expiry of 30 years and also for the contingency of his living beyond that period and continuing to occupy the land.
In the event of the first contingency, the lessee 's heirs would continue in possession till expiry of 30 years and then remove the structures if they wished.
In the case of the second contingency the heirs of the lessee would have a right to remove the structures on the death of the lessee.
In either event the right provided for is the right to remove the structures.
It was not a provisions for the lease being heritable and its being consequently a permanent lease.
[345D H] (c) The pronoun used in the document is the vernacular equivalent of 'we ' used for the executant instead of the singular 'I ' and does not mean the lessee and his heirs.
[346B C] Sivavogeswara Catton Press vs M. Panchaksharappa, ; , Lekhraj Ray vs Kunhya Singh, 1876 77 L.R. 4 I.A. 223 Vaman Shripad vs Maki, I.L.R. , Donkangonda vs Ravanshivappa, , Bavasaheb vs West Patent Co. 56 Bom.
L.R. 61 and Abdul Rahim vs Sarafalli, , referred to.
Sonabai vs Hiragayri, , Runge Lall Lobes vs Wilson, Cal. 204, Promoda Nath Roy vs section Chowdhry, Cal.
648 and Navalram vs Javerilal, , disapproved.
(2) Under section 108(d) of if any accession is made to the leased property during the continuance of a lease, such accession is deemed to be comprised in the lease.
[346F] 337 In the present case, the appellant made no serious attempt to establish accession by adverse possession.
[347H] (a) When the plots were separately demarcated including the strip in the respondent 's portion no protest was ever made against such a demarcation by the appellant or his father.
[347G] (b) The appellant made a categorical statement in evidence, that according to him the said strip of land was covered by the lease deed and was not an acquisition over and above the leased land under the deed, but the evidence showed that strip was not so included.
[347G H], (c) The appellant sought to make out a case of easementary right by prescription, a case incompatible with the claim of adverse possession [348A B] (3) Under sections 12 and 15 of the Easements Act an easement by prescription can be acquired by assertion of hostile claim of certain rights over another man 's property.
In order to acquire the easement the person who asserts the hostile claim must prove that he had, the consciousness to exercise that hostile claim on a property which is riot his ' own, and where no such consciousness is proved, he cannot establish a prescriptive acquisition of the right.
Where he has pleaded ownership and has failed, he cannot subsequently turn round and claim that right as an easement by prescription.
To prove the latter it is necessary to establish.
that it was exercised on someone else 's property and not as an incident of his own ownership of that property.
[349D G] In the present case, the appellant having claimed, though unsuccessfully, that the strip of land was included in the leased land or that there was an accession, he could not successfully claim that during the ' requisite period he exercised rights over it as the owner of a document tenement.
Further,.
he could not claim any right of passage because his use of the strip as a passage was permissive.
[350C E] As to light and air through.
the windows on the western side the appellant could succeed only if there was a substantial privation of light, enough lo render the,occupation of his house uncomfortable according to ordinary notions of mankind [350H 351IA] In the present case, the plan showed that as a consequence of construction by the respondent there would be a partial deprivation of light and air.
But no attempt was made on behalf 'of the appellant to establish that the obstruction caused by the respondent 's construction had been such as to amount to substantial privation so as to render the occupation of the house by the appellant uncomfortable.
[351 C E] Rayachand vs Maniklal, I.L.R. [1946] Boni.
184 (F.B.), approved Colls vs Home and Colonial Stores, ; , applied [The question,whether under sections 4.and,12 of the, Easement Acta lessee can acquire a right to light and air as against the owner, left open] [349A]
