Rule 3 of the rules for selection of candidates for admission to the pre professional course leading to M.B.B.S. in the Government Medical Colleges in the State of Mysore provided that "no person who is not a citizen of India and who is not domiciled and resident in the State of Mysore for not less than ten years at any time prior to the date of the application for a seat, shall be eligible to apply".
The petitioner 's application for admission was rejected on the ground that she had not resided in the State for a period of ten years as required by r. 3.
She challenged the constitutional validity of r. 3 on the ground of violation of right to equality guaranteed by article 14 of the Constitution.
It was contended that the impugned rule, by imposing the condition of residence in addition to the condition of being domiciled in the State created an artificial classification which suffered from, unconstitutional discrimination.
In support of the validity of the rule it was urged that by the rule the State only attempted to select those students who were more likely to serve as doctors in the State and it was for the State to determine the sources from which to select candidates.
Dismissing the petition, HELD:The word "domicile" in r. 3 is used to convey the idea of intention to reside or remain in the State of Mysore.
If classification based on residence does not impinge upon the principle of equality, as held by this Court in D. P. Joshi vs State of Madhya Bharat, then the further condition of residence in the State for at least ten years would also be equally valid unless it is shown that selection of the period of ten years makes the classification so unreasonable as to render it arbitrary and without any substantial basis or intelligible differentia.
The object of framing the impugned rule is to impart medical education to the best talent available, out of the class of persons who are likely, so far as it can reasonably be foreseen, to serve as doctors the inhabitants of the State.
The State has to formulate with reasonable foresight a just scheme of classification for imparting medical education to the available candidates which would serve the object and purpose of providing broad based medical aid to the people of the State and to provide medical education to those who are best suited for such education.
Prover classification inspired by this consideration and selection on merit from such classified groups, therefore, cannot be challenged on the ground of inequality violating article 14.
The petitioner has not shown that they impugned rule suffer from the vice of unreasonableness.
[388 D 389 C] 382 There is likelihood of some casts of hardships under the impugned rule.
But cases of hardships are likely to arise in the working of almost any rule which may be framed for selecting a limited number of candidates for admission out of a long list.
This would not render the rule unconsti tutional.
[389 E] D.p.
Joshi vs The State of Madhya Bharat and Anr., ; , relied on.
Chitra Ghosh & Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors., ; and Minor P. Rajendran vs State of Madras & Ors., ; , referred to.
