There was a decree under the provisions of the U.P. Encumbered Estates Act, 1934 against the appellant 's father on the basis of a mortgage deed.
The decree was transferred to the Deputy Commissioner for liquidation of debts.
Meanwhile the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1951 came into force.
Compensation for proprietary rights as an intermediately vested in the State Government became payable to the judgment debtor.
On the death of his father the appellant and his brother became entitled to his property as well as the compensation payable to him.
The appellant and his brother received bonds of the aggregate value of Rs. 64,000.
Bonds of the face value of Rs. 32,000 remained with the compensation officer.
In 1959 the decree holder applied to the Collector for an order that the appellant and his brother do return the bonds which they had received from the compensation officer failing which their properties were to be attached.
The matter went up to the Board of Revenue.
The Board asked the Collector to take one or the other of three steps, namely, (1) to stop payment of instalment money on the bonds by the treasuries or (2) direct the compensation officer to hand over bonds of the face value of Rs. 32,000 remaining with him for the liquidation of the debts or (3) to attach the movable properties of the appellant and his brother for the liquidation of debts ' The appellant thereafter made an application to the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for an order quashing the order and direction to the Board of Revenue.
The Division Bench, in appeal against the order of the Single Judge, quashed the direction of the Board of Revenue according to which the properties of the appellant and his brother were to be attached.
The High Court upheld the other two orders of the Board of Revenue in regard to stoppage of payment of instalment money on the bonds by the treasuries and direction to the Compensation Officer to hand over the bonds of the face value of Rs. 32,000 remaining with him for liquidation of the debts.
in appeal to this Court the appellant contended that the Board of Revenue did not have power to issue the said directions.
HELD: By reason of the provisions contained in section 70 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and section 23A of the U.P.
Encumbered Estates Act, 1934 the compensation money is sent for by the Collector for the purpose of liquidation of secured debts on which decree is passed.
The Compensation Officer under r. 77(1) of the Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Rules, 1953 could issue notices to the intermediary directing him to take the bonds because under section 18 of the 1934 Act the decree holder becomes entitled to recover the amount of the decree in the manner and to the extent mentioned in 1934 Act.
The proviso 441 to section 18 of the 1934 Act enacts that the secured debt shall be recoverable from the compensation and rehabilitation grant as though the security had not been extinguished.
[445C D] Further, section 23A and section 23B of the 1934 Act require that the amount from the bonds on account of compensation or rehabilitation grant received by Collector shall be expended or utilised by the Collector in liquidation of the amount of the secured debt.
Under section 23B of the 1934 Act the bonds are received byCollector in pursuance of the requisition under section 23A of the 1934 Act.
The absence of the service of a requisition cannot confer a right on thejudgment debtor to take away the compensation money or bonds.
The principle is actus curia neminem gravabit.
[445E F] The decree holder under the provisions of the relevant statutes was entitled to be paid out of the compensation grant monies in satisfaction of the decree.
If the Collector had required the Compensation Officer under section 23A of the 1934 Act to place at his disposal pursuant to section 70 of the 1950 Act the compensation money, the bonds could not have been taken delivery of by the appellant.
The Board of Revenue rightly gave the directions to secure compliance with the provisions of the statute and performance of the statutory duty by the Collector as well as the Cornpenation Officer.
The appellants were not entitled to receive the bonds without satisfying the decree.
That is why the Board of Revenue correctly directed the stoppage by the treasuries of payment of instalment on the bonds.
[445G H] The other direction of the Board of Revenue requiring the Compensation Officer to hand over bonds remaining with the Compensation Officer was in aid of valid compliance with sections 23A and 23B of the 1934 Act as well as section 70 of the 1950 Act.
[446A] The jurisdiction and authority of the Board of Revenue touched directly on the performance of statutory obligations by statutory authorities.
The High Court rightly upheld the directions of the Board of Revenue.
[446B]
