The Bombay Tenancy & Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 was passed in furtherance of the State 's policy of social welfare and to give effect to agrarian reform.
By the Constitution First Amendment Act 1951 the said Act was included in the Ninth Schedule and came within the purview of article 31B of the Constitution.
In 1956 the State Legislature in order to implement the Directive Principles of State Policy passed the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Amendment) Act which came into force on 1st August 1956.
The main effect of the amendments made by the 1956 Act was that on 1st April 1957 every tenant was subject to other provisions deemed to have purchased from his landlord free of all encumbrances, the land held by him as a tenant.
The erstwhile landlord remained entitled only to recover the price fixed under the provisions of the Amendment Act in the manner provided therein i.e. by a tribunal.
The Amendment Act was challenged by a petition under article 32 but this Court held that it was protected by article 31A. Further changes in the Act were made by the impugned Act, namely, the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Amendment) Act, 1964.
In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution it was contended that these changes had affected the petitioner 's right to property in that he had neither the right to recover the price of the land deemed to be purchased by the tenant nor any hope of recovering it through the procedure prescribed by the impugned Act within a reasonable time.
It was urged that there was no time fixed for the tribunal to determine that it had failed in the efforts to recover the amount under the Revenue Recovery Act so that the tenant purchaser could be evicted.
The provisions of the Act were also attacked as unreasonable.
The question that fell for consideration was whether the impugned Act was protected by article 31A.
HELD: Once it has been held that Art 31A applies to an Act the petitioner cannot complain that his rights under articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution have been infringed.
The protection is available not only to Acts which come within its terms but also to Acts amending such Acts to include new items of property or which change some detail of the scheme of the Act provided firstly that the change is not such as would take it out of article 31A or by itself is not such as would not be protected by it and secondly that the assent of the President has been given to the amending statute.
So long as the amendment also relates to a scheme of agrarian reform providing for the acquisition of any estate or of any right thereunder or for extinguishment or modification of such right the mere transfer of the tenure from one person to another or the payment of the price in instalment or even the postponement of payment by a further period cannot be challenged under articles 14, 19 and 31.
[666H] 662 In the present case the impugned legislation had merely amended the Provision which related to the recovery of the amounts from the tenant who had become purchaser and the postponement of the time of ineffectiveness of sale till the tribunal has tried and failed to recover the amount from the tenant purchaser.
, This had not in any way affected the main purpose of the Act or the object which it seeks to achieve nor did the amendments effected thereby take the provision out of the protection given to it under article 31A of the Constitution.
[667B C] The petition must accordingly be dismissed.
Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs State of Bombay, 119591 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 489, referred to and held inapplicable.
