The respondent, who was the landlord of certain premises, filed an application under section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, for the eviction of the appellant, who was the lessee, on the ground inter alia, that the respondent required the premises bonafide for his occupation as a residence for himself and his family members.
The Rent Controller found that the requirement of the landlord was not bonafide and dismissed the application.
The order was confirmed in appeal by the Rent Control Tribunal.
The respondent filed an appeal to the High Court under section 39(2) of the Act.
Before the High Court both parties agreed that the case should be remanded to the Tribunal for a finding on the question whether the premises available with the respondent could be considered to be 'reasonably suitable residential accommodation ' as contemplated by section 14(1)(e).
On remand, the Tribunal reported that the premises in the occupation of the respondent were not reasonably sufficient for the respondent and his family.
The appellant however contended before the High Court, ignoring this finding of the Tribunal that on the concurrent findings of the two sub ordinate authorities that the landlord 's requirement was not bonafide, there was no question of law involved and so the High Court had no jurisdiction under section 39(2) to consider the correctness of those findings.
The High Court rejected the contention and held, that, in view of the finding on remand the decision of the subordinate authorities dismissing the respondent 's application was erroneous.
In appeal to this Court, HELD:This Court in Kamla Soni vs Rup Lal Mehra, C.A. No. 2150 of 1966 dated 26 9 1969 held that a finding on the issue whether the requirement of a landlord is bonafide is a finding on mixed questions of law and fact and not on facts only.
Therefore, it was open to the High Court, when exercising jurisdiction under section 39(2), to consider in proper cases the correctness of such a finding.
[939E G]
