The assessee was a limited company doing business as selling agents of a Textile Mill.
During the previous years relevant for the assessment years 1955 56 and 1956 57 the company had assessable profits but did not declare dividend, because capital loss far in excess of profits was incurred by it due to fall in value of its share holdings.
The Income tax Officer exercised his powers under section 23A (1) and levied additional super tax on the distributable surplus in the relevant years.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and the High Court however, took the opposite view, holding that in the circumstances it was not reasonable to expect the company to declare dividend.
In appeal to this Court by the Revenue, HELD : Whether in a particular year dividend should be declared or, not is a matter primarily for the Directors of a company.
The Income tax Officer can step in under section 23A(1) only if the Directors unjustifiably refrain from declaring dividend.
If the Directors of a company had reasonable grounds for not declaring any dividend, it is not open for the Income tax Officer to constitute himself as a super Director.
Though the object of the section is to prevent evasion of tax, the provision must be worked not from the standpoint of the tax collector but from that of a business man.
[85C E] Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal vs Gangadliar Bannerjee & Co. (P) Ltd. 57 , relied on.
In the present case in view of the capital loss of Rs. 12 lacs as found by the Tribunal, any reasonable body of Directors of a company would have done just what the Directors of the Assessee company did.
The Income tax Officer took an erroneous view of section 23A (1).
[85H] The fact that the company continued to hold the shares whose value could possible go up again was irrelevant.
The Directors of a company will be justified in taking things as they stand and not be fool themselves in the wild hope that the value of the shares may come up again.
[86C] It would be incorrect to say that capital loss cannot be taken into consideration in the application of section 23A(1).
[86E F] Commissioner of Income tax vs Williamson Diamonds Ltd. , applied. 82
