Under cl. 3 of the Imports (Control) Order, 1955, passed under section 3 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, no person shall import any goods of the description specified in Sch.
I except in accordance with a licence, and if it was found that the goods imported did not conform to the description in the licence, then, without prejudice to any action that may be taken against the licensee under the Sea Customs Act, such goods would be treated as having been imported without a valid licence in that behalf.
Under Entry 294 of section 11 of Part IV of Sch.
I of the Import Trade Control Policy (July to December 1956), import of motor cycles and scooters was permitted under an appropriate licence, but such a licence could not be used for their import in a completely knocked down (C.K.D.) condition except by approved manufacturers.
That is, there was no absolute phohibition for their import in C.K.D. condition.
The words completely knocked down conditions are not used in any technical sense and have the dictionary meaning of "made or constructed so as to be capable of being knocked down or taken apart as for transportation; in parts ready to be assembled".
Under Entry 295, except for rubber tyres and tubes, for whose import a separate licence could be obtained, there are no limitations as to the number or kind of parts or accessories of motor cycles and scooters which can be imported under a license obtained in respect of the goods.
There are no remarks against this entry as there are against Entry 294, that the licence would not be valid for import of spares and accessories which, if assembled, would make motor cycles and scooters The respondents ' licence authorised them to import goods covered by Entry 295, and they imported certain goods which arrived in two different consignments and on two different dates.
They did not contain tyres, tubes and saddles so that it was impossible to say that they constituted motor cycles and scooters in C.K.D. condition.
The Collector of Customs and the Central Board of Revenue in appeal, however, put the two consignments together and held that trade practice did not require the supply of tyres and tubes and saddles while supplying motor cycles, and that therefore they made up mopeds in C.K.D. condition and were, for that reason, not the articles covered by Entry 295 but articles prohibited under Entry 294.
The goods were directed to be confiscated with an option to the respondents to pay certain 'sums in lieu of confiscation, and personal penalties.
The respondent filed a suit in the High Court and the trial Judge dismissed it on the authority of Secretary of State vs Mask & Co. [1948] L.R. 67 I.A. 222, and that the suit was time barred under article 14 of the Limitation Act.
In appeal, the Divisional Bench followed Anand vs Thakore & Co., a decision of that High Court, and allowed the appeal.
In appeal to this Court, 558 HELD: (1) The mere fact that the goods imported by the respondents wereso complete that when put together would make motor cycles and scooters in C.K.D. condition would not amount lo a breach of the licence or of entry 295.
The restriction not to import motor cycles and scooters in C.K.D. condition was against an importer holding a licence in respect of the goods covered by entry 294 under which he could import complete and assembled motor cycles and scooters, and not against an importer who had a licence to import parts and accessories under entry 295.
[565 G H; 566 E] (2)When the Collector examines goods imported under a licence in respect of goods covered by Entry 295, what he has to ascertain is whether the goods are parts and accessories, and not whether the goods, though parts and accessories, are so comprehensive that if put together would constitute motor cycles and scooters in C.K.D. condition, because, it would then mean that there is in the entry a limitation against importation of all parts, and accessories of motor cycles and scooters.
Such an approach, would be acting contrary to and beyond entry 295, and in non compliance of the entry and would lead to the anomalous result that even if the importer had sold away one consignment or part of it, the Collector could still say that had the importer desired it was possible for him to assemble all parts and make motor cycles and scooters in C.K.D. condition.
[566 A C, H; 567 A B] (3)This Court in Girdhari Lal Bansidhar vs Union of, India; , , laid down that the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, could not, on the ground that it was erroneous, interfere with the decision of the authority upon whom jurisdiction was conferred to decide the question whether the goods fell under one or other entry, that is, under which of two competing entries the goods fell.
This Court also held that the import of parts of a prohibited article was import of the prohibited article, and that the importer could not be allowed to do indirectly what he could not do directly, and distinguished the case in Anand vs Thakore & Co. In Anand 's case, it was held that the jurisdiction of the Collector was only to ascertain whether the goods were spare parts and accessories and not to find out whether if put together they would constitute auto cycles in C.K.D. condition.
[567 B C; 568 B E] (4)In the present case also the question before the Collector was whether the respondents ' licence covered the goods imported by them, that is; whether the goods were parts and accessories.
It is not, therefore, one of those cases where between two competing entries the statutory authority applied one or the other and where a civil court cannot interfere even if the statutory authority committed an error., [572 C E] (5) Exclusion of jurisdiction of Civil Courts is not to be readily inferred.
Such exclusion is inferred when the statute gives finality to the order of the tribunal on which it confers jurisdiction and provides for adequate remedy to do what the courts would normally do in such a proceeding before it.
Even where the statute gives finality such a provision does not exclude cases where the provisions of the particular statute have not been complied with or the tribunal has not acted in conformity with fundamental principles of judicial procedure, and a determination by a tribunal of a question other than the one which the statute directs it to decide would be a decision not under the provisions of the Act.
[571 B E] Firm illuri Subbayya Chetty & Sons vs Andhra Pradesh, ; , Dhulabhai vs Madhya Pradesh, [1968] 3 S.C.R. 662, Panthulu vs Andhra Pradesh, ; , Anisminic Ltd. vs Foreign Com 559 pensation Commissioner; , and R. vs Fulham, Hammersmith and Kensington Rent Tribunal, , referred to.
(6)Therefore, the decision in the present case was covered by the exception laid down in Mask & Co. 's case and the provision excluding the jurisdiction of the civil court would not be applicable.
Since non compliance with the provisions of the Act would be acting in excess of jurisdic tion the Collector 's order was a nullity and article 14 of the Limitation Act, 1908, could not be applied.
Even if it was applicable, the suit would not be barred if the date of the appellate order of the customs authorities was taken into consideration.
[572 E F]
