The appellant was a public limited company doing the business of jute and manufacturing of jute goods.
It followed the mercantile system of accounting.
Before the Income tax Officer in connection with the assessment year 1955 56 the appellant claimed a deduction on account of assessed sales tax.
The demand of sales tax waS contested by the appellant before the higher sales tax authorities but before the matter was finalised the Income tax Officer completed the assessment.
He disallowed appellant 's claim for deduction of sales tax on the ground that the liability, to pay sales tax had not been accented by the appellant and no provision had been made in its books with regard to payment of the assessed amount.
The authorities Linder the Act dismissed the appeals.
The High Court in reference was of the opinion that unpaid and disputed sales tax liability could not form the basis of a claim for deduction In appeal by special leave to this Court the appellant submitted that sales tax paid or unpaid would be admissible deduction under s.10(2)(xv) as well as section 10(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922, and that where the mercantile system of accounting was observed the deduction would be permissible in the year to which the liability relates irrespective of the point of time when the liability has been actually discharged.
HELD: Under all sales tax laws including the statute applicable to the present case the moment a dealer makes either purchase or sales which are subject to taxation, the obligation to pay tax arises and taxability is attracted.
Although that liability cannot be enforced till the quantification is effected by assessment proceedings, the liability for payment of tax is independent of the assessment.
In the present case the liability had even been quantified.
The liability could not cease to be one merely because the assessee had taken proceedings before higher authorities.
An assessee that follows the mercantile system of accounting is entitled to deduct from the profits and gains of the business such liability which had accrued during the period for which the profits and gains were being computed even though it had to be discharged at a future date.
[281B F] Commissioner of Income tax West Bengal II vs Royal Boot House, and Pope The King Match Factory vs Commissioner of Income tax Madras, , applied.
278 The contention that since the assessee had failed to debit the liability in its books of accounts, it was debarred from claiming the same as deduction either under s.10(1) or s.10(2)(xv) of the Act could not be accepted.
Whether the assessee is entitled to a particular deduction or not will depend on the provision of law relating thereto and not on the view which the assessee might take of his rights nor can existence or absence of entries in the books of accounts be decisive or conclusive in the matter.
[282 C E] The appeal must accordingly be allowed.
