The assessee was a public limited company.
, Under article 37 of its.
Articles of Association the Directors could at any time in their discretion and without assigning any reason decline to register any proposed transfer of shares.
The question in income tax proceedings relating to the assess ment years 1952 53 and 1954 55 was whether on a true interpretation of article 37 the assessee company could be regarded as one in which the public were substantially interested within the meaning of the third proviso to section 23A(1) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
In reference the High Court answered the question in favour of the revenue on the view that the shares of the company were not freely transferable and therefore it was not a company in which the public were substantially interested.
In the assessee 's appeal by special leave, HELD : Article 37 could not by any stretch of reasoning be regarded by itself to be a restriction on the transfer of shares by one shareholder to another.
Free transferability of shares is a normal and common feature ,of limited companies.
Indeed there would hardly be any public company in the memorandum of articles of which an article similar to article 37.
will not be found.
This article appears even in the standard Articles of Association prescribed under the Companies Act itself.
The purpose is ,only to give power to the Directors for declining to register the transfer of a share when the paramount interest of the company so require.
There may be cases where it can be shown that the Directors have been exercising the power very freely and have virtually eliminated the element of free transferability.
In such cases it may be possible to hold that in fact the shares were not freely transferable.
But in the present case there was no evidence of the Directors having acted in the aforesaid manner nor was there any restriction in the other Articles of Association interfering with the free transfer of shares by one shareholder to another.
, The High Court was therefore in error in holding that the mere existence of an article like article 37 would affect the free transferability of the shares within the meaning of the Explanation (1) to section 23A(9) of the Act.
[372 C F] East India Corporation Ltd. vs Commissioner of income tax, Mad? as, and Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, , approved.
Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal vs Tona litte Co. Ltd. 48 I.T.R. 902, disapproved.
