The assessee company made a revaluation of its assets, namely, land, buildings, plant and machinery in 1956, and the increase in value was carried over to subsequent years.
For the assessment year 19 '57 58, on the questions, (1) whether in determining the net value of the assets under section 7(2) of the Wealth Tax Act the value as shown in the balance sheet should be substituted by the written down value as per the income tax records, and (2) whether, even on the basis of the value as shown in the balance sheet an adjustment on account of normal depreciation of the assets for arriving at the net value is justified, the High Court, on reference, answered the first question in favour of the assessee and did not answer the second question.
This Court, on appeal, set aside that judgment and remanded the case to the High Court.
Meanwhile, the High Court, for the assessment years 1958 59 and 1959 60, also on reference answered the first question in favour of the assessee and did not answer the second question.
After remand, with respect to the assessment year 1957 58, the High Court, answered the first question in favour of the Revenue and the second question in favour of the assessee.
In appeal to this Court, with respect to all the three assessment years, HELD : (1) (a) Wealth Tax is levied on the value of the assets of the assessee on the valuation date.
Section 7(2) of the Wealth Tax Act requires the Wealth Tax Officer to have regard to the balance sheet.
it is open to the assessee to satisfy the authorities that the valuation in the balance sheet is not correct, but, in the absence of such proof, the Wealth Tax Officer will be justified in proceeding on the basis that the value shown in the balance sheet is correct, because, no one can know the value of the assets of a business better than those who are in charge of the business.
[488 D F] Therefore, in the present case, the revaluation of the assets made in 1956, undoubtedly afforded a sound basis for valuing the assessee 's assets in the absence of any evidence showing that it was incorrect, and the answer to the first question for all the three years should be in favour of the Department.
The High Court was in error in holding that the evidence afforded by the balance sheet could not be considered as prima facie evidence of the value of the assets.
[488 F H] C.I.T. West Bengal vs Aluminum Corporation, and Kesoram Industries Case; , , followed.
(2) But the assets in the present case were subject to wear and tear and there was no evidence to show that the market value of these assets had , One up after the revaluation in 1956.
Hence, when the value of the 485 assets had to be determined on the concerned valuation dates, the Wealth Tax Officer should have deducted from the 1956 valuation the value of the depreciation of those assets after the revaluation.
Therefore, the answer to the second question for all the three years should be in favour of the assessee.
[488 H; 489 A B]
