The petitioner was detained under an order dated March 2, 1971 passed by the District Magistrate, 24 Pargana, West Bengal, under sub section
(i) read with sub section
(3) of section 3 of the West Bengal (Prevention of Violent Activities) Act, 1970.
The order stated that the District Magistrate was satisfied that it was necessary that the petitioner should be detained with a view to prevent him from acting in any manner pre judicial to the security of the State or the maintenance of public order as provided in section 3(1).
In the grounds of detention supplied to the petitioner three incidents of violence at railway stations in which the petitioner was alleged to have participated and used explosives were men tioned.
In his representations against being detained the petitioner did not allege any mala fides against the administration but only denied that he took part in the violent activities.
In 'support of the writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution challenging the order of its detention it was urged that while the impugned order mentioned his activities as being prejudicial to public order as well as security of the State, the instances given in the grounds of detention only mentioned activities pre judicial to public order.
The detaining authority had thus taken into account extraneous and irrelevant matters in passing the order of detention. ' According to the appellant it is only matters referred to in sub c. (i) of c1. (a) of section 3(2) of the Act which will relate to the activities adversely affecting the security of the State, and none of these matters had been mentioned in the grounds of detention furnished to the petitioner.
HELD : The contention of the petitioner that it is only sub cl.
(1) of cl.
(a) of section 3(2) which deals with matters adversely affecting the security of the State could not be accepted.
In fact that very sub clause refers to the matters herein as affectingthe security of the State or the maintenance of public order.
Thereforein this case the grounds of detention could not be held to be vague norcould the order of detention be held to be invalid on the ground thatthe petitioner must have been detained only to prevent him from actingin any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and not to the security of the State.
In particular under cl.
(d) of section 2 a person will be considered to be acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the State or the maintenance of public order, if he commits any offence under the .
The various incidents mentioned in the grounds of detention may also come under cl.
(b) of sub section '(2) of section 3.
Further the said grounds clearly bring the activities of the petitioner under section 3 of the .
[523 H 524 E] Accordingly the detention of the petitioner must be held to be valid and the petition under article 32 must be dismissed.
