The police filed a charge sheet against the appellant and another for various offences in connection with the fabrication of a British passport.
The offences mentioned in the charge sheet against the appellant were sections 419/109, 468 and 471, I.P.C., and against the other accused sections 419 and 471 read with section 468.
The Magistrate did not examine any witnesses, but after perusing the charge sheet and other documents filed before him under section 173, Cr.P.C., framed charges against the two accused and committed them for trial before the Sessions Court.
The charges against the accused included the offence under section 120B, I.P.C., the object of the conspiracy being, to commit the non cognizable offence of forging the passport.
The appellant filed an application in the High Court for quashing the committal order on the ground that no consent, as required by section 196A(2), Cr.
P.C., having been obtained, the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence of conspiracy.
The High Court dismissed the application.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Cognizance takes place when the Magistrate takes judicial notice of an offence.
Therefore, when a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under section 190, Cr.
P.C. upon a police report, prima facie he does so of the offences alleged in the report.
[573 H; 574 A] In the present case the charge sheet did not refer to or charge either of the accused with criminal conspiracy.
The cognizance which the Magistrate took was therefore, only, of the offences alleged in the chargesheet, and it was only at the later stage of passing the committal order that he considered that a charge under section 120B was more appropriate than that of abetment.
[574 F H] (2) Even on the basis that it is not the sections referred to in the charge sheet that matter, but the offence prima facie disclosed by the allegations, in the present case the offence 'primarily and essentially disclosed in the charge sheet and other documents was one of abetment of forgery and of the false impersonation.
[575 F H] Therefore, the Magistrate did not take cognizance of the offence under section 120B, I.P.C., and hence, consent under section 196A(2) Cr.
P.C., was not a condition precedent.
[576 B C]
