The assessee company was holding certain shares in an investment company which was its parent company.
The amount of dividend receivable by the assessee company was paid to it partly in cash and partly in share scrips of two other companies.
The relevant assessment year was 1959 60.
For the purpose of assessment under the Income tax Act, 1922 the Income tax Officer valued those shares as per their market value on the date on which those shares became the assets of the assessee company.
He therefore added to the amount of dividend purported to have been declared a sum of Rs. 61,500/ in computing the assessable income of the assessee company.
The Appellant Assistant commissioner upheld the order of the Income tax Officer and rejected the contention of the assessee company that those shares should be valued as per their face value.
The Tribunal allowed the assessee 's appeal on the grounds that : (i) the distribution of share scrips was not a distribution of dividend, (ii) the share scrips received by the assessee company had been valued at their face value in the hands of the parent company for the purpose of assessment of its profits and (iii) the assessee company had not sold the shares and so there could be no profit in respect of those shares.
The High.
Court accepted the first two grounds relied on by the Tribunal.
In addition it relied on the circumstance that under section 18(5) of the Act, the assessee can get refund of tax only on the basis on which the parent company was taxed.
The certificate granted by the High Court for appeal to, this Court was found to be invalid because it did not give any reasons.
This Court however allowed the revenue to appeal by special leave.
On behalf of the respondent assessee it was submitted that on a proper interpretation of the relevant provisions of the Income tax Act, 1922 the scheme of the Act in the matter of levying tax on dividend income was that the Income tax Officer should adopt a uniform method in assessing both the company declaring dividend as well as its shareholders who receive the dividend.
HELD : (i) It is well settled by the decision in Kantilal Manilal 's case that dividend need not be distributed in money only.
It may be distributed by delivery of property or right having monetary value.
, [623 B] Kantilal Manilal and Ors.
vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North, Kutch and Saurashtra, Ahmedabad, 67 I.T.R. 315, applied.
Further the question whether a dividend has been lawfully distributed or not is also irrelevant in the matter of bringing the dividend declared to tax so long as the distributing company passes a resolution distributing dividends.
In so doing the distributing company may act illegally and thereby incur penalties.
But yet the amount so distributed as dividend is assessable in the, hands of receiver of the dividend in view of section 16(2) which provides that for the purpose of inclusion in the total income of an 620 assessee, any dividend shall be deemed to be income of the previous year in which it is paid.
[623 C D] Kishnichand Chellaram and Ors.
vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay, , relied on.
(ii)It is well known that the face value of shares need not be their real value at a given point of time.
It would be wrong to say that when shares are distributed as dividend, the person who receives them gets only their face value in terms of money.
What he really receives is the market value of those shares as on the date he 'became entitled to those shares.
The value of the shares distributed does not depend on the valuation made by the distributing company.
The income earned by an assessee has to be determined by the authorities under the Act and not by a third person.
If it is otherwise several companies may distribute their dividend in kind and undervalue the goods distributed and thereby facilitate evasion of tax by their share holders.
[623 G 624 B] (iii)The question whether the shareholder retains those shares or sells them to others at profit or loss is irrelevant.
An income does not cease to be an income merely because the person who receives it retains it in his hands.
The fact that he receives it in kind does not make any difference in principle.
The Tribunal went wrong in thinking that as the assessee company had retained those shares in its own hands those shares should be valued at their face value.
[623 E H] (iv)The Tribunal and the High Court also went wrong in holding that it was not open to the authorities under the Act to value the shares differently in the hands of the assessee company when they had valued them at their face value in assessing the parent company.
The assessee company could not insist that the error should also be carried to the assessment of the assessee company.
No one gets any vested right in an erroneous order.
[624 G H] (v)Because of erroneous valuation of the shares in the hands of the parent company, the assessee may conceivably get a lesser amount as refund under section 18(5) but that circumstance could not alter the levy to be imposed on the assessee company.
There is no provision in the Act which makes the assessment of income dependent on refund.
The provisions relating to assessment are independent of refund through the provisions relating to refund may depend on assessment.
[625 E G] The appeal must accordingly be allowed.
