The Income tax Officer issued a notice to the respondent on January 5, 1962 under section 34(1) (a) of the Indian income tax Act, 1922, seeking to reopen his assessment for the assessment year 1945 47.
The respondent challenged the validity of that notice.
The High Court quashed the impugned notice by its order dated March 6, 1963 on the ground that the notice was issued beyond the time prescribed by law.
On April 1, 1962 the Indian Income tax Act, 1961, came into 'force.
Under section 297(2) (d) (ii) of this Act if "any income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment within the meaning of that expression in section 147 and no proceedings under section 34 of the repealed Act in respect of any such income are pending at the commencement of this Act, a notice under section 148 may . be issued with respect to that assessment year.
" The Income tax Officer again issued a notice under section 148 of the New Act in respect of the assessment which he earlier unsuccessfully sought to reopen by means of notice under section 34(1) (a) of the 1922 Act.
The respondent again challenged the validity of the notice.
The High Court quashed that notice on the ground that the Income tax Officer was not competent to issue that notice.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the notice under section 34(1) (a) being an invalid notice on the ground that it was barred by limitation the proceedings initiated on the basis of the notice should be considered as not pending when the new Act came into force.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : What section 297(2)(d)(ii) requires is the factual pendency of a proceeding under section 34 of the repealed Act.
Whether that proceeding was barred by limitation or not is irrelevant.
The proceedings pending before a competent authority cannot be said to be not pending merely because no relief can he granted in that proceedings because of the bar of limitation.
The proceedings in the present case were initiated by a competent authority and those proceedings were quashed for the reason that the notice was issued beyond the time prescribed by law.
Hence it cannot be said that no proceedings under section 34 of the 1922 Act, either factually or legally, was pending at the time when the new Act came into force.
[617 D]
