The assessee was a .,registered firm deriving income from securities, property, business and other sources.
In 1946 it purchased a hotel in 'Lahore for a sum of Rs. 46 lacs.
For that purpose it raised a loan of Rs. 30 lacs from a bank and a loan of Rs. 18 lacs from one R. The 'loan taken from the, bank was largely repaid but with R the assessee came to an agreement whereby R accepted a half share in the said property in lieu of the loan advanced and .
also 1/3rd of the outstanding liability of the bank.
This arrangement came into effect on November 1, 1951.
After the creation of Pakistan, Lahore became a part of Pakistan and the hotel in question was declared evacuee property.
As such it came to vest in the Custodian in Pakistan.
In its returns for the assessment years 1952 53, 1955 56 and 1956 57 the assessee claimed certain amounts as losses on account of interest payable to the bank but showed the gross annual letting value from the said property at Nil.
The Income tax Officer held that since the property had vested in the Custodian no income or loss from that property could be considered in the assessee 's case.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer.
The Appellate Tribunal however came to the conclusion that the assessee still continued to be the owner of the property for the purpose of the computation of loss, and the interest paid was a deductible allowance under section 9(1) (iv) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
reference the High Court on an analysis of the various provisions of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance.15 of.
1949 came to the conclusion that for the purpose of section 9 of the Act the assessee could not be considered as the owner of that property: 'In the assesee 's appeal to this Court it was contended that the property vested in the Custodian only for.
the purpose of administration and the assessee still continued to be its owner.
HELD : Under the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance 1949 the evacuee could not take possession of his property.
He could not lease that property.
He could not sell the property without the consent of the custodian.
He could not mortgage that property.
He could not realise the income of the property.
All the rights that the evacuee had in the property were exercisable by the Custodian excepting that he could not appropriate the proceeds to his own use.
The evacuee had only a beneficial interest in the property.
In the eye of the law the Custodian who had all the powers of the owner was the owner of the property.
His position_ was no less than that a Trustee.
[643 F 644 A] Section 9 of the Income tax Act, 1922, brings.to tax the income from property and.
not the interest of a. person in the property.
A property cannot be owned by two persons, each one having independent and exclusive right over it.
Hence for the purpose of section 9 the owner must be 640 that person who can exercise the rights of the owner, not on behalf of the owner but in his own right.
Accordingly the assessee was not the owner of the property in question during the relevant assessment years for the purpose of section 9 of the Act.
[644 D] It is true that equitable considerations are irrelevant in interpreting tax laws.
But those laws like all other laws have to be interpreted reasonably and in consonance with justice.
If the thousands of evacuee who left practically all their properties as well as businesses in Pakistan had been considered as the owners of those properties and businesses as long as the 'ordinance ' was in force then those unfortunate persons would have had to pay income tax on the basis of the annual letting value of their properties and on the income, gains and properties of the business left by them in Pakistan though they did not get a paisa out of those properties and business.
Fortunately no one in the past interpreted the law in the manner suggested by the assessee.
[644 E G] Official Assignee for Bengal (Estate of Jnanendra Nath Pramanik), , Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Fleming, and .Sir
Currimbhoy Ibrahim Baronetcy Trust vs C.I.T., Bombay, , applied.
Amar Singh vs Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab, [1957] S.C.R. 801, distinguished.
P.C. Lai Choudhary vs C.I.T., and Nawab Bahadur of Murshidabad vs C.I.T., West Bengal, 28 I.T.R. 510, considered.
