The appellant, a limited company, was managing agent of another company.
Under the terms of the agreement the appellant company was entitled to receive a fixed monthly sum as office allowance and commission at fixed rates on net profits and purchases and sales of cotton and yarn.
The managed company 's accounting year closed on the 30th day of December every year and that of the appellant company on the 30th day of June every year.
Under cl. 2(e) of the managing agency agreement the commission was due on the 31st day of December every year and it was payable immediately after the annual accounts of the managed company bad been passed in the General meeting.
The Annual General meetings of the managed company were held to adopt the accounts for the relevant accounting years on November 24, 1955 and July 21, 1956, The amounts of commission in terms of the cl.
2(e) were thus 'due ' on 31st December 1954 and 31st December 1955 and were 'payable ' immediately after 24th November 1955 and 21st July 1956 respectively.
Since the managed company had suffered losses in the preceding years the appellant relinquished the commission as well as the office allowance by resolutions of the Board of Directors dated April 4, 1955 and June 19.
On these dates the amounts of commission relinquished had become 'due ' but not 'payable '.
The Income tax Officer in making the assessments for the 1955 56 and 1956 57 did not make any allowance for the amounts relinquished and included them in the total income of the appellant.
According to the Income tax Officer the office allowance had been relinquished ex gratia and the commission had been relinquished after it had accrued.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer.
In ,reference the High Court held : (i) that the accrual of income was complete within the accounting year of the managed company and as no relinquishment had been done before the amount became due, the case came within the ambit of section 4(1)(b)(i) of the Income tax Act, 1922, (ii) that the relinquishment had not been made for the purpose of facili tating the legitimate commercial undertaking or by way of commercial expediency and the case was not then fore covered by section 10(2)(xv).
In ;appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) According to s, 4(1) (b) (i) of the Act, subject to the provisions of this Act the total income of any previous year of any person includes all income profits and gains from whatever source derived which if such a person is resident in the taxable territories during 971 such year accrue or arise of the deemed to accrue or arise to him in the taxable territories that year.
The dictionary meaning of the word 'accrue ' is to come as an accession, increment, or produce; to fall to one by way of advantage; to fall due. ' The income can thus be said to accrue when it becomes due.
The postponement of the date of payment has a bearing only in so far as the time of payment is concerned, but it does not affect the accrual of income.
The moment the income accrues, the assessee gets vested with the right to claim that amount, even though it may not be payable immediately.
There also arises a corresponding liability of the other party from whom the income becomes due to pay that amount.
The further facts that the amount of income is not subsequently received by the assessee would also not detract front or efface the accrual of the income, although the non receipt may, in appropriate cases, be a valid ground for claiming deductions.
The accrual of an income is not to be equated with the receipt of the income.
That the two, accrual and receipt of income, have different connotations is also) clear from the language of section 4 of the Act.
Clause (a) of sub section '(1) of section 4 of the Act deals with the receipts of income while the accrual of income is dealt with in cl.
(b) of that sub section. [975 B E] In the present case the accounts of the appellant company were maintained on a mercantile basis.
Under this system the profits and gains are credited though not immediately realised, and the entries thus made really show nothing more than an accrual or arising of the said profits, at the material time.
Further, the amounts of income for the two years in question were given up unilaterally after they had accrued to the appellant company.
As such the appellant could not escape the tax liability for those amounts.
[975 G H; 976 E] Indermani Jatia V. C.I.T., U.P., and C.I.T., Bombay City I vs M/s. Shoorji Vallabhdas & Co., 46 I.T.R. 144, applied.
(ii) The appellant could claim deduction of the amounts under section 10(2)(xv) of the Act if the amounts had represented an expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the business of the, appellant.
There was however nothing to show that the amounts were relinquished for the purpose of the appellant 's business or on grounds of commercial expediency.
The High Court therefore rightly rejected the claim under section 10 (2) (xv)[976 F G]
