By an arbitration award given in 1933 D was given a maintenance allowance enforceable against property allotted to the appellant and his brothers and mother.
Since the allowance was not paid D secured a decree for the sale of houses belonging to the appellant and his brothers.
The property was purchased by respondents 4 and 5 who after obtaining sale certificate from the court sought to obtain possession of the same.
On, 8th April 1955 the appellant his brothers and mother entered into an arbitration agreement with respondents 4 and 5.
According to, the agreement respondents 4 and 5 gave up their claim to the houses purchased by them in court auction and the arbitrators were to make award in respect of the amounts to be paid by either of the parties as well as the maintenance allowance payable to D and to the appellant 's mother.
The arbitrators by their award dated 20th October 1956 made provision for the amounts payable to different parties.
The also made on for the payment of allowance to D as well as for her residence.
provision the award had been put in court objections were filed against it.
The Additional District Judge, set aside the award inter alia on the ground that the award affected the rights of D and she had not been made a party to the agreement.
The High Court reversed the judgment of the Additional District Judge.
In appeal by certificate the appellant contended; (i) that the award was invalid because D was an interested party in the dispute relating to arbitration and she had not joined the arbitration agreement; (ii) that the reference to arbitrators was made out of court and as all the parties to the arbitration agreement did not sign the award in token of their acceptance, the same could not be made a rule of court; (iii) that because there had been earlier litigation about the house allotted to the appellant and his brothers, the same could not be the subject matter of arbitration dispute, HELD : (i) The rights of D remained intact and were in no way affected by the award dated 20th October 1956.
The maintenance allowance payable to her was also kept as a charge over the immovable property.
The fact that D did not sign the arbitration agreement as such would not vitiate the arbitration proceedings. 'She did not raise any objection to the arbitration proceedings or the subsequent award.
Ac cording to counsel she died three years ago.
In the circumstances the question whether her rights were prejudicially affected by the award was purely academic [31 E] (ii) An award given on a reference during the pendency of a suit relating to a dispute which is the subject matter of reference without obtaining the order of the Court cannot be enforced.
The underlying reason for the same is to avoid conflict of jurisdiction.
However according to section 47 of the , an arbitration award otherwise obtained may with the consent of all the parties interested be taken into consideration 29 as a compromise or adjustment of a suit by any court before which the suit is pending. ' In such an event, the Award is enforced as a compromise or adjustment of the suit because all the interested parties give their consent to the award.
When however, as in the present case, no suit is pending with respect to the subject matter of dispute and the parties choose to refer a dispute to the arbitrators, it is not essential that the parties should signify their consent to the award before the same can be enforced.
Agreement and consent are imperative only at the stage of referring the dispute to arbitrators but not at the stage of the award.
[31H 32D].
Jagaldas Damodar Modi & Co. vs Pursottam Umedbhai & Co., A.I.R. 1953 690, held in applicable.
(iii) A dispute is referred to arbitration because the parties agree to such a reference and the mere fact that the property which is the subject matter of dispute was also the subject matter of earlier litigation, cannot prevent the parties to refer the dispute about that property to arbitration.
What is.
referred to arbitrators in such a case is the fresh dispute and although the finding of the Court in the previous litigation may have a bearing on the dispute referred to the arbitrators, it would not stand in the way of reference of the fresh dispute to the arbitrators.
[32 F]
