The appellant created a trust in 1955 by transferring certain securities held by him to a bank as trustee.
One of the beneficiaries of the trust was the appellant 's minor daughter M.
The income accruing to M under the trust during the previous years relevant to the assessment years 1957 58, 1958 59, 1959 60 and 1960 61 was included in the assessments made on the appellant as an individual for those years by applying the provisions of section 16(3)(b) of the Indian Income Tax Act 1922.
In the assessment for the year 1960 61 the Income tax Officer had also to deal with the appellant 's claim for the allowance under section 9(2) off the said Act in respect of two separate houses owned by the appellant and maintained by him for residential purposes in New Delhi.
The Income tax Officer allowed the claim only in respect of one of the houses.
The appellant 's appeals.
before the authorities under the Act failed.
The High Court decided the questions referred to it against the appellant.
In appeals before this Court on certificate the contentions of the appellant which fell for consideration were : (i) (a) that section 16(3) (b) must be strictly construed; (b) that the assets covered by the trust deed not having been transferred to the wife or minor daughter but to a bank as trustee, section 16(3) (b) of the Act had no application; (c) even if section 16(3) (b) of the Act applied, what was to be included in computing the total income of the appellant was not the in come that had been received by the minor daughter under the trust deed but only so much of the income of the trustee as arose from the assets transferred to the trustee for the benefit of the minor child; (ii) that a reading of the first and second provisos to section 9(2) of the Act clearly showed that the allowance to an assessee is not confined only to one residential house HELD : (i) (a) it is true that section 16(3) (b) creates an artificial liability and must therefore be strictly construed.
But in construing section 16(3)(b) Courts cannot ignore the clear and unambiguous expressions contained therein and all those expressions must receive a proper interpretation.[9 C D] C.I.T. Bombay vs Manual Dhanji, , C.I.T.,.
Gujarat vs Keshavlal Lallubhai Patel, and; C.I.T., West Bengal II vs Prem Bhai Parekh (b) The contention that section 16(3) (b) applies only to those cases where ultimately the corpus of the trust property is also transferred to the wife or the minor child, must be rejected.
The provisions of section 16(3)(b) are very clear, and, the only requirement so far as this aspect is concerned is that the assets Must be transferred.
to, any person or association of persons and that transfer of assets must be for the benefit of the wife or the 2 minor child or both.
In this connection it is pertinent to note the wordings of section 16(3) (a) (iii) and section 16(3) (a) (iv).
The former provision clearly refers to assets transferred directly or indirectly to the wife by the husband and the latter provision refers to assets transferred directly or indirectly to the minor child not being a married daughter.
But in cl.
(b) of section 16(3) the transfer of assets is not to the wife or the minor child or both but to any person or association of persons.
Therefore it is clear that when the legislature intended to provide for a direct transfer of assets either to the wife or to the minor child, it has used the expressions as are found in section 16(3) (a) (iii) and section 16(3) (a) (iv).
The different phraseology used in cl.
(b) of section 16(3) makes it clear that the transfer of assets need not be to the wife or the minor child.
Nor does the said clause require that the corpus of the property so transferred to any person or association of persons should ultimately vest in the wife or the minor child [9G 1OB] C.I.T. Bombay vs Sir Mahomed Yusuf Ismail, [1944] 12 I.T.R. 8 approved.
(c) From a plain reading of section 16(3) (b) it is clear that what is to be included in computing the total income of the assessee is that part of the income of the trust which is received for the benefit in this case of the minor daughter.
It is the share income which has accrued to or has been received by the minor daughter under the trust deed in the relevant accounting year, that has to be included in the total income of the father, the assessee.
The expression "so much of the income" occurring in this clause also makes it clear that the said provision relates to the share income of the minor daughter, in this case, and not that of the trustee bank.
[11 B C] Tulsidas Kilachand and ors.
vs C.I.T. Bombay City 1, and C.I.T. Bombay vs Manilal Dhanji, applied.
(ii)A reading of the second proviso to sub section (2) of section
