The appellant was a co operative society registered in Bombay under the Bombay Co operative Societies Act, 1925.
The head office of the appellant was in Bombay and it had a branch in Mangalore.
As the objects of the appellant were not confined to one State it was governed by MultiUnit Cooperative Societies Act, 1942 a Central Act.
The appellant made a claim under section 54 of the Bombay Act in respect of a transaction which took place in Mangalore against the respondent who was a resident of Kesaragod and was a member of the appellant society.
Both Mangalore and Kesaragod were at the relevant time in Madras Presidency.
The Deputy Registrar of Co operative Societies Bombay gave an award regarding that claim.
The award was sought to be executed as a decree in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Kesaragod.
The respondent took an objection to the execution on the ground that the Deputy Registrar of Bombay bad no jurisdiction to pass the award and the same could not be executed as a decree in the courts in Kerala.
Upholding the objection the Subordinate Judge dismissed the execution application.
The High Court affirmed the decision.
In appeal by special leave before this Court the appellant contended that since it was registered in Bombay State it was the Bombay Act which would govern the appellant society for purposes of registration, control and dissolution as laid down in section 2(1) of the Central Act.
The word 'control it was urged comprehends within itself the adjudication of a claim made by the society against its members, and in the circumstances the award under, section 54 of the Bombay Act made by the Deputy Registrar Co operative Societies Bombay did not suffer from any legal infirmity.
HELD, : As the objects of the appellant society were extended to the Presidency of Madras it should in view of sub section (1) of section 2 of the Central Act be deemed to have been registered under the law in force in the Presidency of Madras relating to co operative societies.
The law which was then in force was the Madras Co operative Societies Act, 1932.
Under section 51 of that Act a dispute between the appellant and the respondent in respect of its dealings relating to its Mangalore branch would normally have to be adjudicated upon by the Registrar appointed under the Madras Act.
The fact that for the purpose of control the appellant society was governed by the Bombay Act would not justify a departure from the above normal rule.
[166 B E] The word 'control ' is synonymous with superintendence, management, or authority, to direct restrict or regulate.
Control is exercised by a superior authority in exercise of its supervisory power.
Adjudication of disputes in a judicial or quasi judicial function and it would be unduly straining the meaning of the word 'control ' to hold that it also covers the adjudication of disputes between a co operative society and its members.
There is a clear distinction between jurisdiction to decide a dispute which is a judicial power, and the exercise of control which is an administrative power, and it would be wrong to treat the two as identical or equate one with the other.
[166 F G] 163 Panchshila Industrial Co operative Societies (Multi unit) vs Gurgaon Central Co operative Bank Ltd., Gurgaon, , distinguished.
Since, as held above, the dispute between the parties could only be adjudicated upon in accordance with the provisions of the Madras Act the Registrar under the Bombay Act lacked inherent jurisdiction to decide the dispute and it was not a case of lack of territorial jurisdiction only [167 D E]
