The appellants are dealers in Rab.
The State Government under section 3D(1) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, levied purchase tax in respect of their, dealings in Rab.
Section 3D(1) of the Act, inter alia, provides that for each assessment year, there shall be levied and paid a tax on the turnover of first purchases made by a dealer or through a dealer in respect of such goods, at such rates not exceeding 2 paise per rupee in the case of foodgrains and 5 paise in respect of other goods and in the explanation it is provided that "in the case of purchase made by a registered dealer through a licensed dealer, 'the registered dealer shall be the, first purchaser and in every other case of fresh purchase, the dealer through whom the first purchase is made shall be deemed to be the first purchaser.
The appellants challenged the vires of section 3(d)(1) of the Act before the High Court but the High Court held against the appellants.
In appeal this Court, it was contended by the appellants that in empowering the Government to, levy tax on goods other than foodgrains at a rate not exceeding 5 paise in a rupee, the legislature had given an unduly wide power to the executive.
Such a delegated power was, therefore, excessive and bad in law and secondly, section 3D(1) infringed article 14 of the Constitution because it discriminated between registered dealers who purchased through licensed dealers and the registered dealers who purchased through other dealers.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: (i) The power to fix the rate of tax is a legislative power, but if the legislature lays down the legislative policy and provides the necessary guidelines that power can be delegated to the executive.
, Though a tax is levied primarily for the purpose of gathering revenue, in selecting the objects to be taxed and in determining the rate of tax, various social and economic factors are to be considered and since the legislatures have very little time to go into details, they have to delegate certain powers to the Executive.
This Court has ruled that if a reasonable upper limit is prescribed, the legislature can always delegate the power of fixing the rate of purchase 'tax or sales tax.
[143 E] Devi Days Gopal Krishnan vs State of Punjab, 20 S.T.C. 430, followed.
In the present case, taking into consideration the legislative practice in this country and the rate of tax levied or leviable under the various sales tax laws in force in this country, it cannot be said that the power delegated to the.
executive is excessive and in the absence of any material, it cannot be said that the maximum rate fixed under section 3D(1) is unreasonably high.
144 E F] (ii) Section 3D is not violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
In the present case, there is nothing wrong for the legislature to make a classification between licensed dealers and dealers who are not licensed.
A licensed dealer has to maintain true and correct accounts and other particulars of 142 purchasers whereas dealers who are not registered are not required to maintain any accounts.
Hence, if registered dealers are permitted to make purchases through dealers who are not licensed and those dealers are themselves not liable to be taxed, then opportunity for evasion of tax becomes larger.
Under the circumstances, the classification is not unjustified.
[145 G] State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerlay & Co. (Madras) Ltd., ; and Devi Deo Gopal Krishna vs State of Punjab, 20 S.T.C. 430, referred to.
