Rule 2046 (F.R. 56) of the Indian Railway Fundamental Rules was substituted on January 11, 1967, by a new Rule.
Undo cl.
(b) of the new Rule 2046 every ministerial railway servant who had entered government service on or before March 31, 1938 and who satisfied the conditions mentioned in sub cls.
(i) and (ii) of cl.
(b) had a right to continue in service till he attained the age of 60 years.
The Note to the Rule, defined the expression 'government service ' as including service rendered in ex company and ex State Railway, and in a former provincial government.
On December 23, 1967 a new Note was substituted which stated that the expression "government service" ' included "service rendered in a former provincial government and in ex company and ex State Railways, if the rules of the company or the State had a provision similar to cl.
(b) above".
The respondent joined the service of the Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway company on August 16, 1927.
The company was amalgamated with the Indian Railway Administration in 1947 and on such amalgamation the respondent became the employee of the Indian Railway Administration He was a "ministerial servant" within the meaning of that expression in r. 2046.
On March 31, 1938, he held a permanent post in the company.
After the introduction of r. 2046 on January 11, 1967, the Divisional Accounts Officer passed an order that the respondent was entitled to continue in office till he attained the age of 60 years.
But, after the new Note to cl.
(b) to r. 2046 was substituted on December 23, 1967, another order was passed to the effect that the respondent was retired from service on April 14, 1968, on attaining the age of 58 years.
The order also stated that this action was being taken in view of the new Note substituted on December 12, 1967.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the legality of the order retiring him from service.
The High Court struck down the order and gave a declaration that the respondent was entitled to continue in service till he attained the age of 60 years, on the ground that the order was discriminatory and, therefore, violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
Dimissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court was justified in striking down the order directing the respondent to retire from service.
(1) Rule 2046 as it stood originally and on January 11, 1967 treated the former employees of the ex company, ex State Railway and former provincial Government 188 who were amalgamated with the Indian Administration in 1947 on a par with the other original employees of the Indian Railway Administration.
In fact the Note to cl .
(b) of r. 2046 incorporated in January 11, 1967 only reinforced this position.
Read with the Note, under el.
(b), the respondent is a ministerial servant who had entered government service on or before March 31, 1938 and, therefore, by virtue of el.
(b) he was entitled to be retained in service till he attained the age of 60 years.
C] (2) Up to and inclusive of January 11, 1967, no distinction, inter se, apart from that made by cls.
(a) and (b) between officers of Indian Railway Administration, from whatever source they may have I come, was made.
The position admittedly has been changed by altering the definition of the expression "government service" by the new Note to el.
(b) Thus on and after December 23, 1967, though all the employees are under the Indian Railway Administration, there will be two sets of rules relating to the age of retirement, depending upon the fact whether they were in the original employment of Indian Railway Administration or on the fact of their coming from one or the other employers mentioned in the new Note.
Discrimination, is writ large on the face of the new Note.
Once the employees dealt with under the new Note have taken up service under the Indian Railway Administration and have been treated alike up to January 11, 1967, if follows that they cannot again be classified separately from the other employees of the Indian Railway Administration.
Therefore the classification of these officers under the new Note is not a reasonable classification.
[197 G, 198 F] (3) Assuming there is a reasonable classification, the classification cannot be said to have a nexus or relation to the object sought to be achieved by el.
(b) of r. 2046 which is to provide for the age of retirement of the two types of officers coming under cls.
(a) and (b).
Where there is no indication that any further distinction inter se is sought to be made amongst the officers mentioned in cls.
(a) and (b) and when a uniform age of retirement has also been fixed in respect of officers coming under these two clauses, the classification carving out the ex employees of the three authorities mentioned therein with the added condition that the rules of the company or the State should have a provision similar to el.
(b) has no nexus or relation to the object of the Rule.
[199 B] (4) Though a distinction has been made in the Rule between a railway servant coming under el.
(a) and a ministerial railway servant coming under el.
(b) in regard to age of retirement, those clauses will apply uniformly to all members of the Indian Railway Administration depending upon whether they are railway servants coming under el.
(a) or ministerial railway servants coming under el.
The distinction made in el.
(b) regarding the ministerial railway servants who entered government service on or before March 31, 1938, is again of uniform application.
[196 H] (5) It is only necessary to strike down the offending part in the Note, namely, "if the rules of the company or the State had a provision similar to el.
(b)," and this part of the Note alone is struck down as discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
[200 B]
