In pursuance of an agreement between the assessee respondent and another firm L & Co., by which, L agreed to assist the respondent in procuring coal for export whenever asked to do so and not to export any coal during the subsistence of the agreement, L supplied various quantities of coal to the respondent and the respondent made payments as pet the agreement.
The respondent claimed the payments as admissible expenditure under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922, during the relevant assessment years.
The Department held that they were payments.
to secure a monopoly and were therefore not allowable as revenue ex penditure.
The Tribunal found that the respondent did not acquire any monopoly rights, that the payments were only made to carry on trade in a more facile and profitable manner, that the arrangement was a temporary measure liable to be terminated at will, that the respondent did not derive any advantage of an enduring character and that therefore.
the expenditure was attributable to revenue and not to capital.
and held in favour of the assessee.
The High Court, on, reference, agreeing with the findings of the Tribunal and holding that the consideration was not paid once for all but was related to uncertain shipments to be made, decided in favour of the assessee.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that though the payment for assistance to the Respondent in procuring coal was an item of revenue expenditure, that part of the payment which was made because of L agreeing not to export coal during the subsistence of the agreement constituted a capital expenditure and not a revenue expenditure.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : Although payments made to ward off competition in business, to a rival dealer would constitute capital expenditure if the object of making that payment is to derive an advantage by eliminating the competition over some length of time, the same result would not follow if there is no certainty of the duration of the advantage and the same can be put to an end at any time.
How long the period of contemplated advantage should be in order to constitute an enduring benefit would depend upon the circumstances and facts of each individual case.
An enduring benefit need not be of an everlasting character, but it should not, at the same time, be so transitory and ephemeral that it can be terminated at any time at the volition of any of the parties.
[1096 B; 1097 B C] Further, the payments were related to the actual shipments of coal in the course of the trading activities of the respondent and had no relation to the capital value of the assets.
The payments were not related to or tied up in any way to any fixed sum agreed between the parties.
It was not a case of monopoly value payments being permitted to be paid in instalments giving a false appearance of periodicity.
[1097 F G; 1099 G H] 1090 Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd. vs C.I.T., Kerala , followed.
Atherton vs British Insulated and Halaby Cables Ltd. 10 T.C. 155, Robert Addie and Sons ' Collieries Ltd. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue, 1, Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs C. I. T., West Bengal, , Commissioner of Taxes vs Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd. 58 I.T.R. 241 and Hanrikesen (Inspector of Taxes) vs Grafton Hotel Ltd., , referred to.
