The appellant Panjrapole was started in 1834 as a charitable institution for the care and protection of animals.
it expanded its activities considerably over the years.
The institution gradually diversified its objects from only tending to the sick, infirm and unwanted cattle by adopting a policy of keeping cattle not merely for their own sake but for the sake of improving the cattle population in order to get large quantities of milk for sale and there by get an income which would augment its sources.
The institution was using stud bulls for the purpose of breeding healthy cattle including cows so as to be able to make a sizable income from the sale of milk.
The value of the milk sold was considerable compared to the value of milk supplied to the sick and infirm cattle of the institution.
The expenses for treating the sick animals was also very little compared to the total expenses of the Institution.
A large number of workers were employed at the institution.
They raised an industrial dispute in relation to their wages and other service benefits.
The dispute was referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal.
It was contended by the Appellant that the Institution was a charitable institution and therefore was not an 'industry ' within the meaning of section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Tribunal found that the activities of the institution in connection with its movable property and collection and sale of milk to be an "industry" while the maintenance of lame, infirm and sick cows, dogs and other animals was held not to constitute an "industry".
A petition under article 227 was moved in the High Court for quashing the award of the Industrial Tribunal but the same was summarily rejected.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD:On the facts and circumstances of the case, the Bombay Panjrapole is an "Industry" within the meaning of Sec.
2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The activities of the Panjrapole, though charitable at the.
beginning, was not exclusively so in later years, and the later activities show that it was carried on as a business concern.
Even the value of the milk supplied for the last 3 or 4 years itself was well in excess ,of Rs. 2 lakhs per annum and this could only be possible if the cows ,and buffaloes had been kept and maintained not merely to keep them ,alive but with the idea of getting as much production out of them as possible and the Panjrapole was run like a dairy firm.
[223H] State of Bombay vs The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; , Safdar Jung Hospital, New Delhi vs K. section Sethi & Management of M/s T. B. Hospital, New Delhi vs The Workmen, A.I.R. 1970 'S.C. 1407.
Gynmkhana Club Union vs Management, [1968].
1 S.C.R. 742, Lalit Hari Ayurvedic College Pharmacy vs
Its Workers Union, A.I. R. , Madras Panjrapole vs Labour Court, , Worknien Employed in Madras Panjapole vs Madras Panjropole , Cricket Club vs Labour Union, ' [1969] 1 S.C.R. 60, Harinagar Cone Firma vs State of Bihar, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 458, referred to.
