Section 3 of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Taxation Act (5 of 1963) authorised levy of tax on motor vehicles "used or kept in use in a public place in the State".
Item 4 in the table of the notification issued under section 9 of the Act exempted from the tax "any chassis of motor vehicle when driven to any Place in order that a body may be attached it.
" The Automotive Manufacturers (P) Ltd. in the State of Andhra Pradesh, were dealers, among other things, in chassis received by it from manufacturers outside the State.
The chassis were driven by transport contractors of the manufacturers themselves under temporary certificate of registration under the Motor Vehicles Act and delivered to the appellant in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
The Ashok Leyland Ltd. transported motor chassis by road from their factory in Madras to dealers in various parts of India.
These chassis were driven through the State of Andhra Pradesh either for delivery there or in other States of India.
The Automotive Manufacturers and the Ashok Leyland challenged the imposition of tax under the Act.
The High Court dismissed the petitions.
In appeals to this Court it was contended that (i) section 3 of the Act was not appli cable, because, there could be no user or keeping for use of the chassis of a motor vehicle as a motor vehicle unless a body was attached to it; (ii) as the chassis were invariably driven to their respective destination, in order that bodies may be attached to them, they came directly under the notification of exemption issued by the State Government; and (iii) the impugned levy operated as an impediment to free trade and commerce in violation of article 301 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeals.
HELD : (i) It is not necessary for a chassis to have a body attached to it before it ran be used within the meaning of the Act, inasmuch as, it can be used by the man who drives it and such use of it on public roads would be enough to attract the levy.
[596 D] (ii) Item 4 in the table of the notification limits the exemption from the tax to the journey of the chassis for the express purpose of body being attached to it.
The Automotive Manufacturers, being dealers, could and probably did deal with or dispose of the chassis as such.
Further, it was not the case of the appellant that the chassis were coming from outside the State for the purpose of having bodies attached to them at the workshop of the appellant.
So far as Ashok Leyland was concerned the chassis were being driven along the roads of Andhra Pradesh for disposal at the journey 's end and it would be for the purchaser at the destination to have a body fixed to 594 the chassis according to his own need and on the specification given by him.
, Merely because bodies were going to be attached by the ultimate purchasers it could not be said that the running of the chassis on the roads of Andhra Pradesh would attract exemption under item (4) of the notification.
[597 C E] [The contention that there was no previous sanction of the President in respect of the bill as envisaged by article 304 (b) was not allowed to be raised inasmuch as it was not urged in writ petitions.
Therefore, the Court did not examine the merits of the contentions urged in this regard.
