The appellant challenged the validity of the election of the respondent to the Pondicherry Legislature Assembly on various grounds including corrupt practices.
The High Court dismissed the election petition.
In the appeal to this Court, the appellant contended (i) that the appellant 's amendment application of the election petition giving more particulars of meetings held by the respondent was wrongfully rejected by the Trial Court on the sole ground that it sought to include additional grounds of corrupt practice and (ii) that the respondent had actually incurred expenses in connection with 4 more meetings thereby exceeding the prescribed limit.
The respondent, on the other band, contended that the various police reports about the meetings relied on by the appellant were not admissible in evidence as the head constable who covered the meetings had not been examined in the case that even if the reports were admissible, the Court could not look into the contents of those documents and that the evidence afforded by the Police reports was not relevant.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) The incurring or authorising of an expenditure in contravention of section, 77 of the Act is one single corrupt practice.
The incurring or authorising of an expenditure in connection with the election is Dot by itself a corrupt practice.
The corrupt practice is the incurring or authorising the expenditure of more than the prescribed limit.
Hence, the Trial Court erred in thinking that each item of expenditure is a corrupt practice by itself.
The particulars of corrupt practice failing under sections 123(6) of the Act may, in an appropriate case, be introduced by amendment.
By doing so, no additional ground of corrupt practice can he said to have been introduced.
[650 H] D. P. Misra and Anr .
vs Kamal Narain Sharma and Anr.
[1971] I .S.C.R. 8, referred to.
(ii) As regards the number of meetings held by the respondent, although he denied having held any meeting at all however admitted in his evidence that he bad arranged seven meetings between, February 27, 1969 to March 6, 1969.
The appellant, however, had been able to prove that the respondent had held four more meetings between February 23, 1968 to March 6, 1969.
In support of his claim, the appellant examined a number of witnesses and their evidence was corroborated by a number of applications (which the respondent made to the Inspector of Police asking permission to hold the meetings) and by the police reports (which the Head constables made to their superior after attending the meetings).
Therefore, on an average, if the respondent spent Rs. 32/ per meeting (which he admitted), the total for the 4 extra meetings must have cost the Respondent Rs. 128/ .
If this expense was added to the sum of Rs. 18,86.09 which the respondent had spent for his entire election, the 647 total expenditure, would exceed the prescribed limit of Rs. 2,000/ .
Hence, the respondent was clearly guilty of corrupt practices mentioned in 123(6).
[652 H] (iii) The police reports were marked without any objection.
Hence, it was not open to the respondent to object to their admissibility at a later stage.
Bhagat Ram vs Kheta Ram and Anr., A.I.R. 1929 P.C. 110, referred (iv) Further as regards the contents of the document, once a document is properly admitted the contents of that document are also admitted in evidence although the contents may not be conclusive evidence.
[654 F] (v) The first part of section 35 of the Evidence Act says that an entry in any public record stating a fact in issue or relevant fact made by a public servant in discharge of his official duties is relevant evidence.
Quite clearly the reports in question were made by public servants in discharge of their official duty.
The issue before the Court was whether the respondent had arranged certain election meetings on certain dates.
The police reports in question were extremely relevant to establish that fact.
Hence, it came within the ambit of the first part of section 35 of the Evidence Act.
[655 B] Naveneetha Krishna Thelavar vs Ramesway Pandia Thelavar, I.L.R. 40, Madras 871, approved.
In the present case, the police reports in question were by government officials who were not shown to be inimically disposed towards the respondent or his party.
They were made when there was no dispute and the dispute in question would not have been anticipated.
Therefore, such reports carry greatest possible weight and could not be dismissed lightly.
[656 D] Arjuno Naiko and Ors.
vs Madonomohano Naiko & Ors., A. I. R. , referred to.
