During the mid term election held in 1969 in Bihar the respondent and 11 others contested from the Arrah Assembly Constituency.
The appellant was declared elected as having obtained the highest number of votes.
His nearest rival was the respondent. ' The respondent filed an election petition challenging the election of the appellant on various.
The principal ground taken was that the result of the election had been material affected by the improper acceptance of the appellant 's nomination papers.
It was alleged that nomination Paper showed that r the appellant 's name was registered as an elector in the Arrah Constituency whereas at the relevant time it had been removed therefrom.
The returning Officer was therefore wrong in accepting the nomination paper.
The other allegations against the appellant related to corrupt practice.
The High Court rejected the allegations as regards corrupt practice but it set aside the election of the appellant on the ground that the nomination paper had been improperly accepted and the election had been materially affected thereby.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (i) The appellant was fully qualified to be nominated at the election.
The only thing said against his nomination was that his nomination paper was not properly filled in.
It was proved from the evidence that the Returning officer did look into the nomination paper but unfortunately he also did not notice that the name of the appellant had been re moved from the electoral roll of Arrah constituency.
If he had noticed F that fact he would have asked the appellant either to correct the mistake or to file a fresh nomination paper.
The appellant filed his nomination paper on the 6th of January 1969 and the last date for filing the nomination paper was the 8th of that month.
That being so there would have been no difficulty for him neither to correct the nomination paper filed or to file a fresh nomination paper.
The appellant had with him a certified copy of the electoral roll of Sandesh Constituency where his name was enrolled and he had shown the same to the Returning Officer.
Mistakes complained of occurred because both the appellant as well as the Returning Officer merely looked into the main voters ' list in Arrah constituency but overlooked the deletion noted in a separate list [670 A D] From a combined reading of sections 33 and 36 of the Representation of the People Act, 1961 it is clear that a mis description as to the electoral roll number of the candidate or of the proposer in the nomination paper is not to be considered as a material defect in the nomination paper.
The High Court was accordingly not justified in allowing the election petition on the ground that the nomination paper of the appellant was improperly accepted.
[681 A; 683 E] 675 In view of the above finding the further question whether the result of the election was materially affected did not survive for consideration.
[683 E F] (ii) The appeal of the respondent on the question of corrupt practice had no merit.
The three instances mentioned were in the opinion of the High Court not established by the evidence.
Each instance of a corrupt practice pleaded has to be established separately.
If every one of the instances was not proved all of them put together cannot be accepted as true because of the volume of evidence.
[685 B C] The election petition must therefore be dismissed.
Karnail Singh vs Election Tribuna, Hissar & Ors., 10 E.L.R. 189, Rangilal Choudhury vs Dahu Sao & Ors., [1962] 2 S.C.R. 401, Namdeo Chimnaiji Tapre & Anr.
vs Govindas Ratanlal Bhatia & Ors.
I.L.R. and Wey Kanta Barooah vs Kusharam Nath & Ors,, XXI E.L.R. 459, applied.
Narbada Prasad vs Chhagal Lal & Ors., [1967] I S.C.R. 499, Ram Dayal vs Brijrai Singh & Ors., [1970] I S.C. R. 530 and Brijendralal Gupta find Anr.
vs Jawalaprasad & Ors.
, ; , distinguished.
Vashist Narainin Sharma vs Dev Chandra and Ors., , referred to.
