The appellant, manager of an Oil Mill, was convicted under section 7(i)/16(1)(a)(i) of the , and sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment.
His appeal to the Sessions Judge was without success and a revision to the High Court, was also dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) the sanction for prosecution did not show (a) that the Chairman of the Muni cipality had applied his mind before giving the sanction, (b) that it was invalid since it was not granted by the local authority, namely, the municipality and (e) that since the resolution of the Municipality had authorised the Chairman to give the sanction, the new Chairman could not avail himself of that authorisation and, therefore.
the trial was vitiated for want of valid and legal sanction; (ii) the 'report of the Public Analyst was not a proper report in law and was bad and incomplete for failure to carry out all the tests required under A. 17.06 of Appendix B to the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, and also for failure to disclose the data in the report; and (iv) the sentence awarded was harsh for a first offender.
Reducing the sentence and dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) Reading sections 20 and 51 of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932, the Chairman of a municipality duly authorised by the municipality can accord sanction for prosecution of offences under the Act.
The resolution of the Municipality authorising the Chairman to perform all the functions and exercise the powers of the local authority within the meaning of the , is not to grant power to any particular Chairman eo nominee, but, is a general power exercisable by any Chairman, for the time being, of the municipality.
The High Court has rightly pointed out that under section 15(2) of the Bengal Municipality Act the Municipality is a body corporate and it has perpetual succession and, as such, any authorisation granted by it is not limited to the Chairman then in office but will continue unless rescinded.
[848 D; G H] (ii) It is.
true that the Public Analyst in his report has only indicated the result of the three tests out of which two tests were as indicated in A 17.06, while, only one, namely, the saponification test, was said to have exceeded the maximum on the strength of which the Public Analyst reported that the sample was adulterated.
Omission to.report on the other four tests does not make the report ineffective or inconclusive.
Even assuming that the other four tests are normal, if the saponification test alone did not conform to the standards indicated in A 17.06 of Appendix B to the Rules, the sample cannot be said to have come up to the standard and, therefore, it is adulterated.
It is in exercise of the powers conferred by section 23 (i) (b) that rule 5 was made authorising standards of quality of 846 the various articles of food specified in Appendix B to the Rules.
Standards having been fixed, any person who deals in articles of food which do not conform to them contravenes the provisions of the Act and is liable to punishment thereunder.
[849 A C; 850 E] Andhra Pradesh Grain and Seed Merchants Association and others vs Union of India & Anr., A.I.R. , referred to.
If the report of the Public Analyst was not satisfactory it was open to the appellant to make an application for sending the sample which was in his possession to the Director.
If he had made such an application and sent the sample under section 13(2) the certificate granted by the Director of the Central Food Laboratory would have superseded the report given by the Public Analyst.
This has not been done.
In the circumstances he has been properly convicted.
[850 H] (iv) The reason for the legislature to makeexception to the minimum of six months rigorous imprisonment prescribedunder section 16(1) is not that the offences specified are not considered to be serious, but the gravity of the offences, having regard to its nature can be less if there are any special or adequate reasons.
In the present case having regard to the fact that the appellant has been on bail since 1964 for a period of nearly seven years, and also because not only the oil sample satisfied all the tests except one but the main person concerned in the manufacture of the oil has been acquitted, interests of justice would be served if the sentence of one year is reduced to two months rigorous imprisonment and the appellant is further directed to pay a fine of Rs. 1000/ .
[851 F, H]
