The accused was charged with murder by stabbing, and the evidence against him was circumstantial.
It consisted of : (a) evidence of ill will against the deceased furnishing a motive (b) evidence that he was last seen in the company of the deceased, (c) evidence furnished by finger prints, that he was present in the room of the deceased at or about the time of the murder, (d) evidence that he was subsequently found in Possession of articles which had incriminating blood strains, and (e) evidence that he had bidden a dagger with bloodstains thereon, and certain other articles.
which were discovered on information furnished by him.
The trial court convicted him but the High Court set aside the conviction on the ground that the witnesses were not independent or impartial.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) In an appeal against acquittal by special leave under article 136, this Court has power to interfere with the findings of fact, no distinction being made between judgments of acquittal and conviction though in the case of acquittals, it will not ordinarily interfere with the appreciation of evidence or findings of fact unless the High Court acted perversely or otherwise improperly.
[772 B D] State of Madras vs Vaidyanatha Iyer, ; , 587, referred to.
(2) In the case of circumstantial evidence if the links in the chain are complete leading to the undoubted conclusion that the accused alone could have committed the offence then it can be accepted.
In appreciating such evidence the prime duty of a court is to ensure that the evidence is legally admissible, that the witnesses are credible and that they have no interest or motive in implicating the accused, Since it is difficult to expect a scientific or mathematical exactitude while dealing with such evidence corroboration is sought wherever possible.
If there is any reasonable doubt the accused is given the benefit of such doubt.
The doubt should be reasonable and not a remote possibility in favour of the accused.
That is, the greatest possible care should be taken by the court in convicting an accused,, who is presumed to be innocent till the contrary is clearly established, and the burden of so establishing is always on the prosecution.
[772 C E, G; 773 E H; 774 C] (3)(a) While considering the evidence relating to the recovery under section 27 of the Evidence Act the court will have to exercise that caution and care which is necessary to lend assurance that the information furnished by the accused lead in to the discovery of a fact is credible.
[776 D] 766 In the present case, the various panchnamas of seizure prepared by the Investigating Officer could not be assailed on the ground that the witnesses who witnessed the recoveries were connected with the deceased or with his business, and that therefore, they were not independent or impartial witnesses.
[775 H; 776 G] (b) The evidence relating to recoveries is not similar to that contemplated under section 103, Cr.
It cannot be laid down as a matter of law or practice that where recoveries had to be effected from different places on the information furnished by an accused different sets of persons should be called to witness them.
[777 B C] On the contrary, in the present case, the witnesses who worked with the deceased were proper persons to witness the recoveries as they could identify the things which were missing.
[777 C D] (4) The report of the Director of the Finger Print Bureau regarding the finger prints can be used as evidence under section 510 Cr.
P.C., without examining the person making the report, because identification of finger prints has developed into an exact science.
As long as the report shows that the opinion was based on relevant observations that opinion can be accepted.
[783 A E] In the present case, the report set out many points of similarity between the finger prints found in the room of the deceased and those of the accused.
[783 H] (5) The information given by the accused that he purchased a dagger from one of the prosecution witnesses followed his leading the police to that witness and pointing him out is inadmissible under section 27 of the Evidence Act.
The concealment of a fact which is not known to the police is what is discovered by the information given by an accused and lends assurance that the information was true.
What makes the information leading to the discovery of a witness admissible is the discovery from him of the thing sold to him or hidden or kept with him which the police did not know until information was furnished by the accused.
But a witness cannot be said to have been discovered if nothing was found with or recovered from him.
as a consequence of the information furnished by the accused.
[778 F 779 H; 780 A C] Emperor vs Ramanuya Ayangar, A.I.R. 1935 Mad. 528, over ruled.
Pulukiuri Kotayya & Ors.
vs King Emperor, 74 I.A. 65, Ramkrishan Mithaplal Sharma vs State of Bombay, [1955] I S.C.R. 9 '03, Sukhan vs Crown, I.L.R. X Lah. 283, Public Protector vs India China Lingiah & Ors., A.I.R. 1954 Mad.
435 and Re : Vellingiri, A.I.R. 1950 Mad.
referred to.
(6) But that the accused had taken some of the prosecution witnesses to the witness from whom he bought the dagger and pointed him out, would be admissible under section 8 of the Evidence Act as conduct of the accused.
[780 C D] (7) Even after excluding some recoveries on the ground that the evidence regarding them was not satisfactory, the evidence against the accused consisted of evidence of motive, recovery of a button in the room of the deceased which matched with the button on the cuff of the coat recovered from the accused, the finger prints in the room, recovery of a blood stained coat and other articles of dress, a blanket, and the dagger, and the 767 fact that the accused and deceased were last seen together.
The evidences cogent and conclusive and should not have been rejected by the High Court.
[781 C E; 786 C D]
