A company (in liquidation) was ordered by the High Court to be wound up and the official liquidator was appointed its liquidator.
Thereafter the I.T.O. issued notices under section 148 of I.T. Act proposing to reopen the assessment of the Company in respect of the assessment years 1950 51 to 1955 56.
The I.T.O. further notified the official liquidator to produce accounts and documents specified at the back of the notice.
The official liquidator made an application before the High Court questioning the jurisdiction of the I.T.O. to issue the said notices without the leave of the High Court, as required under section 446(1) of the companies Act.
The learned single Judge of the High Court issued an injunction restraining the I.T.O. to reassess the said Company.
On appeal, the appellate bench of the High Court reversed the order and set aside the injunction.
On appeal to this Court only one question arose for determination as to whether it was necessary for the I.T.O. to obtain leave of the liquidation court when he wants to reassess the company for escaped income in respect of the past years.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : The Income Tax Officer need not obtain leave of the winding up court for commencing or continuing assessment or reassessment proceedings. 'Me Income tax Act is a complete Code and section 147 empowers the Income, Tax Officer to assess or reassess escaped income.
Further while holding these assessment proceedings, the Income Tax Officer does not perform the functions of a Court as contemplated by section 446(2) of the Act.
The liquidation court cannot perform the functions of Income Tax Officers while assessing the amount of tax payable by the assessees even if the assessee be the Company which is being wound up,, by the Court.
It would lead to anomalous consequencs if the winding up Court were to be held empowered to transfer the assessment proceedings to itself and assess the Company to Income tax.
[978 B D] Grovernor General in Council vs Shiromani Sugar Mills Ltd. , Shakuntala vs The Peoples ' Bank of Northern India Ltd. (in liquidation).
Lab. 760 and M. K. Ranganathan vs State of Madras.
; , referred to and discussed.
