The appellant, a partnership firm having 2 partners, carried, on business of importers and exporters, etc.
The Cashier of the firm handed over a wooden case, to the Swiss Airways at Dum Dum for being sent to Hong Kong by air.
According to the consignment note, the consignment was being sent by one R. of Karnani mansions, Calcutta, who was a fictitious person.
The shipping bill showed that the consignment purported to contain food and dried vegetables and was sent to 1, of Hong Kong, also a fictitious person.
After the consignment was accepted and when customs examined it for clearance, it was found that it contained Rs. 51,000 in Indian currency.
On investigation, a search warrant was issued by the Presidency Magistrate and the office of the firm and the residence of partners were searched.
In the course of search, accounts books and other documents were seized.
Investigation revealed that the Cashier, had signed the consignment note as Rs, which, as the subsequent writings showed, were in his hand.
Even the consignment note appears to have been typed on the type writer of the appellant firm.
Thereafter, Customs authorities served a notice, on the appellant pointing out that exportation of Indian currency out of India was in contravention of section 8 (2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1947 read with Reserve Bank Notification dated 27 2 1951 as specified therein and it was asked to show cause and to produce within 4 days the permit, if any, of the Reserve Bank of India, failing which, it would be liable for prosecution under Section 23(1) read with section 8(2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act.
The appellant denied that the firm bad anything to do with the case.
Apart from criminal prosecutions against the partners, a fine of Rs. 1,000 under section 167(3) of the Sea Customs Act with a further personal liability of Rs. 1,000 section 167(37) of the Act was imposed against the firm.
It was further fined Rs. 51,000 section 167(8) of the Act read with section 23(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act.
Apart from these, the currency notes of Rs. 51,000 which were seized, were also confiscated.
This order was challenged before the single judge of the Calcutta High Court who issued a rule but later discharged it.
An appeal against that order was also dismissed.
In appeal to this Court, three points, raised before the Appellate Court were also reiterated : (1) Currency Notes are not 'goods ' and therefore, the provisions of section 167(3), (8) and (37) of the Sea Customs Act are not attracted.
(2) A firm is not a legal entity and therefore, it cannot be a 'person ' within the meaning of any of the above provisions of law.
(3) Even if a 'firm ' be a 'person, no penalty can be imposed on the firm or any of its members unless the members have consciously taken any step to violate the provisions of law; 8 6 even so, only the partner member against whom there is evidence of guilt can be held liable.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD :P (i) section 23A of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, incorporates, by reference, the provisions of the Sea Customs Act by deeming the restrictions under section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, to be prohibiting and restricting under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act.
The legislature can always incorporate by reference, the provisions of some other Act, if they are relevant for the purposes of the scheme and object of that Act.
Restrictions specified in section 8 of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act are deemed to be prohibitions and restrictions mentioned under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act.
The prohibitions mentioned under section 8 are not necessarily confined to goods alone but must be deemed, for the purposes of Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, to include therein restrictions in respect of the articles specified in section 8 thereof, including currency notes as well.
[94 B] (ii) Although there is no definition of the word 'person ' in either of.
the Acts, the definition in section 2(42) of the or Section 2(3) of the Act of 1863 would be applicable to the present Acts.
in both of which, person has been defined as including any Company or association, or body of individuals whether incorporated or not.
Further, the explanation to section 23C clearly envisages that a company for the purposes of that Section is defined to mean any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals and a Director in relation to a firm also means a partner of the firm.
Therefore, for "he purposes of Foreign Exchange Regulations Act and Sea Customs Act.
a registered partnership firm L is a 'legal entity '.
[94G] (iii) From the evidence, it was clear that the appellant attempted to hoodwink the customs officials (currency notes secreted in a cavity), that the consigner and consignee were not shown as real persons, the charges and expenses incurred.
in connection with the despatch were found in the entry in the books of account of the firm that the amount, sought to be sent was half a lakh of rupees which could hardly be within the mean ', of the Cashier and the High Court was right in holding that it was the firm which was interested in sending the currency notes out of India .,II a clandestine manner.[198 A] Radha Krishna Bliatia vs Union of India & Ors., Thomas Dana vs The State of Punjab, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 274 and Additional Collector of Custo is vs Sita Ram Agarwal, C.A. No. 492 of 1962 decided on 14 9 1962 referred to and distinguished.
