Under a compromise decree the amount due to the plaintiff was fixed by mutual consent and it was further agreed that the defendant should within one week of the date of the decree convey to the plaintiff immoveable properties sufficient to satisfy the decree.
The U. P. Agriculturists Relief Act of 1934 having come into force, the decree was subsequently amended by the Civil Judge by reducing the amount and directing that the amount may be paid in 12 annual instalments with the condition that if three instalments were in default the whole amount was to become immediately payable.
The amended decree was set aside by the Chief Court in 1938.
The decree holder applied for execution, and a sale deed was executed by the Civil Judge in 1939 for the entire decree amount.
The Privy Council reversed the decree of the Chief Court and restored the amended decree of the Civil Judge in 1944.
The judgment debtor applied for restoration of the properties with mesne profits by way of restitution: Held, confirming the decree of the Chief Court, that, as the judgment debtor bad not obtained any order staying the operation of the amended decree pending the dereeholder 's appeal to the Chief Court he was bound to carry out the terms of the amended decree, and, as the Privy Council had merely restored the amended decree without altering the provisions as to payment by instalments or extending the time for payment by instalments and its decree did not in any way alter the position of the parties as it stood under the amended decree, and, the sale was not in consequence of any error in a decree which was reversed on appeal by the Privy Council, the judgment debtor was not entitled to restitution.
Dayal Sardar vs Tari Deshi (I.L.R. and Gansu Ram vs Parvati Kuer (A.I.R. 1941 Pat. 130) approved.
560 The judgment debtor in the above mentioned case applied tinder section 4 of the U. P.
Encumbered Estates 'Act, 1934, for administration of his estate in 1936 but the proceedings were quashed by the Board of Revenue in 1938.
As no order for stay of execution was obtained, a sale was effected in execution of the decree in February, 1939.
The U. P. Encumbered Estates (Amendment) Act, 1939, came into force after the date of the sale and the judgment debtor applied on the 10th October, 1939, foe amending his former application, but it was ultimately decided by the Chief Court that the amendment application of 1939 must be treated as fresh proceedings: Held, confirming the decision of the Chief Court, that as the proceedings which were started in 1936 were quashed by the Board of Revenue in 1938, the sale held in February, 1939, was unaffected by the bar imposed by section 11 of the Act.
The order made on the application of the 10th October was an order on a fresh application under section 4 and it had no retrospective effect and could not affect the validity of the sale effected when no application under section 4 was pending.
