Under section 32 of the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1965 the business to be conducted at the annual general meeting of a society includes inter alia election of the committee of management of the society.
Under Rule 409 of the Act namely the Cooperative Societies Rules, 1967 a Cooperative society may, for the purpose of the election of the Committee of management, with the previous sanction of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies (a) divide its membership into different groups on territorial or any other rational basis, and (b) also specify the number or proportion of the members of the committee of management in such a manner that different arm or interests, as the case may be, in the society may, as far as may be, get suitable representation on the committee of management.
On 5 November 1969 the Registrar issued a circular interpreting Rule 409 and laid down the principle that "all the members of the general body" of the cooperative society would "exercise their right of vote in filling all the seats of elected Directors".
The elections in the cooperative societies concerned in the present appeals were held according to the aforesaid directions given by the Registrar.
The elections were challenged and set aside in proceedings under the Act.
On the question whether the circular interpreting Rule 409 issued by the Registrar was valid, this Court, HELD : Under rule 409 the principal matters to be kept in the forefront are these.
First, the society will divide the constituencies on territorial basis or any other rational basis.
By territorial basis is meant territory where the member will reside.
Residence is therefore the relative re quirement of territorial basis.
If any other rational basis like occupation or vocation is determined to be the basis of a constituency the persons falling within the constituency will satisfy that test.
Secondly, the society will specify the proportion of members of the committee in such a manner that different areas or interests may get suitable representation.
The inherent idea is that such areas or interest will obtain representation.
If membership is on territorial basis the different areas will get representation according to the interest of such territories.
Again, if occupational or professional tests are created for dividing groups such interests will have to be given suitable representation.
Representation is therefore with reference to areas or interests.
Judged by these principles the impeached circular of the Registrar suffered from the vice of giving the members the right of casting vote in constituencies to which they did not belong.
This strikes at the basic root of the fight of representation.
This also reads as under the principle of one member one vote which is made a role of law in the Act.
[155 E G] 150 The words 'affairs of the society ' in section 20 cannot be equated with the constituencies to give each member a right to vote for each constituency.
That would defeat the purpose of section 20 and rule 409.
The basic idea of representation for each constituency depends on the mandate of the respective constituency and not of other constituencies.
That is why section 20 of the Act speaks of one member having one vote irrespective of shareholding.
It means equality of votes of members.
[155 H] The impeached circular of the Registrar was illegal and unwarranted.
The Registrar has no power to interpret rule 409.
The Registrar has equally no power to express view with regard to the conduct of the election and regulate the voting rights by giving members more than one vote.
The society is to frame rules for elections.
The rules and the bye laws cannot be in derogation of the statute and statutory rules.
At an election of members of the committee of management one member will have only one vote for the constituency to which he belongs.
[156 E] The result was that the elections which were held following the circular of the Registrar were bad.
