The appellant, a public Limited Company, had a Cement Factory and at a distance, a limestone quarry.
it had two standing orders for the workman employed in the factory and in the quarries.
Upto April, 1967, both sets of standing orders provided for superannuation of the workmen at the age of 55 with a stipulation for extension upto 60 years if a workman was found fit to work.
After a dispute at the Cement Factory, a settlement was arrived at by which it was agreed that the standing order applicable to the Cement Factory be amended by raising the age of superannuation from 55 to 58 without making any provision for further extension and accordingly, the amendment was made.
Nothing was, however, done with regard to the superannuation age of the employees at the quarry.
On April 3, 1968, the appellant intimated the incline driver at the quarry that he had reached the age of retirement on 3 4 68 and accordingly he was given notice of retirement in terms of the standing order.
On April 30, 1968, the said workman wrote to the appellant that although service records showed him to be 55 years of age, his proper age according to his horoscope, was about 50 years and so his service records should he amended accordingly, but the appellant refused.
The Union took up the cause of the worker and requested the Regional Labour Commissioner to put the worker back to work.
On a reference under section 10(1) (d) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Tribunal took the view that the Cement Factory and the quarries were two units of the same establishment and so, there should be a uniform set of rules for the workmen of the Company as a whole.
In the result, the Tribunal held that there could not be a lower age limit of superannuation for workmen at the quarry specially in view of the fact that workmen were admittedly transferred from one unit to the other.
As a consequence, the Tribunal quashed the order of dismissal and directed the reinstatement of the workman with full back wages.
It was contended by the Company before this Court that the Tribunal was wrong in construing the order of reference to include a dispute as to whether it was open to the Company to have two sets of standing orders providing for different ages of superannuation.
According to the appellant, the dispute between the parties was whether or not the Company was justified in coming to the conclusion that the workman concerned had reached the age of 55 on April 3, 1968, and as such, was to be superannuated in terms of the standing orders, Setting aside the award, HELD : The Tribunal had not taken care to examine what was the dispute between the parties when the government made the order of reference.
No dispute was ever raised either by the workman or the Union that the age of superannuation governing the workman was not 297 55 years.
The finding of the Tribunal that the Company could not fix a lower age limit of superannuation for the workman at the quarries went beyond the scope of reference.
The Tribunal never addressed itself to the point of view of the workman that his proper age was only 50 and not 55; nor did it come to a finding that the true age of the workman being 50 years in 1968, there was no question of his superannuation in that year.
[302 C] The Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd. vs The Industrial Tribunal, Gujarat & Ors. ; referred to.
