The appellant joined as a lecturer in a College in U.P.
On the hub ,of certain complaints received by the Manager of the College, charges were framed against him and his explanation, was called for.
He submitted an explanation.
The explanation was found unsatisfactory and the Managing Committee passed a resolution for removal of the appellant from service.
The relevant statutes governing the present case are Statutes 151, 152 and 153 framed under the provisions of the Lucknow University Act, 1920.
The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court challenging the validity of the resolution and a learned single judge finding that the Managing Committee acted in violation of the principles of natural justice, quashed the resolution and allowed the writ petition.
On appeal, a Division Bench set aside the order of the learned single judge and dismissed the writ petition on the ground that no writ lies in the facts and circumstances of the case.
The remedy of the appellant lay in a suit for damages.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that the appel lant had a statutory status, that his services were terminated in violation of the provisions of the statutes passed under the Lucknow University Act, 1920 and therefore, the High Court was wrong in its conclusions that no writ of certiorari would lie against the respondent.
It was further submitted that ,the appellant was not given a reasonable opportunity of defending himself against the charges.
Statue 151 provides that a teacher of an associated College shall be appointed on a written contract and the contract shall provide the conditions mentioned there in addition to such other conditions as the associated College may include in the agreement.
Clause 5 of the agreement provides that the Managing Committee may dispense with the services of a lecturer without notice if the Committee is satisfied that it is necessary to remove the said lecturer for misconduct or otherwise, provided, an opportunity is given to him by the Committee to give his explanation before a decision is arrived at.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD : (1) When there is a purported termination of a contract of service,.
a declaration that a contract of service 'still subsisted would not be made in the absence of special circumstances and courts do not ordinarily enforce specific performance of a contract of service.
The remedy of the victim lies in a claim for damages, not a claim for a declaration that the contract of service still subsisted.
[322 E F] Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation Ltd. vs Chandra Kiran Tyagi, ; ; and Indian Airlines Corporation vs Sukh Dev Rai, ; followed.
(2) On a plain meaning of statute 151, it is clear that it only provides that the terms and conditions mentioned therein must be incorporated in 321 the contract to be entered into between the College and the teacher concerned.
It does not say that the terms and conditions have any legal force, until: and unless they are embodied in an agreement.
The terms and conditions of service mentioned in Statute 151 have proprio vigore, no force of law.
They become terms of service only by virtue of their being incorporated in a contract.
Without the contract, they have no vitality and can confer no legal right.
Therefore, the appellant cannot find a cause of action of any breach of law, but only on the breach of the con tract, for which a writ in the nature of ceritiorari will not lie [327 H] (3) A writ will lie when the order is the order of a statutory body acting in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by a statute.
The College or the Managing Committee in question, is not a statutory body and so the High Court is right is dismissing the petition.[328 D] Further, since the High Court has no jurisdiction, it is not necessary to go into the question as to whether the appellant was given sufficient opportunity to meet the charges against him.
[328 G] Prabhakar Ramkrishna Jodh vs A. L. Pande & anr.
[1965] 2 S.C.R. 713, and Vidyodaya University vs Silva discussed and distinguished.
