Pursuant to an order by a Muslim ruler of an erstwhile princely State, the respondent was allotted a house and he was living in it.
After the merger of the princely State with the appellant State, rent was demanded from the respondent and he filed a suit for a declaration that be was the owner in possession of the house; and in the alternative, that he was a licensee entitled to remain in possession for life without payment of any rent.
The High Court, in second appeal, held that the use of the Urdu words 'inteqal ' and 'atta ' showed that the Ruler intended the order to be a valid declaration of gift under Mohammedan Law and that when the respondent took possession of the house, he became its owner.
The High Court also held that no other evidence was admissible for deciding on the Ruler 's intention.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) There being no mention in the order either of rights of ownership or those of a life estate holder, the mere use of the two words, did not determine what was meant to be granted.
The word 'inteqal ' is used in connection with a transfer of property, but in the context of its use here, it could only indicate that the respondent was to have change or transfer his residence in the physical sense.
The word 'atta ' is used to denote all kinds of grants including a mere permission to live in a house.
Therefore, assuming that the order reduced the terms of a grant to writing, oral and other evidence was both necessary and admissible under section 92, proviso (6), Evidence Act, to resolve the latent ambiguity.
The evidence adduced in the case, however, is more consistent with the view that the Ruler meant to resolve the immediate financial difficulty of the respondent by giving him free residential accommodation than with a conferment of the ownership of or a life interest in the house.
[346 B H] (2) There was no declaration of any gift either of the corpus or the usufruct and the admissible evidence relating to the nature of the transaction, which the High Court should have considered, showed, that the transaction amounted to nothing more than a grant of a licence revocable at the grantor 's option.
From the mere expenditure by the respondent of money over some necessary repairs, an inference of a larger grant cannot be drawn.
[347 C. E]
