The petitioner was detained under section 3(i) and (iii) of the West Bengal (Prevention of Violent Activities) Act, 1970.
The first and the second ground of detention served on him mentioned two incidents of theft and throwing of bombs with intent to kill said to have been committed in the yard of Naibati Railway Station.
The third and the last ground was that on January 13, 1971 between 12 and 12.20 hrs.
the petitioner along with his associates "being armed with bombs, swords, lathis, etc.
entered in a clash with another group with a view to kill them" and that his "violent activities created a serious panic in the Station area and disturbed public order.
" The petitioner contended, inter alia that ground No. 3 was vague and uncertain and was couched in such indefinite language that it would be impossible for the petitioner to effectively make a representation and therefore his detention was invalid.
In his representation the petitioner had merely denied all the three grounds and maintained that he had no concern with any of the three incidents alleged in the grounds of detention.
In his written arguments submitted to this Court the petitioner stated that the allegations in respect of all the grounds were made against him by the Naibati Railway Police and that they were false.
In the reply affidavit of the state the averment for the first time made was that the alleged incident in ground No. 3 took place not in Naibati Railway Station area but at another railway station.
Allowing the petition, HELD : (1) Ground No. 3 is vague by reason of its omission to mention the locality.
It is clear that the petitioner was under the impression, in the absence of the place or the locality where the incident was said to have taken place having been mentioned, that the said incident had taken place either in Naibati Railway Station or the area under the jurisdiction of Naibati police.
Therefore, apart from ground No. 3 being vague by reason of its omission to mention the locality, there was in the context of the other two grounds a likelihood of the petitioner being under a wrong impression that according to the District Magistrate the incident there alleged had taken place in the Naibati Railway Station area.
That being so, the omission to mention the locality prevented the petitioner from effectively making a representation.
[352 D] (2)The omission to specify the group with whom the petitioner and his associates came into clash also renders that ground vague and indefinite, resulting once again in disabling the petitioner from effectively making a representation.
[352 E]
