The lessee of a plot of land from Government sub leased it and the sub lessee built a building on it consisting of Rats, shops and offices.
The sub lessee assigned the rights of occupation of those flats etc.
under various .agreements.
Thereafter, the appellant company was incorporated and the sub lessee purported to assign all his rights in the building to the appellant company.
In the preamble to the deed it was recited that the company had been formed for the better administration of the building and for the protection of the interests of the persons occupying the flats etc., and that ;the sub lessee had agreed to assign to the appellant company all his interests in the, land and the building.
The consideration, mentioned in the document was nil and the document bore a stamp% of 12 annas.
When it was presented for registration, the authority impounded the deed, held that the appellant company was formed of and for the persons who had purchased the flats etc., that the real consideration for the assignment was .made up partly of what was paid by the occupiers of the flats etc., and determined the stamp duty and penalty under section 40 of the Stamp Act, 1899.
On a reference to the High Court it was held, that the article in the ,Schedule to the St amp Act applicable is article 23.
On the question of consideration, 'however, while one Judge held that the consideration was ,nil ' as mentioned in the deed, the majority held that the Revenue was not bound to accept the quantum of consideration mentioned in the deed, that the deed incorporated into itself the various agreements entered into between the sub lessee and the persons to whom rights were assigned in the flats etc., and that the consideration was the total amount payable to the sub lessee by those assignees.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) Before the terms and conditions of an agreement can be said to have been incorporated into another document, it must be shown that the parties intended to do so.
In the present case, the mere reference to the earlier transactions in the deed did not amount to an incorporation in it of the terms and conditions of those transactions.
[338 F H] (2) In view of section 27 of the Stamp Act the parties to a document are required to set forth in the document fully and truly, the consideration (if any) and all other facts and circumstances affecting the chargeability of that document with duty.
But a failure to do so is merely punishable under section 64 of the Stamp Act.
There is no provision empowering the Revenue authorities to make an independent inquiry of the value of the property conveyed for determining the duty, even assuming that the charging words in article 23 do not mean that the Revenue must have regard 333 only to what the parties to the instrument have elected to state the consideration to be, but can assess the duty upon the value of the consideration as disclosed upon an examination of the terms of the instrument as a whole.
[339 A D] (3) There is a long line of decisions of the High Courts holding that the Legislature had not empowered the Revenue to make an independent inquiry as regards the valuation of the right sought to be assigned.
That view is correct and the question must also be held to be settled by state decision.
[340 D F] Ramen Chetty vs Mohomed Ghouse, I.L.R. , Sakharam Shankar vs Ramchandra Babu Mohire, I.L.R. , Muhammad Muzaffar Ali, In re.
I.L.R. 44 All.
339, Sri Sitaram Ramalla & Anr.
vs State of Bihar, I.L.R. 39 Pat.
228 and Bharpet Mohammad Hussain Sahib & Anr.
vs District Registrar, Kurnool, I.L.R. , approved.
(4) In any event, there was no basis for holding that the consideration for the deed was the amount received by the sub lessee from the persons to whom he assigned rights in the flats etc.
Those persons acquired an independent right and title whether perfect or not en before the impounded deed was executed, and their rights did not flow from the impounded deed.
[340 F G]
