Disputes having arisen between the appellant and the respondent with reference to the performance of a contract which provided for arbitration, steps were taken to appoint arbitrators and an umpire.
The appellant filed a petition in the District Judge 's Court, having jurisdiction over the matter, for setting aside the nominations.
When the matter came up to this Court in appeal, this Court appointed a sole arbitrator with consent of the parties.
Thereafter in the presence ' of counsel for both parties this Court gave directions in the appeal that the arbitration records be sent to the sole arbitrator, and later extended the time for making the award, and gave directions regarding the venue.
The arbitrator gave his award, directing the payment of a certain sum by the appellant to the respondent with simple interest at 9% from a date anterior to the reference, and filed the award ip.
this Court 'the next day.
The respondent filed a petition for passing a decree in terms of the award but the appellant opposed the petition.
On the questions : (1) Whether the arbitrator had no power suo motu to file his award; Whether the award should not have been filed in this Court as it is not the Court contemplated by sections Z((4) and 14(2) of the ; and (3) Whether the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to.
award the interest from a date anterior to the date of award or reference, HELD : (1) There is nothing in section 14(2) of the Act which precludes the arbitrator from filing the award suo motu and it is not correct to say that the award should be filed only if the parties make a request to the arbitrator to file it, or make an application to the Court for that purpose.
The arbitrator having filed the award the next day after making it, no question of limitation arises.
[239 G B] Narayan Bhawu vs Dewajibhawu, A.I.R. 1945 Nag. 117, approved.
(2) The expresion 'Court ' occurring in section 14(2) of the Act will have to be understood in the context in which it occurs, because, the definition of the word in section 2(c) applies only when there is nothing repugnant in the subject or context.
The word 'Court ' would include 'an appellate court ' and the word 'suit ' would include 'appellate proceedings '.
Merely because the order of this Court appointing the sole arbitrator stated 'the ,appeal is allowed ' it is not as if this Court had lost all jurisdiction regarding the arbitration proceedings.
The various directions given by this Court indicate that this Court retained full control over the arbitration proceedings.
Therefore this Court is the Court under section 14(2) where the arbitration award should be validly filed.
[240 E. H; 241 B D] 234 Ct. A. Ct.
Nachiappa.
Chettiar & Ors.
V. Ct.
A. Ct.
Subramaniam Chettiar; , , referred to.
(3) In the present case, all the disputes including the claim for the payment of interest had been referred to the arbitrator.
The contract does not provide that no interest was payable on the amount that may be found due.
Therefore the respondent was entitled, under section 61 (2) of the , to claim interest from the date on which the price became due and payable.
The arbitrator had found that the price had become payable from a date anterior to the date of the award.
There fore, the award of interest from the anterior date was justified.
The award of interest at 9% 'is also not exorbitant because the parties themselves claimed interest at 12%, [245 A G] Union of India vs A. L. Rallia Ram, ; and Firm Madanlal Roshanlal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd. Indore; , , followed,
