A global tender to sell surplus serviceable and scrap rails was issued to established buyers by the Government of India and pursuant to this tender notice, the respondents by their letter dated 21 5 68 offered to buy the rails at a particular price and Shri P. C. Oak, Deputy Director, Railway Stores, Railway Board, on behalf of the Secretary, Railway Board,, accepted the respondents ' offer with the terms and conditions mentioned in the letters sent by the respondent on 15 7 68.
Negotiations for the final contract, however, took place between the parties and on 15 7 68, the respondents complained that some of the Railways who were holding stocks are selling the steel rails which they have no right to sell in view of the concluded contract; but Shri P. C. Oak for Secretary, Railway Board, replied that subsequent to 15 7 68, there were negotiations for the vital terms and conditions of the contract and so the question of the existence of a concluded contract did not arise.
At this, the respondents filed a petition in Court under section 20 of the Arbitration Act, after setting out the relevant correspondence leading upto the letter of acceptance of 15th July 1968 and it was stated that, the letter was a definite acceptance of the offer and constitute a valid and binding contract between the parties.
In the written statement, the appellants raised a preliminary objection that the petition was misconceived as there was no arbitration agreement between the parties and so the question of enforcing the arbitration clause in the alleged contract did not arise.
Further, it was contended by the appellants that the letter of acceptance and the subsequent letters were not by the Director of Railway Stores, but by the Secretary to the Railway Board, who was not a person authorized to enter into the agreement between the President of India represented by the Ministry of Rail ways and the respondents as required under article 299 of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal.
BELD : The Secretary to the Railway Board, on whose behalf the offer of the respondents was accepted, was not the person authorized to enter into a contract on behalf of the President of India, as required under article 299, and therefore, the contract, if any, was not binding on the appellants.
Further, it was not correct to say that Clause 43 of Part XVIII and Part XLI empowered the Secretary, Railway Board to enter into such contracts; because Clause 9 specifically provided for the contracts connected with the sale of scrap; ashes coal, dust, empty containers and stores; and repayable rails, being part of the stores, it was covered by Clause 9 and the Secretary, Railway Board, was not empowered by the President to enter into a contract on his behalf.
[445 B] Seth Bikhraj Jaipuria vs Union of India, [1962] 2 S.C.R. 880, referred to. 438
