The appeal is directed against the order of the High Court of Madras directing a sum of Rs. 500/ deposited in the High Court as security for the appellants appearance before it in certain contempt of Court proceedings, to be adjusted against the fine imposed upon him in those proceedings.
The contempt of Court proceedings (No. 3 of 1962) were taken against the appellant in the High Court in respect of a letter written and addressed by the appellant to the then Chief Justice of the High Court and which contained certain remarks in regard to the dismissal of the appellant 's revision application by a single judge of the High Court.
The contempt with which the plaintiff was charged in those proceedings was contempt of the High Court and not the City Civil Court, in which the appellant had filed the suit 'from which, the said revision application arose.
In those proceedings, the High Court by its judgment, held the appellant guilty of contempt of Court and sentenced him to 6 months simple imprisonment and fine.
The appellant served out the sentence of imprisonment but failed to pay the fine.
The said amount of Rs. 500, deposited in the said contempt proceedings remained unattached till 1971.
when two applications were filed in the High Court one by the appellant for refund and the other by the State for adjustment of the said amount towards the fine remaining unpaid and the High Court allowed the State 's application for payment of the said sum towards satisfaction of the said unpaid fine.
Counsel for the appellant relied on section 70 of the Penal Code and urged that six years having elapsed since the passing of the order imposing fine upon the appellant, the State application was time barred and the High Court could not pass the impugned order.
Further, counsel relied on section 25 of the which provides that Sections 63 to 70 of the Penal Code and the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code in relation to the issue and execution of warrants for the levy of fines shall apply to all fines imposed under any Act, Regulation etc., and since a fine which was imposed upon the appellant, was an order passed under the Contempt of Court Act 1952, Section 70 of the Penal Code was applicable.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) See.
5 of the Penal Code provides, inter alia, that its provisions are not to affect the provisions of any special or local law and under article 215 of the Constitution, every High Court being a Court of Record, have all the powers of such a Court including the power to punish fore contempt of itself.
The jurisdiction a special one.
not arising or derived from the , and therefore, not within the purview of either the Penal Code or the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The law as to contempt of Court, as administered by the 418 Madras High Court, in the present case, is a special law and therefore, section 70 of the Penal Code does not apply to the facts and circumstances of the case.
Further since such a special law does not prescribe any period of limitation for collecting and satisfying a fine imposed thereunder no question of limitation would arise.
[420 A] (ii) The power of the High Court to punish for contempt of itself arises not under any Act, such as Contempt of Courts" Act, but the Constitution itself vests these rights on every High Court, and no Act of a Legislature could take away that jurisdiction and confer it afresh by virtue of its own authority and since the sentence of fine and imprisonment passed against the appellant was not imposed under any act or statute,Section 25 of the has no application in the present case.
[420 E F] Sukhdev SinghSondhi v The Chief Justice and Judges of the Pepsu High Court [1954]S.C.R. 454 referred to.
