The appellants entrusted with the duties of carrying out improvement schemes under the Bombay Land Improvement Scheme Act, 1942, were charged with the offence of preparing false documents and committing criminal breach of trust in respect of certain amount.
It was alleged that even though no work had been done and no amount had been disbursed they prepared documents 'showing the doing of the work and payment of the amount, They were convicted under section 218 read with section 34, section 477A read with section 34 and section 409 read.
with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code as well as section 5(2).
read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention, of Corruption Act.
The High Court affirmed the conviction.
in the appeal to this Court it was contended that after the matter had been reported to the, higher authorities the rectification work was done and the money was disbursed for the purpose for which it had been entrusted; that the conviction was bad because of non compliance with section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act; and that the prosecution was barred by time under section 23 of the Bombay Land Improvement Schemes Act, 1942.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) There is no cogent ground to disagree with the trial court and the High Court that the accused had prepared false documents, bad also committed criminal breach of trust and were in the discharge, of their duties guilty of criminal misconduct as defined in section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
(ii)It is no answer to a charge of criminal misappropriation that after the matter bad been reported to the higher authorities the accused got the rectification work done or the money was subsequently disbursed for the purpose for which it had been entrusted.
According to explanation 1 to section 403 Indian Penal Code a dishonest misappropriation for a time only is "misappropriation" within the meaning of that section.
[515 D] (iii)It is well established that cognizance of a case, has, in fact, been taken by the court on a police report following investigation conducted in breach of provisions of section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the result of the trial cannot be set aside unless the illegality in the 511 investigation can be shown to have brought about a miscarriage of justice.
The reason for the above dictum is that an illegality committed during the course of investigation does not effect the competence and jurisdiction of the Court to, try the accused.
Where, therefore, the trial of the case has proceeded to termination, the invalidity of the preceding investigation would not vitiate the conviction of the accused as a result of the trial unless the illegality in the investigation has caused prejudice to the accused.
Since there has been no miscarriage of justice in the present case because of the alleged non compliance with section 5A the conviction of the appellants cannot be set aside on that score.
[515 H] H.N. Rishbud and Inder Singh vs The State of Delhi, ; , referred to.
(iv)Sub section (i) of the Bombay Land Improvement Schemes Act 1942 has plainly no application as it relates to anyth ing done in the good faith.
It cannot also be said that the acts of the appellants in preparing false documents and committing criminal breach of trust as also the act of criminal misconduct were done "under" the Bombay Land Improvement Schemes ' Act within the meaning of sub section (2).
The subsection has no application where something is done not under the Act even though it has been done by a public servant who has been entrusted with the duties of carrying improvement schemes under this Act.
The impugned acts of the appellants was not in discharge of their duties under the Act but in obvious breach and flagrant disregard of their duties.
[516 G 517 D]
