An advocate, in a transfer application in respect of a criminal complaint, filed before the Sessions Judge made certain allegations against two judicial officers before whom the criminal complaint and a civil suit, were pending.
While dismissing the transfer application, the Additional Sessions Judge, who heard ' the application, recorded an order that a report be submitted to the High Court for considering the conduct of the applicant as to the course adopted by him in making imputations or aspersions in the transfer petition against the judicial officers and to take action for contempt of court under section 3(3) of the .
Paragraph 1 of the transfer application stated that "the Magistrate below is on friendly relations with the complainants the respondent No. 1 in the present petition and he even enjoys the hospitality of the Respondent No. 1 sometimes alone and sometimes in company of the Civil Judge J. D. Kalyan (Shri M. B. Boadkar) who is also on friendly relations with the respondent No. 1 and who also enjoys the hospitality of the respondent No. 1".
There were other allegations in the transfer petition.
The show cause notice issued by the High Court containing the charge of contempt was confined only to paragraph 1 of the transfer appli cation.
The High Court held that the appellant was guilty of contempt of court and he was sentenced accordingly.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD : (1) The show cause notice on the face of it disclosed no such allegation which could be regarded as falling within the rule laid down by this Court in which the head of contempt, i.e. scandalizing the Court, had come up for examination.
In Perspective Publications (P) Ltd. vs State of Maharashtra, ; this Court has laid down certain principles as to the law of contempt.
They are : (i) It will not be right to say that Committals for contempt for scandalizing the Court have become obsolete.
(ii)The summary jurisdiction by way of contempt should be exercised with great care and caution and only when its exercise is necessary for the proper administration of law and justice.
(iii)Any one may express fair, reasonable and legitimate criticism of any act or conduct of a judge in his judicial capacity or make a proper or fair comment on any decision given by him.
(iv)A distinction must be made between a mere libel or defamation of a judge and what amounts to contempt of court.
The test in each 537 case would be whether the impugned publication is a mere defamatory attack on the judge or whether it is calculated to interfere with due course of justice or the proper administration of law by the court it is only in the latter case that it will be punishable as contempt.
[542 H] (v)Alternatively, the test will be whether the wrong is done to the judge personally or it is done to the public.
The publication of a disparaging statement will be an injury to the public if it tends to create an apprehension in the minds of the people regarding the integrity, ability of fairness of the judges or to deter actual and prospective litigants from lacing complete reliance upon the courts administration of justice or if it is likely to cause embarrassment in the mind of the judge himself in the discharge of his judicial duties".
[543 E] (2)Allegations made even in a transfer application casting aspersions on a judicial officer can constitute contempt of his court within section 3 of the Act.
However, cases in which applications for transfer are made/ stand on a slightly different footing from those where a party makes an allegation, either inside or outside the court of a scandalizing nature imputing improper motives of the judge trying the case; but even in the case of a transfer application, a person cannot be allowed to commit contempt of court by making allegations of a serious nature scandalizing the court and imputing improper motives to the judge trying the case.
[544 B, 546 D] In the present case, the mere statement that a Magistrate is friendly with a party who happens to be an advocate and enjoys his hospitality or has friendly relations with him will not constitute contempt unless there is an imputation of some improper motives as would amount to scandalizing the court itself and as would have a tendency to create distrust in the popular mind and impair the confidence of the people in the courts.
[544 C] State of Madhay Pradesh vs Revashankar, , State vs
The Editors and Publishers of Eastern Times and Prajatantra, and Swaranamavi Panigrahi vs B. Nayak & Ors., A.I.R. 1959 Orissa 89, referred to and discussed.
