The sale of the Indian Observer, a news weekly, at railway platforms was banned by an order of the appellant board in March 1965.
The respondent who was owner and publisher of the Indian Observer filed a writ petition in the High Court alleging that the ban had been imposed because the new weekly had carried certain articles which were critical of the Railway administration.
The appellant 's case in the High Court was that the ban had been imposed because the news weekly carried sexy and obscene matter.
The High Court allowed the writ petition holding that similar publications were allowed to be sold by the licencees of railway bookstalls and the ban on Indian Observer was therefore dis criminatory.
The High Court also held that under clause 742 of the Indian Railway Code the appellant had no authority to impose the ban.
In appeal against the High Court 's decision.
HELD : (i) In the Indian Railway Code the policy and principle, laid down in categorical terms in sub clause (viii) of Clause 742 is that the contractor should provide equal opportunity.
to all the popular newspapers for sale in their stalls, on the same terms.
This was subject to certain conditions one of which in sub clause (v) was that the sale of obscene books and pictures and publications by the government should be strictly banned.
However the letter written by the railway dated March 26, 1965 did not impose the ban on the ground that Indian Observer was an obscene publication which had been prohibited by the government.
In that letter there was first a recital of what had come to the Board 's notice i.e., that the articles written in the said news weekly were in very low taste bordering on obscenity.
There was no finding or decision that it was a publication which was obscene.
The conclusion of the Board simply was that the Indian Observer was not fit for ,ale, at Railway station,;.
The other condition laid down in sub clause (v) that its sale has been prohibited by the Government was neither mentioned nor had it been shown that any such order had been made by the government prohibiting the sale of the Indian Observer on the ground that it was obscene.
The Central Government was not shown to have, any power under the Railways Act or rules thereunder to ban the sale of any obscene book or publication and it was not claimed that the Railway Board could impose the ban under any other enactment.
For the above reasons the order imposing the ban could not be justified under clause 742 of the Indian Railway Code.
(ii) The High Court had found as a fact that publications which were freely on sale on the bookstalls to whom licences has been given were 866 such that they were hardly distinguishable from the Indian Observer on the ground of obscenity.
It was not disputed before the High Court that the news weekly in question had been sold on railway platforms since 1963 nor was it suggested that the Railway Board had ever accorded individual sanction for the sale of every single book and publication at the book stalls of the Railway Administration.
The Railway Administration had itself directed that the book stall contractors who were its licencees should provide equal opportunity to all the popular newspapers for sale in their stalls.
These very contractors were now being directed to discriminate between the respondent and owners or publishers of other popular newspapers on grounds which had no legal basis or justification.
The administrative act or order of the Railway Board (which fell within the definition of 'State ' in article 1) of the, Constitution) could therefore be challenged by the appellant in a petition under article 226 of the Constitution as violative of article 14.
Since no proper or valid grounds had been shown for sustaining the discrimination made, the view of the High Court that the impugned order of the Railway Board was discriminatory must be upheld.
Railway Board vs Niranjan Singh, [1069] 3 S.C.R. 548, distinguished.
(iii)Judicial propriety and decorum demand that a Bench while considering the question of granting a certificate for appeal to this Court ought not to be critical of or express any dissent from the judgment appealed against because it has not such jurisdiction and all that it has to decide is whether the requirement of the Articles of the Constitution on which a ,certificate can be granted have been satisfied.
