Under the Punjab Rent Restriction Act, 1949 a landlord can evict a tenant only on the grounds and according to the procedure provided in section 13 of the Act.
Section 3 of the Act provides for exemption to be granted by Government from the operation of section 13.
By notification dated July 30, 1965 the Government of Punjab granted such ex emption in respect of building constructed during the year 1959 to 1963 for a period of 5 years from the date of their completion, on the .condition that during the aforsaid period of exemption suits for ejectment of tenants in respect of those, buildings "were or are" institutes in civil courts and decrees of ejectment "were or are" passed.
The respondent had let out to the appellant a building which was completed in 1960.
A suit for ejectment of the appellant was filed in 1963 and decree was obtained in 1969.
In proceeding for execution the question was whether the .decree, having been obtained more than 5 years after completion of the building, was exempt from operation of section 13.
The High Court in second appeal held in favour of the respondent.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, the appellant contended that the decree in the suit having been passed after 1 period of 5 years from the date of construction, exemption from restrictions placed by section 13 will not be available because not only the suit should be filed but the decree for eviction should be obtained within the said period of 5 years.
HELD : The filing of the suit within the period of exemption is the only condition that is necessary to satisfy one of the requirements of the exemption, the other requirement being the passing of the decree in respect of which no time has been prescribed.
If the degree, as contended by the appointment has to be obtained within the period of 5 years, there was no need to specify the at the suit had to be filed within that period because the exemption from the requirements of section 13 is only in respect of the decree and not the suit.
[928 F] The use of the words 'were or are ' in respect of decree ,is A will as suits supports the above interpretation.
The suit should have been filed or are her , after, to filed and likewise decrees of ejectment bid been passed or are hereafter to be passed.
Further, a suit may conceivably be filed on the last day of the expiry of the 5 years exemption.
If so it will be absurd to postulate that a decree would be given immediately thereafter, as that would be the result, if the contention that both the suit.and the decree should be passed within the period of exemption.
is accepted.
[927 H 928 E] 923 A statue must be interpreted in the light of its object.
The very purpose of the exemption of buildings ' from 'the operation of section 13 was to give landlords the light which as owners of buildings they had under the ordinary law, namely, to give them on lease at rents which they thought remunerative and to evict tenant 's during that period without any fetters imposed by the Act.
If no provision was made for exempting such decrees in respect of the exempted buildings the exemption granted will be illusory.[1926 H 927 E] Accordingly the appeal must fail.
