An industrial dispute arose between the appellant and its workmen as to 'whether the employers were required to pay wages for the festival holidays allowed to their workmen in a year.
The appellant contested the workmen 's claim mainly on the grounds that neither in law nor in practice was there any provision for festival holidays with wages, that the appellant was already paying wages for three holidays allowed to the workmen under the U.P. Industrial Establishment (National Holidays) Act, 1961 and that in the entire region in which this mill is situated, no textile mill pays wages for festival holidays.
The mill was stated to be an uneconomic unit and, therefore, not in a position to b@r an extra burden.
The workmen, on the other band, in their separate written statements, filed through three Unions.
pleaded that the grant of holidays without wages was illegal and against social justice.
In their rejoinder the appellant pleaded that the holidays mentioned by the Unions were (,ranted because the workmen had demanded the same and those holidays were substituted by other days in lieu of holidays and as they were paid for the days on which they worked on account of those holidays there was no loss of wages caused to them.
The Tribunal by its award made the appellant liable to pay to their daily rated and piece rated workmen for 17 festival holidays, besides three national holidays, plus arrears, on the ground that the Secretary of,the appellant mill admitted that the festival holidays were paid holidays in the sense that workers were allowed to work on their unpaid rest days in substitution of the said festival holidays.
The appellant being aggrieved by the award presented a writ petition before the High Court which was dismissed by a single Judge.
Special leave to a Divisional Bench of the High Court was dismissed in Iimine, but the Bench certified the case to be fit for appeal to this Court.
The appellant was held entitled ' to certificate either under cl.
(a) or cl.
(b) of article 133(1) of the Constitution on the ground that value of the subject matter of dispute or claim The respondent in the Supreme Court objected to the competence of the certificate on the ground that though the judgment of the Division Bench was one of affirmance the certificate did not disclose on its face the existence 'of any substantial question of law.
This objection was upheld but as the case was considered fit for special leave, on oral request special leave was granted on the condition that the appellant would file a formal application for special leave accompanied by an application for condoning the delay 911 Allowing the appeal on the merits, HELD : By reading the statement of the Secretary of the appellant along with the pleadings as disclosed in the respective statement of cases of the parties, it is not possible to bold that the appellant had admitted that the 17 festival holidays were being given by them as paid holidays dispensing with the enquiry into the question referred for adjustment to the Industrial Tribunal.
Even the workmen did not plead that the festival holidays were treated as paid holidays.
The Secretary 's statement that no festival holidays were paid in the sense that the workers were allowed to work on unpaid rest days in substitution of the said festival holidays.
This statement clearly explains that sense in which the Secretary meant to say that the festival holidays were paid.
The facts contained in the explanation lead to the only conclusion that festival holidays are not paid as the festival holidays are.
This statement read with the detailed explanation could not logically serve as a ground for ignoring the unequivocal denial in the written state ment.
The industrial Tribunal, was therefore, wrong in holding that the statement made by the Secretary was an admission on behalf of the appellant.
The learned single Judge also missed the real point and held that the Secretary 's statement constituted an admission and all 'facts evidence was therefore, excluded.
The Division Bench fell into the, same error in summarily dismissing the appeal in limine.
(920 A EJ (ii) The U.P. Industrial Establishments (National Holidays) Act, 1961 and rules provide for paid National Holidays but that Act dotes not deal with festival holidays.
In determining the number of paid festival holidays per year, certain facts, like custom, practice and uniformity in the industry without prejudicially affecting efficiency and increased produCtion are some of the relevant factors to be taken into account.
The question affects national economy and does not remain confined only to the establishment concerned but has its impact on other concerns as well.
This aspect has been completely ignored by the, Industrial Tribunal.
Further the Tribunal proceeded solely on the basis of misreading of the Secretary 's statement.
thereby ignoring the plea taken by the appellant.
There is.
thus the manifest error of law apparent on the fact of the record which resulted in grave failure of justice, because evidence on the only material point was illegally shut out.
[921 A] The District Board (afterwards Zila Parishad Allahabad vs Syed Tahir Hussain & ors C.A. No. 57 8 of 1963 decided oh July 23, 1965, Shiri Durga Prasad & Anr.
vs The Banaras Bank Ltd., [1964] 1 S.C.R.475.preferred to.
