Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is merely explanatory.
It does not create any specific offence.
Under this section several persons must be actuated by a common intention and when in further (1) A.I.R. 1936 Lah.
1202 ance of that common intention a criminal act is done by them, each of them is liable for that act as if the act had been done by him alone.
There is a clear distinction between the provisions of section 34 and section 149 of the Indian Penal Code and the two sections are not to be confused.
The principal element in section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is the common intention to commit a crime.
In furtherance of the common intention several acts may be done by several persons resulting in the commission of that crime.
In such a situation section 34 provides that each one of them would be liable for that crime in the same manner as if all the acts resulting in that crime had been done by him alone.
There is no question of common intention in section 149 of the Indian Penal Code.
An offence may be committed by a member of an unlawful assembly and the other members will be liable for that offence although there was no common intention between that person and the other members of the unlawful assembly to commit that offence provided the conditions laid down in the section are fulfilled.
Thus if the offence committed by that person is in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object, every member of the unlawful assembly would be guilty of that offence, although there may have been no common intention and no participation by the other members in the actual commission of that offence.
There is a difference between object and intention, for although the object may be common, the intentions of the several members of the unlawful assembly may differ and indeed may be similar only in one respect namely that they are all unlawful, while the element of participation in action, which is the leading feature of section 34, is replaced in section 149 by membership of the assembly at the time of the committing of the offence.
A charge for a substantive offence under section 302, or section 325 of the Indian Penal Code, etc.
is for a distinct and separate offence from that under section 302, read with section 149 or section 325, read with section 149, etc.
A person charged with an offence read with section 149 cannot be convicted of the substantive offence without a specific charge being framed as required by section 233 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
There was no room for the application of section 236 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the facts of the present case.
The provisions of section 236 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can apply only in cases where there is no doubt about the facts which can be proved but a doubt arises as to which of several offences have been committed on the proved facts in which case any number of charges can be framed and tried or alternative charges can be framed.
In the present case there was no doubt about the facts and if the allegation against the appellant that he had caused the injuries to the deceeased with takwa was established by evidence, then there could be no doubt that the offence of murder had been committed, 1203 In the present case there was no question of any error, omission or irregularity, in the charge within the meaning of section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure because no charge under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code was in fact framed.
There was an illegality in the present case and not an irregularity which was curable by the provisions of sections 535 and 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Assuming however that there was merely an irregularity which was curable, the irregularity in the circumstances of the case was not curable because the appellant was misled in his defence by the absence of a charge under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
By framing a charge under section 302, read with section 149, Indian Penal Code against the appellant, the Court indicated that it was not charging the appellant with the offence of murder and to convict him for murder and sentence him under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code was to convict him of an offence with which he had not been charged.
In defending himself the appellant was not called upon to meet such a charge and in his defence he may well have considered it unnecessary to concentrate on that part of the prosecution ease.
Barendra Kumar Ghosh vs Emperor ( (1925] I.L.R. 52 Cal. 197), Queen vs Sabid Ali and others ( [1873] 20 W.R. (Cr.) 5), Panchu Das vs Emperor ( Cal.
698), Beazuddi and Others vs King Emperor ([1901] , Emperor vs Madan Mandal and Others ( Cal. 662), Theethumalai Gounder and Others vs King Emperor ([1924] I.L.R. , Queen Empress vs Bisheshar and Others ( All. 645), Taikkottathil Kunheen ( [1923] 18 L.W. 946), Bamasray Ahir vs King Emperor ( Patna 484), Sheo Ram and Others vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1948 All. 162), and Karnail Singh and another vs State of Punjab ( , referred to.
