Five persons including three appellants were jointly charged and tried for rioting and offence committed in the course of it.
The Sessions Judge acquitted all the accused because he found the prosecution story to be art ficial.
He also took into account the delay in lodging the first information report and the fact that there were no 'blood marks found where the injured persons were alleged to have fallen down.
The High Court in appeal filed by the.
State re assessed, the evidence and reversed the judgment of acquittal in respect of the three appellants.
The appellants had been charged in respect of vicarious offences under section 149, of the Indian Penal Code, but the High Court, in view of the acquittal of two of the five accused, convicted he appellants in respect of those offences under section 34 of the Code.
In appeal by special leave this Court had to consider (i) whether the reversal of the judgment of the trial court by the High Court was justified with reference to principles of appreciation of evidence and the decisions of the Court, (ii) whether the conviction of the appellants by recourse to section 34 was justified on the facts of the case, HELD: (i) Perhaps there is no uniform method of arriving at correct or at least satisfactory conclusions upon veracity of versions placed before the Court which can be applied to all cases.
It may be possible to decide many cases by determining the main or crucial point on which the decision of the case one way or the other may turn.
In other cases, where many disputable points are revolved, none of which is conclusive, a more elaborate and comprehensive treatment of the various points involved in the whole case may be necessary.
Courts have, however, to attempt to, separate the "chaff from the grain" in every case.
They cannot abandon this attempts on the ground that the case is baffling unless the evidence is really so confusing or conflicting that the process cannot be reasonably carried out.
[983 H 984B] Chet Ram vs State, [1971] 1 S.L.I.153, referred to.
(ii) In judging the credibility of aversion the Court must apply the standards of a reasonable and prudent man.
[983 F] (iii) In the present case the High Court had undoubtedly corrected the erroneous approach of the learned Sessions Judge by pointing out obvious answers to the points which the Sessions Judge seemed to regard as riddles incapable of solution.
For example, the delay in lodging the First Information Report, although suspicious, could certainly be satisfactorily, explained by the fact that the stab would in the stomach of one of the victims was so serious that his statement could not be taken for several days afterwards.
The absence of blood at, the place of occurrence 979 was given undue importance by the trial court inasmuch 'as the blood might have got soaked in the clothes of the victims.
Secondly after the occurence, a number of persons must have passed to and fro over the path, where the occurrence took place, before the arrival of the police next day.
The principles laid down by this Court were applied by the High Court in dealing with the case and interference by this Court in respect of the appraisal of evidence by the High Court would not be justified.
[984 P G; 986 A B] Khedu Mohton & Ors.
vs State of Bihar, ; and Laxman Kalu Nikalje vs The State of Maharashtra, ; , referred to.
(iv) The High Court however erred in applying section 34 I.P.C. to the facts of the present case.
Taking the totality of circumstances, particularly the nature of the injuries, the Diwali night, and the place of occurrence on a public thoroughfare into account, the pattern of the case was not that of a pre plained attack.
Mere carrying of spears which was not unusual for Sikhs would not establish pre planning.
The conviction of the appellants with reference to section 34 must therefore be set aside.
[987 D G; 989 G H]
