In order to attract article 133(1)(b) the essential requirement is that there must be involved in the appeal to this Court a claim or question respecting property of the value of not less than Rs. 20,000/ in addition to or other than the subject matter of the dispute; if there is no question or claim raised respecting property other than the subject matter, then, clause (a) of article 133 will apply.
Adding future interest or possible further claims to the original value of the subject matter till the date of the judgment of the High Court and which items are not the subject of consideration by the High Court will not enable a party to plead that the claim so calculated exceeds Rs. 20,000.
[94O G] The respondent had filed applications under the Payment of Wages Act 1948, claiming overtime wages for the period 1957 to 1958 and wages for weekly off days for the period 1962 to 1963.
Against the judgment of the High Court setting aside the order of the appellate authority holding the claim as time barred, the appellants filled appeal to this Court on the basis of a certificate issued by the High Court under article 133(1)(b).
In its application before the High Court the appellant had prayed for the grant of a ' certificate that the amount or value of the subject matter before all the authorities, in the appeals, as well as in the High Court and still in dispute in the proposed appeal to this Court was Rs. 20,000/ and upwards, and, in the alternative on the ground that the case was fit one for appeal to this Court.
On the basis of the claims made by the workmen as overtime wages and weakly off days wages for the particular periods, the appellant had calculated at the same rate for subsequent periods till the judgment of the High Court and claimed that the amount or value in dispute in appeal to this Court was over Rs. 20,000/ .
The appellant bad also urged that it would have to meet in future also claims from its workmen and, as such, it will have to face a recurring liability.
On this basis the appellant had raised the plea that the judgment of the High Court involved directly or in, directly a claim or a question in respect of property of the value of Rs. 20,000/ and more.
The respondents moved this Court for revocation of the Certificate.
They urged that what weighed with the High Court 'for granting a certificate under article 133(1)(b) was the circumstance that the nature of the demands by the workmen were such as they were recurring claim arising in the future also and as such the final" judgment and order of the High Court involved directly or indirectly a claim respecting property of the value not less than Rs. 20,000/ and that thisview of the High Court was erroneous '.
HELD :that the certificate issued by the High Court under article 13,3(1)(b) was not proper and valid and hence the appeal was unsustainable.
930 (i) The High Court has not given any indication as to how it issued the certificate under article133(1)(b); it is clear that it did not grant the certificate on the claim made by the appellant, under clause (a) or clause (c) of article 133(1).
[937 A] (ii) In view of the fact that the High Court granted the certificate under article 133(1)(b), it has to he presumed that it has accepted the appellant 's plea that a certificate could be granted under the clause when there is a recurring liability, which, if calculated for subsequent years, will be Rs. 20,000/ or more.
[937 C D] (iii) But, the present case is not one where the decision of the High Court, apart from dealing with the subject matter in dispute before it, has the effect of affecting the rights of the appellant regarding other properties, including money.
The judgment of the High Court has only adjudicated upon the subject matter of the specified claim of the work men which was for a particular period.
The judgment does not involve directly or indirectly, apart from/the subject matter of the writ petition, any claim or question respecting property or money of the value of Rs. 2O,000/ and more.
The appellant was not entitled to notionally add, to the amount originally claimed by the workmen for particular periods any further amounts on the ground that they must be considered to have accrued due to the workmen till the date of the judgment of the High Court.
[945 E, 946 E] Chaitarmal vs M/s. Pannalal Chandulal, ; , applied.
A. V. Subramania Ayyar vs Sellammal, I.L.R. 39 Madras 843, Meghji Lakhamshi and Brothers vs Furniture Workshop, [1954] Appeals Cases 80; Smt.
Rajah Kishore Devigaru vs Bhaskara Gouta Chorani and others, A.I.R. 1960, A.P. 286, Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs section L. Mathias, A.I.R. ; G. Appuswamy Chettiar and another vs R. Sarangapani Chettiar and others, Moti Chand and others vs Ganga Parshad Singh and another, 29 Indian Appeals 40 and Surapati Roy and others vs Ram Narayan Mukherji and others, 50 I.A. 155, referred to.
