The High Court set aside an order of acquittal of the appellants on various charges and convicted them.
One of the items of evidence on which the High Court relied was the first information report.
Though it was not proved through its maker when be gave evidence in the trial court.
the High Court held it to be admissible under section 157 of the Evidence Act.
in appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The High Court was wrong in holding that the First Information Report would be admissible under section 157 of the Evidence Act.
Under that section.
it could not be used as substantive evidence but only to corroborate its maker.
The appellants were also denied the opportunity of cross examination on the First Information Report.
[627 A D] (2) The High Court, however, was correct in setting aside the order of acquittal and convicting the appellants on the other evidence.
[1639 D G] In dealing with an appeal against acquittal the High Court can go into questions of law and fact and reach its own conclusion on evidence provided it pays due regard to the principles for such review.
These principles are giving due regard to, the views of the trial Judge as to the credibi lity of the witnesses, the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, the right of the accused to any benefit of doubt and the slowness of an appellate court in disturbing the finding of fact arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of seeing the witnesses.
The appellate court ill coming to its own conclusion should not only consider every matter oil record having a bearing on questions of fact and the reasons given by the trial court in support of the order of acquittal but should also express reasons for holding that the acquittal was not justified.
If two conclusions can be reached with a plausible appearance of reason the court should lean in favour of that which leads to acquittal and not to that which lead, to conviction.
But once the appellate court comes to the conclusion that the view of the trial court was unreasonable that itself would provide a reason for interference.
[629 H; 630 A E. 631 B D] In the present case, the High Court bid kept in view the rules and principles of appreciation of evidence in setting aside the order of quitting.
In such a case.
this Court would not ordinarily interfere with the order of conviction by the High Court in an appeal against an acquittal, or review the evidence.
[630 E; 631 B D] Harbans Singh and Anr.
vs State of Punjab, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 104, Senwat Singh & Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan, ; Nihal Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, ; , State of Bombay vs Rusy Mistry, A.T.R. and Laxman Kalu Nikalje State of Maharashtra. , followed.
623 Khedu Mohton & Ors.
vs State of Bihar, ; and Sheo Swarup vs, King Emperor, 61 I.A. 398, referred to.
