The appellant company declared bonus for the year 1955 56 at 13.51% The workmen demanded bonus at the rate of 20%, the maximum provided in the Payment.of Bonus Act, 1965.
The dispute about the rate of bonus and calculation of the available surplus was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that a sum of Rs. 21,06,576 being bonus at 20% of the gross effective salaries and wages was payable for the year in question and it directed the surplus amount of Rs. 1,46,252/ to be set on As the bonus at the rate of 13.51 % had already been declared and paid by the Company, the Tribunal directed the payment of the balance 6.49% within a prescribed period.
In appeal to this Court against the Tribunal 's award the appellant company contended : (i) that the Tribunal erred in holding that under sections 6 and 7 of the the bonus payable for the relevant accounting year has to be deducted from the gross profits for the calculation of direct tax, (ii) that the Tribunal erred in refusing to deduct from the gross profits the ex gratia payment made to employees in respect of salary above the ceiling of Rs. 750 fixed by the Act.
(iii) that the Tribunal wrongly refused to deduct the reserve for doubtful debts from the gross profits.
On behalf of the respondent workmen it was urged that the Tribunal was not justified in allowing deduction of certain items from the gross profits for purposes of computing the available and allocable surplus.
HELD : (i) In the case of Metal Box Co., it was held by this Court that the notional tax liability is to be worked out by first working out the gross profits and deducting therefrom the prior charges under section 6, but not the bonus payable to the employees.
It is clear from the above decision that an employer is entitled to deduct his tax liability without deducting first the amount of bonus he would be liable to pay from and out of the amount computed under sections 4 & 6 of the Act.
This principle has been upheld by the Court in later cases.
This Court has also held that the amendment of the Act in 1969 has not effected any change in the earlier decision that the tax liability under the Act is to be workedout firstby working out the gross profits and deducting therefrom bonuspayableto the employees.
It followed that the Tribunal committed anerror inlaw in computing direct tax after deducting bonus.
[109H 110D] Metal Box Co. of India Ltd. vs Their Workmen, [1969]1 S.C.R. 750, The Workmen of William Jacks, and Company Ltd. Madras vs Management of William Jacks and Co. Ltd., Madras, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 08SupCI/72 106 1821, Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Workmen ; and Indian Oxygen Ltd. etc.
vs Their Workmen; , applied.
(ii) Though officers drawing salary upto Rs. 1600 per mensem are employees under section 2(13) of the Act and eligible for bonus, the salary or wages per month will be taken at the maximum of Rs. 750/ permensem.
What the company had done was to pay such men not only the bonus as calculated under the Act, but also in additional amount representing bonus on the emoluments above the ceiling of Rs. 750/ .
Such additional amount paid to all such officers totalling Rs. 2.5 lakhs could not be considered to be an expenditure debited directly to Reserves.
The Tribunal was justified in adding back this amount to the gross profits.
[12A C] (iii) In view of the decision of this Court in Indian Oxygen Ltd. the Tribunal 's decision adding back the deduction claimed by the appellant on account of return on the provision for doubtful debts must be upheld.
[112E F] (iv) The respondents were entitled to support the decision of the Tribunal even on grounds which were not accepted by the Tribunal or on other grounds which may not have taken notice of by the Tribunal while they were patent on the face of the record.
[113A, 114A B] Management, of Northern Railway Co operative Society Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Rajasthan et. ; ; J. K. Synthetics Limited vs J.K. Synthetics Mazdoor Union, and Ramanbhai Ashabhai Patel vs Dabhi Ajitkumar Fulsinji and others; , , followed.
(v) The Voluntary Retirement Scheme had not been challenged as mala fide by the Unions.
The payment of Compensation.
to induce the workmen to retire prematurely was an item of expenditure incurred by the company on the ground of commercial expense in order to facilitate carying on of the business and it was an expenditure allowable under section 37(i) of the Income tax Act.
It was not an expenditure of a capital nature.
The Tribunal was justified in declining to add back this item of expenditure to the gross profits.
[115B C] (vi) The Company had filed an appeal against the order of the Income tax officer postponing consideration of the company 's claim for extra shift allowance.
The Company had produced figures of depreciation and that had not been subjected to any serious challenge by the Unions.
In the circumstances the Tribunal rightly refused to add back the amount claimed by the Company as extra shift allowance.
[1 15F G] Jabalpur Bijlighar Karamchari Panchayat vs
The Jabalpur Electric Supply Co. Ltd. and another, A.I.R. 1972 S.C.70 applied.
(vii) The amount claimed by the Companyin respect of repairs and renewals was supported by evidence and had been accepted by the auditors.
The contention of the Unions that the Company was not justified in incurring the said expenditure had been rightly rejected by the Tribunal.
[1 15A] (viii) Since from the evidence produced on behalf of the company it was clear that there was no surplus after paying bonus for 1964 65 the question of set on for the next year did not arise.
The plea of the Unions in this regard had to be rejected.
[116F] [After working out the available and allocable surplus on the basis of the above findings the Court fixed the bonus payable at 14.02%].
