The respondent invited tenders for supplying country spirit to retail vendors.
In the notification issued by the Commissioner, it was stated that preference will be given to manufacturers of spirit.
Several persons submitted tenders including the appellant and the 5th respondent who was a manufacturer of spirit.
The appellant offered to supply the spirit at 74 P and the 5th respondent at 95 P.
The Government was not satisfied with any of the tenders and the tenderers were called upon to intimate to the Government whether they were willing to reduce their rate.
None of the tenderers was willing to reduce the rate, except the 5th respondent who agreed to accept the rate fixed by tin Government, and the Government, reduced his rate to 74 P and accepted his tender.
The appellant challenged the order granting the contract to the 5th respondent, but the High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that : (1) the impugned order could not be sustained because the Government nowhere stated that the tenders were not acceptable, on the ground that none of them, on due considerations, appeared to be satisfactory, as provided in r. 93 of the Rules framed under the Eastern Bengal and Assam Excise Act, 1910; ,and (2) under the rule, Government could not have entered into negotiations with :any of the tenderers.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) It is clear from the letter to the tenderers asking them to reduce the price quoted that the respondent Government considered the tenders to be unsatisfactory and hence unacceptable.
[205B C] (2) Rule 93 does not prohibit any negotiations with the tenderers.
On the other hand, it authorises Government to negotiate even with persons who have not tendered.
In the absence of any rule prohibiting Government from negotiating with the tenderers, Government can fall back on its powers under section 19.
In order to get country spirit at the cheapest possible rates and to have regular supplies, Government can negotiate with the tenderers or others.
[205F] (3) (a) No one has a fundamental right to get a Government contract.
In matters like this no question of hearing parties arises.
All that is required is fair play.
The appellant bad an opportunity to submit its tender which was considered and rejected on grounds which ate not irrational.
[306A] (b) Section 19 of the Act undoubtedly confers on the Government very wide powers in the matter of granting the exclusive privilege of manufacturing or of supplying to licensed vendors any country liquor or intoxicating drug within any specified local art a.
in the absence of a rule prohibiting Government from preferring one set of sellers to others, LI208 Sup.
CI/72 202 Government could rely on the section for such a power so long as the classification made by it is based on rational grounds.
Therefore, the Government could exercise that power in the manner most advantageous to it provided it did not infringe any Constitutional guarantee.
[205G] (c) It is true that the Government granted the contract to the 5th respondent at the rate quoted by the appellant and thus preferred the 5th respondent.
But the Government, as the purchaser, can prefer 'One seller to another for good reasons, though, it cannot show any undue favour to any one.
(d) In the notification calling for tenders it was mentioned that preference will be given to manufacturers; and there was justification for preferring a manufacturer to others, because, there would be a reasonable guarantee in the matter of supply of country liquor.
[205C]
