The petitioner was detained under section 3 of the West Bengal (Prevention of Violent Activities) Act, 1970 (President 's Act 19 of 1970) as he was acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
The particulars supplied to the, petitioner showed that he and his associates hurled bombs as a result of which panic was created in the locality and that high explosive bombs were recovered from the possession of the petitioner and his associates.
In the petition for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that (1) on the revo cation of the Proclamation under article 356 of the Constitution, President 's Act No. 19 of 1970 ceased to have effect and, as such, the petitioner could not be kept in detention in pursuance of the order made under the Act , (ii) the impugned detention order was not in conformity with section 10 of the Act as it did not specify the date of detention and (iii) the ground , of detention were not germane to the objects for which a person can be ordered to be detained under the Act.
Dismissing the petition, HELD : (i) The period for which a law made under article 356 (1) remains in force is not co terminous with the duration of the proclamation.
In view of the provisions of clause (2) article 357, President 's Act 19 of 1970 shall remain in force in spite of the revocation of the proclamation and would cease to have effect only on the expiry of one year after the proclamation has ceased to operate unless the provisions of the Act are sooner repealed or reenacted by Act of the appropriate State Legislature.
[227E] (ii) There is nothing in section 10 which makes it obligatory on the part of the detaining authority to specify the date of the commencement of the detention : The words "from the date of detention tinder the order" have reference to the date of the commencement of the detention in pursuance of the detention order.
[228E F] (iii) According to cl.
(d) of sub section (2) of section 3 the expression "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order" would include commission of an offence under the , or the .
The particulars supplied to the petitioner clearly bring the case within the ambit of clause (d) of subsection (2) of section 3 of the Act.
[229H] In order to detain a person with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the state or the maintenance of public order, as contemplated by section 3 (2) (d) of the Act, it is sufficient.
225 that the detaining authority considers it necessary to detain him in order to prevent him from doing any of the acts mentioned in clause (d).
If the past conduct and antecedents of the person concerned reveal a tendency to do the acts referred to in clause (d), the order of detention would be upheld, even though because of some supervening cause like prompt action by the police, the public order is not actually disturbed.
[230E G]
