The plaintiff respondent filed a suit for partition of properties men the first defendant (plaintiff 's brother) was the Karta.
After the filing of the suit the first defendant and his sons made a voluntary sale of some of the properties in suit by sale deed exhibit B7, to the appellant.
Certain other suit properties mentioned in exhibit, B51 were sold at a public auction under the provisions of the Land Improvement Loans Act 19 of 1883 in connection with arrears of a loan taken by the first defendant for the purchase of a pump set.
These properties were also purchased .by the, appellant.
The plaintiff respondent challenged the validity of the sales under exhibit B7 and exhibit B51 relying on the doctrine of lis pendens embodied in section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act.
The .trial court held that the sales were genuine and that the proper ties sold were joint family properties, negativing the claim of the first defendant that they were his individual properties.
The doctrine of his pendens held to be applicable to the properties sold.
In the decree for part however the trial court directed the Commissioner who was to divide the properties by metes and bounds to allot to the share of the first defendant, so far as possible, properties which were covered by exhibit B7 and B51.
The High Court in second appeal held that although the sale under exhibit B7 was made to satisfy the decree in certain mortgage suits it was a voluntary sale and could not be equated with sales in execution of mortgage decrees which are involuntary.
So far as the revenue sale under exhibit B51 was concerned the High Court after setting out the terms of section 7 of Act 19 of 1883 held that only that land sold was to be excluded from the purview of the principle of lis pendens for the improvement of which some loan was taken.
It therefore modified the decrees of the Courts below by giving a direction that further evidence should be taken before ' passing a final decree to show what land could be thus excluded from partition.
The High Court rejected the application of the appellant for leave to appeal to the Division Bench on 'the ground that no oral request immediately after delivery of judgment was made as provided in Rule 28 Order 4 of the Madras High Court Appellate Side Rules 1965.
This Court however allowed special leave to appeal under article 136 of the Constitution.
Apart from the writs the Court had to consider a preliminary objection requiring the appeal to be dismissed in limine.
In this connection the validity of Rule 28 Order 4 also fell for consideration HELD : (i) Per Ray and Beg, JJ.
Rule 28 of Order 4 of the Madras High Court Rules does not purport to affect the power to give the declaration contemplated by clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
It is evident that the rule is most useful and necessary particularly when a period of thirty days only for filing an appeal has been prescribed by the .
The judge pronouncing the judgment can decide then and there, in the presence of the parties or their counsel, whether the case calls for a certificate.
In a suitable case, where a party is able to prove that it 140 was prevented due to some cause beyond its control from asking for leave at the proper time, the judge concerned may condone the delay or extend the time by applying section 5 of the .
This salutary rule could not therefore be held to be ultra vires or invalid.
[143 F H] Penu Balakrishna Iyer & Ors, vs Sri Ariya M. Ramaswami Iyer In the present ease although the appellant was not shown to have attempted any explanation of failure to apply for the certificate at the proper time, yet, the, special leave petition having been granted and the case having passed without objection, beyond the stage of interim orders and printing of records, the Court heard arguments on merits also.
[144 F G] Per Sikri, C.J. (concurring) The High Court can regulate the time at which and the manner in which the application for certificate & WI be made.
Rule 28 Order 4 does not take away any right conferred by cl. 15 of the Letters Patent.
It only regulates the manner of the exercise of that right.
Union of India vs Ram Kanwar, ; , referred to.
(ii) Per Ray & Beg, JJ.
Expositions of the doctrine of lis pendens indicate that the need for it arises from the very nature of the jurisdiction of Courts and their control over the subject matter of litigation so that the parties litigating before them may not remove any part of the subject matter outside the power of courts to deal with it and thus make proceedings infructuous.
[153C] The purpose of section 52 of the Transfer of Property Act is not to defeat any just and equitable claim but only to subject them to the authority of the Court which is dealing with the property to which claims are put forward.
In the present case the Courts had given directions to safeguard such just and equitable claims as the purchaser may have obtained without trespassing on the rights of the plaintiff respondent in the joint property involved in the partition suit before the Court.
Hence, the doctrine of lis pendens was correctly applied. [153H, 154A] In regard to the sale under exhibit B7 the High Court had rightly distinguished cases cited on behalf of the appellant before it by holding that exemption from the scope of lis pendens cannot be extended to voluntary sales in any case.
[149 A] An examination of the sale deed exhibit B7 disclosed that it was not confined to the satisfaction of decretal amounts.
Other items were also found in it.
The sale deed did not purport to be on behalf of the Hindu joint family of which the plaintiff and the first defendant could be said to be members.
The sons of the first defendant were among the sellers but not the plaintiff.
At most it could be a sale binding on the shares of the sellers.
The first defendant as well as the appellant having denied that the properties in dispute were joint, could not take up the position that the sales were binding on the whole family.
Therefore it could not be held that the assumption of the High Court that the voluntary sale could not bind the whole family, of which the first defendant was the Karta, was incorrect.
Bishan Singh vs Khazan Singh, [1959] S.C.R . 878, distinguished.
As regards the revenue sale under exhibit B51 the assumption that the dues could be realised as arrears of land revenue would only apply to the interest of the borrower so, far as clause 7(1)(a) of Act 19 of 1883 is concerned.
The proviso enacts that even recoveries falling under section 7(1) (C) do not affect prior interests of persons other than the borrower or of the party which consents to certain loans.
In the present case the borrower had himself taken up the case that the loan was taken by him individually, for the purpose of purchasing a pumping set installed.
on the 141 land.
It did not therefore follow that this liability was incurred On behalf of the joint family unless it amounted to an improvement of the joint land.
Every transaction of the first defendant or in respect of joint property in his possession could not affect rights of other members.
it was for this reason that section 7(1) (a) was not specifically applied by the High Court.
But at the same time, the direction, that the properties sold should, so far as possible, be allotted to the first defendant meant that the purchaser could enforce his rights to them if they came to the share of the first defendant.
[151D F] Where a statutory provision is relied upon for recovery of dues, the effect of it must be confined to what the statute enacts.
Even under the English law the terms of the statute displace any claim based on the prerogatives of the Crown.
And in no case can the claim whatever its basis, justify a sale of that property which does not belong to the person against whom the claim exists.
[151H] Builders Supply Corporation vs The Union of India, and Attorney General vs Dekerysis Royal Hotel., Ltd., ; , referred to.
Per Sikri C.J. (concurring) Section 42 of the Madras Revenue Recovery Act provides that all lands brought to sale on account of arrears of revenue shall be sold free of all encumbrances.
The liability of the land to be sold under section
