The appellant was an officer in the Mysore State Service.
In 1967, when he had passed the age of 50 years he was compulsorily retired in terms of r. 285 of the Mysore Civil Service Rules read with Note I thereto, as the Government was of opinion that it was necessary in the public interest to retire him.
He challenged the order on the ground, inter alia, that there was violation of natural justice in that the appellant was not informed of the evidence on which the order was based and no opportunity was Riven to him for explaining, away such evidence.
The respondent stated that the action was taken on a consideration of the confidential reports submitted in respect of the appellant and that it was not based on any prejudice against him.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) As the Confidential Reports Rules stood at the relevant time, the appellant could not have appealed against the adverse remarks, and if the opinion of the Government to retire him compulsorily was based primarily on the reports, he could only challenge the order if he was in a position to show that the remarks were arbitrary or mala fide.
If the Government bona fide.
formed the opinion that it was in the public interest to retire him, the correctness of that opinion could not be challenged.
[310 A C] (2) It is difficult to see bow the appellant could have explained that it was contrary to public interest to retire him if there was no basis for attacking the order on the ground that it was made arbitrarily or mala fide.
[309, B C] Shivacharana vs State of Mysore, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 280; Union of India vs J. N. Sinha, [1971] 1 S.C.R. 791, followed.
Orissa vs Binapani Dei, , explained.
A. K. Kraipak vs Union, at 469, referred to '.
(3) The fact that r. 285 was not so emphatically worded as F.R. 56 (i) considered in J. N. Sinha 's case makes no difference, because, both the rules give the Government the same or similar right; and so long as the right is not qualified it must be held to be absolute.
[311 H;312 A] (4) If the confidential reports could be acted upon his promotion could be withheld even if he was not made to retire compulsorily.
If on the basis of the confidential reports be was asked to retire in compliance with the rule, the appellant could not complain of loss of position which he might have attained if there were no adverse remarks against him.
[312 B C]
