The appellant published a book with respect to which the State Government passed an order that, as the book questions the territorial integrity and frontiers of India in a manner which is likely to be prejudicial to the interest of the safety and security of India and thus contains matter the publication of which is punishable under section 2 of the , it was forfeited in favour of the Government under section 4(1) of the Act.
The appellant challenged the order under section 5, that the grounds for the opinion of the State Government, which hid to be stated under section 4 of the Act, were not given in the order.
The ' State Government filed a counter affidavit stating that the book contained erroneous maps of India with incorrect external boundaries and omitting integral parts of India altogether.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The word 'ground ' occurring in the section means 'base ', foundation, motive, valid reasons. ' The grounds must be distinguished from the opinion of the Government.
The grounds of the opinion must mean the conclusion of facts on which the opinion is based.
[396E F] (2) What the State Government did in this case, in the opening paragraph of the order, was merely to quote a portion of the words of section 2, namely , that 'the book questioned the territorial integrity and frontiers of India in a "Manner 'Which is likely to be prejudicial to the interest of the safety or security of India '.
The order gave no indication of the facts or the statements or the representations contained in the book which, according to the State Government, offended section 2.
In the order itself there was no reference to any map or text in the book which would come within the mischief of the section.
[396A C] Mohomed Ali, In re : 41 Calcutta 466, Arun Ranjan Ghose vs State of West Pengal, , approved.
Harnam Das vs State of Uttar Pradesh, , Naresh Chandra Ganguli vs The State of West Bengal and others,, , 421, State of Bombay vs Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya, ; , referred to.
