The appellant was tried by the Sessions Judge for an offence under section 30 of the Indian Penal Code for the murder of his wife.
According to the prosecution the appellant had suspected the fidelity of his wife because he believed that a son born to her was not his.
The wife was last scen in the company of the appellant on the evening of the murder.
It was alleged that the appellant went to the Tahsildar and made a confession.
The Tahsildar thereafter called the police.
At the instance of the appellant the body of his wife was recovered from his house.
When produced before a first class Magistrate for having his confessional statement 'recorded the appellant declined to make any confessional statement.
Relying upon the confession made to the Tahsildar and the other evidence the Sessions Judge convicted the appellant.
The High Court upheld the conviction.
In appeal before this Court it was inter alia contended on behalf of the appellant that the confession recorded by the Tahsildar was inadmissible in evidence since he was a second class Magistrate not specially empowered by the State Government in terms of section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to record a confession, HELD : In Singhara Singh 's case this Court relying on Nazir Ahmed 's 'case laid down that a confession recorded during the investigation of a case by a second class Magistrate not specially empowered could not be put in evidence under sections 74 and 80 of the Indian Evidence Act.
It was also held that the oral evidence of the Magistrate to prove the confession was inadmissible.
In the present case therefore the confession recorded by the Tahsildar was inadmissible and so was his oral testimony to prove ,It.
[434 B C] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Singhara Singh and Others, [1964] 4 S.C.R. 485 and Nazir Ahmed v, King Emperor, L.R. 63 I.A. 372, applied It could not be said that the Tahsildar recorded the statement before the commencement of investigation, The confession was recorded at It p.m. while the intimation to the police regarding a murderer having come to the residence of the Tahsildar was entered in the daily diary at 10.50 p.m.
The Head Constable after having made that entry proceeded to the residence of the Tahsildar and on arrival there put the accused under arrest.
It is well established that the discovery and arrest of the suspected offender is one of the essential steps in the course of an investi gation.
[435 E G] H. R. Rishbud and Inder Singh vs The State of Delhi, ; and The State of Madhya Pradesh vs Mubarak Ali, [1959] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 201, followed.
In re Yendra Narasimha Murthy, A.I.R. 1966 A.P. 131, referred to 429 However in the present case even if the confession was excluded the ,rest of the material on record proved the guilt of the accused.
[435 E] [Conviction maintained but in view of the special facts of the case ,sentence reduced from death to imprisonment for life.]
