The petitioner and his associates attacked a husband and wife with open knives in the third class compartment of a running train and robbed them of valuable property by putting them in fear of death on one occasion, and on another occasion, attacked a police party on the platform of a railway station with bombs.
dagger$, knives and iron rods and exploded bombs with a view to kill the police party.
The petitioner was detained by an order under section 3 of the with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner Prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, and the 'grounds of detention were that the two incidents created terror and panic among passengers and disturbed public order.
The, petitioner challenged the order of detention in this Court.
Dismissing the petition.
HELD : Both the incidents referred to in the order affected public order and not merely law and order.
[550 E F] The question whether a man only committed a breach of law and order or has act ad in a manner likely to cause disturbance of the public order, is a question of degree and the extent of the reach of the act upon the society.
The test to be adopted in determining whether an act affects law and order or public order is : Does it lead to disturbance of the current of life of the community so as to amount to a ,disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an individual leaving the tranquillity of the society undisturbed ? When two passengers are robbed at the point of knives while travelling in a third class compartment of a running train the act affects riot only the passengers who are deprived of their valuables but also the other passengers who are watching in fear as helpless spectators.
Likewise, the attack against the police party on the platform of a railway station by exploding bombs is bound to create panic and confusion among the passengers at the railway station.
Consequently, there is bound to be terror and panic amongst the travelling public.
Therefore, the acts in question, in the very nature of things, would adversely affect the even tempo of life of the community and cause a general disturbance of public tranquillity.
[550 A F] Tapan Kumar Mukherjee and ors.
vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 840. followed.
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar, [1966] 1 S.C.R. 709, .Arun
Ghosh vs State of West Bengal, [1970] 3 S.C.R. 288, Nagendra Nath Mondal vs State of West Bengal, ; , Nandlal Roy @ Nonda Dulal Roy @ Pagla vs State of West Bengal, W.P. No. 15 of 1972, decided on March 11, 1972.
Sudhir Kumar Saha vs Commissioner of Police Calcutta and Anr., ; and section K. Kader vs State of West Bengal, W.P. 35 of 1967 decided on May 2, 1972, referred to. 547
