The Municipal Corporation of Jabalpur purporated to grant a leave of certain land to the appellant Sabha.
According to the document the period of lease was 30 years.
The appellant was entitled on the expiry of the lease to, have the same renewed on such terms and conditions as might be agreed between the parties, The appellant made a college hostel on the aforesaid land and had also used the attached ground as playground for students.
A portion of the said land was sought to be acquired by the State Government under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 for constructing the Home Science College.
The Collector of Jabbulpur by his award dated July 18, 1955 dealt with the claims filed by the appellant and the Municipal Corporation and assessed the compensation at As.
/8/ per sq.
Apportionment was made between the appellant and the Corporation on the footing that the appellant was not merely a tenant at will as contended by the Corporation but was a lessee for the terms mentioned in lease.
The appellant and the Corporation made applications for reference under section 18(1) of the Act.
The Additional District Judge held that the price should be As. /10/ per.
sq ft.
and that the appellant and ' the Municipal Corporation were entitled to equal compensation.
The Corporation and the appellant filed appeals to the High Court.
The decision of the Addl.
District Judge fixing the price of the land As. /10/ per sq.
ft. was affirmed.
As regards the dispute regarding apportionment the High Court held that the lease deed having been exempted by the Administrator during the time when the Corporation stood superseded was ineffective to convey the leasehold interest to the appellant.
However, the appellant was paying the rent which had been accepted for a long time by the Corporation.
there was thus a tenancy by necessary implication.
The High Court further held that the lease was to continue for the period of 30 years mentioned in the deed but there was no valid contract for renewal of least because the clause relating to that was vague and uncertain.
The apportionment was made on acturial basis between the appellant and the Corporation in the ratio of 1038 : 962.In appeal before the Court the quest ions relating to quantum of compensation and the apportionment between the appellant and the Corporationfell for consideration.
HELD : (1) No lease could be spelt out of the deed dated August 31, 1940 for a period of 30 years containing the renewal clause.
If th officer who executed the lease deed had no power to lease out the property in question the grant of the lease was wholly null and void.
It is true that by the acceptance of rent from the appellant the relationship of landlord and tennant came into xistence.
But that did not show that a lease deed for a period of 30 years with a renewal clause had come into existence.
[497E] Since the lease deed was ineffective the lease could be under the provisions of section 106 of the 'transfer of 'Pro@y Act, only from.
mouth 494 to month because the immovable property had not been leased out for agricultural or manufacturing purpose in which case it would have been from year 'Lo year.
Therefore the :contention that the renewal clause was effective and should have been taken into consideration while making the apportionment between the appellant and the Corporation could not be accepted.
(The question whether the High Court was right in holding that the period of lease was 30 years was not gone into because the Corporation had filed no appeal against that portion of the decision.
[497H] Dagdulal vs Municipal Committee, Burhar, (19 '60) M.P.L.J. 627 and H. V. Ranan vs G. N. Gopat & Ors.
A. I. R. 1961 Mys. 29, referred to.
(2) The value which was fixed by the Addl.
District Judge and the High Court was fixed by reference to sales of plots of comparable nature.
There was no doubt that the High Court had taken all the factors into consideration while as essing the value and there was no reason to interfere in this regard.
[499A C] Raja Vyigheria Narayana Gajapatiraju vs The Revenue Divisional Officer Vizagapatam, 66 I.A. 104, referred to.
