According to the general principles set out in sections 23 and 24 of the Land Acquision Act, 1894, for determining compensation, the compensation payable to the owner of the land is the market value which is determined by reference to the price which a seller might reasonable expect to obtain from a willing purchaser; but since it may not be possible to ascertain this with any amount of precision the authority charged with the duty to award compensation is bound to make an estimate judged by an objective standard.
The land acquired, has, therefore, to be valued not only with reference to its condition at the time of the declaration under section 4 of the Act, but its potential value also must be taken into account.
This Court has laid down the methods of valuation to be adopted in ascertaining the market value of the land on the date of the notification under section 4, which are : (i) opinion of experts (ii) the price paid within a reasonable time in bona fide transactions of the purchase of the lands acquired or the lands adjacent to the lands acquired and possessing similar advantages and (iii) a number of years purchase of the actual or immediately prospective profits of the lands acquired.
These methods, however, do not preclude the Court from taking any other special circumstance into consideration, the requirement being always to arrive as near as possible an estimate of the market value.
In arriving at a reasonable correct market value it may be necessary to take even two or all these methods into account in as much as the exact valuation is not always possible as no two lands may be same either in respect of the situation or the extent or the potentiality, nor is it possible in all cases to have reliable material from which that valuation can be accurately determined.
[211 H] Special Land Acquisition Officer Bangalore vs T. Adinarayan Setty, [1959] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 404, referred to.
In the present case, the High Court was not justified in adopting the sale deed in respect of a land which was farther away not only from the land acquired, but from the town.
The annual rental value of the land acquired, based on the rent fixed in 1944 when that land was not of such great value as , it had acquired at the time when section 4 notification was issued, would also not furnish a proper method of computation.
The High Court was not justified in giving 10 per cent towards potential value, be.
cause, that element was inherent in the fixation of market value of the land and could not be assessed separately.
The High Court was also not justified in disallowing 5 per cent awarded by the Judicial Commissioner Is compensation for severance merely because there was an entrance to the land.
When a portion of the land is acquired and a large portion left out there would be diminution.
in the value of land that is left out for which some compensation has to be allowed.
[214 B]
