The respondent filed an application for permission to sue in forma pauperis against the appellant, and notice of the petition was given to the state Government and the appellant under O.33, r. 6, CPC.
The Government and the appellant filed objections, that the respondent was not a pauper.
The appellant also filed an application for discovery of docu ments from the respondent for proving that the respondent was not a pauper.
The Court passed an order directing the respondent to discover on affidavit the documents relating to bank accounts of the respondent for a specified period.
The respondent did not file the affidavit on the prescribed date but filed applications for time which were dismissed by the Court and the Court thereafter dismissed the application for permission to sue in form pauper is as there was no evidence to show that the respondent was a pauper and directed the respondent to pay the court fees.
The respondent challenged the orders directing discovery of documents and dismissing the application for permission to sue in forma pauperis in revision before the High Court., The High Court set aside the two orders holding that; (1) Since the proceedings under O.33, rr. 6 and 7 are summary, discovery should not have been ordered : (2) the documents of which discovery was sought were not specified in the application of the appellant, (3) the inquiry under O.33, rr. 6 and 7 was a matter between the respondent and the State Government and discovery and inspection at the instance of a private party like the appellant should not have been ordered;(4) the trial court acted with material irregularity as it did not consider the question of the necessity for discovery of the documents or the relevance of the documents of which discovery was sought; (5) the trial court overlooked the right of the respondents to claim pri vilege; and (6) the trial court, rejected the application to sue in forma pauperis for statistical purposes.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) The suit commences from the moment an application for permission to sue in forma paupers as required by O. 33 C.P.C. is presented and the provisions of Order 1, r. 10, of O.9 and O.39 would apply to it.
If that be so, there is no reason why the provisions of O.11 r. 12 relating to discovery should not also apply to proceedings under O.33.
[701B C] Vijay Pratap Singh vs Dukh Haran Nath Singh and Anr., , 675. followed.
(2) When the ' Court makes order for discovery the opposite party is bound to make an affidavit of documents and if he fails to do so he will be subject to the penalties specified in O.11, r. 21.
An affidavit of documents shall set forth all the documents which are or have been in his possession or power relating to the matter in question in the proceedings.
As to documents which are not but have been in his possession or power he must state what has become of them in order that the other Party may Ll529upCI/73 698 be able to get their production.
Therefore, unless the party discovery knows what are the documents in the possession of custody of the other party which would throw light.
upon the matter in controversy it is not possible for him to ask for discovery and inspection of specific documents.
, In the circumstances therefore the order was as specific as it could be.
, [702C F] (3) Order 33, r. 6 provides that it the Court does not reject the application under r. 5 notice shall be given to the opposite party and the Government pleader for receiving such evidence as the applicant may, adduce in proof of pauperism and for hearing any evidence in disproof thereof.
Also under O.,33, r. 9 it is open to the Court on the application of the defendant to disappear the plaintiff on the grounds specified therein one of which is, that his means are such that he should not be allowed to continue to sue as a pauper.
Since an immunity from litigation unless the requisite court fee is paid by the plaintiff, is a valuable right for the ' defendant, the inquiry into pauperism is not a matter exclusively between the Government and the plaintiff.
[703C G] (4) The High Court was not right in holding that the documents were not relevant for the inquiry.
The documents sought to be discovered need not be admissible in evidence in the inquiry or proceedings.
It is sufficient if they would be relevant for the purpose of throwing light on the matter in controversy.
A document might.
be inadmissible in evidence and yet may contain information which may either directly or indirectly enable the party seeking discovery either to advance his case or damage the adversary 's case or which may lead to a trail of inquiry which may have either of these two consequences.
Since documents of which dis covery was sought would throw light on the means of the respondent to pay the court fee they are relevant.
[702H; 703A C] (5) The High Court was wrong in holding that the plaintiff 's right to claim privilege was affected by the order, because, the stage for claiming privilege had not yet been reached.
, That would be reached only when the affidavit of discovery is made, and the plaintiff objects under O.11, r. 13, to produce for inspection by the Opposite party specific documents.
[702E G] (6) (a) A distinction must be drawn between errors committed by subordinate courts in deciding questions of law which have relation to, or are concerned with, questions of jurisdiction of the Court and errors of law which have no such relation or connection, for the purposes of section 115, C.P.C.
If there was an entitlement to enter upon an inquiry into a question then any subsequent error committed by the Court could not be regarded as an error of jurisdiction, because the question of jurisdiction is determinable at the commencement and not at the conclusion of the inquiry.
[705A B, G H; 706A] Manidra Land and Building Corporation Ltd. vs Bhutnath Banerjee & Ors, A.I.R. Vora Abbashhai Alimahommed vs Haji Gulamnabi Haji Safibhai, ; and Pandurangh Dhoni Chougule vs Maruti Hari Jadhav, ; , followed.
Rajah Amir Hassan Khan vs Sheo Baksh Singh, [1884] L.R. II I.A. 237, Balakrishana Udayar vs Vasudeva Aiyar, [1917] L.R.44 I.R. 261, Venkatagiri Ayyangar vs Hindu Religious Endowments Board, Madras, (.194849) L.R.76 I.A. 67, Anisminic Ltd., vs Foriegn Composition, Commission ; and R. vs, Botton, [184,41],, I Q.B. 66 referred to.
699 (b) But the effect of the observations in the Anisminic case is to reduce the difference between a jurisdictional error and an error, of law within jurisdiction, almost to a vanishing point.
The practical effect of the decision is that any error of law can be reckoned as jurisdictional.[706 H] In the present case even if lack of jurisdiction is assumed to result from every material error of law even an error of law within the jurisdiction as generally understood the order of the trial court (was not vitiated by any such error.
of law and the High court was not justified in interfering with it in revision.
The trial court had jurisdiction to pass the order for discovery.
The rejection of the application for time and the consequent dismissal of the petition for permission to sue in forma pauperis cannot be said to sound in jurisdictional error even in its extended sense.
The refusal to adjourn had not occasioned any failure of natural justice, nor is there any thing to show that in rejecting the application for time the trial court acted illegally or with material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction.
[707D G]
