The petitioner was detained by an order of the District Magistrate, Howrah and under the provisions of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (26 of 1971).
He was supplied the grounds of detention.
He made a representation which was considered by the authorities under the Act and rejected.
A petition under article 32 of the Constitution was then filed and the petitioner urged : (i) that the 'facts mentioned in the grounds of detention came within the purview of sections 109 and 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and therefore his detention on those facts under section 3 of the Act was unjustified; (ii) that the facts mentioned in the grounds were not correct and the order of detention was mala fide.
Dismissing the petition, HELD : (i) Merely because a detenu is liable to be tried in Criminal Court for the commission of criminal offences or to be proceeded against for preventing him from committing offences dealt with in Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure would not by itself debar government from taking action for his detention under the Act.
The Act was passed in order to meet a serious situation affecting the security of India and the maintenance of public order as contemplated by section 3 of the Act.
Judicial trial for punishing the accused for the commission of an offence as also preventive security proceedings in a criminal Court against a person merely for keeping the peace or for good behaviour is a jurisdiction distinct from that of detention under the Act which has in view the object of preventing the detenu from acting in any manner prejudicial Inter alia to the security of the State or maintenance, of public order.
The fields of these two jurisdictions, are not co extensive nor are they alternative ' The jurisdiction under the Act may be invoked when the available evidence does not come up to the standard of judicial proof but is otherwise cogent enough to give rise to suspicion in the mind of the authority concerned that there is reasonable likelihood of repetition of past conduct which would be prejudicial inter alia to the security of the State or the maintenance of public order or even when the witnesses may be frightened or scared of coming to the Court and deposing about past acts on which the opinion of the authority concerned is based.
This jurisdiction is sometimes called the Jurisdiction of suspicion founded on past incidents and depending on subjective satisfaction.
The authorities mentioned in section 3(2) which include the District Magistrate are best suited to decide whether it is necessary to proceed under the Act, which decision rests on their subjective satisfaction.
The grounds of detention relate to the past acts on which the opinion as to the likelihood of the repetition of such or similar acts is based, and those grounds are 'furnished to the detenu to inform 752 him as to how and why the subjective satisfaction has been arrived it so as to enable him to represent against them.
The fact, therefore that a prosecution under the Code could have also been launched is not a valid ground for saying that it precludes the authority from acting under the Act.
(2) The District Magistrate is expected to know the situation prevailing in the district and to take suitable action for the maintenance of public order.
His assessment of facts and his opinion on the propriety of making a detention order must be given due consideration and respect by this Court.
The petitioner 's representation was also duly considered by the State Government and rejected.
The Advisory Board after hearing the detenu petitioner in person also expressed opinion that there was sufficient cause for his detention.
In these circumstances it was not possible for this Court in habeas corpus proceedings to hold an independent inquiry into the question whether or not the grounds on which the impugned order or detention was passed were false or non existent.
Nor could the impugned order be held to be mala fide.
There being no legal infirmity in the order of the petitioners detention, and the 'facts affirmed by the District Magistrate which must be accepted on the facts and circumstances of the case to be true, being relevant to the object of the detention, this petition must fail.
