A notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 in respect of land belonging to the respondent was published in the official gazette of the Government of Mysore on August 17, 1961.
But no notice as required by that section were published in the locality till November 1 and 19 of 1961.
Under section 5A of the Act the time limited for filing objections is thirty days from the issue of the notification.
The respondent filed his objections only on December 4, 1961.
In his writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the respondent contended that the notice under section 4 was invalid.
The High Court upheld the contention and quashed the impugned notification.
The State of Mysore appealed to this Court with certificate.
HELD: Under certain circumstances publication in the official gazette is presumed to be notice to all concerned.
But in the case of a notification under. 4 of the Land Acquisition Act the law has prescribed that in addition to the publication of the notification in the official gazette the Collector must also give publicity to the substance of the notification in the concerned locality.
Unless both these conditions are satisfied section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be said to have been complied with.
no publication of the notices in the locality is a mandatory requirement.
In the absence of such publication the interested persons may not be able to file their objections about the acquisition proceedings and they will be deprived of the right of representation provided under section 5A which is a valuable right.
Under section 4 it is only when the notification is published in the official gazette and it is accompanied by or immediately followed by Public notice that a person interested in the property proposed to be acquired can be regarded to have had notice of the proposed notification.[857H 858D] The impugned notification did not comply with the requirement of the law since it was not accompanied by or immediately followed by public notice.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in quashing the proceedings taken.
[858E] The appeal must accordingly fail.
Gangadharaih vs State of Mysore & Ors., (1961) Mys.
L.J. 883, referred to.
