The respondent manufactures cigarettes at its factory upon which Excise Duty is levied by the Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Calcutta Division.
The rates varied according to the provisions of Finance Act, 1951, and 1956 and the Additional Duty of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957.
The Company was required to furnish quarterly consolidated price lists and the particulars of cigarettes to be cleared were furnished by the Company as required by Rule 9 of the Central Excise Rules.
For facilitating collection of duty, the Company maintained a large sum of money in a Current Account with the Central Excise authorities, who used to debit this account for the duty leviable on each stock of cigarettes allowed to be removed.
The Company used, to furnish its quarterly price lists to the Collector ,on forms containing nine columns and until July 1957, so long as this form was used by the Company, no difficulty was experienced in checking prices.
But after this column was dropped from the new form of six, columns, the Excise authorities encountered some difficulty in valuing the cigarettes for levying Excise Duty.
They therefore, changed the basis of assessment from the Distributors selling price to the wholesale cash selling price at which stockists or agents were selling the same in the open market.
The authorities informed the Company of this change of basis on 5 11 58 by letter, which also asked the Company to furnish its price lists immediately for determining the correct assessable value of its cigarettes.
Two days thereafter, the authorities served a notice upon the Company demanding payment of Rs. 1,67,072,40 P. as Basic Central Excise Duty and Rs. 74,574,85 P. as Additional Central Excise Duty on ground of short levy for a certain brand of cigarettes cleared from Company 's Factory between 10th August 1958, After another five days, the authorities sent another notice demanding more than Rs. 6 lakhs as Basic Central Excise Duty and more than Rs. 2 lakhs as Additional Central Excise Duty.
On the following day, the authorities sent a third notice under Rule 10 A of the Central Excise Rules, demanding more than Rs. 40,000/as Central Excise Duty and more than Rs. 16,000/ as Additional Duty.
The Company challenged these notices by a writ before the High Court.
, The High Court quashed the notices on the ground that the Company had not been given an opportunity of being heard.
No appeal was filed by the other side against this decision, but when the case went back to the Collector, he issued P. fresh notice on 24 4 1960.
By this notice, for certain periods, a sum of more than Rs. 10 lakhs was levied as Basic Central Excise Duty and a total sum of more than Rs. 3 lakhs as Additional Duty, and this amount had been provisionally debited in the Company 's Account on the basis of the price list supplied by the Company and the Company was informed that if it desired a personal hearing, it 823 can appear before the authorities to make the final assessment in accordance with law.
The Company challenged the validity of this notice dated 24 4 60 on the ground that the notice was barred by limitation and was 'issued without jurisdiction, so that no proceedings could be taken.
The learned single Judge, as well as the Divisional Bench of the High Court allowed the petition on the ground that the notice was barred by time under Rule 10 of the Central Excise Rules because the notice was held to be fully covered by Rule 10 and by no other rule.
The case was certified under article 33(a), (b) and (d) for an appeal to this Court.
Rule 10 of the Central Excise Rules provides that when duties or charges have been short levied through inadvertence or misconstruction etc., the person chargeable with the duty so short levied, shall pay the deficiency or pay the amount paid to him in excess on written demand by the proper officer within three months from the date on which the duty or charge is paid or adjusted in the owner 's account, if any, or from the date of making the refund.
It was contended that this was substantially a provisional assessment covered by Rule 10 B.
The Division Bench of the High Court, however, refused to agree that the impugned notice of 24 460 fell under Rule, 10 A.
The reason given for this refusal was that such a case was neither taken before the learned single Judge, nor could be found in the grounds, of the appeal despite the fact that the appellant had ample opportunity of amending its Memorandum of Appeal.
Allowing the appeal.
HELD : (i.) That the High Court erroneously refused to consider whether the impugned notice fell under Rule 10 A.
The applicability of Rule 10 A was very much in issue because the Collector in his affidavit denied that Rule 10 A of the said rules had any application to the facts of the case.
(ii) It cannot be accepted that merely because the current account kept under Rule 9 indicated that an accounting had taken place, there was necessarily a legally valid or complete levy.
The making of debit entries was only on ground of collection of the tax.
Even if payment or actual collection of tax could be spoken of as a defective levy, it was only provisional and not fINal.
It could only be closed or invested with validity after carrying out the obligation to make an assessment that really determines whether the levy is short or complete.
It is not a faCtual or presumed levy which could prove an assessment.
This has to be done by proof of the actual steps taken which constitute assessment.
[836D] A mechanical adjustment, or settlement of accounts by making debit entries was gone through in the present case, but it cannot be said that any such adjustment is assessment which is a quasi judicial process and involves due application of mind to the facts, as well as to the requirements of law.
Rule 10 and 10 A seems to be so widely worded as to cover any inadvertence error etc.; whereas Rule 10 A would appear to cover any deficiency in duty if the duty has for any reason, been short levied, except that it would be outside the purview of Rule 10 A if its collection is expressly provided or by any rule.
Both the rules as they stood at the relevant time, deal with collection, and not with assessment.
In N. B. Sanjana 's case ; this Court indicated that Rule 10 A which was residual.
in character, would be inapplicable if a case fell within a specified category of cases mentioned in Rule 10.
It was pointed out in Sanjana 's case that the reason for the addition 824 of the new rule 10 A was a decision of the Nagpur (Chotabhai Jethabhai 's case; A.I.R. 1952 Nagpur 139), so that a fresh demand may be made on a basis altered by law.
The excise authorities had made a fresh demand under Rule 10 A, the validity of which was challenged, but it was upheld by a Full Bench decision of the High Court of Nagpur.
This Court, in Chotabhai Jethabhai 's case also rejected the assessee 's claim that Rule 10 A was inapplicable after pointing out that the new rule was specifically designed for the enforcement of the demand like the present one.
[836F 837E] (iii)The present case, therefore, falls within the residuary clause of unforeseen cases from the provisions of section 4 of the Act, read with Rule 10 A, an implied power to carry out or complete an assessment, not specifically provided for by the rules, can be inferred.
Therefore, it is wrong to hold that the case falls under Rule 10 and not under Rule 10 A.
