In a suit for partition of property between two joint owners the plaintiff made an application to the Court under section 2 of the Partition Act that as one of the properties namely, a cinema house with its appurtenances, was incapable of division by metes and bounds, the same be sold and the proceeds divided between the parties.
The defendant contended that it was possible to ' divide the property by metes and bounds but offered, if the Court took the contrary view, to purchase it at a valuation made by the Court, under the provisions of section 3 of the Act.
The Court appointed a Commissioner whose report showed that he had considerable difficulty in suggesting a division.
The Single Judge had given no final decision on the matter when an oral application was made by the plaintiff for withdrawing the suit with liberty to institute a fresh suit.
The Judge held that the suit could be withdrawn because no preliminary decree had been passed and that a fresh suit could be brought under the provisions of Order 23 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The suit was dismissed as withdrawn.
In appeal the Division Bench held that the defendant had a vested right to purchase the property and reversed the judgment of the trial Court.
In this Court it was urged on behalf of the plaintiff 's legal representatives that under Order 23 Rule 1 there was an unqualified right to withdraw a suit except that in certain limited circumstances where the defendant had acquired a vested interest, the Court was not bound to allow withdrawal.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : The true position under sections 2 and 3 of the Partition Act so far as O. 23, r.
I C.P.C. is concerned must be determined in the light of the rule enunciated by Crump, J., in Tukarama 's case as that rule has seldom been doubted and there is a large body of judicial opinion to support it.
It was observed by Crump J. that on wider considerations it must be held that Plaintiff could not withdraw so as to defeat the defendant 's claim.
He further pointed out that in a partition suit a defendant seeking a share is in the position of a plaintiff and one plaintiff cannot withdraw without the permission.
of another.
[914B, D] Under sections 2 and 3 of the Partition Act, the various stages in the Proceedings would be as follows : 1.
In a suit, for partition if, it appears to the Court that for the reasons stated in section 2 a division of the property cannot reasonably and conveniently be made and that a sale of property would be more beneficial it can direct sale.
Ibis can be done, however, only on the request of the shareholders interested individually or collectively to the extent of one moiety or upwards.
(2) When a request is made under section 2 to the court to direct a sale any other shareholder can apply under section 3 for leave to buy at a valuation the share of the other party asking for a sale.
(3) The court has to order valuation of the share of the party 905 asking for sale.
(4) After the valuation has been made the court has to, offer to sell the share of the party asking for sale to the shareholders applying for leave to buy under section 3.
(5) If two or more shareholders, severally apply for leave to buy the court is bound to order a sale of the share or shares to the shareholder who offers to pay the highest price above the valuation made by the court.
(6) If no shareholder is willing to buy such share or shares at the price so ascertained the application Linder section 3 shall be dismissed, the applicant being liable to pay all the costs.
[914E 915A] As soon as a shareholder applies for leave to, buy at a valuation, the share of the party asking for a sale under section 3 of the Partition Act he obtains an advantage in that the court is bound thereafter to order a valuation and after getting the same done to offer to sell the same to such shareholder at the valuation so made.
This advantage, which may or may not fulfil the juridical meaning of a right, is nevertheless a privilege or a benefit which the law confers on the shareholder.
If the plaintiff is allowed to withdraw the suit after the defendant has gained or acquired the advantage or the privilege of buying the share of the plaintiff in accordance with the provisions of s.3(1) it would only enable the plaintiff to defeat the purpose of section 3(1) and also to deprive the defendant of the above option or privilege which he has obtained by the plaintiff initially requesting the court to sell the property under s.2 instead of partitioning it.
Apart from these considerations it would also enable the plaintiff in a partition suit to withdraw that suit and defeat the defendant 's claim which, according to Crump, J. Tukaram 's case cannot be done even in a suit where the provisions of the Partition Act have not been invoked.
, [915G 916A] The trial court bad prima facie come to the conclusion that a division by metes and bounds was not possible.
That was sufficient so far as the proceedings in the present case were concerned.
The language of s.3 of the Partition Act does not appear to make it obligatory on the court to give a positive finding that the property is incapable of division by metes and bounds.
It should only 'appear ' that it is not so capable of division.
[916C] Section 3(1) does not contemplate a formal application being filed, in every case.
The words employed therein simply mean that the other shareholder has to inform the court or notify to it that he is prepared to buy at a valuation the share of the party asking for sale.
In the written statement of the defendant in the present case it was said that even if the court held that the property was incapable of division into two shares the defendant was ready and willing to buy the plaintiff 's share in the suit at a valuation to be made in such a manner as the court might think proper.
That was sufficient compliance with the, requirements of section 3 of the Partition Act.
[916F G] Tukaram Mahadu Tandel vs Ramchandra Nahadu Tandel, I.L.R. , applied.
Bijayananda Patnaik vs Satrughna Sahu & Others [1964] S.C.R. 538, Hulau Rai Baij Nath vs Firm K. B. Dass & Co. ; , Jhamandas Lilaram vs Mulchand Pahulma 244 Indian Cases 273.
Jharan Chandra Ghosh vs, Promoda kumar Ghosh, I.L.R. [1953] Vol.
at page 247, Hasan Badsha vs Sultan Raziah Begum.
A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 772, and Peter Pill & Others vs Thomas Webb Jones, 5 A.C. 651, referred to.
906 Observed that the provisions of the English Partition Act did not appear to be in pari materia with those of the Indian Partition Act and no assistance could be derived from the English law on the points to be determined in the present case.
[917B]
