The Supreme Court, in Lokmanya Mills, Barsi Led.
vs Barsi Borough Municipality ; struck down Rule 2(c) as being violative of article 14 of the Constitution of India, for the vice of assumed uniformity of return per sq.
from structures of different classes which are in their nature not similar.
The Maharashtra Legislature passed Borough Municipalities (validation of certain taxes on buildings and lands) Act 1965, to validate the levy and collection of the tax with retrospective effect and to enable the municipalities to levy house tax on mills factories and buildings on the basis of Rule 2(c).
Explanation to Sec.
75 of the Act was substituted by the new explanation, by the Validating Act.
Ss. 4 and 5 are designed to validate the levy and collection of tax with retrospective effect.
On challenge through a Writ Petition, the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court struck down Sections 3(b), 4(1), 4(2) and 5 of the Validating Act for their contravention of article 14.
The appeal filed by the State and the Barsi Municipal Council before this Court among other things, raised a question as to whether the Validating Act has resurrected the provisions of Rule 2(c) and levy and collection were validated as required by law.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : When the rule was struck down by this Court, the effect was that the Rule could never be deemed to have been passed.
Apart from Rule 2(c), there was no charging provision 'similar to Rule 2(c) either in the Boroughs Act or in the Validating Act for levying house tax on mills, factories and buildings connected therewith.
After Rule 2(c) was struck down, the Municipality did not frame any rule under the provisions of Section 75 of the Boroughs Act for imposing tax on mills, factories or buildings connected therewith.
Section 4 of the Validating Act does not revive or resurrect Rule 2(c).
Since the charging section is not revived, there was no authority under law to collect tax on the said categories of properties.
Since in the eye of law there was no charging provision, there could be no validation of any levy or collection.
[403G] Held further, that the above holding was enough to grant all reliefs claimed by the respondent in the Writ Petition and there was no need to express an opinion on the validity of the impugned sections of the Validating Act.
[404F]
