In accordance with the provisions of the , and the U.P. Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Rules, 1946, the appellant substituted draft standing defining the conditions of employment of its employees and they were certified bythe Certifying Officer in 1951.
Clause 32 of the Standing Orders provided that an employee who has served 30 years or who has reached the age of 55 years will be retired, but, exemption from this may be granted by the company in special case.
In 1959, notices were served on the respondent workmen that they were retired by reason of their having attained the age of superannuation as per cl. 32.
The workmen contended that the clause was not binding or enforceable as far as they were concerned, because, they had entered the service of the appellant prior to the certification of the Standing Orders and there was no condition that they would be liable to retirement after attaining any prescribed age or any fixed period of service, and that they were entitled to continue in service as long as they were physically.
The industrial dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal and the Tribunal held in favour of the appellant.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court They also applied in 1960, under s ' 10(2) of the , for amendment and motification of cl. 32 claiming fixation of retirement age at 60.
The Certifying Officer modified the clause and fixed the age of retirement at 58, but the appellate authority refixed it at 55.
The High Court, in the writ petition, on the basis of the decision or this Court in Guest Keen Williams Pvt. Ltd.; , her that Cl.
32 was not applicable to the employees and directed the Tribunal to rehear the case.
The Tribunal thereafter held that the respondent.
workmen were wrongfully and unjustifiably retired.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) It was not intended by the Legislature that different sets of conditions should apply to employees depending on whether workman was employed before the Standing Orders were certified by after, as that would defeat the object of the legislation.
The objection and 755 scheme of the Act is that the employers must define precisely the conditions of employment of all the employees and have them certified by the Certifying Officer.
The right given to be workmen to express their views, to raise objections, to appeal to the appellate authority and to ask for modification of the Standing Orders under section 10 of the Act, show that every possible safeguard has provided in the interests of the workmen.
Moreover, the individual items in the Schedule to the Act show that there cannot be different conditions for different employees depending upon the point of time when they came to be employed, for that would result in a great deal of heart burning between the employees inter se.
[762 F H; 763 A D] Salem Erode Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. vs Its Workers; ; , and Agra Electric Supply Co. Ltd., vs Sri Alladin & Ors. ; , followed.
(2) The decision in Guest Keen Williams Pvt.
Ltd. that the Industrial Tribunal had to consider not only the propriety, reasonableness and fairness of a Standing Order but that it had also to deal with the question as to whether a particular Standing Order could be made applicable to employees who had already been employed without any limit as to age of retirement was delivered under the unamended section 4 of the Act, under which the Certifying Officer or the appellate authority could not go into the reasonableness or fairness of the Standing Orders.
But after the amendment of the section in 1956, the Certifying Officer and the appellate authority are bound to examine the question of fairness of the standing orders, and therefore, there can be no justification now for not giving effect to the principle of uniformity of conditions of service which is clearly contemplated by the provisions of the Act.
[763 D F] (3) But cl. 32 of the Standing Orders as certified in 1951 was not valid and could not be binding on the respondents, because, there was then 'no item in the Schedule to the Act covering cases of superannuation or retiretirement, with respect to which Standing Orders could be made.
[766 E F, G H] Item 8 and 9 of the Schedule deal with the termination of employment and notice thereof, and suspension or dismissal for misconduct.
The language of item 8 shows that it does not cover the case of superannuation, which does not depend on )any notice and which covers an event which is automatic and which must be given effect to without any volition on the Part of the employer or workmen.
If termination is to be read in a wide sense as meaning 'employment coming to an end ' there was no necessity to have item 3, because, dismissal would then be covered by termination.
From the paragraph 13 of the Model Standing Orders contained in the Schedule to Rules it is apparent that item 8 is confined to termination of employment by notice in writing and 'does not refer to superannuation or retirement.
It was only in 959 that item 11(C) was introduced in the Schedule enabling the framing of Standing Orders in relation to the age of retirement and superannuation.
[765 F H; 766 A C] Saroj Kumar vs Orissa State Electricity Board, A.I.R. 1970 Orissa, 126, approved.
Management of the Windu ' vs Secretary Hindu Office & National Press Employees Union, , disapproved.
(4) No assistance can be derived by the use of the word 'retirement ' in para, 16 of the Model Standing Orders, because, it may well refer to 756 retirement under the terms of the contract of employment entered into between the employer and the employees.
[765 A B, E] (5) Since before the amendment of section 4 the Certifying Officer and the appellate auhority were debarred from adjudicating upon, the fairness or reasonableness of the Standing Orders, the Certifying Officer at that time, could not certify any Standing Order on the ground that it was reasonable or fair.
Therefore, in 1951, when the Standing Orders were certified, cl. 32 could not have been framed because there was no item in the Schedule relating to superannuation and the Certifying Officer could not certify it on the ground it was fair and reasonable because he bad no power to do so.
[766 D F] (6) The Certifying Officer, however, when be modified cl. 32 and fixed the retirement age at 58 (after section 4 was amended) could have validly certified such clause as modified by him.
This Court could also give an appropriate direction with regard to fixing the age of superan , nuation.
In the circumstances of this case the age of superannuation should be 58 years.
Therefore, the concerned workman should be deemed to have continued in service of the appellant till they had attained the age of 58 years.
[767 A C, G H] (7) The order of the High Court in the writ petition did not finally termingte the proceedings at all.
The proceedings were terminated only by the award of the Industrial Tribunal after remand.
Therefore, the order of the High Court following Guest Keen William 's case did not debar a fresh consideration of the question by virtue of the rule or principle of res judicata.
[768 A B, E F] Satyadhyan Ghosal vs Smt.
Deorajan Devi, [1960] 3 S.C.R. 590, followed.
Management, of N. Railway Co operative Society vs Industrial Tribunal, ; , explained.
