Section 56 of the Bombay Police Act provides that whenever it shall appear, in Greater Bombay, to the Commissioner (a) that the movements or acts of any person are causing or are calculated to cause alarm, danger or harm to person or property or (b) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is engaged or is about to be engaged in the commission of offence involving force or violence or an offence punishable under Chapter 22, 16 and 17 of the Indian Penal Code, and when in the opinion of such officer witnesses are not willing to come forward to give evidence in public against such person by reason of apprehension on their part as regards safety of their person or property, the said officer may by order in writing direct such person to remove himself outside the area districts, or any part thereof contiguous thereto, within such time as the said officer may prescribe and not to enter or return to the said area, from which he was directed to remove himself.
Section 59(1) requires that before an order under section 56 is passed against any person the officer shall inform that person in writing "of the general nature of the material allegations against him" and give him a reasonable opportunity of tendering an explanation regarding those allegations.
The appellant was served with a notice under section 56 of the Act.
The allegations were that the appellant 's acts and movements were causing alarm and danger to the residents of certain localities within the jurisdiction of Vile Parle Police Station, that he was given to assaulting the resi dents of the localities either because they were suspected to be police informants or because they failed to accede to the demands of money, that he had committed robberies in the particular localities, and that witnesses were not willing to come forward to depose against him in public.
The appellant offered his explanation and examined his witnesses to refute the allegations.
On a consideration of the explanation and the evidence tendered by the appellant an order was passed externing him from the limits of Greater Bombay and the District of Thana for a period of two years.
The order was confirmed in appeal by the State government.
A writ petition to the High Court was dismissed.
in the appeal to this Court it was contended (i) the allegations that witnesses were not willing to come forward to depose against the appellant in public was falsified by the very record of the present proceedings; (ii) the particulars contained in the notice issued under section 59 of the Act were so vague that the appellant could not possibly meet the allegations made against him and thus he was denied reasonable opportunity to defend himself; (iii) the extern ing authority had the duty to pass a reasoned order or else the right of appeal would become illusory; and the State Government also ought to have given reasons in support of the order dismissing the appeal and its failure to do so showed non application of mind; and (iv) the order of 64 externment imposed unreasonable restrictions on the personal liberty of the appellant in that, whereas his activities were alleged to be restricted to an area within the jurisdiction of the Vile Parle police station, the order of externment not only extended to the whole district of Greater Bombay but to the district of Thana also.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD (1) In order to attract the operation of section 56 of the Act the officer concerned has to satisfy himself that witnesses are not willing to come forward to give evidence in public.
, But it is not necessary that all the witnesses must be found unwilling to give evidence.
The circumstance, therefore, that in two criminal cases certain witnesses came forward to depose against the appellant cannot falsify the assertion that witnesses were unwilling to give evidence against the appellant to public.
[68C] Dhagubhai Dullabhabhai Bhandari vs The District Magistrate, Thana & Ors.
; , referred to.
, (2)The relevant provisions of the Act show that the reasons which necessitate or justify the passing of an externment order arise out of extraordinary circumstances.
An order of externment can be passed under Clause (a) or (b) or selection 56 if, and only if, the authority concerned is satisfied that witnesses are unwilling to come forward to give evidence in public against the proposed extend by reason of apprehension on their part as regards the safety of their person or property.
A full and complete disclosure of particulars such as is requisite in an open prosecution will frustrate the very purpose of externment proceedings.
There is a brand of lawless element in society which it is impossible to bring to book by established methods of judicial trial, because, in such trials, there can be no conviction without legal evidence.
And, legal evidence is impossible to obtain because out of fear of reprisals witnesses are unwilling to depose in public.
That explains why section 59 of the Act imposes but a limited obligation on the authorities to inform the proposed externee "of the general nature of the material allegations against him".
That obligation fixes the limits of the correlative right of the proposed externee.
He is entitled before an order of externment is passed under section 56 to know the material allegations against him and the general nature of those allegations.
He is not entitled to be informed of specific particulars relating to the material allegations.
Though the provisions of section 56 make a serious inroad on personal liberty, such restraints have to be suffered in the larger interests of society.
However, care must be taken to ensure that the terms of sections 56 and 59 are strictly complied with and that the slender safeguards which those provisions offer are made available to the proposed externee.
[70E] Gurbachan Singh vs The State of Bombay and another; , ; Bhagubhai Dullabhabhai Bhdndari vs The District Magistrate Thana & others ; ; Hari Khemu Gawali vs The Deputy Commissioner of Police, Bombay and Another ; and State of Gujarat and Anr.
vs Mehboob Khan Usman Khan etc.
[1968] 3 S.C.R. View of the Bombay High Court in Criminal application No. 332 of 1971 in judgment dated April 29, 1971 disapproved.
65 (3)Precisely for the reason for which the proposed externee is only entitled to be informed of the general nature of the material allegations, neither the externing authority nor the State government in appeal can be asked to write a reasoned order in the nature of a judgment.
If those authorities were to discuss the evidence in the case it would be easy to fix the identity of the witnesses who were unwilling to depose in public against the proposed externee.
[72H] (4)It is primarily for the externing authority to decide how best the externment order can be made effective so as to subserve its real purpose An excessive order can undoubtedly be struck down because no greater restraint on personal liberty can be premitted than is reasonable in the circumstances of the case.
An order of externment restricted to the particular area chosen by the externee for his unlawful activities and to a small periphery thereof may in certain circumstances fail of its true purpose.
A larger area may conceivably have to be comprised within the externment order so as to isolate the externee from his moorings.
[73 B, D] Balu Shivling Dombe vs The Divisional Magistrate, Pandharpur section 71 Bombay Law Reporter, 79, held inapplicable.
The High Court of Bombay has, on similar facts, consistently repelled challenges made to externment orders on the ground that they extended not only to the district of Greater Bombay but also to the District of Thana.
In matters of such local colour and conditions, the view so consistently expressed by the learned judges of the High Court must be accepted as correct.
[75C] Criminal Application No. 1427 of 1968, judgment dated March 17, 1968; Criminal Application 30 to 93 of 1970 judgment dated February 23, 1970, 73 Bombay L.R. 442; Criminal Application No. 149 of 1972 decided on March 3, 1972, referred to.
