The petitioner was tenant of some fields in a village in Patwari Circle 10, Nagpur.
He had applied to the Agricultural Lands Tribunal under a local Act for fixing the purchase price of the said fields.
The land in question was however acquired under the Nagpur Improvement Trust Act; 1936.
Dissatisfied with the compensation awarded the petitioner filed a petition under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution.
In this petition the validity of the Improvement Act was challenged on various grounds, one of the grounds being that the Improvement Act was in violation of article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as it empowered the acquisition of lands at prices lower than those which would have been payable if they had been acquired under the Land Acquisition Act 1894.
The High Court allowed the petition and set aside the award.
Appeal in this Court against the High Court 's judgment was filed with certificate.
Dismissing the appeal.
HELD : The effect of the modifications made by Improvement Act in the Land Acquisition Act in two respects is tremendous.
First the owner where land is acquired under the Improvement Act is paid compensation not according to the market value of the I and but the market value according to the use to which the land was put at the date with reference to which the market value is to be determined in that clause.
In other words, if the land is being used for agricultural purposes even though it has a potential value as a building site, the potential value is to be ignored.
The second respect in which the owner suffers if the land is acquired under the Improvement Act is that he does not get a solatium of 15% which he would have got if the land had been acquired under the Land Acquisition Act.
It is true that be has some minor advantage but they have no comparison in value to the loss suffered by virtue of the market value being determined according to the use to which the land was being put or the loss of 15% of the market value of the land.
[146D] It is quite clear especially in View of section 17A as inserted in the Land Acquisition Act by para 6 of the Schedule to the Improvement Act, that the acquisition will be by the Government and it is only on payment of the cost of acquisition by the Government that the land vest in the Trust.
It is true that the acquisition is for the Trust and may be at its instance, but nevertheless the acquisition is by the Government.
If this is so, it enables the State Government to discriminate between one owne 'r equally situated from another owner.
[45G] 40 It is now well settled that the State can make a reasonable classification for the purpose of the legislation provided it is based on intelligible differentia having a rational relation with the object sought to be achieved by the legislation in question.
In this connection it must be home in mind that the object itself should be lawful.
[47D] The legislature cannot lay down different principles of _ compensation for lands acquired say for a hospital or a school or a Government building.
An three objects are public purposes and so far as the owner is concerned it does not matter to him whether it is one public purpose or the other.
article 14 confers an individual right and in order to justify a classification there should be something which justifies a different treatment to this individual right.
Ordinarily a classification based on the public purpose is not permissible under article 14 for the purpose of determining compensation.
[48A] Similarly different principles cannot be laid if the land is acquired for or by an Improvement Trust or Municipal Corporation or Government because so far as the owner is concerned it does not matter to him whether the land is acquired by one authority or the other.
[48D] It is equally immaterial whether it is one Acquisition Act or another Acquisition Act under which the land is acquired; if the existence of two Acts enables the State to give one owner different treatment from another ,equally situated the owner who is discriminated against can claim the protection of article 14.
[48E] TO accede to the contention of the appellant and the intervening states would be destructive of the protection afforded by article 14 of the Constitution.
The States would only have to constitute separate acquiring bodies for each city, or Division or indeed to achieve one special public purpose and lay down different principles of compensation.
[49D] Nandeshwar Prasad vs U.P. Govt.
, ; , P. Vairavelu mudaliar vs Special Deputy Collector, Madras; , ; 619 and Balammal & Ors.
vs State of Madras, ; ,
