The assessee in these appeals is an Hindu Undivided Family The assessment years in question are ranged from 1942 43 to 1953 54.
The assessee filed its returns for these years in time.
The assessee 's account books showed considerable cash credits in the name of some relations of the second respondent, the Karta of the H.U.F.
The I.T.O. went into the genuineness of these cash credit entries.
The contention of the assessee was substantially accepted either by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or by the Revenue Appellate Tribunal.
With regard to the, assessment for the assessment years 1943 44 to 1949 50, the final assessment was made in pursuance of an agreement or settlement arrived between the assessee and the Deputy Director of Inspection (Investiga tion).
Long after the assessments in question were finalised, the I.T.O. issued notices to the appellants under section 34(1) (a) of the Indian Income Tax Act 1922, seeking to reopen the assessments already finalised.
The assessee challenged the validity of these notices of the I.T.O.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions and quashed the impugned notices.
The assessee alleged that there was no relevant material before the I.T.O. before he issued the notices under s 31(a) on the basis of which he could have reason to believe that any income had escaped assessment.
In the writ petitions, the assessee called upon the I.T.O. to produce the report made by him to the Central Board of Revenue, as well as the order of the Central Board of Revenue thereon.
Despite this prayer, neither the Union of India, nor the I.T.O produced the report made by the I.T.O. to the Central Board of Revenue under s.34(1)(a) nor the order of the Central Board of Revenue.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) Before an I.T.O. can issue a statutory notice under s.34(1)(a), he must have reason to believe that by reason of omission ,or failure on the part of an assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for the years in question, income, profits or gains chargeable to Income Tax have escaped assessment during those years.
Further, before doing so, he must have recorded his reasons for acting under section 34(1) (a) and the Central Board of Revenue must have been satisfied on those reasons that it is a fit case for the issue of the notice.
The recording of the reasons in support of the belief formed by the I.T.O. and the satisfaction of the Central Board of Revenue on the basis of the reasons recorded by the I.T.O. that it is a fit case for issue of notice under section 34(1) (a) are extremely important circumstances to find out whether the I.T.O. has jurisdiction to proceed under s.34(1)(a).
[104D] 103 Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. vs I.T.O. Company District 1 Calcutta and Others, ; Chhugamal Rajpat vs section P. Chalia & Ors.
79 I.T.P 603; Sheonath Singh vs Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax, Central, Calcutta & Ors., referred to.
(ii)In the present case, an affidavit was filed before the Court stating that the relevant records could not be traced from the file of the Central Board of Revenue.
Assuming that the concerned records were missing from the file of the Central Board of Revenue, the copy of the report made by the I.T.O. and the Order received by him, must have been in the file of the I.T.O. and reason was given for not producing those records.
These circumstances give rise to an adverse inference that the records in question were not produced because they did not assist the department 's case.
Under the circumstances, it is not possible to come to the conclusion that the facts necessary to confer jurisdiction on the I.T.O. to proceed under s.34(1)(a) had been established.
There is nothing to show on record that there was any relevant material before the I.T.O. before he issued the notices under s.34(1) (a).
[105F]
