As a result of a judicial enquiry in relation to a complaint by the appellant against the four respondents, summons were issued to the respondents, and before the Magistrate, evidence, oral and documentary, was adduced by the complainant (appellant) in the presence of the accused (respondents).
On a consideration of those materials, the Magistrate framed charges against I all the four accused under sections 120 B/409 1.
P.C. and under section 409, against accused 1 to 3, in September 1968.
Thereafter, the trial proceeded, a large volume of oral and documentary evidence was let in, and all that remained was the examination of two prosecution witnesses and a court witness before closing the trial.
All the prosecution witnesses, examined till then were also cross examined by the respondents.
At that stage, in March 1969, the 4th accused moved the High Court for quashing the proceedings and the other accused followed with similar petitions.
The High Court, in spite of the complainant representing that the trial had almost come to a close quashed the charges and proceedings on the grounds that, the complainant had suppressed material facts, that the two prosecution witnesses should not be allowed to be examined 'in the circumstances of the case ', that the ' examination of the court witness was not necessary as it would only prejudice the accused and under the effect of cross examination, and that the evidence on record ruled out any offence of breach of trust or a conspiracy to commit it.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : The High Court was in error (a) It is not as if the accused had moved the High Court at the earliest stage when summons was issued to them.
Nor had they ,approached the High Court when charges were framed against them.
If the case of the accused was that the allegations try the complaint did not constitute the offences complained of or that the complainant was to be quashed on any other ground available in law, the accused should have approached the High Court at least when the charges were framed.
[186DE] (b) Assuming there was a suppression of material facts by the complainant that was a matter to be considered by the trial Court.
Similarly, whether the evidence on record established that an offence of breach of trust or a conspiracy to commit it, had been committed, Is again a matter for the trial court to come to a conclusion after, an appraisal of the entire evidence let in by the prosecution and the defence.
The High Court was not justified, at that stage, to have embarked upon an appreciation of the evidence.
[187AC] (c) The accused never challenged the order of the trial court regarding the examination of prosecution witnesses or the court witness, and 180 the High Court was not justified in holding that they should not be examined, and hence, the order regarding their examination should stand.
Jamatraj Kewalji Govani vs The State of Maharashtra, , referred to.
(d) If the High Court had passed the order quashing the charges and proceedings in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction under s.561A, Cr.
P.C. then the exercise of the power by the High Court was not justified, because, the present case does not come within the ambit of the principles laid down by this Court, in R. K. Kapur vs The State of Punjab, [188 A C] (e) Even assuming that the High Court was exercising jurisdiction under section 439, Cr.
P.C., the present was not a. case for interference by the High Court.
The jurisdiction of the High Court is to be exercised nearly, under the section, only in exceptional cases when there is a glaring defect in the procedure or there is a manifest error on a point of law and consequently a flagrant miscarriage of justice.
[188D]
