On 29 4 1942, a mining lease was granted by the Crown Representative to the father of the respondents for a period of 20 years to operate the coal.
mines.
The father died on 18 5 1961.
On 3 8 61, the respondents applied for renewal of the lease.
By his order dated 27 6 62, the Deputy Commissioner Khasi Jayantia Hills informed the respondents that the application for renewal must be deemed to have been refused.
On 22 10 1962.
the respondents filed a revision petition to the Central Government under Rule 54.
This was rejected on 8 2 1963.
On 7 5 63, the respondents filed a writ petition before the High Court for quashing the order dated 27 6 62 and for a writ of mandamus directing the renewal of the lease.
The High Court allowed the petition filed by the respondents holding that Rule 24(3) of the Rules under which the application by the respondents was deemed to have been rejected was unreasonable and ultra vires of Sec. 8 of the Act, and the deemed refusal of the application for renewal had no legal effect that the explanation to Rule 54 should also be struck down as repugnant to the main sections of the Act.
On appeal by special leave to this Court, HELD : (i) The Act and the Rules contained the complete code in respect of the grant and renewal of prospecting licence as well as mining lease in lands belonging to the Government, as well as the lands belonging to private persons.
The mining lease in question is in a land belonging to Government and it is for a mineral included in the First Schedule to the Act in respect of which no mining lea ,P. can be granted without previous approval of the Government.
Normally, the Government like any other owner of property is entitled to choose with WhoM it shall deal and what sort of a contract it will enter into, but being a public authority, its acts are necessarily regulated by certain Rules.
The Act and Rules in this case are intended to regulate the development of mines and minerals under the control of the Union an contained the provisions necessary for that purpose.
No person can claim as of right any lease or prospecting licence in any land belonging to Government or in any mines in anv lands belonging to Government except under and in accordance with the Act at the Rules or any right except these created or conferred by the Act.
[174G H] As a result of the provisions of Sections 19 and 20 of the Act, renewal of the lease granted to the father of the respondents is governed by Act and the Rules.
Rule 24(3) as amended.
has the effect that while the provisions regarding disposal within 90 days of an application for renewal still stands, provision for deeming it should have been 170 refused is no longer there.
The explanation to Rule 54 has two purposes : (i) to state the effect of the failure to dispose of the applications referred to in Rule 24 sub rule (1) and (2) within the periods specified within these sub rules as also (ii) to provide the starting point for the purpose of computing the period of two months within which an application for re vision under Rule 54 must be preferred.
[175D, G & 176A] (ii)There is nothing unreasonable in the order passed by the Central Government.
It has been mentioned in that order that after careful considerations of the facts stated in that review application, it was rejected as time barred.
The application to the Central Government preferred by the respondents contained, all the facts.
There is no reason to assume that the Central Government did not apply their minds to these facts.
[177 DE] (iii)Rule 24(3) and the explanation to Rule 54 cannot be said to contravene the provisions of Section 8 of the Act.
They are within the rule making powers of the Government and in view of the provisions of Rule 24 and 54, the only reason which the State Govt.
can give under Rule 26 is that because 90 days are over, the application should be deemed to have been refused.
The High Court 's view that Rule 24(3) and the explanation to Rule 54 are in contravention of Sec. 8 is vitiated by its assumption that every order to be passed on an application for renewal should be approved by the Central Government.
This is incorrect.
Only renewal cannot be granted with the Central Govt 's approval and not rejection.
[177 F H] Shivji Nathubhai vs Union of India & Others, [1960] 2S.C.R. 775, Supreme Court judgment dated 7 8 1967 in C.A. 657/67 distinguished.
Seeta Ramaiah vs State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1963 A.P. 54, Shivaji Nathubhai vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1959 Punjab 510 referred to.
