For the years 1957 58 to 1962 63 the assessees were assesed by the Income tax Officer as an 'Association of Persons. ' They had filed their returns for the first two of these years as 'Association of persons but in 1959 60 they claimed that they had divided their interest in the shares held by them and therefore in respect of them they should be thereafter assessed as 'Individuals '.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld the order of the Income ' tax Officer.
The Tribunal however held that the assesseess should be assessed as 'Individuals ' and not as Association of Persons '.
The High Court in reference answered in favour of the Revenue.
In appeal by certificate it was urged on behalf of the assessees appellants that the facts that a joint gift of shares was made in favour of more than one person or those shares were registered jointly in their names or even the fact that the dividend was realised together did not go to show that the shareholders or the beneficiaries did act as an 'Association of Persons. ' HELD : (i) For forming an 'Association of Persons ' the members ,of the association must join together for the purpose of producing income.
An 'Association of Persons ' can be formed only when two or more individuals voluntarily combine together for a certain purpose.
Hence volition on the, part of the members of the association is an essential ingredient.
[519F G] In the case of receiving dividends from shares where there is no question of any management, it is difficult to draw an inference that two or more shareholders functioned as an 'Association of Persons ', from the mere fact that they jointly own one or more shares and jointly receive the dividends declared.
These circumstances do not by themselves go to show that they acted as an 'Association of Persons '.
[519G H] (ii)For the years 1957 58 and 1958 59, the assessees were rightly assessed as an 'Association of Persons ' because of their own admission which was an import ant piece of evidence.
[519,H; 520A B] (iii)For the years 1959 60 and 1962 63 they had specifically stated that they were no more functioning as an 'Association of Persons '.
In the case of an 'Association of Persons '.
It is always open to its members to withdraw from the same.
No one can be compelled to continue as a member of an association.
For withdrawing from an association no particular form need be observed.
[520C D] In the present ease the question related only to realisation of dividends.
If the individual members of the association choose to realise their dividends as individuals there is an end of the association.
The assesees ' assertion that they bad realised their dividends in their individual capacity remained unrebutted.
There was nothing to disprove their claim.
None of 516 the facts proved could be said to be inconsistent with the claim made by them.
[520D E] The answer, therefore, in respect of the years 1959 60 to 1962 63 must be in favour of the assessees.
[521C D]
