Before September 1966 the marketing Organisation of the employercompany was in three divisions.
Thereafter it was organised into two divisions.
There were extensive and prolonged consultations between the employer and the employees but the reorganisation was not approved by the employees.
The new scheme was introduced on the 5th or 6th September and the industrial dispute arising therefrom was referred to the Tribunal on 30th September.
The workers presented themselves for work every day and offered to work according to the old scheme but they were not given any work.
They were told that as long as they refused to work under the new scheme they would not be paid any wages.
Some workers had voluntarily retired and the vacancies were not filled.
Therefore, pending the adjudication on the reference already made, seven workers filed applications under section 33A of the , alleging that during the pendency of the adjucation, their service conditions had been changed adversely and that their salary for the month of October had not been paid.
The Industrial Tribunal was different in the two cases as also the evidence let in in the two cases.
In the main reference, the Tribunal held in favour of the employer.
With reference to the applications of the employees, the other Tribunal held in favour of the employees on the grounds that the conditions of work had been changed to the workers ' prejudice, that the reorganisation was likely to lead to re trenchment, that the matter thus fell under item 10 of Schedule 4 to the Act and that therefore, the employees were justified in refusing to work.
Both parties appealed to this Court, HELD : On a consideration of the material in each of the awards 'both the awards should be upheld.
[628 A B] (1) The evidence given in the main reference not being a part of the evidence in the applications filed by the employees it is not open tothis Court to take it into consideration in deciding the appeals filed by the employer as against the award in favour of the employees.
[628A] (2) This Court, in considering a matter under article 136, does not ordinarily reassess the evidence on the basis of which the Tribunalcame to its conclusion.
It will interfere with findings of facts only if they are unsupported by any evidence or are wholly perverse.
[628 D E] (3) The reorganisation is neither a change in usage falling under item 8 of the 4th Schedule to the Act, nor rationalisation falling under item 10, nor an increase or reduction in the number of persons employed in any department falling under item 11; and hence, it was not necessary to give any notice under section 9A of the Act.
[633 D E] 625 (a) The employer has a right to organise his work in the manner he pleases.
[631C] (b) The various decisions show that whether any particular practice or allowance or concession had become a condition of service would always depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
, On the evidence and findings given by the Tribunal it cannot be held that there has been any change in the terms and conditions of service of the workers in this case to their detriment.
[633 C E] Parry & Company 's ; Dharangadhara Chemical ,Works Ltd., vs Kanju Kalu & Ors. [1955] 1 L.L.J. 316; Chandramalai Estate vs Its Workmen ; The Graham Trading Co. (India) Ltd. vs Its Workmen ; ; Workmen of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. vs I.T. ; McLeod & Co. vs Its Workmen ; Indian Overseas Bank vs Their Workmen [1967 68] ; Indian Oxygen Limited vs Udaynath Singh , Oil & Natural Gas Commission vs Their Workmen and Tata Iron & Steel Co. vs Workmen ; , referred to.
(c) The Tribunal held on the basis of oral as well as documentary evidence that the contention of the workers that it was a condition of service of every employee to work for only one division at a time was not established.
The arrangement of the words and phrases in item 10 shows that only rationalisation or standardisation or improvement of plant or technique, which is likely to lead to retrenchment of workmen that would fall under that item and not mere rationalisation or standardisation.
The retrenchment contemplated is retrenchment as defined in section 2(00), which does not include voluntary retirement of the workmen.
Therefore, the workers cannot make a grievance of the voluntary retirement and non filling of vacancies and try to bring the matter under item 10.
The employer had the right to decide the staff complement and to fill only such jobs as continued to exist and not automatically replace every individual.
[630 A H] Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen, ; , referred to.
Therefore, there is no reason for differing from the findings of the.
Tribunal that there has been no change in usage adversely affecting the workers coming under item 8, and that there has been no retrenchment under item 10.
[632D] (4) The 4th schedule relates to conditions of service for change of which the notice is to be given, and section 9(A) requires the employer to give notice under that section to the workmen likely to be affected by such.
change.
The word 'affected ' in the circumstances could only refer to the workers being adversely affected and unless it could be shown that the abolition of one department has adversely affected the workers it cannot be brought under item 11.
[631 A C] [The question whether the prolonged and detailed discussion between the parties was a substantial compliance with the provisions of section 9A not decided].[633E] (5) But the non payment of wages in the circumstances of this case amounts to an alteration in the conditions of service and the fact that the scheme was introduced before the reference under section 10 was made does not bar an application under section 33A.
The tribunal was justified in coming to the conclusion that this alteration in the conditions of service could not have been made without the notice under section 9A. [634 C D; 635 B C] 626 (a) The applications in this case were not for wages due for the month of September but for October.
[634E] (b) The refusal to pay wages was not a solitary instance in respect of which an application could have been made under section 33C. it was a continued refusal and the cause of action arises de die in diem.
If the refusal of the workers to work under reorganisation scheme is justified then the refusal by management to pay unless they work under the reorganisation scheme would amount to alteration of the conditions of service of Workers.
[634 G H] (c) Even if an application had been made under section 33C the whole scheme would have been considered and it is not fair at this distance of time to drive the workers to file application under that section, the procedure for which would be the same as under section 33A, merely on the ground that the introduction of the scheme had taken place before the reference to the adjudication was made.
[636 B C] (d) The Tribunal had found that the reorganisation scheme had rendered some workers surplus, that the scheme had seriously prejudiced.
the workers, and that the apprehension of the workers that the reorganisation would result in some members of the staff becoming surplus had come true.
[635 A B] North Brooke Jute Co. Ltd. , National Coal Co. vs L. P. Dave, , Shama Biscuit Co. vs Their Workmen , referred to : Ram Nath Koeri vs Lakshmi Devi Sugar Mills & Ors. , approved.
(e) If all the evidence which was let in in the main reference were available to the Tribunal which decided the applications of the workers, the result might have been different.
But it could not be said that the Tribunal is wrong in having proceeded to dispose of the matter in the way it did.
[636 A D]
