Plot No. 4635A (old number 5199) admeasuring bigha and 2 biswas and located in the Meerut municipal area was leased by the Lala Nanak Chand Trust to the predecessor in interest of the present respondents.
According to the lease deed dated June 23, 1926 the lease was granted "for the purpose of planting a grove, erecting buildings and digging wells etc.".
The period of the lease was 30 years but the lessor agreed that on the expiration of that period he would at the request of the lessee renew the lease for another 30 years.
On the expiry of the initial period of 30 years on July 1, 1956 the lessor Trust instituted a suit for recovery of possession of the aforesaid land.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court but decreed by the first appellate court.
The respondents thereafter, on permission granted by the said first appellate court instituted a suit for the specific performance of the agreement to re let the land for another term of 30 years.
The suit was dismissed on the ground of limitation by the trial court, as well as the first appellate court.
In both the suits the present respondents filed second appeals in the High Court.
While these appeals were pending the U.P. Urban Areas Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1956 was enforced in the city of Meerut.
The land in dispute was declared an agricultural area ' under the Act and a notification under section 8 of the Act vesting the land in the State was issued on July 16, 1964.
Rule 39 of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Areas Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Rules, 1957 provided for abatement of certain suits and appeals.
Applying the rule the High Court abated the two aforesaid appeals filed by the respondents before it.
The Trustees appealed to this Court by special leave.
They also filed a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution praying that the notifica tion under section, 8 of the Act dated July 16, 1964 be quashed as violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(f) and 31 of the Constitution.
It was further contended that section 2(1)(d) of the Act whereby land held on lease duly executed before the first day of July 1955 for the purposes of erecting buildings thereon was included in the term 'agricultural area ' was protected by article 31 A of the Constitution.
HELD : (i) The lease was not exclusively a building lease.
Admittedly no building had been constructed.
The respondents claimed to have planted a grove.
If so, the land would be covered by section 2(1)(c)(viii) The lease could not therefore be held to fall exclusively under section 2(1)(d).
[790B] 784 (ii) In Durga Prasad 's case the Allahabad High Court has pointed out the history of cl.
The High Court has taken the view that section 2(1)(d) is limited to lands which are being used for agricultural purposes.
The conclusion must be held to be correct though for different reasons, On this construction of section 2(1)(d) it cannot be said that this provision is not connected with agricultural reforms.
It could accordingly receive the protection of article 31A and would be immune from attack on the ground of violation of Articles 14, 19 and 31.
[792C] Durga Prasad vs Board of Revenue U.P. Allahabad and others, A.I.R. 1970 All. 159, referred to.
(iii) The report of the Commission would not show that the land in dispute was a grove within the meaning of section 2(6) of the U.P. Tenancy Act, 1939.
As the appellants had given the old number of the plot in their petition the Government did not reply to the allegation in the petition.
Accordingly it was not possible to express any concluded opinion on the question whether the land in dispute was an 'agricultural area ' on the date specified under section 2(1) and was being used for horticulture.
, The issue must be decided afresh by the appropriate authority under the Act.
If it is held by him that the land in dispute is an 'agricultural area ' and the State Government issues a notification under section 8 of the Act with respect to the land, the appeals will be, disposed of by the High Court in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[793C] [Notification dated June 16, 1964 quashed, and orders of the High Court abating the appeals and suits set aside.]
