Appellant, aged 20, was convicted and sentenced to death for murdering his wife on October 30, 1971 and the High Court confirmed the death sentence on January 24, 1972.
The appeal to this Court was limited only to the question of sentence.
In the High Court it was argued that the sentence should be reduced to life imprisonment because, the appellant was a young man of 20 years of age, the incident arose out of sexual jealousy and the crime was not pre meditated.
The High Court did not consider these circumstances to be sufficient to merit a lesser sentence.
In this Court it was contended that appellant acted under grave provocation and secondly, the Courts below had ignored the effect of the recent amendment of section 357 Cr.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) While confirming the capital sentence, the High Court has an obligation to itself to consider why sentence should be imposed and should not be content with the trial court 's decision on the point.
It is the duty of the High Court to consider the proceedings in all their aspects and come to an independent conclusion on the materials, apart from the view expressed by the Sessions Judge.
, In so doing, the High Court will be assisted by the opinion expressed by the Sessions Judge but the law requires that the High Court should come to an independent conclusion of its own.
[847E] Jumman & others vs The State of Punjab, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 469, referred to.
(ii)In the present case, assuming the trial court was justified in imposing the capital sentence, the long lapse of time since the imposition of the capital sentence by the trial court and the consideration of the question by this Court, constitutes a relevant ground for reducing the sentence to life imprisonment.
The appellant must have been in the condemned cell ever since the death penalty was imposed on him.
The appellant must have been subjected to acute mental agony ever since the death penalty was imposed on him.
Therefore, the sentence of capital punishment must be reduced to life imprisonment in the present case.
[848C] in Piare Dusadh & Others vs Emperor A.I.R. 1944 F.C. 1, the sentence of death was reduced to one of transportation for life when the convict had inter alia, been awaiting execution of death sentence for over a year.
