Two army officers and a businessman were put up for trial before the Special Judge under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952.
They were all charged with offences of conspiracy under section 120B, I.P,.
C. read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and section 420 I.,P.C. The businessman was charged under s.420 and sections 420 and 511, I.P.C.
The two army officers were also charged with the offences under section 420 I.P.C. read with section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
After some witnesses were examined by the prosecution, on a petition by the three accused, the High Court quashed the charges and the proceedings on the grounds, (1) that the officer who investigated the case was not competent to do so; (2) that the offences were non cognizable and hence the Special Judge could not take cognizance of them without sanction under section 196A, Cr.
P.C.; and (3) in view of the enormous length of time that elapsed between the date the registration of the case and the examination of the witnesses (about 4 1/2 years), to proceed further with the case would be an abuse of the process of Court causing harassment to the accused.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) (a) Under section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, before it was amended in 1964, no officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police could investigate into offences punishable under Ss. 161, 165, 165A I.P.C., or under section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, without the orders of a Presidency Magistrate or the Magistrate First Class.
Where an offence is committed in more than one place the order of every Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the offence or part of the offence was committed was not necessary to enable the investigation to be carried on.
All that is necessary is that the Magistrate who makes the order under section 5A should have territorial jurisdiction over the place where any part of the offence took place.
In the present case, the offence of conspiracy was alleged to have been committed both at Tejpur as well as at Gauhati and the Inspector concerned had obtained the order of the First Class Magistrate, Tejpur.
[821H; 822A C] Chinnappa vs State of Mysore, A.I.R. , Chatterjea V. Delhi Special Police Establishment I.L.R. 1969 Assam and Nagaland 275 and Union of India vs B. N. Ananthapadmanabbiah, A. I.,R. , referred to.
(b) The High Court expressed doubt whether the order of the Magistrate of Tejpur was a genuine one.
If he had any such doubt it was the duty of the Judge to have gone into the matter thoroughly and satisfied 819 himself whether the order was genuine or not, and given a categorical finding on the matter.
There should have been no room allowed for any doubt, or suspicion of any underhand dealing or unfair conduct, in a matter of this kind.
[823A C] (2) Under Schedule 11 of the Criminal Procedure Code offences under Ss. 161 to 165, I.P.C. and offences punishable with imprisonment for life or imprisonment of 7 years and upwards are shown as cognizable offences.
Under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act the sentence may extend to 7 years.
Therefore, an offence under section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act is a cognizable offence.
The words 'notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, in the section merely carve out a limited exemption from the provisions of Criminal Procedure Code in so far as they limit the class of persons who are competent to investigate, and to arrest without a warrant.
The mere fact that under the Act certain restrictions are placed as to the officers who are competent to investigate into the offences mentioned in section 5A would not make those offences any the less cognizable.
Therefore, the offences under section 161, 165 and 165A of the I.P.C. and section 5, Prevention of Corruption Act, are cognizable offences and there is no question of their being cognizable if investigated by a Deputy Superintendent of Police and non cognizable when investigated by an Inspector of Police; nor can there be any question of these offences being cognizable if investigated under section 156, Cr.
P.C. but not when investigated under section 5A, Prevention of Corruption Act.
It is illogical to say that offences would be cognizable in certain circumstances and non cognizable in certain other circumstances.
Therefore, the reed for a sanction under section 196A, Cr.
P.C. does not arise.
[824A H; 825A D; 827] Union of India vs B. N. Ananthapadmanabhiah, A.I.R. , Union of India vs Mahesh Chandra, A.I.R. 1957 Madhya Bharat 3 and Public Prosecutor vs Sheikh Shariff, A.I.R. 1965 A.P. 372, referred to.
Taj Khan vs The State, A.I.R. , Ram Bijhumal vs The State, A.I.R. 1958 Bombay 125 and Gulabsingh vs State, A.I.R. 1962 Bombay 263, approved.
G. K. Apte vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1970 Assam & Nagaland 43, disapproved.
(3)The need to order re investigation or to begin the trial again after the sanction under section 196A is obtained, and the consequent inordinate delay and harassment of the officers concerned, do not arise at all.
Hence, there is no question of quashing the charges on that ground.
[827G H] (4) Under section 6 and 7(3) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, and Ss. 235 and 239, Cr.
P.C. the businessman (private individual) and the two army officers, (public servants) could be tried together.
[829A C] The State of Andhra Pradesh vs Kandimalla Subbaiah & Anr. , followed.
