The appellant obtained possession of a parcel purporting to contain apples after presenting before the railway authorities a railway receipt endorsed in his favour by the consignee.
The parcel on being opened was found to contain a considerable quantity of opium besides apples.
At his trial for an offence under section 9(a) of the Opium Act 1878 he however denied that he had anything to do with the parcel.
There was no evidence that the appellant was aware that the parcel contained opium.
He was convicted by the trial court and the conviction was upheld on appeal by the Sessions Judge and on revision by the High Court.
In appeal by special leave, this Court had to consider the effect of section 10 of the Act which provide that in a prosecution under s 9 "it shall be presumed until the contrary is proved, that all the opium for which the accused is unable to account satisfactorily is opium in respect of which he has committed an offence under this Act.
" The appellant contended that unless otherwise provided, it must be presumed that the legislature will not make an act an offence unless it is accompanied by mens rea.
HELD : (1) Normally, it is true that the plain ordinary grammatical meaning of the words of an enactment affords the best guide.
But in cases like the present, the question is not what the words mean but whether these are sufficient grounds for inferring that Parliament intended to exclude the general rule that mens rea is an essential element in every offence.
The authorities show that it is generally necessary to go behind the words of the enactment and take other factors into consideration.
in the context it is permissible to look into the object of the legislature and find out whether.
as a matter of fact.
the legislature intended anything to be proved except the possession of the article as constituting the element of the offence.
[218D] Brend vs Wood, , Sherras vs De Rutzen, I Q.B. 918 and Sweet vs Parsley, ; , referred to.
Even if it be assumed that the offence is absolute, the word possess ' in section 9 connotes some sort of knowledge about the thing possessed.
It is necessary to show that the accused had the article which turned out to be opium.
It is not necessary to show in fact that he had actual knowledge of that which he had.
[218E F] Reg. V. Ashwell, and Reg.
vs Warner, , 289, relied on.
(ii) Section 10 proceeds on the assumption that a person who is in any way concerned with opium or has dealt with it in any manner, must be presumed to have committed an offence under section 9 of the Act, unless the person can satisfactorily prove by preponderance of probability either that he was not knowingly in possession or other circumstances which exonerate him.
The burden to account will arise only when the accused is in some manner found to be concerned with opium or has otherwise dealt with it, [220D] 373SupCI/74 216 In the last analysis it is only necessary for the prosecution to establish that the accused has some direct relationship with the article or has otherwise dealt with it.
If the prosecution proves detention of the article or physical custody of it.
then the burden of proving that the accused was not knowingly in possession of the article is upon him.
The practical difficulty of the prosecution to prove something within the exclusive knowledge of the accused must have made the legislature think that if the onus is placed on ',he prosecution, the object of the Act would be frustrated.
[221C] Lockyer vs Gibb, , 246, Emperor vs Santa Singh, A.I.R. 1944 Lahore 339, Sahetzdra Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1948 Patna 222, Abdul Ali vs The State, A.I.R. 1950 Assam 152, Pritam Singh and Others vs The State, 1966 P.L.R. 200, Sub Divisional Officer and Collecor Shivasagar vs Shri Gopal Chandra Khaund and Another. , State vs Slzam Singh and Others, I.L.R. [1971] 1 Punjab and Haryana, 130, Sheo Rai Singh vs Emperor, A.I.R. (31) 1944 Oudh 297 and Syed Mehaboob Ali vs State [1967] Cr. L.J. 1727, referred to.
(iii) In his statement under section 342 the appellant totally denied having anything to do with the parcel.
He never put forward the case that he bona fide believed that the parcel contained only apples.
He was in physical custody of opium.
He had no Plea that he did not know about it.
Accordingly the conviction must be confirmed.
[sentence altered [221F]
