For the years 1962 and 1963 the appellants workmen demanded additional bonus of three months ' basic wages.
The tribunal, to which, the industrial dispute was referred on a consideration of the materials placed before it by both the parties, accepted the case of the respondent management, regarding certain deductions made from the profits.
and held that the bonus already paid to the workmen was sufficient and that they were not entitled to any additional bonus for those two years.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
HELD : (i) The commission and royalties received from Dunlop, U.K., for the two years were rightly not included by the respondent in its profits, because, the evidence established that the circumstances under which the respondent earned the amounts showed that appellants had not made any ,contribution of work or labour for earning those amounts.
It accrued to the respondent as extraneous income.
[233D F] Workmen of M/s Hindustan Motors Ltd. vs M/s Hindustan Motors Ltd. & Anr, [1968] 2 S .C.R. 311, followed.
Tata Oil Mills Co. Ltd. vs Its Workmen and Others ; , referred to.
(ii) The contention of the appellants that no return should be allowed on the share premium of Rs. 70 lacs was rightly rejected by the tribunal.
When ,a company makes a Rights issue, the Government, while giving consent, fixes a certain amount of premium to be charged for those shares.
Those shares are issued only to the shareholders who ask for them and who pay the premium amount in addition to the nominal value of the share.
Under the , as amended, a capital introduced by the shareholders in a company had to be shown in accordance with schedule VI as a separate item.
But the share premium is not undistributed profit and cannot be distributed as dividend.
It is really the share capital of the respondent and therefore, the respondent was justified in claiming 6% return on this amount.
[234 A C] (iii) Mere production of a balance sheet by a company cannot be taken.
as proof of a claim as to what portion of the reserves had been actually used as working capital.
The utilisation of any amount from the reserves as working capital has to be proved by an employer by adducing proper evidence by way of affidavit or otherwise after giving opportunity to the workmen to contest its correctness in cross examination.
The company will have to satisfactorily prove that the amount on which the return is claimed has been actually used as working capital.
But in the present case the respondent has adduced oral and documentary evidence.
It is not a case where merely profit and loss account alone has been filed without any further evidence being adduced by ' the respondent.
Therefore there is no basis for the contention of the appellants that the respondent had not properly established its claim for return on working capital [234G H, 235 C D] 2 2 9 The Oriental Gas Company Ltd. vs Their Workmen, and Bareilly, Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen & Ors. ; referred to.
(iv) (a) Even if the claim of the company for rehabilitation is rejected completely, on the basis of the findings, that is, after taking into account the claims of the respondent, allowed and rejected, and the rebate in income tax that may be received by the company, the workmen would still have been paid bonus at a rate which has been accepted as correct by this Court.
[237 C D] (b) On the basis of the education to be made according to the appellants in respect of rehabilitation claim, the respondent will be entitled to some amount at least in that regard.
Even if that lesser amount is taken into account the available surplus will be reduced further, and, the result will be that even the amount paid as bonus already by the respondent will be more than what the workmen will be entitled to according to the decisions of this Court.
[238 E H] (c) The industrial Tribunal, Calcutta, in relation to a claim for bonus for the year 1957 had elaborately discussed the matter and allowed a certain sum as rehabilitation charges.
When once the tribunal had considered a similar claim and had adopted it on the basis of evidence adduced by the parties, normally, the amount so awarded towards rehabilitation should be adopted even though it will not be conclusive for subsequent years.
In the present case, the rehabilitation claim was worked out only on the basis of replacement costs of the year 1958.
If the appellant 's case was that the tribunal, when working out the claim for 1957 had not properly appreciated the evidence they should have elicited from the witnesses who deposed on behalf of the respondent that the figures furnished by the respondent are not correct and could not be accepted.
But the appellants had not objected to the data adduced as well as the documents produced by the company with reference to its rehabilitation claim.
No suggestions had been made to the various witnesses examined on behalf of the respondent that the figures on the basis of which the rehabilitation claim was made were in any way erroneous.
[237G 238D] Therefore, considering the matter from any point of view, there is no question of the workmen being entitled to any additional bonus over and above what has already been paid M/s Gannon Dunkerley and Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, A.I.R. followed.
