The appellant was appointed Secretary of the respondent company in 1942.
Later he was promoted as General Manager.
By a resolution dated December 16, 1953 the Board of Directors of the company decided to terminate the services ,of the appellant.
By a telegram and a letter dated December 17, 1953 addressed to the appellant the Chairman of the Board of Directors terminated the services of the appellant.
Subsequently at a meeting held on December 23, 1953 the Board of Directors confirmed the minutes of the meeting held on December 16, 1953 and the action of the Chairman in terminating the services of the appellant by his letter and telegram dated December 17, 1953.
The appellant filed a suit challenging his dismissal and also claimed that he was entitled to 18 months ' notice before termination of his services.
The trial Court and the High Court ,decided against the appellant.
In appeal by certificate to this Court the questions for consideration were : (i) whether the termination of the appellant 's service was valid and (ii) whether the appellant was bound by the company 's rules which ,provided for termination of the service of employees after one month 's notice.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) Notice to all the Directors of a meeting of the Board of Directors was essential for the validity of any resolution passed at the meeting.
As admittedly no notice was given of the meeting on December 16, 1953 to one of the Directors, the resolution passed terminating the services of the appellant was 'invalid.
[307 D E] But the resolution of the Board of Directors to confirm the action of the Chairman to terminate the, services of the appellant by his telegram and letter dated December 17, 1953, would show that the Board ratified the action of the Chairman.
Even if it be assumed that the telegram and the letter terminating the services of the appellant by the Chairman was in pursuance to the invalid resolution of the Board of Directors passed on December 16, 1953 to terminate his services, it would not follow that the action of the Chairman could not be ratified in a regularly convened meeting of the Board of Directors.
Even assuming that the Chairman was not legally authorised to terminate the services of the appellant, he was acting on behalf of the Company in doing so, because he purported to act in pursuance of the invalid resolution.
Therefore it was open to a regularly constituted meeting of the Board of Directors to ratify that action which, though unauthorised, was done on behalf of the company.
Ratification would always relate back to the date of the act ratified and so it must be held that the services 'of the appellant were validly terminated on December 17.
1953, [307 G 308 C] (ii) The rules which provided for one month 's notice in case of termination of services of all employees would apply to the appellant as well.
The rules expressly purported to bind all the employees of the respondent company.
There was no reason to hold that the appellant was not an employee of the respondent company.
The appellant had himself relied on the rules.
It was therefore idle to contend that the rules did not bind him.
The contention of the appellant that he was entitled to 18 months ' notice must be rejected.
[308 D E]
