The appellant was convicted by the Sessions Judge for offences under section 302 I.P.C. on two counts for causing the death of a Head Constable and another and sentenced to death on each count.
The appellant was further convicted under section 307 I.P.C. for attempt to murder a P.S.I. and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 7 years.
He was also convicted under sections 333, 332 I.P.C. and sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act and sections 3, 4 (b) and 5 of the Explosive Substances Act and separate sentences were passed, On appeal and reference to the High Court, the judgment of the learned Sessions Judge was affirmed.
The High, Court maintained the conviction of the appellant relying upon circumstantial evidence.
The appellant came before this Court by special leave.
The prosecution case was that a hand grenade was exploded in the house of one A when the police party headed by a Sub Inspector arrived there with a view to apprehend the appellant and as a result of the explosion two persons, including a Head Constable, received fatal injuries and other police officials received serious injuries.
The question was whether the appellant possessed the hand grenade in question and exploded the same.
as a result of which, injuries were caused to the two deceased persons and the different police officials.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) The case against the appellant had not been proved by the prosecution beyond all reasonable doubt and the conviction of the accused, therefore, must be set aside.
(ii) There is no direct evidence as to the fact that the appellant was seen carrying a hand grenade or that he exploded the hand grenade.
The circumstances relied upon by the High Court in convicting the appellant do not singly or cumulatively show that it was the appellant who exploded the handgrenade.
From the evidence, there is nothing to rule out the possibility of the hand grenade having been exploded not by the appellant but by one of his companions.
There is no direct evidence as to who exploded the hand grenade.
(iii) Further, in the F.I.R. there was no mention of a hand grenade.
All that was mentioned in the said report was that there was firing from inside; but the medical evidence revealed that there was no bullet injury on any of the injured persons.
(iv) In order to base the conviction of an accused on circumstantial evidence, the Court must be certain that the circumstantial evidence is of such a character as is consistent only with the guilt of the accused.
The circum stances must show that within all reasonable probability, the impugned act must have been done by the accused.
If two inferences are possible from the circumstantial evidence The pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other, also plausible, that the commission of the crime was the act of someone else the circumstantial evidence would not warrant the conviction of the accused.
[273D] 267
