The appellants were convicted u/s 148 and 302 read with Sec. 149 of the I.P.C.
The conviction was challenged in the Supreme Court, inter alia, on the ground that besides the eye witnesses, the F.I.R. mentioned the names of three more persons who had seen the incident but they were not examined by the prosecution.
In rejecting the contention and dismissing the appeal.
HELD : Non examination of some of the eye witnesses mentioned in the F.I.R. does not introduce any fatal infirmity to the prosecution case.
It is no doubt true that the prosecution is bound to produce witnesses who are essential to the unfolding of the narrative on which the prosecution is based.
Apart from that, it cannot be laid down as a rule that if a large number of persons are present at the time of the occurrence,.
the prosecution is bound to call and examine each and every one of those persons.
The answer to the question as to what is the effect of the non examination of a particular witness would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
In case enough number of witnesses have been examined with regard to the actual occurrence and their evidence is reliable and sufficient to base the conviction of the accused thereon, the prosecution may well decide to refrain from examining the other witnesses.
Likewise, if any of the witnesses is won over by the accused party and as such is not likely to state the truth, the prosecution would have a valid ground for not examining him in court.
The prosecution would not, however, be justified in not examining a witness on the ground that his evidence even though not untrue would go in favour of the accused.
It is as much the duty of the prosecutor as of the court to ensure that full and material facts are brought on the record so that there may be no miscarriage of justice.
The discharge of such a duty cannot be affected by the consideration that some of the facts if brought on the record would be favourable to the accused.
In case the court finds that the prosecution has not examined witnesses for reasons not tenable or not proper, the court would be justified in drawing an inference adverse to he prosecution.
[654F]
