The appellant, a British citizen, was detained under section 3(2) read with section 3 (1) (a) (i) and (ii) of .
The grounds of detention were that he was engaged in subversive activities by instigating and creating hatred between the Hindus and Sikhs and by calling upon the Sikhs to establish a separate homeland by resorting to violent methods.
In reply to ,I representation by the Akali party for the release of the appellant from detention the Chief Minister of Punjab stated in the State Assembly that the appellant was in Pakistan in November.
1971 alongwith a Pakistani official, that he had been photographed getting down from a Pakistani plane, and that he had made a statement to a newspaper that 'India was a prison house for Sikhs; but, he did not mention any of the grounds contained in the order of detention.
The appellant 's petition for the issue of a writ of habeas corpus on the ground that he had made arrangements to leave the country was dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : Clauses, (a) and (b) of section 3(1) of the deal with two different kinds of powers.
Under clause (a) power is given to the State to detain any person including a foreigner for any of the pur poses mentioned therein and under el.
(b) power is given to detain a foreigner either for regulating his continued presence in India or for making arrangements for his expulsion from India.
It is not only in a case where a foreigner wants to continue in India that the power to detain under el.
(a) was available but it is available even where, in order to avoid preventive detention, the foreigner offers to go out of the country.
[667 B C] (2)It is not correct to say that el.
(b) is beyond the legislative competence of Parliament, and, that, therefore, the order under el.
(a) could only be made with a view to regulate the presence of the appellant in India and not when the appellant wanted to leave India.
It is well established that various legislative entries should be interpreted in a broad manner and if any legislation could be brought within the ambit of any one or other of the legislative entries the validity of the legislation cannot be questioned.
Entry 10, List I, Schedule VII to the Constitution deals with foreign affairs and all matters which bring the Union into relations with a foreign country, would certainly cover el.
Therefore, it is within the competence of the detaining authority to exercise the power conferred on it either under el.
(a) or.
[667 C D] (3)The decision of this Court in Hants Muller of Nurenburg vs Superintendent, Presidency fail, Calcutta that section 3(1)(b) of Preventive Detention Act which is exactly similar to section 3 (1) (b) of the conferred power to use the means of preventive detention as one of the methods of achieving expulsion of a foreigner does not mean that section 3 (1) (a) of the cannot be used for the purpose for which it is plainly intended.
[667 E F] (4)The appellant, taking advantage of the fact that by race he is an Indian, proposed to indulge in activities which were a danger to the integrity and security 663 of tile country.
The first duty of the State is to survive.
To do SO it had got to deal with enemies both overt and covert whether they be inside the country or outside.
The fact that the appellant, if released, would go to England and from there continue to indulge in activities prejudicial to the security and integrity of this country was a relevant factor in determining whether he could be detained when he was found in this country.
It is true that there is no law in this country providing for extradition of persons against whom this country would consider it necessary to pass an order for preventive detention.
But if such a person hap pened to come to this country he could be detained.
It is not correct that a person like the appellant could be detained only if it was apprehended that if not detained he would indulge in prejudicial activities within the country.
[669 E F, H] (5)Preventive detention is not a punishment for an offence.
To accept the argument of the appellant that only where the grounds of detention were based on facts which could be held to amount to an offence either in India or in a foreign country, that he could be detained would make the grounds given in section 3(1) of the , meaningless.
Preventive detention is an anathema to champions of individual liberty, but times being what they are, the Constitution makers in their wisdom have provided for it in article 22.
In the absence of a law dealing with the matter the courts will have to decide whether the activities for which a person was detained was one prejudicial to the defence and security of India.
[669 D E,H] (6)The District Magistrate who made the order of detention could not have known of the activities of the appellant which the Chief Minister mentioned in the Assembly.
Moreover, the Chief Minister 's reply was in answer to a demand of the party for the appellant 's release.
The grounds of the appellant 's detention must have been known to them.
The Chief Minister was, therefore, only giving them additional information which came to his knowledge subsequently.
There fore, it could not be contended that the grounds for approval of the appellant 's detention were not the same grounds on which he was detained but some others, Hence no malice in law has been established.
[670 C, E, F]
