The respondent joined the Jammu and Kashmir University in 1963 as lecturer on contract basis.
He was later promoted as professor.
His appointment as professor was also on contract basis and by agreement he was bound by the statutes and regulations from time to time in force in the University.
While extending his period of probation as Professor the Central Council of the University resolved that the respondent be charge sheeted for certain alleged misconduct.
An Enquiry was held under the Jammu and Kashmir University Act, 1965 and at report was submitted holding the respondent guilty.
On the day the enquiry officer submitted the report, the Jammu and Kashmir University Ordinance 1969 was promulgated.
Section 52 of the Ordinance provided that teachers employed on contract basis "unless otherwise ordered by the Chancellor after consulting the Pro Chancellor shall cease to hold such posts or to discharge such duties after 60 days from the commencement of this Ordinance or the Act, as the case may be." No such order was issued by the Chancellor extending the respondents employment on the expiration of the period.
Or, the other hand.
the Vice Chancellor.
allowed him to function as Professor and his probation was again extended for a year by the Vice Chancellor under section 13(4) of the Ordinance (which had already been replaced on November 16, 1969 by the Jammu and Kashmir University Act, 1969).
The Vice Chancellor also directed the release of the salary of the respondent and requested him to serve on the academic council as an ex official member.
Based on the enquiry report the Vice Chancellor issued a show cause notice to which the respondent submitted his explanation.
The University Council decided to terminate the services of the respondent.
In a writ petition filed by the respondent the High Court directed reinstatement.
The High Court took the view that the facts and circumstances of the, case clearly enabled the spelling out of a fresh appointment of the respondent as Professor by an emplied contract.
The High Court was also of the opinion that the enquiry directed under the 1965 Act lapsed when the 1969 Ordinance came into force and could not furnish the basis for punitive action against the respondent and therefore the order of dismissal based on the report of the Enquiry Officer was bad in law.
HELD : that the High Court 's order of reinstatement.
had to be quashed.
While the respondent had no right to continue in the University the termination of his services was invalid.
(i)Under the 1969 Ordinance and the subsequent Act which replaced it the only body competent to appoint a professor, like the respondent, is the University Council and even the Council shall make such appointments only on the recommendation of the Selection Committee created by section 36.
There is no case that.
the Selection Committee even considered or recommended the respondent for appointment and there is no suggestion that the University Council appointed the respondent as professor.
it follows that the only statutory body 170 empowered in this behalf has not appointed the respondent to the post claimed by him.
Therefore the continuance of the respondent on the expiration of the statutory two months ' period cannot be legitimated by law.
The circumstance that the respondent functioned in the University does not vest in him the legal status of a validly appointed employee with all the protection that the, Act and the relevant statutes give to such a person.
Thus no case of statutory ter mination is called for, the basis of statutory employment being absent.
[175F] When a statute creates a body and vests it with authority and circumscribes the powers by specifying limitation.
the doctrine of implied engagement le hors the provisions and powers under the Act would be subversive of the statutory scheme regarding appointment of officers and cannot be countenanced by the Court.
If a Vice Chancellor by administrative drift allows such employment it cannot be validated by any theory of factum valet.
[176E] (ii)When there was no provision in the 1969 Act which would continue or validate the enquiry commenced against the respondent by the Jammu and Kashmir University created by the 1965 Act.
the Enquiry report falls to the ground vis a vis the respondent.
The fact that he responded to a show cause notice cannot clothe the enquiry with legality and the report is impermissible material to injure the respondent with a punitive termination.
The respondent would be considerably damnified in his standing and reputation by the order of the University.
The termination of his service therefore has to be declared illegal.
[176G]
