The appellant, a Railway Guard, was convicted and sentenced for an offence under section 509, I.P.C.
The High Court uphold his conviction.
On appeal this Court set aside.the conviction and acquitted him.
In the meanwhile the appel lant, was dismissed from service with effect from 31st March, 1956.
The appellant impugned the order of dismissal in the High Court which held that his dismissal was wholly void and ineffective.
Thereupon the appellant was reinstated and was informed that the matter of his back wages for the period between the date of his dismissal and the date of reinstatement would be decided later.
By another letter he was informed that this period was treated as leave due.
He was paid Rs. 81.51 as his wages for the entire period ending on March 7, 1959.
The appellant made an application under section 15(2) of the claiming Rs. 9,016.60 plus ten times the said amount as compensation.
In addition, he first claimed 'traveling allowance ' but later sought to amend the application by replacing 'traveling allowance by 'running allowance This was rejected by the Prescribed Authority.
The Authority allowed a part of the claim but the appellant preferred an appeal to the Appellate Authority under the Act.
The Appellate Authority held that the claim was barred by time as limitation had commenced from the date of dismissal from service and not from the date of reinstatement Or the date on which it was decided to treat the period of dismissal as leave due.
On the question (i) whether the.
claim application filed by the appellant tinder s 15(2) was time barred and (ii) whether he was entitled to running allowance.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) the first proviso to sub sections
(2) of section 15 indicates two alternative starting points for limitation, namely, (i) the date on which deduction from wages was made or (ii) the date on which the payment of the wages was due to be made.
[183 A] From a reading of section 15 it is clear that the legislature has deliberately used, first.
in sub section
(2) and then in sub section
the expressions "deduction of wages" c and "delay in payment of wages ' as two distinct concepts.
Terminus a quo (i) in the proviso expressly relates to the deduction of wages, while (ii) is referable to the delayed wages.
If both these terminii were always relatable to the same Point of time, then there would be nor point in mentioning terminus a quo (i) and the legislature could have simply said that limitation for a claim under section 15(2) would always start from the date on which the wages "fall due" or "accrue" as has been done under Article 102 of the Limitation Act which applies only to suits for recovery of wages.
The very fact that two distinct starting points of limitation referable to two distinct concepts have been stated in the proviso.
shows that the legislature had visualised that the date of deduction of wages and the due date of delayed wages.
may not always coincide.
Conjunction "or" which in the context means "either" and the phrase "as the 179 case may be" at the end of the proviso are clinching indicate of this interpretation.
They are not mere surpluses and must be given their full effect.
The legislature is not supposed to indulge in tautology; and when it uses analogous words or phrases in the alternative, each may be presumed to convey a separate and distinct meaning.
the choice of either of which may involve the rejection of the other.
To hold that the two expressions "wages deducted" and "wages delayed" though used in the alternative.
carry the same meaning, and in the proviso are always referable to one and the same point of time, would be contrary to this primary canon of interpretation.
(183B E] Ordinarily where an employee was dismissed on one date and reinstated on another, the deduction of wages may synchronize with the act of reinstatement.
In the instant case the deduction did not take place on the date of reinstatement because the order of reinstatement expressly stated that decision with regard to his wages for the period would be taken later.
Therefore the deduction would coincide with the decision deducting the wages.
Such a decision was taken on February, 18, 1959 and limitation under the first part of the proviso commenced from that date.
[183G H] Jai Chand Sawhney vs Union of India ; ; Divisional Superintendent.
Northern Railway vs Pushkar Dutt Sharma (1967] ; held inapplicable.
(ii) Running allowance was counted towards average pay in those cases only where the leave did not exceed one month.
Travelling allowance or running allowance was eligible if the officer had travelled or run, not otherwise.
it could not be said that running allowance was due to the appellant as part of his wages for the entire period of his inactive service.
[185H; 186A] Per Krishra Iyer J. (Concurring) In this country the State is the largest litigant today and the huge expenditure involved makes a big draft on the public exchequer, In the context of expanding dimensions of State activity and responsibility, it is not unfair to expect finer sense and sensibility in its litigation policy, the absence of which in the present case had led the Railways callously and cantankerously to resist an action by its own employee.
a small man, by urging a mere technical plea which had been pursued right up to the highest court and had been negatived, It was not right for a welfare State like ours to be Janus faced and while formulating the humanist project of legal aid to the poor contest the claims of poor employees under it pleading limitation and the like, [186 E]
