The appellant, who was Assistant Office Superintendent, was promoted as Office Superintendent but immediately thereafter was reverted after issuing a charge sheet but without holding an enquiry.
He, however, continued to perform the duties of Office Superintendent.
A few months later charges against him were withdrawn with the remark that "no stigma was attached to him".
Thereupon the appellant applied to be reinstated in the post of Office Superintendent and for payment of arrears of his salary.
But his reversion order was upheld with the remark that his guilt was established.
The appellant retired in 1959 and filed a suit in 1962 claiming arrears of salary and allowances and for a declaration that from the date of reversion to the date of retirement he was a Railway employee on a salary ranging from Rs. 400 to 575 and for certain other benefits.
The trial court, while dismissing the suit in toto, had held (i) that the suit was maintainable but denied any declaration to him and (ii) that the order of demotion passed against him was illegal.
The High Court decreed the suit and held that the suit for arrears of salary, except to the extent of Rs. 180/ was barred by article 102 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
The High Court further held that the action against the appellant being penal and violative of the constitutional protection afforded by section 240(3) of the Government of India Act, 1935 was void and, therefore, could be ignored as non est.
[489F H] On the question (i) whether article 102 of the Limitation Act would apply to the case and (ii) whether a declaration was needed for enforcing a claim which fill within time.
Allowing the appeal in part.
HELD : (1) In Shri Madhav Laxman Vaikunthe vs The State of Mysore ; , which view was reiterated in two later decisions, it was held that article 102 of the Limitation Act would apply to a case of this kind.
Though a good deal can be said in favour of the contention that a claim for arrears of salary is distinguishable from a claim for wages, the question is no longer open for consideration afresh.
it is not advisable to review the authorities of this Court after such a lapse of time when, despite the view taken by this Court that article 102 of the Limitation Act, 1908 was applicable to cases of this kind, the Limitation Act of 1963 had been passed repeating the law, contained in article 102 of the Limitation Act, 1908, in identical terms without any modification.
The legislature must be presumed to be cognizant of the view of this Court that a claim of the nature, as in the instant case, falls within the purview of article 102 of the Limitation Act, 1908.
If Parliament, which is deemed to be aware of the declarations of law by this Court, did not alter the law it must be deemed to have accepted the interpretation of this Court even though the correctness of it may be open to doubt.
It was for the legislature to clear these doubts.
When the legislature has not done so despite the repeal of the Limitation Act 1908 and the enactment 1 of the after the decision of this Court it is inexpedient to reexamine the correctness of the view adopted by this Court in its decisions on the question.
[489 FH] The Punjab Province V. Pandit Tarachand , 93, 108, Jai Chand Sawhney vs Union of India [1969](III) S.C.C: p. 642 and State of Andhra Pradesh vs
Kutubuddin,civil Appeal No. 2289 of 1966 decided on 8 10 69, referred to.
(2)The High Court was right in treating the order of reversion to be void and inoperative or non est.
Therefore no declaration was needed for the purpose of enforcing a claim which fell within three years.
Consequently only the amount which fell within 3 years of the suit could be decreed in accordance with the statement of the counsel for the respondent.
[490F] 486
