The respondent was prosecuted under clause 7(iii) of the Foreigner 's Order, 1958 read with Sec.
14 of the for over staying in India after the expiration of the permit.
The respondent had entered India on a Pakistani passport.
At the trial, the respondent produced evidence to show that he was a citizen of India when the Constitution came into force on 26 1 1950 and never migrated to Pakistan to obtain the citizenship of that country.
He further stated that he had to obtain the Pakistani passport against was volition.
The respondent further urged that without the decision of the Central Government u/s 9(2) of the as to whether he has acquired Pakistani citizenship or not, the prosecution under the was incompetent.
The trial Magistrate acquitted the respondent, holding that he had proved that he was an Indian citizen who never migrated to Pakistan.
The High Court upheld the acquittal as it thought that the prosecution had not proved the only case set up by it namely that the res pondent was not an Indian citizen on 26 1 1950.
Quashing the charge and setting aside the acquittal, HELD : (1) The real and decisive question to be considered and decided was not whether the respondent possessed Indian nationality and citizenship on 26 1 1950 but whether he had lost that nationality at the time when he entered this country on Pakistani passport.
Without a decision of the Central Government under section 9(2) of the on that question, the Criminal Court had no jurisdiction to acquit or convict a person.
(II) After having examined the charge framed, the cases set up by the two sides, the contentions advanced in the trial court, the grounds of appeal of the High Court and those in the special leave petition, we think that the question regarding acquisition of foreign citizenship by the respondent was the decisive question.
The respondent had himself raised the plea although he gave an impression that the prosecution was inviting a decision on the legality of the order of acquittal without obtaining a prior decision of the Central Government under Sec.
9(2) of the .
It was not proper for the prosecuting authorities to have proceeded with a case without the determination of the said question under sec.
9(2) of the .
[577 D] (III) In view.
of the erroneous procedure adopted on behalf of the State in pressing for a conviction without obtaining a decision from the appropriate authority, quashing of the charge itself is the correct order.
This would leave the State free to follow the proper procedure under law regarding the acquisition of foreign citizenship by the respondent and then to prosecute the respondent.
(577 H) State of Andhra Pradesh vs Abdul Khader ; , Abdul Sattar vs State of Gujarat A.I.R. 1965 section C. 810 and Akbarkhan vs Union of India ; , followed.
Kulathilmammu vs State of Kerala ; , referred to.
