The respondent was employed in a company.
The contract of service Provided for, the termination of service by giving three months notice or three months pay ,in lieu thereof without assigning any cause.
The company gave him a notice that it was found that his performance and conduct have not been good and that he had not proved useful to the company.
He was therefore advised to try for alternative employment.
He was informed that he would be released from the company at his request on payment by him of the amount under a bond executed by him with some concession.
The respondent thereupon filed a suit claiming various reliefs.
He, did not ask for an interim injunction restraining the appellant and the company from terminating his service during the pendency of the suit, nor did the appellant and the company give any such undertaking.
The company gave the respondent notice terminating his service with effect from the date of the service of the notice and granted him three months ' pay.
The High Court hold that the act of giving the second notice amounted to con.
tempt of court because, as a result of the termination some of the reliefs Prayed for would become infructuous and that would amount to obstruction or interference with due course of justice.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD Where a party to a suit terminates the service of the adversary party in the honest exercise of his rights under the contract of service and in the absence of any interim injunction or undertaking,, the act would not constitute contempt of court.
[653 B C] (a) A combined reading of the two notices shows that the appellant had terminated the service in the honest exercise of the right vested in the company by the contract of service.
The order did not threaten the respondent to withdraw the whole or part of the suit.
[653 C] (b)The circumstance that one or more of the reliefs claimed in the plaint had become infructuous on account of the termination would not establish contumacy, because the respondent was free amend his plaint and ask for an appropriate relief.
[653 D] (c) The fact that the appellant had tendered an unconditional apology in the High Court is not a ground for this Court refusing to interfere, because, (i) the High Court had in fact held that appellant has committed contempt though it did not award punishment because of the apology and(ii)the High Court had directed the appellant to pay cost to the respondent.
[654 B] Taka Qim Goakar vs R. V. Shakla, ; , fang Bahadur Singh vs Baij Nath rewari, Cand Malojirao Shitole vs C. G. Matkar, A.I.R 1953 M. B. 245, referred to.
Pratap ginirh vs Gurbaksh Sinqh, [1962] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 838, and Govind Sahl vs State of U. P. [1969] 1 S.C.R. 176, distinguished.
