The appellants.
two brothers and their sons, constituted a firm.
They were declared insolvent and the Official Receiver took possession of all their properties including the building in dispute.
The appellants filed an objection petition under Sec.
60 of the Code of Civil Procedure read with Sec. 4 of the Provincial Insolvency Act in respect of taking possession of the building in dispute basing this upon cause (ccc) of the, Proviso, subsection (1).
The Trial Court held that the entire building consists of two distinct units, the one being distinct business premises as a shop, while the other structure, on the back thereof, exclusively used a residential premises, and, therefore, upheld the objection petition of the appellants in respect of the residential portion and the upper storey thereon and dismissed it in respect of the rest of the building on appeal the Dist.
Judge and the Single Judge of the High Court held in favour of the appellants.
On a further appeal under the Letters Patent.
the Division Bench purporting to follow the Full Bench Decision of that Court in Ude Bhan and Ors.
vs Kapoor Chand and Ors.
allowed the appeal and set aside the judgments of the learned single Judge and restored the order of the Insolvency Judge.
On appeal by certificate, allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) If a portion of the residential house is occupied by the Judgment debtor himself for the. purpose of a shop that portion does not cease to be part of the residential house.
In the circumstances and social conditions in this country it would be difficult to justify the conclusion that where a part of a residential house is used in connection with the business or profession of the owner of that house that portion ceases to be part of the residential house.
The Punjab High Court has taken the same view at least from the year 1951.
The contrary view taken by the impugned judgment does not flow form the full bench judgment or the language of the Section [201D] Ude Bhan & Ors.
vs Kapoor Chand & Ors., I.L.R. 1966 (2) Punjab 400, Agha Jafar Ali Khan vs Radha Kishore, A.I.R. 1951 Punjab 433, distinguished.
Firm Ganga Ram vs Firm Jia Ram, A.I.R. 1957 Punjab 293 followed.
Punjab Mercantile Bank Limited (in liquidation) Jullundur City vs Messers General Typewriter Co. Jullundur City, , referred to.
(2) There is no doubt that the building in question was the main residential house of the appellants and it was occupied by them.
The facts of the ' case bring it squarely within the scope of the section and the whole building is, therefore, exempt from attachment.
[2O3A]
