In accordance with a reciprocal arrangement arrived at between the Governments of U.P. and Rajasthan certain bus routes between these two States had been nationalised.
Under the proposed scheme, approved under section 68D of the (4 of 1939) which was duly approved by the Central Government under the proviso to sub s.3 of section 68D, no person other than the State Transport Undertaking was permitted to provide any road transport services on the routes or portions thereof and permits which had already been granted to private operators were cancelled.
The High Court held that the impugned schemes and notifications were valid in Law.
In appeal to this Court it was contended (i) that a State Government cannot approve a Scheme for inter State route under section 68D of the Act as the power of the State Government can only operate within its own territory; (ii) that as a State Government cannot make law for areas outside its territorial limits, the scheme approved by it in respect of inter State routes is unconstitutional and (iii) that in approving a scheme a State Government exercises executive power which cannot operate in areas beyond the territorial limits of the State.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD : The contention runs counter to the plain language of the proviso to subs.
(3) of section 68D.
In the face of the proviso it is difficult to hold that the U.P. Government was not competent to approve and publish the impugned scheme.
The proviso manifestly contemplates that the State Government can, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Ch.
IVA of the Act, approve a scheme relating to an inter State route and publish the same.
In the instant case the previous approval of the Central Government was admittedly obtained in respect of the two different States.
[568B E] (b) If the approval of the State Government was to be accorded in respect of that portion of inter State route which was within is own territory, there would have been no necessity to obtain the prior approval of the Central Government.
The necessity of obtaining prior approval of the Central Government arises because the scheme envisages nationalisation of transport service not only for that part of the inter State which is within the territorial limits of the State Government approving the scheme but also for the remaining part of the route which is outside the said territorial limits.
Inter State route would normally cover the entire route and not merely the portion of the route which is within the territorial limits of the State.
Government which accords approval.
[568G H] (ii) The State Government in approving a scheme does not legislate in the sense the legislature of a State makes law under article 245 of the constitution for the whole or any part of the State.
The limitation on the power of a State Legislature to make laws for the whole or any part of the State and not for areas outside the territorial limits of the State cannot be invoked for the purpose of placing a restriction on the power conferred upon the State Government by Parliamentary legislation to approve a scheme relating to an inter State route, [569 C D] (iii) The executive power of the Union and each State under article 298 of the Constitution extends to the carrying on of any trade or business.
There is nothing in article 298 to show that the trade or business carried on by a State must 563 be restricted to the area within its territorial limits.
The article envisages the carrying on of trade and business by a State without any territorial limitations.
A scheme approved by the State Government under sub section
(3) of section 68D effectuates the object of State monopoly in the matter of transport service.
Such a scheme does not entail encroachment by one State Government upon the executive sphere of another State Government.
In the instant case there is no question of encroachment upon the executive domain of one State Government by another because the whole thing is being done by the two Governments acting in concert.
(569F G)
