The appellant and the deceased who were friends, came to Delhi to purchase a motor cycle and stayed in a hotel.
The deceased fell short of money and the appellant promised to get it, from someone known to him.
Two prosecution witnesses saw the deceased and the appellant entering the room of the 'hotel ,on the night of the occurrence and the appellant leaving the hotel room in the morning on the following day.
Two days later the room was broken open and the dead body of the deceased was recovered.
The appellant was arrested at Gaya in his sister 's house and an attache case containing clothes, a spanner set, an allenkey set and a connecting rod were recovered from him.
The appellant was convicted under section 302 Penal Code.
by the Sessions Judge.
In appeal the High Court reduced the sentence to life imprisonment.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD : In a case of circumstantial evidence it is necessary to find whether the circumstances on which the prosecution relies are capable of supporting the sole inference that the appellant is guilty of the crime of which he is charged.
The circumstances have to be established by the prosecution by clear and cogent evidence and those circumstances must not be consistent with the innocence of the accused.
For determining whether the.
circumstances established on evidence raise but one inference consistent with the guilt of the accused, regard must be had to the totality of the circumstances.
Individual circumstances considered in isolation and divorced ' from the context of the overall picture emerging from a consideration of the diverse circumstances and their conjoint ,effect may by themselves appear innocuous.
It is only when the various circumstances are considered conjointly that it becomes possible to understand and appreciate their true effect. ' [696G H] In the instant case, the circumstances that, the appellant and the deceased who occupied a room in the hotel were seen entering the room together at midnight on the night of the occurrence, the appellant was seen locking the room and leaving.
the hotel, the dead body was recovered from the room, the appellant was found indulging in what for a man of his means was a spree of extravagance, and a blood stained connecting rod was recovered from the house of the appellant 's sister where he was found, all point to , the guilt of the accused.
