On the tenants ' appeal, the Full Bench of the Madras High Court held that the Act controls both contractual and statutory tenancies and it enables both landlords and tenants to seek the benefit of fixation of fair rent.
Thereafter, the matter came up before a Single Judge of the High Court who applying the provisions of the ' Act to the facts of the case, held that the Act did not apply to the premises in question.
The Division Bench reversed this decision, In the appeal by special leave the tenants mainly contended that a landlord has no right to apply for the fixation of a fair rent at a figure higher than the contractual rent, where there was a subsisting contract of tenancy.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (per majority and Bhagwati, JJ.
Contra) The present Act which replaces the 1949 Act adopts a completely new scheme of its own and provides for every contingency, i.e. in 'the relationship of landlord and tenant.
The provisions of the Act show that the Madras Legislature deliberately proceeded on, the basis that fair rent was to be fixed which was to be fair both to the landlords as 'well as to the tenants, and that only the poorer class of tenants needed protection. 'the assumption that the Act like ill rent acts, is intended only for the to on of tenants is not warranted by the provisions of the Act.
It is clear therefore, that the fair rent under the present Act is payable during the contract period as well as after the expiry of the contract period.
[636C F] The analysis.
of the Act shows that it has a scheme of its own and it is intended to provide a complete code in respect of.
both contractual tanancees.
the definitions of the term "landlord" and "tenant" show that the Act applies to contractual tenancies,as well as to.
cases of statutory tenants and their landlords.
On some supposed general principles governing all Rent Acts it cannot be argued that such fixation can only be for the benefit of the tenants when the Act clearly lays down that both landlords and tenants can apply for fixation of fair.
A close reading of the Act shows that the fair rent is fixed for the building and it is payable by whoever is the tenant whether a contractual tenant or statutory tenant.
What is fixed is not the fair rent payable by the tenant or to, the landlord who applies for fixation of fair rent but fair rent for the building somethings like an incident of the tenure, regarding; the building.
[637F] 630 The general observations to the contrary in Bhaiya Punjalal Bhagwanddin vs Dave Bhagwat Prabhuprasad ; and Manujendra vs Purendu Prasad ; , held obiter.
Sri Brij Raj Krishna vs section K. Shaw and Bros. [1951] S.C.R. 145, Hem Chand V. Sham Devi, I.L.R. [1955] Punj, 36, R. Krishnamurthy vs Parthasarathy A.I.R. 1949 Mad. 780, distinguished.
Abbashails case ; and Mangilal vs Sugarchand Rathi ; , referred to.
Per Mathew and Bhagwati, JJ : Two basic considerations must guide our approach to the question whether a landlord can, during the subsistence of the contractual tenancy, apply for fixation of fair rent under section 4(1) of the Act.
The first is that the rent which is the result of contract between the parties must continue to bind them so long as the contract subsists, unless there is anything in the statute which expressly or by necessary implication over rides the contract.
It is to counter act the in justice resulting from in equality in bargaining power and to bring about social or distributive justice that social legislation interferes with sanity of contract.
Ordinarily, we do not find and in deed it would be a strange and rather incomprehensible phenomenon,that legislation intervenes to disturb the sanctity of contract for the benefit of a stronger party who does not need the protective bind of the legislature.
Secondly the Act has been enacted inter alia, with the object of controlling rents of residential and non residential buildings and preventing unreasonable a diction of tenants.
Tamil Nadu Act 18 of 1960 is in its essential character as also in its object and purpose similar to what may conveniently be described rent control legislation, in other States, such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh.
The general purpose and intendment of rent control legislation and its positive thrust and emphasis on the protection of the tenant cannot be lost sight of when we are construing a similar legislation like the Tamil Nadu Act 18 of 1960 [642C] Bhaiya Punjalal Bhagwanddin vs Dave Bhagwat prasad Prabhuprasad ; , Mangi Lal vs sugarchand Rathi [1964] 5 S.C.R. and Manujendra vs Pwendu prasad ; referred to.
Having regard to the basic character of the statute as a rent control legislation and the scheme of its provisions and reading sec.
4(1) in its contextual setting and in the light of the other provisions of the statute, the conclusion is inescapable that the ward "landlord" in sec.
4(1) is used in a limited sense and it does not include contractual landlord.
The landlord does not have the right to apply for fixation of fair rent during the subsistence of the contractual tenancy.
It is only when the contract of tenancy is lawfully determined that he becomes entitled to apply for fixation of fair rent, for it is only then that he can recover fair rent higher than the agreed rent from the statutory tenant, there being no contract of tenancy to bind him down to the agreed rent.
[646G] (2) Per majority : General observations in earlier decisions of this Court should be confined to the facts of those case.
Any general observation cannot apply in interpreting the provisions of an Act unless this Court has applied its mind to and analysed the provisions of that particular Act.
Therefore, the observations in ; , that rent acts are not ordinarily intended to interfere with contractual leases and are Acts for the protection of tenants and are consequently restrictive and not enabling conferring no now right but restricting the existing rights either under the contract or under the general law, should not be held to apply to all rent Acts irrespective of the scheme of those acts and their provisions.
The present Act did not proceed on the basis that the legislation regarding rent control was only for the benefit of the tenants.
It wanted the legislation to be fair both to the landlord and the tenant.
[834B] (per Mathew and Bhagwati,JJ).
The meaning of the term landlord ' must not be confined to that given in the definition or to its ordinary etymological meaning but must be understood in the context of the setting in which it occurs, and the scheme and object of the Act.
The Provisions of the Act, particularly of sec.
7, are clearly restrictive in character and not enabling provisions empowering the landlord to recover the fairrent where it is higher than the agreed rent.
This is the only rational 631 construction which can be placed on the relevant provisions of the Act relating to control of rent and such a construction is not only compelled by grammar and language but also accords with the broad general considerations in interpreting the rent control legislation.[646B] Cog vs
Hakes(1890) A.C. 15, and Whethered vs Calcutta(842)5 Scctt.
N.R. 409,referred to.
(3)Any variation of rent reserved by registered lease deed must be made by another registered instrument.
The agreement between the landlord and the tenant by which the rent was increased being in variation of a written contract,evidence of that was barred under section 92 of the Evidence Act.
