The appellant was found preparing illicit liquor when the raiding excise party searched the room in which he was present.
The appellant pleaded that he had no concern with the bungalow searched and that he was not present when the search was taken and that he was falsely implicated in the case.
All the materials found in the room were seized.
The Excise Inspector had tested the contents of the drums with the aid of litmus paper, hydrometer, and thermometer and did not confine himself to smelling the contents of the drums.
The appellant was convicted by the trial court under section 60(a), U.P. Excise Act, 1910 for preparing illicit liquor and was sentenced to imprisonment and fine.
His conviction and sentence were confirmed both by the sessions Judge and the High Court.
The questions raised in this Court were (i) whether the smelling test employed by the Excise Inspector together with other circumstances were enough to justify the conclusion that the liquid recovered was illicit liquor of O.P. strength and (ii) whether the Excise Inspector could be considered an expert whose opinion about the nature of the liquor found was opinion evidence under section 45 of the Evidence Act.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (i) It is not desirable to lay down an inflexible rule on questions of fact even though their determination requires the adoption of scientific methods and tests.
It is really for the court of fact to decide whether, upon a consideration of the totality of the facts in a case, It has been satisfactorily established that the objects recovered from the possession of the accused included liquor of prohi bited strength Hydrometer test would be enough if the liquid was known to contain alcohol because it would help to determine the strength of alcoholic contents.
[825 D] In the instant case the false defence taken, that the appellant was not present at the house in question when it was searched, could indicate that he wanted to keep his distance from the recoveries made as he was aware of their incriminating nature.
Secondly, the appellant who was an employee in a liquor shop, could not be so ignorant about the nature of the liquid recovered as not to be able to raise the question before the trial court that the liquid under consideration was not "liquor" as defined in the Act.
There was no reason why the accused, who could be presumed to have enough knowledge about the composition and strength of the prohibited liquor, could not raise this question in the trial court so that the prosecution might cure whatever weakness there might be in the evidence on that point.
The Excise Inspector was cross examined at considerable length but the whole of it was directed at showing that the recoveries were not made from the possession of the appellant.
No question was put to him In cross examination to suggest that the appellant questioned the composition or strength of the liquid recovered as alcohol of prohibited strength or the competence of the Excise Inspector to give his conclusion on the strength of tests ad opted by him.
The appellant should not be allowed to raise it at a stage when it may be difficult or impossible to adopt a conclusive test.
The objects recovered from the possession of the appellant almost proclaim the nature of his activity and of the liquid which could be in his possession.
(ii)The competence of the Excise Inspector to test the composition and strength of the liquid was not questioned at all.
Nor was his competence questioned to give his conclusion on the strength of the tests adopted by him.
No defence evidence was led to indicate that the liquid could be anything else.
[826A] 822 In the instant case, the question of admissibility of the opinion of the Excise Inspector was, however, not raised before the Sessions Judge.
The Excise Inspector had deposed that he had put in 21 years ' service as Excise Inspector and had tested lakhs of samples of liquor and illicit liquor.
On the facts of this case this particular Excise Inspector could be.
treated as an expert within the meaning of section 45 of the Evidence Act.
The evidence was sufficient to prove the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt.
[826 C] State of Andhra Pradesh vs Madiga Boosenna & Ors., ; , distinguished.
State vs Madhukar Gopinath Lalze, I.L.R. [1965] Bombay 257, and Ram Jus vs State, , referred to.
