In the proceedings before the Supreme Court two of them being writ petitions under article 32 of the Constitution and two others being appeals from the orders of the Delhi High Court in writ petitions under article 226 relief was claimed in respect of the search of certain premises and seizure of account books, documents, cash, jewelry and other valuables by Income tax authorities purporting to act u/s 132 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The petitioners/ appellants challenged the validity of Sec.
132(1) and (5) of Rule 112(A) on the ground that they violate article 14, Article 19(1)(f) and (g) and 31 of the Constitution.
It was also contended that a writ of prohibition to restrain the authorities from using the 'information gathered from the documents seized should be issued.
In the writ petitions, the actual search and seizure were challenged on the ground that they were carried out in contravention of the provisions of Sec. 132 and Rule 112 A.
The Court negatived all the contentions.
Dismissing the writ petitions and appeals, HELD: (1) When one has to consider the reasonableness of the restrictions or curbs placed on the freedoms mentioned in article 19(i) (f) and (g), one cannot possibly ignore how such evasions eat into the vitals of the economic life of the community.
Therefore, in the interest of the community, it is only right that the fiscal authorities should have sufficient powers to prevent tax evasion.
As a broad proposition, it can be stated that if the safeguards while 'carrying out search and seizure are generally on the lines adopted by the Criminal Procedure Code they would be regarded as adequate and render the temporary restrictions imposed by these measures as reasonable.
On detailed examination of the provisions of Sec. 132, and Rule 112, it is clear that the 705 Safeguards are adequate to render the provisions of search and seizure as less onerous and restrictive as is possible under the circumstances.
The provisions, therefore, relating to search and seizure in Sec. 132 and Rule 112 cannot be regarded as violative of articles 19(1)(f) and (g).
[714F, 717C] In the course of his duties, the Director of inspection has ample opportunities to follow the course of investigation and assessment carried on by the income Tax Officers and to check the information received from his sources with the actual material produced or not produced before the assessing authorities.
It is not, therefore, correct to argue that the Director of Inspection could not entertain honest and reasonable belief before ordering search and seizure under Section 132(1)(a)(b) and (c).
The second proviso to sub section (5) of Sec. 132 shows that the assessee can get a release of all the assets seized if he can make satisfactory arrangements for the payment of the estimated dues.
So also, the excess collection is refundable u/s 132 A with interest after the regular enquiry.
The provisions of Section 132(5) are not confiscatory in nature.
[717F] M. P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra ; and Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs R. section Jhaver [1968]1 S.C.R. 148 followed.
(II) The provisions of Section 132(1) and (5) cannot be challenged on the ground that they make unjust discrimination between two sets of tax evaders in .ordering search and seizure or retention of the seized wealth for recovering the tax, in some cases and not ordering the same in other cases.
All evaders of taxes can be proceeded against u/s 132.
Only in some cases, the search may be useful because of the information about the undisclosed income and wealth.
Where there is no such information, search and seizure would be futile.
Therefore, there is no substance in the contention that two different procedures for assessment are adopted an hence there is discrimination under article 14.
[720C] C. Venkata Reddy and Another vs Income tax Officer, (Central) 1, Bangalore, and others, 66 Income tax Reports, 212 and Ramjibhai Kalidas V.I. G. Desai, Income tax Officer, and others, 80 Income tax Reports, 721, cited with approval.
(III) The Income tax authorities can use as evidence any information gathered from the search of the documents and accounts and articles seized.
Neither by invoking the spirit of our Constitution nor by strained construction of the fundamental rights can we spell out the exclusion of evidence obtained on an illegal search.
U23F], A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; and M. P. Sharma vs Satish Chandra ; Courts in India and in England have consistently refused to exclude relevant evidence merely on the ground that it is obtained by illegal search or seizure.
Where the test of admissibility of evidence lies in relevancy, unless there is an express or implied prohibition in the Constitution or other law, evidence obtained as a result of illegal search or seizure is not liable to be shut out.
[723G] (IV) In writ petition No. 446171, on facts it was found that the allegations of mala fide and oppressiveness and highhandedness in search and seizure were not proved.
On examining the records, held that the petitioner was not co operating with the Director of Inspection.
(V) Held further, that seizure of books of account and other documents which were afterwards found to be not relevant, along with the documents relevant for the enquiry, does not make the search and seizure illegal.
It may at the most be an irregularity.
On the material on record, the Director of inspection had proper grounds for a belief for ordering search and seizure under sub clauses (b) and (c) of sub section (1) of Sec. 132.
Merely because the assessment for the relevant year was already completed, it does not mean that on the information in the possession of the Director of Inspection, he cannot 706 entertain the necessary belief.
On facts, in Writ Petition No. 86/72 held the search and seizure were neither oppressive nor excessive.
