In W. P. No. 92 of 1969, the Petitioner Company prayed for issue of appropriate direction or order for the enforcement of its fundamental rights guaranteed under article 31(1) of the Constitution.
The facts are as follows: The petitioner company was a dealer in non ferrous metals and was a registered supplier to the Directorate General of Supplies and Disposals.
The company was also a registered dealer in the State of West Bengal.
The petitioner used to procure non ferrous metals from various countries and also from within the country for fulfilling its contracts with D.G.S. & D.
The import of non ferrous metals was under open General licence till June, 30, 1957.
Thereafter, a licensing system was introduced by the Government of India and the petitioner was asked to get their quotas fixed on the basis of their past imports.
On April 2, 1958, the Government of India promulgated the Non ferrous Metals Control Order, 1958 by virtue of which free sale of copper was banned.
Any import of copper by the licence holders was to be distributed under the directions of the Controller of Non ferrous metals.
Under the Non ferrous Metals Control Order, 1958, and also under the Import Trade Regulations, the established importers were not free to sell the metals imported by them against their quota licences even to D.G.S.& D. The petitioner, in order to effect supplies to D.G.S. & D. had to obtain additional import licence.
The petitioner obtained quota licences for import of non ferrous metals for the licensing periods upto April 1964, March 1965; but the imports were to be distributed only under the directions of the Controller.
On Sept. 14, 1965, the Govt.
of India promulgated the Scarce Industrial Materials Control Order 1965, under the Defence of India Rules.
Stocks of non ferrous metals including incoming imports were thus frozen.
The Non ferrous Metals Control Order 1958 and the Scarce Industrial Materials Control Order 1965 were both repealed.
The Government of India in placing orders with the petitioner used to grant import licences in terms of the contract.
The petitioner had been importing and supplying non ferrous metals to respondents 1,2 and 3 during the last 19 years.
Respondent No. 2 had agreed to pay and was paying the Central Sales Tax and/or West Bengal Sales Tax, whichever was applicable to the petitioners in terms of the contract.
In 1966, the Supreme Court held in K. G. khosla and Co. vs Deputy Commissioner of Commercial tax ; that the sale by Khosla & Co. to DGS & D in India of axle box bodies manufactured in Belgium by their principal, occasioned the movement of goods in the course of import and sales tax was not exigible on the transaction in view of Sec.
5(2) of the , and article 286 of the Constitution.
Thereafter, respondent No. 2 issued an order to respondent No. 4 that Sales Tax should not be allowed in respect of supply of stores which had been specifically 620 imported against contracts placed by D.G.S. & D. Respondent No. 4, acting in terms of the order, deducted Rs. 60,780/ being the Sales Tax already paid from the pending bills of the petitioner and also threatened to recover more than Rs. 2 lakhs being the amount paid by respondent No. 2 as Sales Tax in respect of contracts which had already been executed.
The petitioner, thereafter, approached the Sales Tax Authorities in W. Bengal and filed revised returns in the pending assessments and claimed refund of taxes paid on the sales, treating the sales as having been made in the course of import on the basis of the judgment in Khosla 's case.
The West Bengal Sales Tax Authorities took the view that there were two sales one, to the petitioner by the foreign seller and the other, by the petitioner to D.G.S. & D. and that there was no privity of contract between D.G.S. & D. and the foreign sellers, that the petitioner under the import licences granted to it, was entitled to import the goods from any person or country and that the import licences issued as against the contracts with the Directorate General of Supplies & Disposals imposed ,no obligation on the petitioner to supply the goods to the D.G.S. & D after they had been imported, they therefore, held that tax was exigible on the sales by.
the petitioner to the D.G.S. & D.
The questions which arose for consideration were: (i) whether on the basis of the order, respondent No.4 was entitled to deduct Rs. 60,780 from the amount due to the petitioner and (ii) Whether the claim of the respondent to recover a further sum of more than Rs. 2 lakhs from the petitioner was justified.
The petitioner contended that the sales which the Company made to D.G.S. & D. were not the sales which occasioned movement of any goods in the course of import as those sales were separate and distinct from the contracts of purchase made by the Company with the foreign sellers which alone occasioned the movement of goods in the course of import, tax was exigible upon the sales by the petitioner to D.G.S & D. and therefore, the decision in Khosla 's Case has no application to the facts here.
Allowing the writ petitions, HELD : (i) article 286(1) (b) provided that no law of a State shall impose a tax on the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of the import or export of the goods in India.
A sale by export involves a series of integrated activities commencing from the agreement of sale with a foreign buyer and ending with the delivery of the goods to a common carrier for transport out of the country by land or sea and that such a sale cannot be dissociated from the export without which it cannot be effectuated, and the sale or resultant export from parts of a single transaction of these two integrated activities which together constituted an export sale, whichever occurs first can well be regarded as taking place in the course of the other.
[623H] State of Travancore Cochin and Ors.
vs The Bombay Co. Ltd. ; 12, referred to (ii) The words, 'Integrated activities ' were used in the earlier case to denote that such a sale ' (i.e. a sale which occasions the export) ' cannot be dissociated from the export without which it cannot be effectuated, and the sale and the resultant export form parts of a single transaction ', and in that case the sale and the export were said to be integrated.
[624B] per Patanjali Sastri C.J. in State of Travancore Cochin and Ors.
vs Shamugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory and Ors. ; referred to .
(iii) There was no definition of the expression 'in the course of import ' before the Sixth Amendment of the Constitution.
Later Parliament gave legislative meaning to the expression in section 5(2, of the which provides that a sale or purchase of goods in the course of the import into India, shall be deemed to take place if the sale or purchase either occasions such import or is effected by a transfer of documents of title before the goods have crossed the customs frontiers of India.
[624C] 621 (iv) In the present case, the petitioner as principal made the sale to the D.G.S. & D. 'For effecting the sales, the petitioner had to purchase goods from foreign sellers and it was these purchases from the foreign sellers which occasioned the movement of goods in the course of imports.
In other words, the movement of goods was occasioned by the contracts for the purchase, which the petitioner entered into with the foreign sellers.
No movement of goods in the course of import took place in pursuance to the contracts of sales made by the petitioner with the D.G.S. & D. The petitioner 's sales to D.G.S. & D. were distinct and separate from his purchases from foreign sellers.
There was no privity of contract between the D.G.S. & D. and the foreign sellers.
The foreign sellers did not enter into a contract by themselves or through the agency of the petitioner to the D.G.S.& D. and the movement of goods through foreign countries was not occasioned on account of the sales by the petitioner to D.G.S. & D.
Even if the contracts between the petitioner and the D.G.S. & D. envisaged the import of goods, and their supply to the D.G.S. & D. from out of the goods imported, it did not follow that the movement of the goods in the course of import was occasioned by the contracts of sale by the petitioner with the D.G.S. & D.
The present case, therefore, cannot be distinguished from the decision in the Coffee Board 's case though that case was concerned with the question when a sale occasioned the movement of goods in the course of export.
The order issued by respondent No. 2, was, therefore, quashed.
, [627E 628E]
