The match industry in India has grown over the decades.
From the point of view of manufacturing techniques the safety match industry comprises of two distinct categories: the machanised sector occupied by a few big manufacturers and the non mechanised sector comprising varying sizes of production units.
The Government classified the safety match manufacturers into four categories depending on the quantity turn out and other relevant factors.
But the Tariff commission recommended the abolition of sub classification for the purpose of levying excise duty and suggested separate scales of excise duty to be levied for four classes of units, namely, A, D, C and D. Based on these recommendations the slab system of excise duty was abandoned by the Government and the category wise rate was adopted.
As a result of the adoption of the differential duty scheme the advantages offered to the 'C ' group went to the 'B ' group which in turn resulted in fall in production.
It also generated pseudo C category producers from out of the erstwhile B category which ultimately eliminated C category producers.
The Government, therefore, withdrew the tax concession to C category and equated it with B category.
The Government of India had from time to time issued notifications under section 37 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
The notification issued in 1967 levied excise duty on the basis of manufacture of matches of which "any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power".
As a result of this notification the B and C categories of old were now treated equally.
The change in classification of the manufacturers was based on the use of power which in turn had a rational relation to the techniques and processes of production and their ability to bear the burden of the levy.
This was done on the basis of recommendations of the Central Excise Re organisation Committee.
The High Court refused to strike down the notification.
it was contended in this Court that this unsocialistic step had left the small producers in the cold and virtually compelled them to retire from the industry and is thus discriminatory.
Dismissing the appeals to this Court, HELD This is a criticism of legislative judgment, not a ground of judicial review.
The Court is being invited to compel the legislative and executive wings to classify but from the judicial inspection tower the court may only search for arbitrary and irrational classification and its obverse, namely, capricious uniformity of treatment where a crying dissimilarity exists in reality.
Unconstitutionality and not unwisdom of a legislation is the narrow area of judicial review.
[129 E] The question of classification is primarily for legislative judgment and ordinarily does not become a judicial question.
The power to classify being extremely broad and based on diverse considerations of executive pragmatism the judicature cannot rush in where even the legislature warily treads.
All these operational restraints on judicial power must weigh more emphatically where the subject is taxation.
[130 E] It is equally well settled that merely because there is room for classification it does not follow that legislation without classification is always unconstitutional.
The court cannot strike down a law because it has not made the classification which commends to the court as proper.
Nor can the legislative power be said to have been unconstitutionally exercised because within the class a sub classification was reasonable but has not been made.
[130 H] 122 In the present cage, a pertinent principle of differentiation, which is visibly linked to production prowess, has been adopted in the broad classification of power users .and manual manufacturers.
It is irrational to castigate this basis as unreal.
[131 C] K.T. Moopil Nair vs State of Kerala, ; , State of Kerala vs Haji K. Hail Kutty Naha.
As Nos 1052 etc.
of 1968; judgment dated August 13, 1968 and Khandige Sham Bhat vs The Agricultural Income Tax Officer, ; , 817, followed.
