Since the matters are similar, the facts of W.P. No. 1679 of 1973 are as follows: The petitioner was arrested section 3, sub section (1) and (2) of the .
The grounds of detention were that the petitioner, on 3 7 72, alongwith his associates kept concealed 20 bundles of Telegraph copper wire in his court yard under ground with a view to dispose the same at an opportune moment.
The said telegraph wire were recovered on 3 7 72 on the basis of the confession made by his associates.
The petitioner was, therefore, arrested because he was acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community.
The detention order was challenged on various grounds : (i) That the counter affidavit on behalf of the State of West Bengal was sworn by the Deputy Secretary and not by the District Magistrate, on the basis of whose subjective satisfaction the detention order was made and therefore, it was illegal.
(ii)From the counter affidavit, it was clear that there were "reliable informations" and material other than the solitary ground of detention communicated to the detenu and so, the detenu was unable to make an.
effective representation.
Therefore, the detention order was violative of clause (5) of article "I of the Constitution of India etc.
Allowing the petitions, HELD : (1) When a Rule Nisi is issued in a habeas corpus petition, it is incumbent upon the State to satisfy the court that the detention of the petitioner was legal and in conformity not only with the mandatory provisions of .he Act, but is also in accord with the requirements of Cl.
(5) of article 22 of the Constitution.
[262 EJ Niranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 2215, referred to.
(2)Since the Court is precluded from testing the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority by objective standards, it is all the more desirable that in response to the Rule Nisi, the counter affidavit on behalf of the State should be sworn to by the District Magistrate or the authority on whose subjective satisfaction the detention order was made.
If for sufficient reason shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the affidavit of the person who passed the detention order could not be furnished, the counter affidavit should be sworn by some responsible officer who personally dealt with the case in the Govt.
Secretariat etc.
[262 E F] In the present case, the deponent did not swear that he had at any relevant time personally dealt with the case of the detenu and secondly, the explanation given for not furnishing the affidavit of the District Magistrate due to his transfer from that District, was far from satisfactory.
Ranjit Dam vs State of West Bengal A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 1753 and J. N. Roy vs State of West Bengal A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 2143 referred to.
259 (3)The failure to furnish the counter affidavit of the Magistrate who passedthe order of detention is an impropriety.
However, in most cases, it mayDot be of much consequence; but in a few cases, for instance.
where mala fides or extraneous considerations are attributed to the detaining authority, it may, taken in conjunction with other circumstances, assume the shape of a serious infirmity.
[263 C] (4)In the counter affidavit, it was mentioned that the detenu was a "veteran copper wire stealer" and there were "reliable information" before the District Magistrate.
Those reliable information were withheld.
The words . veteran copper wire stealer" also implied a long course of repetitive, thievery of copper wire, it is manifest that but for those "reliable information" showing that the detenu was repeatedly and habitually stealing copper wire, the District Magistrate might not have passed the detention order in question.
Further, from the 'Criminal Biography, supplied by the State, it was clear that all material particulars of the ground of detention necessary to enable the detenu to make an effective representation were not communicated to the detenu.
Hence, the impugned order of detention is violative of article 22(5) of the Constitution and therefore, liable to be quashed.
Similarly, the other two petitions were also allowed on the ground that material particulars were not communicated to the detenues and therefore, the detentions were illegal.
[263 G 264 C]
