Section 20(1) of the Food Adulteration Act, 1954, as it stood before its amendment by Act 49 of 1964 provided that no prosecution for an offence under the Act shall be instituted except by or with the written consent of the State Government or a local authority or a person authorised in this behalf by the State Government or a local authority.
On the written consent of the Superintendent of Police, Vigilance, who was authorised to give written consent for instituting prosecutions for offences, under the Act, the appellant was prosecuted and convicted for an offence under section 16 (1) (a) of the Act.
It was contended on his behalf that while it was permissible under the section, after its amendment by Act 49 of 1964, to issue such general notification authorising a person to give written consent, under the section as it stood before the amendment, the authority should be in respect of a specified individual offence.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : There is nothing in the language of the section which makes it imperative to specify a particular offence in the order authorising a person to give consent to the institution of prosecution.
The legislature had a two fold object in enacting section 20 (1) (a) to prevent institution of prosecutions for offences under the Act except with the written consent of the authorities mentioned in the section, and (b) to relieve the State Government or local authority of the necessity of applying its mind and dealing with each individual case of prosecution under the Act.
In case the authority conferred by the State Government or local authority could not be general but had to relate to an individual offence the very purpose of the section would be defeated, for then, it would become necessary for the State Government or local authority fast to authorise a person to give written consent in respect of an individual case and thereafter for the person authorised to give written consent, so that what could be done in one step by the State Government or local authority would have to be done in two steps.
The words 'in this behalf ' indicate that the authority conferred by the State Government or local authority upon a person should relate to the giving of written consent for the institution of prosecution for offences under the Act and not that the authority conferred must relate to some specified individual offence.
The amended section also contains those words, and must obviously carry the same meaning.
If the interpretation sought to be placed upon these words is accepted no general authority can be conferred even under section 20(1) even as amended , and the words 'by general or special order ' in the amended section would become meaningless and lose all significance.
The amendment bad only made more clear what was already contemplated by the section.
[659G 661B] Corporation of Madras vs Arumagham.
AJ.R. 1966.
Madras 194, Laxman Sitaram Pai & Anr.
vs The State of Mysore, A.I.R. and Public Prosecutor vs Thatha Rao & Ors., A.I.R. 1968 A.P. 17, approved.
