The respondent 's father, W, who owned the suit property died in 1933.
His widow, who succeeded to the estate, gifted the property to her daughter, the respondent.
The appellants filed a suit as reversioners of W questioning the gift.
The "it 'as decreed and the decree was confirmed on appeal.
After coming into force of the on 17 6 1956, the widow again made a gift of the same, lands to the respondent.
She died in 1963.
The appellants then filed the suit, out of which this appeal arose, for possession of the lands.
alleging that the second gift was void.
The trial court decreed their suit but on appeal the respondent succeeded in the first Appellate Court as well as in the High Court on second appeal.
On appeal by special leave to this Court, Dismissing the appeal, HELD (1) Following the decisions of the Privy Council in Moniram Kolita vs Keri Kolitani, I.L.R. 5 Calcutta 776 at 789 and Duni Chand vs Anar Kali, A.I.R. 1946 P.C. 173, (infra) the words "dying intestate in Sec.
8 of the Act must be interpreted as merely meaning "in the case of intestacy of a Hindu male" and to place this interpretation on the Act is not to give retrospective effect to its provisions.
The reference is only to the fact of 'intestacy.
The material point of time is the date when the succession opens, namely, the death of the widow.
Thus this propositions follow (i) Succession opens on the death of the limited owner, and (ii) the law then in force would govern the succession.
[532D G] Moniram Kolita vs Keri Kolitani, I.L.R. 5, Calcutta 776 789 and Duni Chand vs Anar Kali, A.I.R. 1946 P.C. 173, followed.
Eramma vs Verritpatina, , explained and distinguished.
Banso vs Charan Singh, A.I.R. 1961, Punjab 45 and Kuldip Sing vs Karnail Singh, A.I.R. 1961, Punjab, 573, approved.
Kempiah vs Giriganima, A.I.R. , overruled.
Renuka Bala vs Aswini Kumar A.I.R. 1961, Patna 498 and Sam pathkumari N. Lakshmi Ammal, A.I.R. 1963 Madras, 50, distinguished.
(ii)Succession to W 's estate in the present cage opened when his widow died and it would have to be decided on the basis that W died in 1963 when his widow died.
in that case succession to his estate would have to be decided on the basis of section 8 of the .
The accepted position under the Hindu law is that where a limited owner succeeds to an estate the succession to the estate on her death will have to be decided on the basis that the last full owner died on that day.
If, therefore, succession opens and is to be decided on the basis of the last full owner dying on the date of the death of the limited owner it is only the law in force at the time of the death of the limited owner that should govern the case.
To hold that the old Hindu law applies to such a case is to allow your imagination to boggle.
[533 A C, G H] Eastend Dwellings Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council, , 132, per Lord Acsquit and Venka tachalam vs Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co. Ltd., ; , referred to.
The reversioners ' right being a mere spes successions there is no question of impairing existing rights by adopting the interpretation we place on section 8 apart from 529 the fact that it does not amount to giving retrospective operation to section 8.
Of course,, if the property had already vested in a person under the old Hindu Law, it cannot be divested.
We can see no reason either in principle or on authority why the principle consistently followed under the earlier Hindu law that on the death of the limited owner succession opens and would be decided on the basis that the last male owner died on that day, should not apply even after coming into force of the Act.
In the view we have taken it is section 8 of the Act that applies and not the Customary Law.[534C D,E F.535G]
