On September 1, 1940, the basic date under the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, the properties in dispute were parts of a larger entity comprised in a single lease.
In March 1948, the respondent took a fresh lease of the properties in dispute, Thereafter, the respondent filed applications in the court of Small Causes for fixation of standard rent on the basis of apportionment.
The trial court dismissed the applications holding that the premises, on account of structural alterations, had undergone such a change that they could no longer be identified with the property that existed in September 1940; that the mode of determining the rent by apportionment was not available to the tenant; and that there was no sufficient material for ascertaining the standard ' rent in any other way.
This order was set aside in revision and the case was remanded to the trial court.
After remand, the trial court held that except with respect to three items of the premises in dispute, which were new Structures, there was no change of identity in the rest of the properties; that the new structures belonged to the respondent who was consequently liable to pay rent only for the land underneath; and on that basis, applying the principle of apportionment, fixed the standard rent.
With respect to one item the trial court took into consideration the investment made by the landlord inclusive of the, cost of structures, estimated the value of the land underneath as in 1940, and fixed the standard rent on that basis.
In revision it was held that the ownership of the three new structures also vested in the appellant, that he was entitled to get a fair return on that investment also and that the value of the land should be taken as in 1948 and not in 1940, and the standard rent was fixed on that basis.
Further revisions to the High Court were dismissed with some arithmetical corrections.
In appeal to this Court, HELD : The principle of apportionment is applicable to the fixation of standard rent of the premises in dispute and the principle had been rightly invoked and applied.
[584 F G] (a) One of the primary objects of the Act is to curb exaction of extortionate rent.
Section II (1) empowers the Court to fix the standard rent at such amount, as having regard to the provisions of the Act and the circumstances of the case, the Court deems just, If on the basic date the premises were not let out separately but were a part of the subject matter of a larger demise then section 11(1)(c) comes into operation.
If the standard rent of a whole was a specific amount it stands to reason that the standard rent of a part or sub division of the whole should not ordinarily exceed that amount.
Therefore, if in the circumstances of a given case the court feels that for securing the ends of justice and giving effect to the provisions and policy of the Act it is reasonably necessary and feasible to work out the standard rent by apportionment, it can legitimately do so.
The language of the Act consistently with its scheme and in built policy is elastic enough to permit the fixation of standard rent on apportionment basis.
At the same time, caution and circumspection are necessary in applying the principle to the particular circumstances of a case.
For example, if after the material date, the landlord has made investments and improvements in the premises it will be just and reasonable to take that factor also into account and give him a fair return on such investment.
Similarly, in apportioning the rent, the Court must also consider other relevant circumstances and advantages enjoyed by the tenant of the premises of which the standard rent is in question as compared with the rest 578 of the Property in which it is comprised.
Further,where after the basic date the premises completely changed their identity, apportionment as a method of determining just standard rent loses its efficacy and may be abandoned altogether.[583E 585C] Narayanlal Bansilal vs Venkatrao Anant Rai 67 Bom.
L.R. 352, Bainbridge vs Congdon and Fox vs Bishop of Chester ; at 655 referred to.
Dhanrajgirji Naraingirji vs W. G. Ward (1925) 27, Bom.
L.R. 877 and Bata Shoe & Co. Ltd. vs Narayan Das Mullick and Ors.
not approved.
(b)(1) The findings of the trial court before remand had been set aside in the order of remand, and there is nothing wrong or unfair or untenable in the method adopted by the lower courts after remand which would warrant interference by this Court in exercise of special jurisdiction under article 136 of the Constitution.
[587D G] (ii) The question whether certain property has changed its identity after the basic date is largely one of fact.
The factual conclusions arrived at by the revisional court and High Court are not shown to be perverse or manifestly unjust" It was with regard to the unchanged old properties that the High Court and the Revisional Court mainly adopted the method of apportionment.
Even so, they allowed the landlord a fair return over the amount invested by him towards the cost of flooring, ceiling and other fixtures.
since the rent of the old unchanged premises was fixed mainly on apportionment basis, the courts rightly did not think it necessary to take the value of their sites separately into computation in fixing the standard rent.
[588 B D] (iii) As regards the new structures the courts below, in capitalising their value did take into account the value of the land and took the market value of the land as in the year 1948.
[588B]
