The deceased, who was at the material time in the employment of the State of Rajasthan in the Public Department, was required to proceed from his office at Bhilwara to Banswara, in connection with famine relief work undertaken by the department.
For that purpose, he boarded a truck owned by the department from Bhilwara on May 19, 1952 with six others.
Throughout the journey the radiator of the truck was getting heated frequently and the driver was pouring water into it after every 6 or 7 miles of journey.
The truck took nine hours to travel the distance or seventy miles.
After having travelled four miles from Peragraph, the engine of the truck caught fire.
As soon as the fire was seen, the driver cautioned the occupants to jump out of the truck.
Consequently, they did so, The deceased struck against a stone lying by the side of the road and died instantaneously.
The widow of the deceased brought a suit for damages against the State of Rajasthan under the provisions of the Act.
The plaintiff alleged, inter alia, that it was on account of the negligence of the driver of the truck that a truck which was notroad worthy was put on the road and that it caught fire which led to the death of her husband and that the State was liable for the negligence of its employee in the course of his employment.
The plaint also alleged that the deceased had left behind him his widow namely, the plaintiff, two minor sons, one minor daughter and his parents.
The plaintiff claimed damages to the tune of Rs. 20,000/ and prayed for a decree for that amount.
The state resisted the claim denying negligence of the driver and pleading sovereign immunity.
The trial Court relied on the maxim res ipsa loquitur, found that in putting the truck on the road the driver was negligent as the truck was not road worthy and since the driver was negligent, it held that the State was vicariously liable for his act.
The court assessed the damages at Rs. 14,760/ and granted a decree for the amount to the plaintiff.
Against this decree the state appealed to the High Court on the evidence on record, the High Court held that the principle of res ipsa loquitur had no, application to the facts of the case.
Accordingly, the High Court allowed the appeal.
On appeal by special leave to this Court.
HELD : (1) Generally speaking an ordinary road worthy vehicle would not catch fire.
The driver was negligent in putting the vehicle on the road.
From the evidence, it is clear that the radiator was getting heated frequently and that the driver was pouring water in the radiator after every 6 or 7 miles of journey.
The vehicle took 9 hours to cover the distance of 70 miles between Chittorgarh and Paragraph The fact that normally a motor vehicle would not catch fire if its mechanism is in order would indicate that there was some defect in it.
The Distt.
Judge found on the basis of evidence of witnesses that the driver knew about this defective condition of the truck when he started from Bhilwara.
[554D F] It is clear that the driver was in management of the vehicle and the accident is such that it does not happen in the ordinary course of things.
There is no evidence as to how the truck caught fire.
There was no explanation by the defendant about it. ' It was a matter within the exclusive knowledge of the defendant.
It was not, possible for the plaintiff to give any evidence as to the cause of the accident.
these circumstances, the maxim ipsa loquitur is attracted.
[514F G] 550 The maxim does not embody many rule of substantive law nor a rule of evidence.
It is perhaps not a rule of any kind but simply a caption to an arguments on the evidence.
The maxim is only a convenient label to apply to a set of circums tances, in which the plaintiff proves a case so as to call for a rebuttal from the defendant, without having to allege any specific act or omission on the part of the defendant.
Its principal function is to prevent injustice which would result if a plaintiff were invariably compelled to prove the precise cause of the accident and 'the dependent responsible for it, even when the facts bearing on the matter are at the outset unknown to him and often within the knowledge of the defendant.
The maxim is based on commonsense and its purpose is to do justice when the facts bearing on causation and on care exercised by the defendant are at the outset unknown to the plaintiff and are or ought to be within the knowledge of the defendant.
[k52F 553 C] The plaintiff merely proves a result, not any particular act or omission producing the result.
If the result, in circumstances which he proves it makes it more probable than not that it was caused by the negligence of the defendant, the doctrine of res ipsa loquacious is said to apply, and the plaintiff will be entitled to succeed unless the defendant by evidence rebuts that probability.
Res display loquitur is an immensely important vehicle for importing strict liability into negligence cases.[583 C D, 584 F] Scott.
vs London & St. Catherine Docks ; , 601, (1923) section C. (HL) 43, Barkway vs South Wales Transport [1950]1 All E.R. 392, Jones vs Great Western, , referred to.
(11)As the law stands today, it is not possible to say that famine relief work is :.it sovereign function of the State as it has been traditionally understood.
It is a work which can be and is being undertaken by private individuals.
There is nothing ,peculiar about it so that it might be predicated that the State alone can legitimately undertake the work.
[555 E F] Kasturilal vs State of Uttar Pradesh [1965] 1 S.C,.
R. 375, referred to.
Quaere : (a) Whether the Immunity of the State for injuries on its citizens committed in the exercise of what are called sovereign functions has any moral justification today; (b) whether there is any rational dividing line between the so called sovereign and proprietary commercial functions for determining the liability of the state.
1555 B C, E] Sensable : The modern sovereign immunity doctrine which is based on the ground that there can be no legal right as against the authority that makes the law on which the right depends, for exempting the sovereign from suit is neither logical nor practical.
[555 D E].
