The trial court had convicted the respondents u/S. 302/34 I.P.C. and section 307/34 I.P.c.
for the death of two persons G&Z.
The occurrence took place during the night between 18th & 19th June, 1969.
The victims used to cultivate jointly with others.
The respondents and the two acquitted accused persons were brothers who lived in the same village.
It is said that there was enmity between the deceased persons and the respondents.
The prosecution case was that on the of 18th June 1969, the respondents with two others attacked G&Z and as result G died but Z survived.
The trial court had convicted the respondents but the High Court acquitted them.
I On appeal by the State, the main question was whether the three alleged eye witnesses, P.W.3, P.W.4 & P.W.5 who were related to each other and the victims could be relied upon, when corroborated by other facts and circumstances.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) It is a principle, common to all criminal appeals by special leave that this Court will refrain from substituting its own views about the appreciation of evidence if the judgment of the High Court is based on one of two alternative views each of which was reasonably open to the High Court to accept.
If however, the High Courts approach is vitiated by some basically erroneous assumptions, or it adopts reasoning which, on the face of it is unsound, it may become the duty of this Court, to prevent a miscarriage of justice and to interfere with an order whether it be of conviction or of acquittal.[729F] (2) In the present case, the trial court had accepted the testimony of 3 eye witnesses, despite the fact that they are relations of the victims.
It has been repeatedly held by this Court that the mere fact that witness is related to the victim could not be a good enough ground for rejecting his testimony although it may be a ground for scrutinizing his evidence more critically and carefully where facts and circumstances disclose that only relations have been produced and others, presumably independent witness", who were available, were not produced.
[729 H] The ordinary presumption is that a witness speaking under an oath Is truthful unless and until he is shown to be unreliable or untruthful.
In any particular respect, witnesses solemnly deposing on oath in the witness box during a trial upon a grave charge of murder, must be presumed to act with a full sense of responsibility of the consequences of what they state.
it may be that what they say is so ' very unlikely or unreasonable that it is safer not to act upon it or even to disbelieve them.
[730 F] In the present case, the evidence of Z who became unconscious due to fatal blows by the assailants can be accepted when his evidence is strongly corroborated by medical and other evidence. 'Therefore, the present case is a fit case where this court will interefere.
