In 1953, defendant 1 executed on behalf of himself and his minor son, defendant 2, a deed of mortgage in favour of the plaintiff.
Deft. 3 is also a son of deft.
I who was born after the mortgage deed.
In 1956, a regd.
deed of partition was executed amongst the defendants under which the mortgaged property was allotted to the share of defts 2 & 3.
Thereafter, the mortgagee filed a civil.
suit to enforce the mortgage and the trial court passed a preliminary decree for sale of deft.
1 's interest in the mortgaged property.
It held that part of the consideration for the mortgage was not supported by legal necessity and the balance of the debt incurred was tainted with immorality.
Therefore, the debt was held not binding on the one half share of deft.
2 in the mortgaged property.
As regards the partition, the trial court held that it was a colourable transaction effected to delay or defeat the creditors.
Being aggrieved, pltf.
filed an appeal (40/59) in the High Court.
Deft. 1 & 2 against whom the suit was dismissed, also filed an appeal (72/59) against the finding of the trial court that the partition was a colourable transaction.
During the pendency of these 2 appeals, the preliminary decree was made final by the trial court and in 1960, the plaintiff purchased with the permission of the court, a joint half share of the mortgaged property in full satisfaction of his decree.
Thereafter, the auction sale was confirmed and the plaintiff was put in joint possession of the property.
Thereafter, the appeals filed by the) plaintiff and defendants 2 and 3 came up for hearing and while the appeals were part hard, defts 2 & 3 applied on August 2, 1966 (nearly 7 1/2 years after filing the appeals), applied for amendment of their Memorandum of appeal in first appeal No. 72/59 and sought permission of the High Court to challenge the preliminary decree passed by the trial Court.
The plaintiff opposed that amendment and applied that she did not desire to prosecute first appeal No. 40/59 filed by her.
The High Court did not pass any orders either on the application for amendment or the plaintiff 's appeal, but adjourned the hearing of the appeals for 3 months to enable defendants to pay the amount due under the preliminary decree.
Accordingly the defendants deposited the money towards the satisfaction of the preliminary decree.
After about 2 years, another division bench of the High Court, allowed the amendments of the defendants Memo of Appeal in Appeal No. 72/59 and allowed time to the defendants to pay the deficit Court fee, which they paid.
The High Court, then took the 2 appeals for hearing and dismissed appeal No. 40/59 for non prosecution and confirmed the findings of the trial court in favour of the defendants.
As regards appeal No. 72/59, the High Court held that in view of Order 41, Rule 2 C.P.C., it was open to the defendants.
with the leave of the court, to urge additional grounds without amending the Memo of Appeal and therefore, the objection raised.
by the plaintiff that amendment should not be allowed, cannot be upheld.
The High Court further held that the defendants ' appeal was competent and they had the right to redeem the mortgage.
On the merits, the High Court held that the partition was real and genuine.
In the result, the High Court set aside the preliminary decree as also the final decree and with it the auction 883 sale in favour of the plaintiff.
The High Court passed a fresh preliminary decree under order 34, Rule 4 C.P.C., directing that that the plaintiff was to recover Rs. 34,386/ and 'odd and directed the defendants to pay the entire decretal amount within 6 months of the date of decree.
The plaintiff questions the correctness of the decree before this Court.
The appeal filed by defendants 2 & 3 Was against the finding recorded by the trial court that the partition between deft. 1 and his sons was a colourable transaction.
Therefore, it was clear that the appeal filed by defts.
2 & 3 was directed originally not against any part of the preliminary decree but against a mere finding recorded by the trial court that the partition was not genuine.
Before this Court, the main question was whether that appeal was maintainable and secondly, whether it was proper for the High Court to allow the amendment of the Memo of appeal after 7 1/2 years without good cause shown and Without any application for condonation of delay.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (i) There is a basic distinction between the right of suit and the right of appeal.
There is an inherent right in every person to bring a suit of at civil nature, but the right of appeal inheres in no one and therefore an appeal for its maintainability must have the clear authority of law.
The various provisions in the C.P.C. show that under the Code, an appeal lies only as against a decree or as against an order passed under rates from which an appeal is expressly allowed by Order 43, Rule 1.
No appeal can lie against a mere finding for the simple reason that the Codes does not provide for any such appeal.
Therefore, the first appeal filed by.
defendants 2 and 3 in the High Court was not maintainable as it was directed against a mere finding recorded by the trial court.
[886 D H] (ii) The High Court should not have allowed the amendment of the Menlo of Appeal particularly when defendants 2 & 3 had neither explained the long delay nor sought its condonation.
Defendants 2 & 3 were not denied by the preliminary decree the right to pay the decretal amount and the two defendants could even have applied under order 21, Rule 89 for setting aside the sale in favour of the appellant; but they failed to do so.
The preliminary decree had remained unchallenged since September, 1958 and by lapse of time a valuable right had accrued in favour of the decree holder.
Therefore, to allow the amendment after such a long time without a good cause was not a proper exercise of judicial discretion in the circumstances of the case.
[888 D E]
