Under s.14(1) of the Mysore Agriculturists Relief Act 1928 no agricultural land belonging to an agriculturalist shall be attached or sold in execution of any decree or order unless it has been specifically mortgaged for the payment of the debt to which such decree or order relates, The appellant filed a suit on a promissory note executed by the father of the respondents.
There was an attachment before judgment, and after decree was passed, the properties belonging to the family were sold in execution.
The res pondents were born thereafter.
They filed a suit contending that the sale of the properties in execution of the appellant 's decree was void ab initio under the Act.
The trial Court decreed the suit but the first appellate court allowed the appeal on the ground that as the respondents were not born on the date of the sale they could not challenge its validity.
The High Court restored the judg ment of the trial court.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
HELD ; (1) The attachment before judgment was not valid and therefore the sale in pursuance of that attachment was void.
The suit filed by the appellant was not on the foot of a mortgage and therefore the sale in execution of the appellant 's decree is against the provisions of section 14(1).
The contention that section 14(2) does no more than lay down the same procedure as 0.
38, C.P.C., and therefore the attachment is valid, is not correct.
Section 14(2) permits an attachment only in execution of a decree.
[972 B E] (2) The respondents were entitled to file the suit questioning the sale.
A void sale held in execution of a decree confers no title on the auction purchaser.
Therefore the joint family to which the properties belonged did not lose their title, but continued to be owners, and the respondents got a right to the property as soon as they were born by right of birth.
[972 E G] (3) The suit was not barred by res judicata because : (a) to the earlier suits referred to the respondents were not made parties; and (b) those suits were filed in the Munsiff 's court and were therefore not decided by a court of competent jurisdiction as the present Suit was filed in the Subordinate judge 's court.
The respondents were also not representatives of their father as contemplated in section 11, C.P.C. [972 H 973 C]
