The appellants, who are owners of Small Scale Industrial Units, employ mechanised process for decortication of retted coconut husks.
The respondent State issued a notification in July 1973, under r. 114(2) of the Defence of India Rules,, 1971, imposing a total ban on the use of machinery for defibring husks in the district of Trivandrum, Quilon and Alleppey.
The appellants, who were affected by the notification, challenged the validity of the notification.
The High Court dismissed the petition.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended : (1) that section 3(2)(21) of the Defence of India Act does not authorise r. 114; (2) that the formation of opinion by the State Government for the exercise of power under the rule is a justiciable issue, that the court should call for the material on which, the opinion had been formed, and examine it to find out whether a reasonable man or authority could have come to the conclusion that for securing equitable distribution and availability of retted husks at fair prices a regulation or prohibition of the manufacture of fibre by mechanical process was necessary; (3) that the reasons given in the notification imposing a total ban on the use of machinery were not justified; (4) that there was no application of the mind by the authority to any genuine materials or relevant considerations while exercising the power; (5) that section 38 of the Defence of India Act requires that, consonant with the purpose of ensuring the public safety, defence of India and Civil defence, there should be minimum interference by an authority or person, acting in pursuance of the Act with the ordinary avocations of life and enjoyment of property; (6) that the notification offended article 14; and (7) that it violated article 301, of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD : (1) Rule 114 is in complete consonance with the powers conferred, under section 3(2)(21).
[102 B] (2) Where powers are conferred on public authorities to exercise the same when "they are satisfied" or when "it appears to them," or when "in their opinion" a certain State of affairs exists, or when powers enable public authorities to take "such action as they think fit" in relation to a subject matter, the courts will not readily defer to the conclusiveness of an executive authority 's opinion as to the existence of a matter of law or fact upon which the validity of the exercise of the power is predicated.
Administrative decisions in exercise of powers conferred in subjective terms are to be made in good faith and on relevant considerations.
The courts can inquire whether a reasonable man could have come to the decision in question without misdirecting himself on the law or the facts in a material respect.
The standard of reasonableness to which the administrative body is required to conform may range from the court 's opinion of what is reasonable to the criterion of what a reasonable body might have decided; and courts will find out whether conditions precedent to the formation of the opinion have a factual basis.
But the onus of establishing unreasonableness rests upon the person challenging the validity of the acts.
[99 C D. E G] (3) The Committee appointed by the State Government in connection with, the revision of minimum wages in the coir industry reported that when unemployment is acute in the State it is not practicable to encourage mechanisation for fibre production till alternative sources of employment are developed, and 94 recommended that the Government might appoint a separate committee to study the various problems resulting from mechanisation in the industry.
Accordingly, a study group was appointed and that group reported that coir industry brings employment or partial employment to an area where there is chronic unemployment and under employment, and hence, any kind of mechanisation is bound to cause displacement of people.
The study group therefore suggested a composite plan by which the coir industry should be woven into the pattern of area development or regional development which will bring prosperity not only to the coir industry but also to many other ancillary industries and avocations, that the pace of mechanisation should be such that none should be thrown out of employment, and that for those who are displaced alternative work is to be found in the general development that is envisaged.
The State Government found that out of 414 mechanised units in the State, 282 units were in the three districts of Trivandrum, Quilon and Alleppey and that the balance were in the remaining eight districts of the State, and that the use of machinery for the purpose of extraction of fibre from husks in regions other than Trivandrum, Quilon and Alleppey districts had not affected the supply of and availability at fair prices of husks for extraction of fibre in the traditional sector.
The Government therefore, was of the 'opinion that it was necessary to prohibit the use of machinery only in those three districts, but that it was not necessary to prohibit the use of machinery for the production of fibre in the other eight districts.
[100 F 101 H] (4) It is a matter of policy for the State Government to decide to what extent there should be interference in relation to enjoyment of property.
Public interest is of paramount consideration and in, the present case the steps taken were in the larger interests of labour engaged in the coir industry.
The notification was based on a consideration of relevant and useful material. 'The opinion of the State Government could not be said to have been based on any matter extraneous to the scope and purpose of the relevant provisions of the statute.
The materials supporting the subjective satisfaction indicate that there were reasonable grounds for believing that the prescribed state of affairs existed and a course of action was reasonably necessary for the given purpose of equitable distribution of coconut husks at fair prices.
[102 C H] (5) The Government took notice of section 38 of the Defence of India Act and was satisfied about the public interest.
Further, the notification does not interfere with the avocations and enjoyment of property any more than is necessary for the purposes of equitable distribution of husks at fair prices 'to the traditional sector.
[103 A B] (6) The classification, in the circumstances, of the districts.
is reasonable and bears a nexus to the objects sought to be achieved by the impugned notification.
[103 D] (7) The Defence of India Act has been passed by Parliament and the Rules under the Act have legislative sanction.
The restrictions imposed by them are in the interest of general public and are authorised under Article 302, Therefore, there is no violation of article 301.
[103E G] Sadhu Singh vs Delhi Administration ; , Rohtas Industries vs section D. Agarwala ; , and Liversidge v Anderson ; , 228 229, referred to.
ARGUMENTS For the appellants : The Notification Annexure A, is justiciable.
The court is not deprived of jurisdiction to examine the validity of the order.
The grounds mentioned in Annexure A notification are irrelevant and there is no real and proximate connection between the ground given and the object which the Government has in view.
The State Government never applied its mind to the matter and the Notification is malafide in the sense that the statutory power has been exercised for some indirect purpose not connected with the object of the statute or the mischief it seeks to remedy.
(1) Jaichand Lall Sethia vs State of Bengal [1966] Suppl.
S.C.R. 464.
95 It is open to court to enquire whether grounds really existed which would have created that satisfaction on which alone the order could have been made in the mind of a reasonable person.
Though the satisfaction of the Government is subjective and its power is discretionary its exercise depends upon the honest formation of an opinion that in order to secure equitable distribution and availability at fair prices of husks for use for production of fibre in the traditional sector it is necessary to ban production of fibre by machines.
The existence of these circumstances is a condition precedent and must be demonstrable.
It is therefore open to the Court to examine the existence of such circumstances.
The Barium Chemicals Ltd. vs The Company Law Board , 357, Rhotas Industries Ltd. vs section D. Agarwala ; Rose Clutnis vs Papddo Poullous , Ridge vs Baldwin , 73.
There has been no application of the mind to all the relevant factors justifying total ban being imposed with reference to reliable data and materials in issuing the Notification and therefore the action is mala fide.
The action is not an action which is genuinely intended to implement the intention of the Defence of India Act or the rules and is not based on any enquiry or investigation or data made available to the Govt.
before such action was taken.
Nor was it made after any consultation or after reference to materials published by expert bodies like the State Planning Commission, the Coir Board, the Coir Advisory Committee appointed from time to time, nor based upon literature of a reliable nature published by such bodies aforesaid.
That being so, the notification is ultra vires the Defence of India Act and the rules and for a purpose extraneous to the intention of the Defence of India Act.
The purpose for which the notification has been issued is served by the Coconut Husks Control Order, dated 29 9 1973 and the notifications issued under the Order.
The above Order was issued by the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, Act (10 of 1953).
Two Notifications fixing the fair prices of the retted coconut husks were issued by the special officer for coir (Licensing Officer) constituted under cl. 4 of the Kerala Coconut Husks Control Order 1973.
There is no material before the Government to conclude that the price of coconut husks increased only because of mechanisation.
On the basis of section 38, Defence of India Act, the notification is beyond the needs of the situation.
It is obligatory on the Government to have examined the several alternative remedies to make available husks to the traditional sector without banning manufacture of fibre by machines.
The notification contravenes article 301 of the Constitution which guarantees that trade, commerce and inter course throughout the territory of India shall be free.
District Collector of Hyderabad vs M/s. Ibrahim & Co. Article 301 guarantees freedom of trade not only from geographical barriers but also from restrictions imposed on an individual to carry on trade or business, other than a regulatory measure.
; (233).
It is not open to the Parliament to delegate the power under article 302.
The law passed under article 302 has to be in the interest of the public.
There is nothing in the Defence of India Act to indicate that Parliament has imposed restrictions in the interest of public within the meaning of the Article.
If there is no provision in the Act, the power under article 302 cannot be delegated by rules to the Central Government or the State Government.
96 VII.
The Notification banning the machinery of defibering husks is violative of the fundamental rights of the petitioners under article 14.
It is highly discriminatory as its operation is confined to the 3 districts of Trivandrum, Quilon and Alleppey.
Owners of defibering machinery in other Districts are all similarly situated like the petitioners.
For the respondent : (1) Ext.
P. 1 order being issued in exercise of power conferred by law made by Parliament i.e. Defence of India Act 1971 & Defence of India 1971 there can be no violation or infringement of Fundamental Rights and other Constitutional rights.
As a measure of emergency legislation "the words in the opinion of" in Rule 114(2) should be given the same width of meaning as in "satisfied" in Rule 30 Defence of India Rules 1962 as expounded by this Hon 'ble Court in decisions namely. , 469 470. , 718, 719, 740.
These decisions show that the Courts are only entitled to look into the matter which if in terms of the Rule, then Court is bound to stay its hands and that the recital will be accepted in the absence of any inaccuracy.
It is open to the Court to satisfy itself, as to the accuracy of the recital only if the order suffers from any lacunas.
The meaning given to the expression, "the reason to believe" are in the sentence as explained above in the context of emergency although the meaning given to these expressions will be in the sense ruled by this Court in Bariunam, Chemicals case and Rohtas Industries case when these expressions occur in peaceful legislations.
For the Construction of these words in the context of emergency see ; , 718. ; , 132.
; , 122.
; , 128.
, 247.
; , 239, 251 252, 253, 256 257, 263, 239.
wade and Phiulip Constitutional Law, 1970 pp.
631, 632.
Smith Judicial Control and Administrative Action PP.
275, 276.
Waynes Legislative Executive and Judicial Powers 1970 4th Edn p. 213.
Halsbury 's Laws of England 4th Edn.
Vol I, p. 23. ; , 73. , 34 (e to g).
, 967 968 (h to a) at 970 (J) P. 972 (h) p. 973 982 (g h) P. 983 (a).
Assuming that the ratio of Barium Chemicals Case and of Rohtas Case ; is applicable to the notification it is submitted the materials furnished in paras 4 to 9 of the Counter affidavit are sufficient to sustain it.
The machines consume enormous quantity of coconut husks starving out the traditional section.
The owners of machinery are able to corner large quantity of husk at exorbitant pi ices to the detriment of traditional sector because of the large saving in wages resulting from the displacement of labour by mechanisation.
Due Compliance of section 38 is to be presumed.
; ; , 132.
