The appellants who owned Dumpers, Rockers and Tractors claimed that these machines were not liable for registration under section 22 of the Indian and as such were not taxable under section 6 of the Bihar and Orissa Motor Vehicles Taxation Act, 1930.
The trial court held that the machinery were motor vehicles within the meaning of section 2(18) of the and were therefore liable for registration under that Act and so to payment of tax under the Taxation Act.
The High Court held that unless it was shown that the vehicles were of a special type adapted for use only in factories or enclosed premises and incapable of running on any other type of roads or public roads the vehicles were motor vehicles and that the three types not being motor vehicles were not liable for registration under section 22 of the Act nor were they subject to payment of tax under the Taxation Act.
Section 2(c) of ' the Taxation Act adopted the definition of motor vehicle contained in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1914.
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1914 was repealed and replaced by the .
The definition of motor vehicle in section 2(18) of the having been redefined the Taxation Act, by the Orissa Amendment Act 2 of 1940 adopted that definition for the purpose of taxation.
The Orissa Amendment Act, 1943 reenacted provisions of sections 2 to 8 of the Taxation Act as the Amendment Act 2 of 1940 was due to expire.
Section 2(18) of the was amended by Act 100 of 1956.
But there was no corresponding amendment in the definition of section 2(c) of the Taxation Act.
It was contended in this Court that under the definition of motor vehicle as it existed prior to amendment or subsequent thereto dumpers, rockers and tractors were not motor vehicles because they were not adapted to use on the road and (2) the definition of motor vehicle in section 2(c) of the Taxation Act is not a definition by incorporation but only a definition by reference and as such the meaning of motor vehicle for the purpose of section 2(c) of the Taxation Act would be the same as defined from time to time under sections 8(2) to 18 of the .
HELD : Dumpers and rockers though registrable under the are not taxable under the Taxation Act as long as they are working solely within the premises of the respective owners.
So far as the tractairs are concerned they are neither registrable under the nor taxable under the Taxation Act.
[160 F] A motor vehicle which is not "adapted for use" upon roads to which public have no right of access is not a motor vehicle within the meaning of section 2(18) of the Act.
The words "is adapted for use" have the same connotation as "is suitable" or "is fit" for use on the roads.
The meaning of the word adopted" in section 2(18) of the Act is itself indicated in entry 57 of List If of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution which confers powers on the State to tax vehicles whether propelled mechanically or not and uses the words "suitable" in relation to its use on the roads.
The words "adapted for use" must.
therefore, be constructed as "suitable for use".
The words "adapted for use" 139 cannot be larger in their import by including vehicles which are not "suitable for use" on roads.
A perusal of the provisions of the Act would justify the conclusion that it is not necessary for other vehicles registered under the Act to, be also liable for payment of tax under the Taxation Act.
[153 G A; 151 F G] Daley and others vs Hargreaves , MacDonald vs Carmichael , Maddox vs Storer and Burns vs Currell , referred to.
(2) The power of taxation under Entry 57 List II cannot exceed the compensatory nature which must have some nexus with the vehicles using the public roads.
If the vehicles do not use roads notwithstanding that they are registered under the Act they cannot be taxed.
If this be the Purpose and object of the Taxation Act, when the motor vehicle is defined under section 2(c) of the Taxation Act as having the same meaning as in the then the intention of the legislature could not have been anything but to incorporate only the definition in the as it existed in 1943, as if that definition was bodily written into section 2(c) of the Taxation Act.
If the subsequent Orissa Motor Vehicle Taxation (Amendment) Act 1943 incorpo rating the definition of "motor vehicle" referred to the definition of "motor vehicle" under the Act as then existing the effect of this regulative method would amount to an incorporation by reference to the provisions of section 2(18) of the Act in section 2(c) of the Taxation Act.
Any subsequent amendment in the Act or a total repeal of the Act under a fresh legislation on that topic would 'not affect the definition of "motor vehicle" in section 2(c) of the Taxation Act.
[155 B; D E] The use of the word 'has ' in the expression "has the same meaning as in the Motor Vehicle Act, 1939" in section 2(c) of the Act would justify the assumption that the legislature had intended to incorporate the definition under the Act as it then existed and not as it may exist from time to time, [155 F] In re.
Woa 's Estate (1886)31 Ch.
D.607, Clarke vs Bradlaugh (1888)8 Q.B.D. 63, Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindusthan Co operative Insurances Society Ltd. L.R. 58 I.A. 259, State of Bihar vs section K. Ray [1966] Supp.
S.C.R. 259 and Ram Sarup vs Munshi and Others ; , referred to.
The definition of motor vehicle as existing prior to the 1956 amendment of the would alone be applicable as being incorporated in the Taxation Act.
The intention of Parliament for modifying the has no relevance in determining the intention of the Orissa Legislature in enacting the Taxation Act.
The power of taxation is not in the concurrent List but in List It and construed as a taxation measure the ambit of it cannot be extended by mere implication.
It is possible for both the Acts to Co exist even after the definition of "motor vehicle" in the Act has been amended.
[159 B; 158 H] In the instant case there is evidence to show that the dumpers, rockers and tractairs are exclusively used on the premises of the owners.
[159 E] The machines which are the subject matter of these appeals must be working in their respective mining areas.
The mere fact that them is no fence or barbed wire around the leasehold premises is not conclusive.
There is evidence to show that the public are not allowed to go inside without prior permission, there are gates and a check on ingress and egress is kept by guards who also ensure that no unauthorised persons have access to the mining area.
[160 DE]
