Eighteen persons were charged with various offences arising out of five murders.
The trial court found, that there was dispute between the party of the accused and the party of the deceased regarding the right to take water from a tube well; that one of the accused party was appointed as Thokdar to regulate the distribution of water; that on the day of the occurrence the accused party consisting of over 20 armed persons, went to the field and the Thokdar ordered big companions to divert the water from the field of one of the members of the deceased party ; that on an objection being raised by members of the deceased party the accused opened fire as a result of which four persons died instantaneously and a fifth was injured, that the four dead bodies were then dragged to some distance, the injured person was forced to ,walk, the dead bodies were decapitated and limbs severed, the injured person was hacked to death, a fire was it, and the five dead bodies were thrown into the fire; and that the severed heads were carried away by the accused as trophies.
On these findings the trial court convicted nine accused for offences under sections 302 and 201 read With section 149 I. P. C., another accused under section 201 read with section 149 I. P. C., and acquitted the other eight.
On appeal, the High Court, on the basis that the Thokdar could regulate the distribution of water and was entitled to enforce his authority in such manner and by such means as he thought proper, held, that the common object of the assembly was to redivert the water if necessary by use of force and that the Thokdar and his followers had armed themselves with guns and other weapons only for carrying out that object and not for the purpose of committing murder, and that therefore, they did not form an unlawful assembly.
The High Court accepted the evidence of motive and found that the actual number of persons who took part in the incident must have been considerably more than five and that all those who took part in the incident also took part in dragging the dead bodies and in the attempt to do away with the evidence of murder, but convicted only one out of the nine persons convicted by the trial court for murder, and convicted five others for offences under section 201 read with section 149 I. P. C. in the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) Under section 149, every member of an unlawful assembly.
is liable for the offence committed by any member of the assembly in prosecution of its common object.
Such vicarious liability is not limited to the acts done in prosecution of the common object of the assembly, but extends even to acts which the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that common object.
On the findings of the High Court the assembly was undoubtedly an unlawful assembly as provided by section 141, fourth paragraph, I. P. C.
Under the Explanation to g. 141, an assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled may subsequently become an unlawful assembly.
The conclusion is also unavoidable that the members of the assembly knew that the prosecution of even the limited object of the assembly was likely to result in the murder of the members of the opposite party.
If the accused were members of the unlawful assembly and had taken a leading part either in the first or the final stage of the incident they cannot escape their liability for the five murders.
There wag but one unlawful assembly and its members were animated by a unity of purpose.
Whether one did this or that act, there was identity of interest among the members of the unlawful assembly and they were actuated by a common object.
Hence the five accused, who were convicted by the High Court of the offences under section 201 read with section 149 should also be convicted under g. 302 I. P. C. read with, section 149.
[421 H 423 E] 419 (2)As regards sentence, three of them bad taken part in the decapitation and throwing the dismembered bodies into the fire.
They were the more prominent members of the unlawful assembly and without their active participation the assembly could not have achieved its common object.
in respect of them, the sentence of death imposed by the trial Court must, therefore, be restored.
As regards the other two, there was no evidence as to how they were armed and therefore the trial Court was as justified in imposing the lesser sentence and that sentence should be confirmed.
[423 F 424 C] (3)As regards the three others convicted by the trial court and acquitted by the High Court it is possible to take a view different from that of the High Court but that would not justify the setting aside of the High Court 's order of acquittal, when the finding of the High Court could not be said to be perverse or against the weight of evidence.
[424 C E]
