In the island of Bombay certain lands were held on a tenure known as "Foras".
Under section 2 of Bombay Act VI of 1851 the occupants were entitled to hold the lands subject only to the payment of revenue then payable.
Between 1864 and 1867 the Government of India acquired these lands under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act (VI of 1857).
On 22 11 1938 the Governor General sold them to certain persons under whom the present respondents claimed.
In April 1942 the appellant acting under the Bombay City Land Revenue Act (Bombay Act II of 1876) issued notices to the respondents proposing to levy assessment on the lands at the rates mentioned therein.
The respondents thereupon instituted two suits disputing the right of the appellant to assess the lands to revenue.
They contended that under the Foras Land Act the occupants had acquired the right to hold the lands on payment of revenue not exceeding what was then payable, that the right to levy even that assessment was extinguished when the Government acquired the lands under the Land Acquisition Act, that the Governor General having conveyed the lands absolutely under the sale deed dated 22 11 1938 the respondents were entitled to hold them revenue free and that even if revenue was payable it could not exceed what was payable under the Foras Land Act.
Held, (i) that under the Foras Land Act (VI of 1851) the occupants of Foras lands acquired a specific right to hold them on payment of assessment not exceeding what was then payable.
(ii) that the right of the Government to levy assessment was not the subject matter of the land acquisition proceedings and that the effect of those proceedings was only to extinguish the rights of the occupants in the lands and to vest them absolutely in the Government.
(iii) that where there is an absolute sale by the Crown it does not necessarily import that the land is conveyed revenuefree.
The question is one of construction of the grant.
The rule is that a grantee from the Crown gets only what is granted by the 168 1312 deed and nothing passes by implication.
When the grant is embodied in a deed the question ultimately reduces itself to a determination of what was granted thereunder.
Section 3 of the Crown Grants Act (XV of 1895) that "all provisions, restrictions conditions and limitations over shall take effect according to their tenor" does not apply when the question is as to the liability to pay revenue.
(iv)that the Foras tenure became extinguished when the lands were acquired under the Land Acquisition proceedings and it was incapable of coming back to life when the lands were sold on 22 11 1938 and the respondents cannot claim a right to pay assessment only at the rate at which it was payable under the Foras Land Act.
Goswammi Shri Kamala Vahooji vs Collector of Bombay ([1937] L.R. 64 I.A. 334), Shapurji Jivanji vs The Collector of Bombay ([1885] I.L.E. , 488), Naoroji Beramji vs Rogers , Deputy Collector, Calicut Division vs Aiyavu Pillay ([1911] , Dadoba vs Collector of Bombay ([1901] I.L.R. , Thakur Jagannoth Baksh Singh vs The United Provinces ([1946] F.L.J. 88) and Collector of Bombay vs Municipal Corpration of the City of Bombay and others ([1952] S.C.R. 43), referred to.
