The petitioners originally belonged to the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial) in the time scale of Rs. 400 1250.
They had been put in the scale of Rs. 1300 1500.
On the other hand, respondents 3 to 5 were judicial officers in the U.P. in the lower scale of Rs. 300 900.
The next higher scale on being appointed to the post of Additional District Magistrate was Rs. 400 1000.
Prior to 1966, the Union Territory of Delhi for the purposes.
of administration of justice was included within the territorial jurisdiction of the erstwhile Punjab High Court and the Presiding Officers of the courts at Delhi were posted by transfer from the State of Punjab.
There was no separation of executive and judiciary.
In1970, Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 and Delhi Judicial Service Rules1970 were framed under article 309 of the Constitution.
A selection Committee was constituted in accordance with rule 7 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules.
On the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee, appointments of officers by way of initial recruitment to the Delhi Judicial Service were made.
Petitioners 1 and 2 were working as Assistant Sessions Judges at the time of initial constitution of the Delhi Judicial Service while none of the respondents 3 to 5 was appointed as Assistant Sessions Judge in spite of their longer service in the cadre of U.P. Judicial Officers Service.
The petitioners were promoted to the post of Additional District Judges in January and March, 1972.
Respondents 3 to 5 were not considered to have qualified for being promoted as Additional District Judges.
Respondents 3 to 5 were promoted as Additional District Judges in June, 1972 and respondent No. 6 was promoted in June, 1973.
Thus respondents 3 to 6 were promoted to the higher judicial service later on, yet they were made to rank senior to petitioners under rule 8 of the Delhi Higher Judicial Ser vice Rules.
Rule 9 of Delhi Judicial Service Rules provides that initial recruitment to the service would be made from amongst the subordinate Judges and Law Graduate Judicial Magistrates working in the Union Territory of Delhi on de putation from other States as well as members of Civil Judicial Cadres of States whose names might be recommended by their respective State Governments for appointment and members of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Andaman & Nicobar islands who were law graduates.
Rule 11 of Delhi Judicial Service Rules provides that the Selection Committee should arrange the seniority of the candidates recommended by it in accordance with the length of service rendered by them in, the cadre to which they belonged at the time of their initial recruitment the service provided that the interse seniority as already fixed in such cadre shall not be al tered.
Rule 7 of Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules provides that recruitment after the initial recruitment shall be made by promotion from the Delhi Judicial Service and by direct recruitment from the Bar.
It further provides that not more than one third of the substantive posts in the service should be held by direct recruits.
Rules 8 further provides that the interse seniority of members of Delhi Higher Judicial Service promoted to the service shall be the same as in Delhi Judicial Service and that the seniority of Direct Recruits vis a vis Promotees shall be determined on the basis of roaster following the quota system.
The petitioner 's contention was that they should be treated as senior to respondents 3 to 6.
The petitioners contended that rule 9 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules was bad as it was not framed in accordance with Article 234 of them 554.
Constitution and also because it permitted the initial appointment to the Delhi Judicial Service of persons who were not in any judicial service from before.
The petitioners further contended that rule 11 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules is bad as it infringes Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as it equates length of judicial service with the length of non judicial service for the purpose of fixing seniority and thus treats unequals as equals.
Rule 8 of the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules is bad because it fixes the seniority in higher service according to the seniority in the lower one.
The respondents controverted the contention of the petitioners.
In addition the respondent contended that the Writ Petition was not maintainable on the ground of delay.
It was also contended that after the impugned seniority list a further seniority list was published which has not been challenged and that, therefore, the petition ought to be dismissed.
HELD : (i) The relative position of the petitioners and respondents 3 to 6 remains the same in the new seniority list as it was in the impugned seniority list.
The contention of the respondent therefore cannot succeed.
(ii)The question of laches is one of discretion.
There is no lower limit and there is no upper limit.
The rule which says that the court may not enquire into the belated and stale claims is not a rule of law but a rule of practice based on sound and proper exercise of discretion and there is no inviolable rule that when ever there is delay the court must necessarily refuse to entertain the Petition.
Each case must depend upon its own facts.
In the present case, nothing special has happened creating any right in favour of the respondent or no such position has been created the disturbance of which would unsettle the long standing settled matters.
The writ application, therefore, cannot be thrown out on the ground of delay in regard to any of the reliefs, asked for by the petitioners.
[559C; G & A D] (iii)It is difficult to find any trace of invalidity in rule 9 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules.
For the purpose of initial recruitment to the Service officers of the Judicial cadre all the officers although not belonging to the judicial cadre but by and large performing the judicial functions could be put together.
There was no infraction of articles 14 and 16.
Rule 11 of Delhi Judicial Service which provides that the seniority should be determined in accordance with the length of service does not put unequals as equals.
The rule is neither arbitrary nor discriminatory.
Once the Selection Committee found persons belonging to Clause (a) rule 9 suitable for appointment to the service it was under a duty and obligation to arrange the list of suitable persons by placing them in proper Place in the matter of seniority.
Arranging the seniority in accordance with the length of service rendered in judicial cadre to which they belonged at the time of their initial recruitment to the service was perfectly good.
Petitioners cannot have any grievance in that regard.
It was not possible to have a different yardstick.
Taking the length of service for the purpose of fixation of seniority was justified, legal and valid.
For the purpose of fixation of seniority it would have been highly against, and un reasonable to take the date of their initial recruitment to the service as their first appointment.
Nor was it possible to take any other date in between the period of their service in their parent cadre.
It would have been wholly arbitrary.
There was no escape from the POsition that the entire length of service of the two classes of officers had got to be counted for the purpose of determination of their seniority on their initial recruitment to the Delhi Judicial Service.
It was not possible or practical to measure the respective merits for the purpose of seniority with mathematical precision by Barometer but some formula doing largest good to the largest number had to be evolved.
The only reasonable and workable formula which could be evolved was the one engrafted in rule 11.
[561F; 562C H] Kunniathat Thatthuni Moopil Nair vs The State of Kerala and another; , , distinguished.
Jalan Trading Co. (Private Ltd.) vs Mill Mazdoor Union, , distinguished.
(iv)In the instant case, treating the two classes as one for the purpose of initial recruitment and fixation of seniority was reasonable as the classification was one which included all persons who were similarly situated with respect to the purpose of the law.
[563G H] 555 (v)The interse seniority of the members of the Delhi Judicial Service promoted to the higher service would be the same provided the promotion from the lower to the higher service is at the same time.
If a member of Delhi Judicial Service is superseded at the time of recruitment under rule 7 by his junior but gets a chance of promotion later it is obvious that he cannot retain his seniority in the lower rank.
All candidates on appointment to higher service have jot to be on.
probation for a period of 2 years ordinarily and generally they would be confirmed it the end of the said period of 2 years.
Strictly speaking, the Question of determination of interse seniority under rule 8 will crop up at the time of confirmation of the appointee.
The question of seniority therefore has to be determined when the persons appointed either temporarily or on officiating basis are given substantive appointments ' So far as the petitioners and three respondents.
are concerned that time is yet to come.
Two members of the Delhi Judicial Service confirmed in the higher service at the same time will retain their interse seniority as in the lower service but if they are not confirmed at the same time then one who is confirmed earlier will be senior to the one who is confirmed later though they might have been appointed on probation at the same time.
There are no rules prescribing the mode of determination of interse seniority of temporary appointees or permitting them to count their officiation in the temporary appointments for the purpose of their seniority on their being appointed substantively.
The attack on the constitutionality of rule 8 is obliterated in view of the construction placed by this Court.
In the absence of such an interpretation rule 8 would be discriminatory and violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
With the aid of well established connons of interpretation.
we see no difficulty in saving the constitutionality of the rule by interpreting it in a reasonable sensible and just manner.
[566BC; FH] (vi)The appointment of a Government servant to a permanent post may be.
substantive or on probation or on officiating basis.
An appointment to officiatein a permanent post is usually made when the incumbent substantively holding, that post is on leave or when the permanent post is vacant and no substantive appointment has yet been made to that post.
Such an officiating appointment comes to an end on the return of the incumbent substantively holding post from leavein the former case or on the substantive appointment.
In the instant case due to justifiable reasons the appointment of respondents 3 and 4 substantively to 14th and 15th vacancies was deferred and the petitioner No. 1 was made to officiation in a temporary capacity against the substantive vacancy.
Such an officiation came to an end on the substantive apppointment of either of respondent No. 3 or 4.
[569A C]
