The assessee collected sales tax from the purchaser but did not pay the collections to the State Government alleging that the sale was interstate sale.
The Income Tax Officer treated the sales tax as income of the assessee.
The assessee claimed that the sales tax realised from the purchaser did not form part of the sale price of the goods and as such did not constitute taxable receipt.
The Income tax Officer held that the sales tax formed part of the consideration for the sales and, therefore, the accumulation on that account represented the assessee 's income.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner also rejected the contention of the assessee that the sales tax realised was not part of the taxable receipt of the assessee.
The Appellate Tribunal held that where a dealer collected sales tax under the provisions of the Orissa Sales tax Act the amount of tax did not form part of the sale price and the dealer did not acquire any beneficial interest in that amount and that the failure of the assessee to deposit the amount with the Government could not transform the character of that amount.
The High Court held that if a validly eligible tax was realised by a trader which had been utilised in his business the tax so realised could not form part of the sale price and that the tax would be included in the trading receipt of the dealer and would become part of his income as the money realised from the purchaser on account of tax was employed by the dealer ' for the purpose of making profit and was not separated from price simpliciter.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that the amount received as sales tax retained its character as such and could not be considered to be a part of trading receipt.
Dismissing the appeal,, HELD : It is 'the true nature and quality of the receipt and not the head under which it is entered in the account books as would prove decisive.
If a receipt is a trading receipt the fact that it is not so shown in the account books of the assessee would not prevent the assessing authority from treating it as trading receipt.
If and when the appellant paid the sum or any part thereof either to the State Government or to the purchaser it would be entitled to claim deduction of the sum so paid.
In the instant case there is no escape from the conclusion that the amount should be treated as a trade receipt.
[632B F; 633C] Chowringhee Sales Bureau P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax West Bengal followed.
The purchaser pays what the seller demands, that is, the price, even though it may include tax.
That is the whole consideration for the sale and there is no reason why the whole amount paid to the seller by the purchaser should not be treated as the consideration for the sale and included in the turn over.
[634F] Messrs George Oakes (Private) Ltd. vs The State of Madras & Ors.
(1961) 12 S.T.C. 476 followed, Morley (H. M. Inspector of Taxes) vs Messrs. Tattersall REFERRED TO, Paprika Ltd. & Anr.
vs Board of Trade and Love vs Narman Wright (Builders) Ltd. [1944] 1 All E.R. 618, held inapplicable.
