The three collieries owned by the appellant company employ over 4,200 workmen.
At the relevant time, there were three Trade Unions functioning at the collieries namely, Madhya Pradesh Koyla Mazdoor Panchayat, Azad Koyla Shramik Sabha and Madhya Pradesh Colliery Workers ' Federation.
At the material time, the Panchayat, according to the allegations of the Company, had about 75 per cent of the workers on its rolls.
This Union conducted a complete strike for 57 days in the months of March and April 1968 at the collieries.
The Central Wage Board for Mining Industry by its award recommended payment of Variable Dearness Allowance (V.D.A.), correlated to the cost of living index prevailing from time to time.
The Company accepted those recommendations.
The workers represented by the various Unions, on the basis of the Wage Board 's award, demanded V.D.A. at the rate of Rs. 1.47 per day with effect from April 1, 1968 while the Company was paying it at the rate of Re. 1. 1 1 per day.
The Company refused to pay more than Re. 1. 11 per day.
Thereupon, in December 1968.
the Federation.
which had a membership of 169 workers (Respondents 4 to 173) made an application before the Central Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal Jabalpur (the Labour Court) under section 33 C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act for determination of the amount of V.D.A. due to the workers.
The Company submitted its Written Statement on May 13, 1969, challenging the jurisdiction of the court and raised other legal objections.
In consequence of the notice of strike under Sec.
22(1) of the Act by the Panchayat, the conciliation proceedings to be under section 22 read with sec.
12(1) of the Act were held by Mr. B. D. Sharma.
Assistant Labour Commissioner.
In the course of these conciliation proceedings besides other matters, the dispute relating to V.D.A. was settled.
Subsequent to the signing of the conciliation agreement, the company filed a supplementary statement before the Labour Court that, in view of the settlement, the application filed by the Federation had become infructuous.
The stand taken by the workers Was that the settlement was not in accordance.
with the provisions of the Act.
The Labour Court tried this issue as a preliminary issue.
It held that Shri Sharma was not a duly appointed ,conciliation officer on the 'date on which the settlement was arrived at and consequently, it did not put an end to the dispute pending before the Labour Court.
The Writ Petition filed by the Company in the High Court impugning the order of the Labour Court was dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
It was contended for the appellant (i) Assuming that the settlement in question was not a settlement in the course of conciliation proceedings and binding under section 18(3) of the Act, it was still a settlement binding on the workmen, including respondents 4 to 173 herein, when 99 per cent of the total workmen had accepted the terms of the settlement, including V.D.A; (ii) The Labour Court 's order refusing permission to the appellant Company to lead evidence to prove the implementation and acceptance of the aforesaid settlement by 99 per cent of the workers, was violative of the principles of natural justice, and (iii) There is nothing in the Act which prohibits the employers and the workmen 874 from entering into a settlement during the pendency of proceedings under section 33 C(2) the Act.
On the other hand, settlements inter se between the parties have always been preferred by this Court to the adjudicatory process.
HELD (i) A perusal of sec.
18 of the Act makes it clear that a settlement at rived at in the course of conciliation proceedings is binding not only On the actual parties to the industrial dispute but also on the heirs, successors or assigns ,of the employer on the one hand, and all the workmen in the establishment, present or future.
on the other.
Thus had Mr. B. D. Sharma been a duly appointed Conciliation Officer, the settlement arrived at in the conciliation proceedings, duly conducted by him under sec.
12, would have been binding on the entire body of the workers.
Since the finding of the High Court to the effect, that the settlement between the Panchayat and the management cannot be deemed a, settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceedings under the Act, now stands unassailed, sub sec.
(3) of sec.
18 cannot be invoked to make it binding on Respondents 4 to 173 represented by the Federation.
An implied agreement by acquiescence or conduct such as acceptance of a benefit under an agreement to which the worker acquiescing or accepting the benefit was not a party being out side the purview of the Act is not binding on such a worker either under sub sec.
(1) or under sub sec.
(3) of sec.
18 of the Act.
It follows, therefore, that, even if 99% of the workers have impliedly accepted the agreement by drawing V.D.A. under it, it will not whatever its effect under the general law put an end to the dispute before the Labour Court and make it functus officio under the Act, [878C E; 879A B] (ii) The refusal of the Labour Court to allow the appellant to lead evidence at this stage, has not caused any prejudice to the appellant.
The issue decided as a preliminary issue involved a question of law which could be decided on the basis of material on record.
Furthermore, the decision of the Labour Court neither debars the appellant from bringing on record evidence relevant to the issues which still remain to be decided, nor does it rule out the agreement for all purposes.
[879C E] ' (iii) In East India Coal Company Ltd., Benares Colliery, Dhanbad vs Rameshwar and ors.
, this Court held that although the scope of section 33C(2) is wider than that of sec. 33 C(1), cases which would appropriately be adjudicated under sec.
10(1) are outside the purview of sec.
33C(2).
The provisions of section 33 C are broadly speaking in the nature of executing provisions.
The jurisdiction of the Labour Court, in the present case, is not only circumscribed by sec.33 C(2) but the matter also is yet at the initial stage.
The controversy between the parties still remains to be determined on merits.
[880F & G] Amalgamated Coffee Estates Ltd. and Ors.
vs Their workmen and Ors.
discussed and The Sirsilk Ltd. and Ors.
vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh and Anr, [1964] S.C.R. 448, referred to.
