The Regional Transport Authority granted a stage carriage permit to the respondent as against the appellant on the ground that the former was a single bus operator while the appellant was an operator having four stage carriage permits, including a stage carriage permit which was recently granted to him.
The State Transport Appellate Tribunal, on the other hand, took the view that the respondent did not have a pucca fire proof building for workshop,.
that it was immaterial whether the sector experience of the appellant was derived under a temporary permit or a permanent permit; that the appellant was entitled to two marks even though the experience gained by him was by operation of temporary permits, that the history sheet of the appellant was clean without any adverse remark and that since a portion of the route fell within the interior roads it was desirable in public interest to prefer "an experienced operator instead of single bus operator".
The Appellate Tribunal,.
therefore, found that the appellant had superior qualifications and was entitled to be preferred to others.
On a revision application under section 64B of the a single Judge of the High Court took the view that public interest required that in the socialist pattern of society monopoly should as far as possible be avoided and a smaller operator with one stage carriage permit should be preferred to a bigger operator having three or more stage carriage permits, that the appellant was a recent grantee of stage carriage permit; that a proper standard of comparison of the history sheets of the appellant and the respondent had not been made; and that the respondent was entitled to two marks on account of sector experience.
The order of the Regional Transport Authority granting permit to the respondent was, therefore, restored.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1) The High Court was not right in refusing two marks to the appellant.
Clause 3(c) of rule 155A provides that two marks shall be awarded to the applicant, who.
on the date of the consideration of the application by the Regional Transport Authority, has been plying a stage carriage permit on the entire route.
It does not contain any restriction that in order to be entitled ' to these two marks the applicant should have been plying on the route on the basis of a permanent permit.
What is material is that the applicant should have experience of plying on the route and this experience would be there whether plying is done on a temporary permit or a permanent permit.
[94G H] (2) The paramount consideration to be taken into account in determining as to which of the applicants should be selected for grant of permit always is public interest.
[95 B C] (3) The mere fact that an applicant has more than one permit or he is a recent grantee cannot by itself be regarded as a factor against him in the comparative scale.
Possession of more than one permit also cannot, by itself, divorced from other circumstances, be regarded as a disqualification.
[96 F; H] Ajantha Transports (P) Ltd. vs T. Y. K. Transports, ; , followed.
The High Court was in error in rejecting the claim of the appellant to the grant of permit by mechanically relying on the circumstance that the 92 appellant was a multi bus operator having four Stage carriage permits including a recent grant without considering how in the light of the other facts and circumstances, it was correlated to the question of public interest. ' The four stage carriage permits which the appellant had were not on the same route and there was no question of any monopoly being created in his favour if the permit applied for by him was granted.
The possession of more than one permit by the appellant was a circumstance in his.
favour because according to cl.
3(F) of rule 155A an applicant operating more than four stage carriages would be entitled to one mark.
[97B D] (4) The High Court was in error in holding that the same standard was not applied by the State Transport Appellate Tribunal in comparing the history sheets of the appellant and the respondents.
[97H] (5) In the instant case the, High Court overstepped the limits of the revisional jurisdiction and treated the revision application as if it were an appeal.
The jurisdiction of the High Court under section 64B is as severely restricted as that under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure and it is only where there is a jurisdictional error or illegality or material irregularity in the exercise of jurisdiction that the High Court can interfere under section 64B with an order made by the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
[98D E]
