The petitioner was detained under section 3 of the .
The grounds of detention were that twice on the same day he and his associates, armed with dangerous weapons, committed thefts of overhead copper wire, the first time in broad day light and then at about mid night.
On both occasions they were challenged by public servants, members of the para police force, attached to the railway administration but the petitioner and his associates escaped after attacking the members of the Railway Police Force.
The petitioner was arrested in connection with the two incidents.
His name was not in the F.I.R. but was gathered in the course of investigation.
The police, how ever reported that the petitioner being a dangerous person, witnesses were afraid to depose against him in open court and so he was discharged.
He was, however, taken into custody the same day of discharge pursuant to the detention order.
Allowing the petition challenging the detention.
HELD : 1(a) The discharge or acquittal by a criminal court is not necessarily a bar to preventive detention on the same facts for 'security ' purposes.
But if such discharge or acquittal proceeds on the footing that the charge is baseless or false, preventive detention on the same condemned facts may be vulnerable on the ground that the power of detention has been exercised in a mala fide or colorable manner.
(b) The executive authority may act on subjective satisfaction and is immunised from judicial dissection of the sufficiency of the material.
But the executive conclusion regarding futuristic prejudicial activities of the detenu and its nexus with his past conduct though acceptable is not invulnerable.
(c) The satisfaction though attenuated by 'subjectivity ' must be real and rational, must flow from an advertence to relevant factors, and not be a mockery or mechanical chant of statutorily sanctified phrases.
The subjective satisfaction must be actual satisfaction.
(d) One test to check upon the colorable nature or mindless mood of the alleged satisfaction of the authority,is to see if the articulated 'grounds ' are too groundless to induce credence in any reasonable man or too frivolous to be brushed aside as fictitious by a responsible instrumentality.
(e) If witnesses are frightened off by a desperate criminal, the court may discharge for deficient evidence but on being convinced (on police or other materials coming within his ken) that witnesses had been scared of testifying, the District Magistrate may still invoke his preventive power to protect society.
(f) But if on a rational or fair consideration of the police version or probative circumstances he should have rejected it the routinisation of the satisfaction, couched in correct diction.
cannot carry conviction about its reality and on a charge of mala fides or misuse of power being made, the court can examine the circumstances.
[297 D 298 C] (2) Merely to allege that witnesses were panicked away from testifying to truth cannot be swallowed gullibly when the witnesses are members of the Railway Protection Force and the offenses against public property were of grave character.
[299 B C] 292 (3)In a case like the present, where the circumstances Of the non prosecution strongly militate against the reality of the petitioner 's involvement in the occurrence, the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate must be spoken to by him.
While the detainer 's on oath is not always insisted on as the price for sustaining the order, subjective satisfaction, being a mental fact or state is best established by the author 's affidavit and not that of a stranger in the secretariat familiar with the papers.
But in the present case, the District Magistrate 's affidavit is not available and the reason given for his not filing his affidavit is not convincing.
If the District Magistrate had sworn an affidavit that the identity of the petitioner as participant in the two incidents was not known to the Railway Protection Force and that other villagers made them out as the gang was decamping with the booty, the detention might have been upheld.
But there is no such averment and the bare ipse dixit of the Deputy Secretary in the Home Department that witnesses were afraid to depose is too implausible and tenuous to be acceptable even for subjective satisfaction.
[298 E F; 299 A B, C E] [Were a grievous crime against the community has been committed the culprit must be subjected to condign punishment so that the penal law may strike a stern blow where it should.
Detention is a softer treatment.
Further, if the is innocent the process of the law should give him a fair chance and that should not be scuttled by indiscriminate to easy but unreal orders of detention un bound by precise time.].
[300 C E] Srilal Shaw vs The State of West Bengal Writ Petition No. 453 of 1974.
decided on 4 12 74 and Jaganath 's case ; and 138, followed.
Rameshwar Shaw ; 926.
Hoorchand 's cast A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 2120; Golam Hussain vs Commissioner of Police ; , 534 and Dulal Roy vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan ; referred to.
