The services of the appellant, who was an employee of the respondents, were terminated by the latter by giving him a month 's notice as per the standing orders without assigning any reasons for the termination.
The consequential industrial dispute was referred to the Labour Court.
The management alleged that the dismissed employee misused his position by passing on important and secret information about the affairs of the company to certain outsiders, that even after he was transferred to another section he made attempts to elicit information from the section with a view to pass it on to outsiders, and that, therefore, the management lost confidence in the employee and terminated his services by a bona fide order.
The Labour Court confirmed the order of termination.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that, even where a management had the Power to terminate the services of its employees without reasons but with notice pay the colourable exercise of that power invalidated the order and the Court court probe, beheath the surface to check upon the bona fides behind the exercise of the power, Allowing the appeal to this Court.
HELD: 1(a) Ile Labour Court has misled itself on the law and its order should be set aside.
The word will be reinstated with back wages.
[498 G] (b) The manner of dressing up an order does not matter.
The Court will lift the veil to view the reality or substance of the order.
[495 F] (2) (a) 'The Tribunal has the power and.
indeed, the duty to X ray the order and discover its true nature, if the object and effect, if the attendant circumstances and the ulterior purpose be to dismiss the employee because he is an evil to be eliminated.
But if the management, to cover up the inability to establish by an inquiry, illegitimately but ingeniously passes an innocent looking order of termination simpliciter, such action is bad and is liable to be set aside.
Loss of confidence is no new Armour for the management; otherwise security of tenure, ensured by the new industrial jurisprudence and authenticated by a catena of cases of this Court can be subverted by this neo formula Loss of confidence in the law will be the consequence of the Loss of Confidence doctrine.
[497 C D] (b) An employer who believe or suspects that _his employee, particularly one holding a position of confidence, has betrayed that confidence, can, if the conditions and terms of the employment permit, terminate his employment and discharge him without any stigma attaching to the discharge.
But such belief or suspicion of the employer should not be a mere whim or fancy.
it should be bona fide and reasonable.
It must rest on some tangible basis and the Power has to be exercised by the employer objectively, in good faith, which means honestly and with due care and prudence.
If the exercise of such power is challenged on the ground of being colourable or mala fide or an act of victimisation or unfair labour practice.
the employer must disclose to the Court the grounds of his impugned action so that the same may be tested judicially.
[498 B C] In the instant case this has not been done.
There is only the ipse dixit of the employer that he was suspecting since 1968 that the appellant was divulging secrets relating to his business.
The employer has not disclosed the grounds on which this suspicion arose in 1968.
Further after 1968, the appellant was given 490 two extra increments in addition to his normal increments in appreciation of his hard work.
This circumstance completely demolishes even the whimsical and tenuous stand taken by the employer.
It was manifest that the impugned action was not bona fide.
[498 D] The Chartered Bank vs The Chartered Bank Employees ' Union ; ; Murgan Mills Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Madras ; and Workmen of Sudder Office, Cinnamare vs Management, [MO] II L.L.J. 620. followed.
Air India Corporation Bombay v, V. A. Rebellow & Anr. ; distinguished.
Delhi Transport Undertaking vs Goel [1970] II LIJ, 20, referred to.
(3) It is true that this Court, in appeal, as a rule of practice, is loath to interfere with a finding of fact recorded by the trial court.
But if such a finding is based on no evidence or is the result of a misreading of the material evidence or is so unreasonable or grossly unjust that no reasonable Person would judicially arrive at that conclusion.
it is the duty of this Court to interfere and set matters right.
[498 E F]
