The appellant was charged with two offences, (i) under section 307 I.P.C. with respect to one person, and (ii) under section 302/34, I.P.C. for having, along with other accused, caused the death of another.
The trial court convicted him under s.324 I.P.C. on the first charge and acquitted him of the other charge.
The appeal by the State against the acquittal on the second charge was allowed by the High Court and the appellant was convicted under s.302/34 I.P.C. and sentenced to life imprisonment.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD : (1) In the case of an appeal against an acquittal the appellate court should not interfere with the acquittal merely because it can take one of the two reasonably possible views which favours conviction.
But if the view of the trial court is not reasonably sustainable, on the evidence on record.
the appellate court will interfere with the acquittal.
If the High Court sets aside an acquittal and convicts, this Court has to be satisfied, after examining the prosecution and defence cases, and the crucial points emerging for decision from the facts of the case, that the view taken by the trial court, on the evidence on record, is atleast as acceptable as the one taken by the High Court, before this Court could interfere with the decision of the High Court.
[521D] (a) The First Information Report is a previous statement which, strictly speaking, can be only used to corroborate or contradict the maker of it.
In the present case, the F.I.R. was made by the father of the deceased to whom all the important facts of the occurrence were bound to have been communicated.
But, though the F.I.R. was given about 4 hours after the incident, it was not mentioned therein that the appellant had stabbed the deceased.
The omission of such an important fact affecting the probabilities of the case is relevant under s.11 of the Evidence Act in judging the veracity of the prosecution case.
[522D] (b) The evidence, shows that the deceased was stabbed by one or the other accused; that the place of occurrence had been shifted by the witnesses for the prosecution; that the version of the alleged eye witnesses is not credible; and that the alleged dying declaration is unreliable.
[524B D] (2) The High Court, having found that the appellant and the other accused were individually responsible for their acts, erred in finding the appellants guilty on the basis of common intention, of an offense under section 302/34 I.P.C. [524FG] (3) An appeal to this Court by the accused, in a case where his acquittal had been converted into a conviction and the sentence of life imprisonment was imposed upon him, lies as a matter of right under the , and no certificate of the High Court is necessary.
[521A]
