The appellant, which was a manufacturer of dye stuffs, sold its product to, two wholesale buyers at a uniform selling price described as "the basic selling price" less trade discount of 18%.
The wholesalers in turn sold the product to large consumers such as textile mills and distributors.
One wholesaler sold the dye stuff to the distributors Pat a higher price but allowed 10% discount while the other sold at a lower price and allowed 2 1/2% discount.
The price charged by both however was so adjusted that the net selling price charged to the distributors was almost the same.
The excise duty chargeable under section 3(1) of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 was ad valorem.
Section 4 provided as to how the value of an article chargeable with duty at a rate depending on its value shall be determined for the purpose of assessment of excise duty.
Before the excise authorities the appellants claimed that, for the purpose of assessing the excise duty the value of the dye stuffs should be taken to be the price at which the appellants sold the same to the two wholesale buyers less trade discount allowed to these wholesale buyers.
The Superintendent of Central Excise rejected this contention and took, for the purpose of assessment, the price at which the wholesalers sold the dye stuffs to the distributors.
He did not, however, allow any deduction in respect of the discount given by the wholesalers to the distributors since it was not uniform.
On appeal the Assistant Collector of Central Excise confirmed the assessing authority 's order.
On further appeal, the Collector of Central Excise held that in determining the assessable value, the lower trade discount of 21% allowed by one of the wholesalers to the distributors only should be deducted.
The appellant 's revision application was rejected by the Central Government on the ground that since the dye stuffs manufactured by the appellant were not available to an independent buyer in open market conditions at price at which these were sold by them to the wholesalers these prices could not be adopted as the basis of (id valorem assessment under section 4 of the Act.
It was observed that these dyestuffs were available to any independent buyer in open market conditions at the distributors ' prices, that is, at the prizes charged by the wholesalers to the distributors and,, therefore, these prices should form the basis of assessment after allowing the discount.
Dissatisfied with the decision of the Central Government the appellant filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that where the entire production was sold by a manufacturer to one or more favoured distributors there was no wholesale market in the sense of open market at the site of the factory where an independent buyer could purchase the goods in wholesale and the assessable value must therefore be taken to be the price at which favoured distributors sell the goods in wholesale and if not in wholesale, then, in retail.
The High Court accordingly upheld the view of the Central ' Government.
Allowing the appeal, HELD : (1)(a) The assessable value of the dye stuffs manufactured by the appellants must be taken to be the price at which they were sold by the appellants to the two wholesale dealers less 18% trade discount and not the price charged by the wholesale dealers to the distributors.
[573F G] 564 (b) Where a manufacturer sells the goods manufactured by him in wholesale to a wholesale dealer at arm 's length and in the usual course of business, the wholesale cash price charged by him to the wholesale dealer less trade discount would represent the value of the goods for the purpose of assessment of excise.
That would be the wholesale cash price for which, the goods are sold at the factory gate within the meaning of section 4(a).
The price received by the wholesale dealer who purchases the goods from the manufacturer and in his turn sells the same in wholesale to other dealers would be irrelevant to the determination of the value of the goods and the goods would not be chargeable to excise on that basis.
[573E F] (c) The value of the goods for the purpose of excise must take into account only the manufacturing cost and the manufacturing profit and it must not be loaded with post manufacturing cost or profit arising from post manufacturing ,operation.
[572F] (d) Once the goods have entered the stream of trade and are on their onward journey to the consumer, whether along a short or a long course depending on the nature of the goods and the conditions of trade, excise is not concerned with what happens subsequently to the goods.
[573B C] A. K. Roy vs Voltas Ltd., , followed.
