Section 13(1)(f) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 Act XII of 1956) enacted that no order or decree for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by any court in favour of the landlord against the tenants except among others, on the ground that the premises are reasonably required by the landlord either for the purpose of building or rebuilding or for making thereto substantial additions or alterations or for his own occupation if he is the owner or for the occupation of any person for whose benefit the premises are held.
Section 13(4) of the Act provides that where a landlord requires the premises on any of the grounds mentioned in cl.
(1)(f) and the Court is of opinion that such requirement may be substantially satisfied by ejecting the tenant from a part only of the premises the Court shall pass a decree accordingly.
In 1969 the Act was amended by West Bengal Premises Tenancy (Second Amendment) Act.
Section 13 of the original Act was amended by introducing sub section (3A) in it.
This sub section prohibits institution of a suit for ejectment of a tenant by a landlord who has purchased the premises for his own use within three years of the purchase.
The Amending Act also enacted that the said Act shall apply to suits and appeals, which are pending at the date of the commencement of the Act.
The respondent purchased the suit premises in which the appellant was a tenant and instituted a suit for ejectment of the tenant under s.13(1)(f) of the original Act.
The suit was decreed by the lower court and affirmed by the lower appellate court.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the appeal.
When the Letters Patent Appeal was pending before the High Court, the Amending Act of 1969 was passed, whereupon, the tenant appellant invoked the provisions of the new sub sec.
(3A) and contended that since the landlord had instituted a suit the ejectment within three years of the purchase, the suit should be dismissed.
The High Court held that s.3A was valid prospectively but that the restriction imposed by the sub section.
giving it retrospective effect, was violative of article 1(1) (f) of the Constitution.
Per Beg and Krishna Iyer, JJ: Allowing the appeals and remitting the case to the High Court, HELD : (1) (a) There is no violation of article 19(1) (f) read with article 19(5) of the Constitution in the Amending Act, and s.13 of the original Act, as amended is valid.
The evil corrected by the Amendment Act is to stop the influx of a transferee class of evictors of tenants and institution of litigation to eject and rack rent or re build to make large profits.
Apparently the inflow of such suits must have been swelling slowly over the years and when the stream became a flood the Legislature rushed with an amending bill.
Had it made the law merely prospective, those who had, in numbers, already gone to Court and induced legislative attention would have escaped the inhibition.
This would defeat the object and so the application of the additional ban to Pending actions could not be called unreasonable.
There is no foundation for the assumptions made by the High Court that there may be cases of ejectment instituted prior to 1956 or that a number of suits and decrees, perhaps decades old.
will unjustly be nullified by the previous operation of the new ban.
Recondite instances and casual hardships cannot deflect constitutional construction of social legislation, 775 if the main thrust of the statute relates to a real social evil of dimensions deserving to be antidoted by antedated legislative remedy.
Questions such as whether those cases which were filed several years ago should have been carved out of the category of transferees hit by the Act, and at what point of time the evil assumed proportions were best left to legislative wisdom and not to courts commonsense.
[788C D; 787F G; 783F; 787H] In the instant case the two landlord respondents had purchased the buildings in the early sixties, but while considering the constitutionality the Court would not be moved by such accidental instances.
The substantial evil has been substantially met by a broad application of the new ban to pending proceedings.
[788C] Section 13.
fairly read, directs that the amendment made by section 4 shall have effect in respect of suits, including appeals, pending at the commencement of the Act.
The Court is, therefore, bound to give effect to section 4 in pending actions regardless of isolated anomalies and individual hardships.
[788G] (b)Where two interpretations are possible that which validates the statute and shortens litigation should be preferred to the one which invalidates or proliferates it.
Although the old cl.
(f) is substantially similar to the present cls.(f) and (ff) the latter imposes more severe restrictions protecting the tenants.
Much more has to be proved by the landlord now before he can get eviction than when he was called upon to under the earlier corresponding provision of the basic Act.
Moreover, the three year prohibition against institution of the suit is altogether new.
It follows, therefore, that on the present allegation and evidence the landlord may not get a decree, his suit having been instituted at a; time when he could not have foreseen the subsequent enactment saddling him with new conditions.
[789C; 789B] Though therefore, the suit, as originally brought in, would be defective since it did not and could not contain the averments complying with the new cls.
(f) and (ff) of section 13(1) it is made effective by construing the term 'institute ' in a natural and grammatical way.
[789D] (c) 'To institute is 'to begin or commence '.
The prohibition clamped down by sub section (3A), carefully read, is on suits for recovery of possession by transferee landlords on any of the grounds mentioned in cl.
(f) Qr cl.
(ff) of sub section (1).
[789G] In the instant case the suits were not for recovery on grounds contained in clauses (f) and (ff).
They were based on the repealed cl.(f) of s.13 of the basic Act.
Strictly speaking sub section (3A) brought in by section 4 of the Amending Act applies only if (a) the suit is by a transferee landlord; (b) it is for recovery of possession of premises; and (c) the ground for recovery is what is mentioned in cls.
(f) and (ff) of sub section (1).
Undoubtedly the third condition is not fulfilled and therefore sub section
(3A) is not attracted.
[789H] (d)But since the new cls.(f) and (ff) were included by the Amendment Act in s.13 of the basic Act and since the suits did not seek eviction on those grounds they will have to be dismissed on account of the omnibus inhibition on recovery of possession contained in section 13 itself.
[790C] Per Goswami, J : (1)(a) In trying to include old actions that may be surviving in courts because of laws ' proverbial delay section 13 of the Amended Act has gone far in excess of the actual needs of the time and problems and the provisions therefore cannot be said to impose a reasonable restriction on the right of the transferee landlords, albeit a well defined class amongst the landlords, to hold and enjoy their property in the interest of the general public.
Such transferee landlords with pending old actions in suits or in appeals are not likely to be of a large number.
The imposition of such restrictions on a few transferee landlords cannot be in the general interests of the large body of tenants.
If relief in the shape of postponement of the landlord 's suit were the object of sub section (3A) in giving retrospectivity to it.
the law did not take count of the inevitable long 776 delay that takes place in pending litigation as a result of man made laws of procedure in courts such as have been clearly demonstrated by the cases at hand.
The lawthat misses its object cannot justify its existence.
Besides it will be a sterilerelief if tenants have to face a fresh summons next days.
[798A C] (b)Under the Constitution an individual 's right will have to yield to the commonweal of the general community, That general community may be in broad segments but even then must form a class as a whole.
A few individuals cannot take the Place of a class and for the matter of that the general public.
[798H] In the present case the relief contemplated by the Amendment Act is in favour of tenants in general and the restriction under sub section (3A) must be viewed in that context.
It cannot be said that the legislature in applying sub section (3A) retrospectively has achieved that avowed object at all.
The applicability of the blanket ban to pending suits and appeals cannot be said to be a reasonable restriction in ,he interest of general public.
[799A B] (c)Sub section (3A) so far as it is retrospective and as such applicable to pending suits including appeals is ultra vires article 19(1) (f) of the Constitution.
The provision is valid only prospectively.
The retrospectivity so far as subsection (3A) in concerned with regard to institution of suits made applicable to pending suits and appeals is clearly very wide of a reasonable mark and is an imposition of an unreasonable restriction on the right of the transferee landlords in pending suits which had been instituted prior to the amendment Act and in appeals arising therefrom and it is not saved by the protective clause (5) of article 19 of the Constitution.
[799D E] (2)On the terms of only section 13 (3A) it is difficult to hold that it would bring old actions within the mischief of section 13(3A) which imposes a ban expressly on institution of suits within three years of the acquisition of ownership of the premises subject to the relaxation contained in the proviso thereto.
[796B C] (3)Section 13(1)(f) and (ff) are not ultra vires of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
Further reliefs have been sought to be given to the tenants as a class by these provisions in the Amendment Act.
These further reliefs are in the general interests of tenants and can be applied without any difficulty, to pending suits including appeals.
There is nothing unreasonable about such a retrospectivity in applying these provisions for the general welfare of tenants in securing for them asafe and sure tenure as far as practicable untrammelled by inconvenient litigation.[799F G] Arguments for theappellants In C.A. 2063/73 by P. C. Chatterjee There is no vestedright to eject on determination of the tenancy but it is conditioned by section 13, Cl.
(a) to (k) and therefore right to eject is not vested in the landlord until a decree is passed.
Upto that stage it is contingent depen ding on the satisfaction of cl.
(a) to (k) of s.13.
If there is no vested property right, no question of article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution will arise.
By denying the right to eject for three years from the date of purchase the right to property is not restricted or burdened.
The approach of the High Court of separately treating prospectivity and retrospectivity is not correct.
The correct approach adopted by this Court is that in considering the reasonableness of any provision retrospectivity of the law is a factor to be considered.
Retrospective operation is not bad because it covers a period of 10 years or so.
For respondent (In C.A. 1304 of 1973.) The object of the new sub section (3A) being to give protection to tenants for a limited period of three years from the date of purchase of the premises by the landlord, by giving retrospective effect to ' the said sub section the period limited by the subsection cannot be enlarged.
Therefore, s.13 of the Amending Act which gives retrospective effect to the said sub section (3A) should be construed in a manner so as to keep the effect of retrospectively within the period 777 limited by the said new sub section 3A. Sections 4 and 13 of the Amending Act have to be construed harmoniously keeping the object of the Act in view and in doing that if the court has to supply some words to make the meaning clear, it should prefer the construction which is more in consonance with reason and justice.
at 745.
The language of sub section
3A and the object and reason for introduction of the said sub section make it clear that Only Prospective effect could be given to the sub section and in any case its effect cannot go beyond three years of purchase of the premises by the landlord.
If, s.13 of the Amending Act means that section 4 of the Amending Act applies to all pending suits including appeals filed by a transferee landlord after the principal Act came into force, then it is clearly violative of art 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
The High Court therefore, rightly struck down s.13 giving retrospective effect to section 4 of the , Act.
Further no law can impose restrictions retrospectively on fundamental rights.
Arguments for the respondent in C.A. No. 2063 of 1973.
The impugned section cannot be so interpreted as to give it retrospective effect so as to bring within its mischief all suits and proceedings including appeals which may be pending since the enforcement of the Act.
This Court can depart from the general rule to apply the law as it is on the date of institution of the suit and apply the law as on the date when the appeal comes up for disposal specially because no injustice is going to be caused between the parties and as such a course would avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
Section 13 of the Amending Act is ultra vires of article 19, because, construed literally the section cannot give protection to such of the tenants against whom proceedings are pending for more than 10 years or so, a protection for a period more than what is envisaged by the Amending Act.
This is clearly not what is intended or contemplated by the legislature.
Giving retrospective effect to the section would only benefit a few and is not in the public interest of the tenants of the transferee landlords.
The restriction is arbitrary and invades the right to property and is not saved by cl.
(5) of article 19.
The restriction is not reasonable.
