The appellant engaged a pleader to fight her case in a Court.
The case was adjourned from time to time for the parties to compose their differences.
Eventually, the Court recorded a compromise, signed by the pleader of the appellant.
At the time of signing the compromise, though the appellant was not present in Court, her litigation agent was present and was consulted when the order was made.
The appellant later filed a suit for a declaration that the decree based on a compromise entered into by her pleader was without authority and was not binding on her.
The suit was dismissed.
The appeal was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended that the respondent, being a mere pleader, had no power to compromise a suit unless expressly authorised by the party.
Dismissing the appeal ` HELD : (a) Lawyers, be they advocates, vakils or pleaders, stand on the same footing in regard to their power to act on behalf of their clients.
By the , the Indian Bar came into existence permitting enrollment of various categories of legal practitioners like vakils and pleaders.
Section 55 of the Act provides that every pleader, who did not elect to be enrolled as 'an advocate tinder that Act, shall continue to enjoy the same ,is rights respects practice in any Court as be had before that Act came into force.
[340 H, 341 A] In the instant case, though the respondent.
bad not enrolled himself as an advocate, his.
rights respects practice, in any Court are what he had enjoyed under the Bombay Pleaders Act, 1920 notwithstanding its repeal P. by the .
[341 B].
(b) Every legal practitioner is an officer of the Court and aids in the cause of justice.
The responsibility of the advocates to their clients and to the Court has to be the same even though some of them may be entitled to appear only in District Courts while others in High Courts.
The quality of power cannot stand differentiation.
[341 GH] (2) If a suitor countermands his pleader 's authority to enter into a compromise or withholds, by express recital in the vakalat, the power to compromise the legal proceeding, the pleader or the advocate cannot go against such advice and bind the principal, his client.
This is as illegal as it is unprofessional.
[342 FG] Jiwibai vs Ramjuvar, AIR 1947 N4g.
17, approved.
(3) To act for the suitor involves myriad intricate actions often so legal that the client may not even understand ' the implication.
Representation in Court may be so demanding and so transforms forensic obligation that a lawyer may have ethical difficulties in mechanically obeying all the directions of his principal.
The legal skill that is hired by the client may, for its very effective exercise, 'need in area of autonomy and quickness of decision that to restrict the agency to express authorisation is to ask for an unpredictable and endless enumeration of powers.
To circumscribe the power to act is to defeat the purpose of the engagement.
It is perfectly open to a party, like any 337 other principal, to mark out in the vakalat or by particular instructions forbidden areas or expressly withhold the right to act in sensitive matters, the choice being his, as the master.
The legal profession is a para public institution which deserves the special confidence of and owes greater responsibility .to the community at large than the ordinary run of agency.
[346 D G, H] Sourindra vs Heranba, AIR 1923 PC 98, followed.
Laxmidas Ranchhodrlas vs Savitabai, , section section Waiker vs L. section waiker, AIR 1960 Bom.
20 and C. section Nayak vs A. N. Menon AIR 1963 Ker. 213 approved.
Rondel vs Morsley [1969] 1 A. C. 191 referred.
(4) The Advocate or pleader has authority to act by way of compromising at case in which he is engaged even without specific consent from his client subject to two over riding considerations : (i) He must act in good faith and for the benefit of his client; otherwise the power fails.
(ii) It is prudent and proper to consult his client and take his consent if there is time and opportunity.
In any case, if there is any instruction to the contrary or withdrawal ' of authority, the implicit power to compromise in the pleader will fall to the ground.[352 B] In the present case, the 'pleader had acted substantially with the knowledge of and encouraged by his client.
The several adjournment taken by the appellant specifically for settling the suit speak for themselves.
There is no doubt that the broad sanction for.
the compromise came from the appellant, that no shady action was in imputable to the respondent and that his conduct had been motivated by the good of his client.
[352 H] [Counsel should not rush in with a compromise where due care will make them fear to tread, that a junior should rarely consent on his own when there is a senior in the brief, that a party may validity impunge an act of compromise by his pleader if he is available for consultation but is by passed.
The lawyer must be above board, especially if he is to agree to an adverse verdict.] [353 C D]
