Section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, provides that, for the purposes of this Act, "Public servant" means a public servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Before the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1958 (Act No. 11 of 1958) was passed adding clause 12 to this section, section 21 of the Penal Code consisted only of eleven clauses and an employee under the Corporation or a Government Company did No. fall within the purview of any of the clauses of section 21 of the Penal Code.
Clause 12 was further amended by the Anti Corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964 (Act No. XL of 1964) enlarging the definition of "public servant".
The respondent who was an employee in the Heavy Electricals (India) Ltd. Bhopal, which is a Government Company, was convected by the Special Judge Indore, under section 420 I.P.C. and section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) of the Act and was sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment on each count.
The appeal filed by the respondent before the High Court of Madhya Pradesh was allowed mainly on the ground that as the respondent was not a public servant as contemplated by the provisions of the Act, his trial under the Act was without jurisdiction.
The High Court took the view that as the Act had incorporated the definition of the Penal Code prior to its amendment, it became an integral and independent part of the Act and would remain unaffected by any repeal or change in the previous Act, namely, the Penal Code.
This appeal has been preferred on the basis of the certificate granted by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (i) It is well settled that, after the provision of the previous Act is incorporated in the subsequent Act, the off spring, namely, the incorporated provisions, survives even if the previous Act is repealed, amended, declared a nullity or erased from the statute book.
But the Act being a social legislation its provisions must be construed liberally so as to advance the object of the Act.
Though the Act and the Penal Code are not statutes in pari materia there can be no doubt that the evidence Act and the Prevention of Corruption Act form part of one system, because the rules of Evidence Act, with minor exceptions, apply to trials of offences created under the Act.
The Act, no doubt, contains a penal flavour but it is in effect a piece of social legislation directed towards eradication of the evil of corruption amongst the services alone.
In other words, the public servants alone fall within the mischief of the Act and no one else.
[11E; 12A C] Clarke vs Bradlaugh, ,69, Ram Sarup vs Munshi and other ; , 868 869, In re Wood 's Estate, Ex parte Her Majesty 's Commissioners of Works and Buildings, [18861 , 615 616, Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance Society Ltd. L.R. 58 I.A. 259.
266 267. referred to.
State of Madras vs Vaidyanath Aiyar, A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 61, relied on.
(ii) The object of the Act is to eradicate corruption from various levels either in Government services or in service under the Corporation or Government Companies.
The Penal Code no doubt creates offences like those mentioned in sections 161 and 165 of the Code but they were not found sufficient to cope with the present situation and the expending needs of the nation.
In these circumstances, 7 it was considered necessary to evolve a quick, expeditious and effective machinery to destroy the evil of corruption existing in any form.
If, therefore, the Penal Code with the same object enlarged the definition of section 21 by adding the twelfth clause by virtue, of the Criminal law (Amendment) Act, 1958 and the Anti corruption Laws (Amendment) Act, 1964, there is no reason why the extended meaning to the provision of section 2 of the Act ns borrowed from section 21 of the Penal Code be not given lo that section.
Otherwise the Act would become wholly unworkable.
[12D F] Secretary of State for India in Council vs Hindustan Co operative Insurance Society Ltd. L.R. 58 I.A. 259, 266 267.
section Gangoli vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, [1960] 1 section C. R. 290 and M. Narayanan Nambiar vs State of Kerala, [1963 Supp. 2 S.C.R. 724.
referred to.
(iii) Even if section 2 of the Act had not applied the provisions of the Penal Code and had not defined public servant, then the provisions of the Penal Code would have come into operation by implied reference because the Act was a supplemental Act to the Penal Code.
It was only by way of abundant caution that section 2 of the Act incorporated the definition of "public servant" as mentioned in section 21 of the Penal Code and in that sense alone the Act can be treated as being pari meteria with the Penal Code.
[15A B]
