The appellant an owner of a mango grove has been deriving income by was of fruits and fallen trees.
In the year 1939 40 he claimed this income to be agricultural income and therefore immune to income tax.
The Assessing Authorities negatived the claim of the appellant.
The High Court in the year 1963 held the income to be agricultural income and therefore exempt from income tax.
The State did not challenge the decision of the High Court.
The appellant did not challenge the orders of the Assessing Authorities for the subsequent years i.e. 1940 to 1962 in the hope that if ultimately the High Court upheld his contention for one year the Tax Authorities would give effect to that holding for all the years.
The appellant thereafter approached the Central Board of Revenue for refund of the tax paid by the appellant in respect of the subsequent years.
The Central Board rejected the petition in 1968.
The appellant moved the High Court under article 226.
The High Court refused to interfere both on the ground of delay as well as on the ground that the assessment orders for the relevant years had become final, the assessee not having taken advantage of his remedy provided for in the statute.
The High Court.
however, made an observation that if so advised the appellant might file appeals under section 30 of the Income Tax Act, 1922 and pray for condonation of delay under section 30(2) of the said Act.
appeal by Special leave to this Court, it was contended by the appellant.
(1) Since various assessment orders were void the State was bound to refund what had been illegally levied.
(2) The Central Board should have exercised its power to give appropriate directions for refund.
(3) Regardless of statutory remedies and rules of limitation, the High l; Court had power under article 226 to quash the illegal orders and to prevent unjust enrichment by the State.
The respondents contended: (1) The appellant is guilty of laches.
High Court has rightly exercised its discretion.
This Court may not interfere with it (2) The assessment orders have become final (3) The Central Board of Direct Taxes has no statutory duty to grant refund even in cases where orders of assessment, though illegal, have been allowed to become final by.
wilful default of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal.
^ HELD: (1) The imposition of tax on agricultural income is beyond the legislative competence of Parliament and altogether outside the jurisdiction of the Income Tax officer.
It may well be contended that the impost is ultra vires.
its powers, and therefore, a nullity.
We need not consider this aspect especially since the writ petition itself is bad for unexplained delay.
[54C E] 50 (2) The writ jurisdiction is not measured by statutory finality to orders regardless of their illegality.
If the levy is illegal the constitutional remedy goes into action.
However, article 226 is not blanket power regardless of temporal and discretionary restraint.
of a party is inexplicably and unduly delayed due to laches the court may ordinarily deny redress.
If the High Court has exercised its discretion to refuse the redress, this court declines to disturb such exercise unless the ground is too untellable.
The High Court I in refusing relief on ground of laches did not exercise its discretion arbitrarily or improperly.
[55B. D E] (3) It is doubtful if the Central Board can exercise any judicial power and direct refund.
Even so, it is always open to the state where the justice of the ease warrants reconsideration of the levy of a tax illegally imposed, to view the situation from an equitable standpoint and direct refund wholly or in part.
In this case a liberal approach may well be justified The Appellate Authority if moved under section 30(2) will give due regard to the happenings in between exercising its power of condonation of delay in filing appeals and no observations made in this judgment or in the High Court judgment shall be taken into account to the prejudice of the appellant while considering the condonation of delay by the appropriate authority.
[55G 56C]
