The petitioner was carrying on business in diesel oil, an essential commodity, in two places.
He was detained under section 3(1)(a)(iii) of the , on the basis of allegations in two grounds that as had committed sets prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community.
The allegation in the first ground was that he had stocked a large quantity of light diesel oil in one of the places without waiting for the licence to be cleared by the Chief Controller of Explosives in violation of the provisions of the Petroleum Act.
It was also stated in the ground that a complaint had been lodged in the Magistrate 's court for the offence.
The allegation in the second ground was that the petitioner violated the U.P. Sale of Motor Taxation Act and the rules made thereunder, in that the names and addresses of customers who had purchased light diesel from tho petitioner, had not been given in the cash memos.
Allowing The petition, ^ HELD: (1)(a) There is no allegation by the detaining authority in the first ground that by storing the huge quantity of light diesel oil the petitioner had in any way affected the distribution or sale of that commodity; nor is there any allegation to show that the petitioner had refused to sell the oil to anybody who required it.
Also there is no suggestion, far less any allegation, that the petitioner had tried to divert his ' stocks from one place to the other and thereby deprived the people of one place of their share of the oil.
Therefore, there is absolutely no correlation between the act of the petitioner and the disruption of distribution of essential supplies to the community.
[20D E, F G] (b) From the violation of the mandatory provisions of the Petroleum Act and the Rules made thereunder, no presumption can be drawn that there was disruption of supply of the essential commodity.
[20G H] (c) The commission of an offence at a private place or a violation of a provision or a law by itself does not attract the unless, by the Act committed, the supply or an essential commodity to the community is disrupted or the even flow of the life of the community is disrupted.
[21B] Manu Bhushan Roy Prodhan vs State of Bengal and others, A. I. R. , referred to.
(2) The second Ground does disclose a clear overt act from which an inference can be drawn that the petitioner had made a number of fictitious sales.
But, in view of the finding that the first ground is irrelevant it is not possible to determine to what extent the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority was influenced or affected by the first ground.
When out of 2 grounds one is ague or irrelevant, then the entire order of detention falls to the ground.
[22C, F G] (3) The Court cannot go behind the subjective satisfaction the detaining authority but such satisfaction does not confer a blanket power which may authorise the detaining authority to act in a ruthless or arbitrary fashion.
Judicial decisions have carved out an area though limited, within which, the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority, which is a sine qua non for the exercise of the power, can be tested on the touchstone of objectivity.
[24F G] 17 (a) The words "make an order directing that such person be detained" in Section 3 (1) of the Act postulates three conditions: (i) that the order must be made by the authority in the section; (ii) The order must be duly signed by the said authority; and (iii) that only one authority and one authority alone can pass the order of detention.
Therefore, unless the order made and the grounds prepared are signed by the authority concerned, the order is not made as contemplated by the section.
[25F G] (b) Further, since the order is based on grounds to be served on the detenu, he order of detention could be passed only if the grounds are in existence and are prepared contemporaneously, otherwise the order of detention becomes illusory.
[25H 26A] In the present case, the District Magistrate who filed the counter affidavit was acting in place of the permanent District Magistrate.
In the High (court which was moved in the first instance for a writ of habeas corpus, the District Magistrate stated that the order of detention was passed by him after being satisfied of the grounds of detention, that he also framed the draft of the grounds and that the permanent District Magistrate, who took over from him merely signed and served those grounds on the detenu.
But, in this Court he stated that the order of detention was passed by the two detaining authorities, namely, both the District Magistrates, after they had fully satisfied themselves about the existence of the grounds.
It is, therefore.
not possible to determine as to who in fact made the order of detention.
and in view of the contradictory stand taken in the counter affidavits filed by the detaining authorities, the exercise of the jurisdiction to detain the petitioner has not been made with due care and caution or in a proper and fair manner.
[23B 24F] Khudiram Das vs The state of West Bengal and Other, A. 1.
R. 1975 section C. 550, referred to.
The Court also expressed strong disapproval of the careless and irresponsible manner in which the counter affidavit had been filed by the District Magistrate because the date on which reference was made to the advisory Board was in correctly stated in the counter affidavit which created unnecessary confusion and controversy over a simple issue] [18F G]
