The appellants sell Gur and Shakkar within the market area notified under Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.
The appellants have obtained licences under Section 10 of the Act in Form as Commission Agents.
Since the appellants were selling Gur and Shakkar in their own shops within the notified market area without submitting accounts and without Payment of fees they were asked to show cause by the Market Committee why legal action should not be taken against them for violation of rules 29(3) and 31(1) of the Punjab Agricultural Produce markets (General) Rules, 1962.
The appellants dismissed their liability to pay the fees under the Act.
The Administrator of Market Community levied fees on the appellants on the basis of best judgment assessment and also imposed penalty.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petitions filed by the appellants and quashed the order of assessment as arbitrary and violative of the principles of natural justice.
The High Court, however, rejected the contention of the appellants questioning the validity of the fees levied.
Under section 10 of the Act any person may apply for a licence which may be granted on such conditions as may be prescribed.
Under section 6(3) after tho issue of a notification under section 6(1) no person can purchase or sell any Agricultural produce except under a licence granted in accordance with the pro visions of the Act.
Section 23 authorizes the Committee to levy fees on the agricultural produce bought or sold by the licensees in the notified market area.
Rule 29 provides that the Committee shall levy fees on the agricultural produce bought or sold by licensees in the notified market area.
Rule 17(1) provides that a per son desirous of obtaining a licence under section 10 of the Act shall apply in form A.
The licence granted to the appellant is in accordance with form B. No licence has been issued to the appellants for doing the business of busing and selling agricultural produce.
Therefore, although the appellants are licensees as required for some of the businesses mentioned in Form B. they have no licence for carrying out business of purchase and sale of agricultural produce within the notified Market Area.
Reading section 23 and rule 29 it is clear that the Act authorises levy of fee on the agricultural produce bought or sold by licensees only.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD : The appellants have not as a matter of fact been issued licences as contemplated by section 23 and rule 29, and no fees can, therefore, be levied on them in respect of purchase and sale of agricultural Produce by them.
The appellants are, therefore, not liable to payment of fee under the Act as demanded.
[15B C]
