A family arrangement can, as a matter of law, be inferred from a long course of dealings between the parties.
It is well settled that a compromise or family arrangement is based on the assumption that there is an antecedent title of some sort in the parties and the agreement acknowledges and defines what that title is, each party relinquishing all claims to property other than that falling to his share and recognising the right of the others, as they had previously asserted it, to the portions allotted to them Respectively.
That explains why no conveyance is required in these cases to pass the title from the one in whom it resides to the person receiving it under the family arrangement.
It is assumed that the title claimed by the person receiving the property under the arrangement had always resided in him or her so far as the property falling to his or her share is concerned and therefore no conveyance is necessary.
But in view of the fact that the Courts lean strongly in favour of family arrangements that bring about harmony in a family and do justice to its various members and avoid, in anticipation, future disputes which might ruin them all the Supreme Court, carrying the principle further, upheld an arrangement under which one set of members abandons all claim to all title and interest in all the properties in dispute and acknowledges that the sole and absolute title to all the properties resides in only one of their number (provided he or she had claimed the whole and made such an assertion of title) and are content to take such properties as are assigned to their shares as gifts pure and simple from him or her, or as a conveyance for consideration when consideration is present.
The legal position in such a case would be this.
The arrangement or compromise would set out and define that the title claimed by A to all the properties in dispute was his absolute title as claimed and asserted by him and that it had always resided in him.
Next, it would effect a transfer by A to B, C and D (the other members to the arrangement) of properties X, Y and Z; and thereafter B, C and D would hold their respective titles under the title derived from A. But in that event, the formalities of law about the passing of title 23 by transfer would have to be observed, and under the present state of law either registration or twelve years ' adverse possession would be necessary.
But in the present case the arrangement was made in 1875 when the Transfer of Property Act was not in force and no writing was required; and as there is no writing, the Registration Act does not apply either.
Therefore, the oral arrangement of 1875 would be sufficient to pass title in this way and that is what happened.
Once a reversioner has given his assent to an alienation, whether at the time, or as a part of the transaction, or later as a distinct and separate act, he is bound though others may not be, and having given his assent he cannot go back on it to the detriment of other persons; all the more so when he himself receives a benefit.
It is settled law that an alienation by a widow in excess of her powers is not altogether void but only voidable by the reversioners, who may either singly or as a body be precluded from exercising their right to avoid it either by express ratification or by acts which treat it as valid or binding.
The principle applicable to the present case is a rule underlying many branches of the law which precludes a person who, with full knowledge of his rights, has once elected to assent to a transaction voidable at his instance and has thus elected not to exercise his right to avoid it, from going back on that and avoiding it at a later stage.
Having made his election he is bound by it.
Held, that in the present case the plaintiff who is in titulo now that the succession has opened out, had unequivocally assented to the arrangement with full knowledge of the facts and accepted benefit under it, so he is now precluded from avoiding it, and any attempts he made to go behind that assent when it suited his purpose cannot render the assent once given nugatory even though it was given when he was not in titulo and even though the assent was to a series of gifts.
Hardei vs Bhagwan Singh, (A.I.R. ; Clif ton vs Cockburn ( ; ; William vs William ; Bani Mewa Kuwtivar vs Rani Hutlas Kuwar [1874] L.R.
I I.A. 157); Khunni Lal vs Gobind Krishna ( [1911] L.R. 38 I.A. 87); Bamsumirn Prasad vs Shyam Kumar ( [1922] L.R. 49 I.A. 348); Baia Modhu Sudhan Singh v Booke ( [1897] L.R. 24 I.A. 164); Bijoy Gopal vs Sm.
Krishna [1906] L.R. 34 I.A. 87); Ramgouda Annagowda vs Bhauaheb ( [1927] L.R. 54 I.A. 396); Dhiyan Singh vs Jugal Kishore ( [1952] S.C.R. 478 at 488); Rangaswami Gounden vs Nachiappa Gouinden ( [1918] L.R. 46 I.A. 72 at 86 & 87), referred to.
