The appellant is a Cooperative Society engaged in the business of banking According to section 8] (i) (a) of the Income 'Tax Act, 1961, a Cooperative Society engaged in the business of banking is not liable to pay income tax on its business income.
The Finance Act, 1963, however, by section 2(i) (a), 2(8), 3, paragraph A(ii) of Part I of the First Schedule and clause of that portion of Part I called surcharge on Income Tax provides for levy of additional surcharge for the purposes of the Union calculated on the amount of the residual income at the rates mentioned therein.
The total income of the appellant for the assessment year 1963 64 was Rs. 10,00,098.
Out of this Rs. 9,48,335 was its business income. 'The tax amounting to Rs. 23,845 was charged on Rs. 51,763 Applying the Finance Act of 1963, the residual income of the appellant was computed at Rs. 5.39,386 and a surcharge thereon was levied of Rs. 52,828 Thus, the total tax imposed on the appellant came to Rs. 76,674.
The assessment order passed by the Income Tax officer levying the tax as aforesaid was challenged by the appellant in the High Court by a Writ Petition.
The main grievance of the appellant before the High Court was that whereas its taxable income was only Rs. 51,763, a tax of Rs. 76,674 was imposed on it.
The relevant provisions of the Finance Act were challenged as invalid on the ground that(i) they imposed additional surcharge on income which was exempt from tax under the provisions of the Income Tax Act and that (ii) the additional surcharge was intended as additional levy on the income tax and had no independent existence apart from it The High Court rejected these contentions.
On an appeal by certificate, dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : 1.
It is indisputable that the appellant is not required to pay income tax on the banking income.
In view of section 81.
It is also not liable to pay surcharge on its business income in view of section 99(1)(v).
[139C] 2.
The, grievance of the appellant that the tax levied upon it exceeds its taxable income can afford no true guide to the construction of the relevant provisions of the Income Tax Act or the Finance Act.
Harshness of a taxing statute, apart from a possible challenge to it under article 13 of the Constitution cannot be an invalidating circumstance.
But, the grievance on this score is misconceived.
It assumes what has to be examined that no part of the income exempted from Income Tax and Super Tax under the Income Tax Act can be brought to tax by a Finance Act, [140G H] 3.
The concession of the counsel for the appellant giving up challenge to the power.
of the Parliament to impose a new charge by Finance Act was Properly made.
Under article 246(11) of the Constitution, Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws with respect ' 'o any of the matters in List of the Seventh Schedule.
Entry 82 in List I relates to tax on income other than agricultural income.
The Income Tax Act, 1961 and the annual Finance Acts are enacted by the Parliament in exercise of the powers conferred by Art 246(1) read with entry 82 of List I.
Once the Parliament has the legislative competence to enact a law with respect to certain subject matter, the limits of 136 that competence cannot be judged further by the form or manner in which that power is exercised.
Exigencies of the Financial year determine the scope and nature of the provisions of the Finance Act.
The primary purpose of the Finance Act is to describe the rates at with the Income Tax will be charged under the Income Tax Act but that does not mean that new and distinct tax cannot be charged under Finance Act.
Therefore, what is not income under the Income Tax Act can be made income by the Finance Act.
An exemption granted by the Income Tax A, t can be withdrawn by the Finance Act or the efficacy of that exemption may be reduced by the imposition of a new charge.
[141D E; G H] 4.
The contention of the appellant that surcharges are nothing but income tax and, therefore, expression income tax occurring in Sec. 4 and 81 of the Act includes surcharges and AS such exempted cannot be accepted.
The case of the C.I.T. Kerala vs K. Srinivasan distinguished.
There the essential point for determination was whether surcharge is additional mode or rate for charging income tax.
The Court held there that it was so.
The question before us is whether even if the surcharge is an additional mode or rate for charging income to the Finance Act of 1963 authorises by its terms the levy of additional surcharge on income which is exempt from income tax under the Income Tax, Act, 1961.
The residual income as defined by the 1963 Finance Act is not the same as the business income of a Cooperative Bank which is exempted under see.
The additional surcharge is a distinct charge not dependent for its leviability on the assessee 's liability to pay income tax or Super Tax.
The decision of Allahabad High Court in Allahabad District Co operative Bank Ltd vs Union of India over ruled.
[143D E] 5.
The additional surcharge though levied by the Finance Act 1963 independently of the Income Tax Act is but a mode of levying tax on a portion of the assessee 's income computed in accordance with the definition in section 2(8) of the Finance Act 1963.
[147F] ARGUMENTS For The Appellant 1.
Under section 81 read with section 4 of the Income tax Act, 1961, income tax is not payable by the appellant.
a Co operative Society, in respect of its income from banking business.
Similarly super tax is not payable under section 99(i)(v) read with section 4. 2.
The primary purpose of the annual Finance Acts as envisaged by section 4 of the Income tax Act is to prescribe the rates of income tax on the total income of an assessee, and this function as contemplated by section 4 is to be "subject to the other provisions of this Act", namely, the Income tax Act, 1961, which would include, inter alia, section 81. 3.
The history of Indian income tax shows that surcharges by way of increase to the amount of income tax, which are added to the basic amount, in view of article 271 of the Constitution of India, are nothing other than income tax and a part of income tax alone.
Therefore the expression 'income tax ' in section 4 and 81 of the Income tax Act, 1961, and section and Schedule I, Part 1 of the Finance Act, 1953, includes surcharges.
Section 2 of the Finance Act, 1963, and Schedule I, Part I, Paragraph A all clearly contemplate that the surcharge.
special surcharge and additional surcharge are all only by way of increase of the amount of income tax and not only partake of the character of income tax but are actually a part of income tax.
They are merely rates of income tax.
The main part of section 2(1) (a) says that "Income tax shall be charged at the rates specified in Part I of the First Schedule" and clause (ii) of that section provides in the ease referred to therein that income tax "shall further be increased by an additional surcharge for the purpose of the Union calculated in the manner provided in the First Schedule.
Similarly in Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule the heading to the provisions prescribing rates of surcharge is "surcharges on income tax" in the plural.
The main part in the heading also provides that "the amount of 137 income tax. shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges calculated as under " Clause (c) thereafter provides for the additional surcharge for the purpose of the Union.
Paragraph A also therefore clearly indicates that the three surcharges are only of the same nature and that all the three surcharges are only by way of increase of the amount of income tax; in other words part of the income tax.
Is either section 2 nor paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule can even remotely be said to contemplate any separate levy of additional surcharge other than income tax.
From the assessment order it is seen that the following have been charged only on the real taxable income of the appellant namely Rs. 51,763: (i) income tax (ii) surcharge on income tax (iii) special surcharge on income tax (iv) super tax and (v) surcharge on super tax.
These items have not been charged on the total income of Rs. 10,00,098, because income tax is not payable on the balance of the total income under section 81.
The Income tax officer has sought to impose only additional surcharge under clause (c) in respect to the total income of Rs. 10,00,098.
In view of section 81 no additional surcharge is payable on the total income of Rs. 10,00,098.
It is payable only on the taxable income of Rs. 51,763.
Section 2 read with Paragraph A Part I of Schedule I to the Finance Act merely purports to lay down the method of computation where income tax is payable.
It does not either dire thy or by implication make any amendment or modification in section 81. 7.
Section 3 of the Finance Act ]963 also applies to a stage of computation only and in regard to relief, rebate etc.
It does not impose any liability or any tax.
It operates only where additional surcharge is payable and not other wise, and where relief, rebate etc.
is to be given from the tax payable by the assessee, e.g. deduction of tax based on life insurance premia provident fund contribution.
donations to charitable institution etc.
Section 81 does not provide for any such relief or rebate.
Section 2(8) of the Finance Act, 1963, defining "residual income" which requires deduction from the total income of income tax, surcharge and special surcharge to ascertain residual income also does not have the effect of imposing any liability or any tax but merely provides for computation.
In a taxing Act one has to look merely at what is clearly said.
There is no room for any intendment.
There is no equity about a tax.
There is no presumption as to tax.
Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied." "In a case of reasonable doubt.
the construction most beneficial to the subject is to be adopted.
" The court will be very slow in reading an implied amendment in a tax law because there is no intendment.
Income tax is one tax, not several taxes on several heads or several items of income: For the Respondent 1.
It is open to the Parliament to pass an Act relating to more than one topic or field of operation, covered by the Entries in List 1.
It is not as if there must be as many Enactments as the topics which the enactment covers.
The legislature has a wide range of selection and freedom in appraisal not only in the subjects of taxation and the manner of taxation but also in the determination of the rate or rates applicable.
If production were always to be taken into account there will have to be a settlement for every year and the tax will become a kind of income tax.
The burden of proving discrimination is always heavy and heavier still when a taxing statute is under attack.
The burden is on the person complaining of discrimination.
The burden is proving not possible 'inequality ' but hostile 'unequal ' treatment.
This is more so when uniform taxes are levied.
The State cannot be asked to demonstrate equality.
Income which is exempt from taxation is income which is assessable to tax and therefore liable to tax but tax is not imposed on account of the exemp 138 tion.
This exemption can by subsequent legislation be wholly or partially withdrawn both as regards items of income and levies imposed for the purpose of taxation.
Thus where the Income tax Act 1961 says that business income of a co operative society will be exempt from income tax it would be open to the Parliament by enactment of the Finance Act of 1963 to say that this exemption shall be partially withdrawn as regards residual income and this partial exemption will operate only for the purpose of income tax but not surcharge on residual income.
The net result of the partial withdrawn of the exemption would mean that though the business income of a co operative society will be exempt from tax the residual income which is only a part of the exempted business income could be subjected to surcharge on income tax only. 4.
Income tax and surcharge on income tax are two different levies though the computation of the latter is based upon a percentage of the former.
The to are inclusive for the purpose of imposing tax but they are not one levy only.
