Held (Per MUKHERJEA C.J., DAS, VIVIAN BOSE, and IMAM JJ.
SINHA J. dissenting) that a Constitution Bench of five or more Judges before which a case happens to be posted in the first instance 207 is competent to split up the case by deciding the constitutional questions and leaving the rest of the case to be dealt with and disposed of by a Division Beach of less than five Judges on merits in conformity with the opinion of the Constitution Bench.
The splitting up of cases into different stages for hearing and decision is not repugnant to the Constitution or the general principles of procedural law.
The underlying principle of the Constitution is clear and all that it insists upon is that all constitutional questions should be heard and decided by a Bench of not less than five Judges.
As long as this requirement is fulfilled there can be no constitutional objection to the rest of the case being disposed of by a Division Bench of less than five Judges, so as to save the time of the Constitution Bench of five or more Judges.
There is no general rule of indivisibility of a case for the purpose of its hearing and decision: vide.proviso to Article 145(3) and Article 228 of the Constitution, section 24 and Order 18, Rule 15 of the Code of Civil Procedure and sections 350, 526, 528 and 556 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Article 145(3) of the Constitution cannot be so construed as to deprive the Supreme Court of the inherent power of splitting up a case for the purpose of hearing and decision .
Per SINHA J. The Constitution while laying down clause (3) of Article 145, contemplates the whole matter in controversy arising in a case, which may include substantial questions of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution as also other questions.
The main clause (3), excepting cases coming within the purview of the proviso, does not contemplate a splitting up of a case into parts, one part involving substantial questions of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution and another part or parts not involving such questions.
The language of clause (3) of Article 145 does not warrant the hearing of a case piecemeal by different Benches unless it comes within the purview of the proviso.
The proviso is meant to cover only a limited class of cases which otherwise would have come within the purview of the main clause (3).
But the proviso cannot have a larger effect than is justified by its language, viz., that only a question of that description has to be referred for the opinion of the larger Bench, the case itself remaining on the file of the smaller Bench.
The proviso thus makes a clear distinction between a "case" and a "question".
Maulvi Muhammad Abdul Majid vs Muhammad Abdul Aziz (L.R. 24 I.A. 22), Burrowes vs High Commission Court (3 Bulst.
48) and Habibar Rahman vs Saidannessa Bibi (I.L.R. , referred to.
