Under section 3(b) of the U.P. , the State Government issued a notification directing that the recommendations of the First Sugar Wage Board were to come into force from November 1, 1960.
The appellant refused to implement the provisions of the notification.
There was, consequently in industrial dispute but the State Government passed an order refusing to refer the dispute for adjudication under section 4K of the Act.
In a writ petition filed by the respondent, the High Court, following the decision of this Court in State of U.P. vs Basti Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. ; , issued a writ of certiorari quashing the order of the State Government refusing to make a reference, and also, issued a writ of mandamus directing the State Government and the Labour Commissioner to refer the dispute for, adjudication under section 4 K.
Allowing the appeal to his Court against the issue of the writ of mandamus: ^ HELD: (1) 'The power of the Government under section 10 of the (Central Act) is discretionary and it is open to the Government, taking into consideration relevant factors, to refuse to make a reference that is, the High Court may, after quashing the order of the Government refuse to make a reference, ask the Government to re consider the matter but it could not give peremptory directions to make a reference.
Section 4 K of the U.P. Act, divorced from the context and setup of s.3 is in pari Materia with and stands on the same footing, as section 10(1) of the Central Act.
[253B] M/s Mahabir Jute Mills Ltd. Gorakhpore vs Shri Shibban Lal Saxena & Ors.
Civil Appeal No. 781 of 1973, followed.
(2) Section 3(d), as it stood in the U.P. Act before 1957, was so interwoven and inter connected with the exercise of the power in cl.
(b) that it led this Court in the Basti Sugar Mills case to opine that a writ of mandamus could be issued directing the State Government to make a reference.
The position, however, has changed after the amendments brought about in 1957 [253B C) (3) The observation that, if the Government refuses to make a reference on the basis of irrelevant considerations, the party may move the High Court for a writ of mandamus in the Bombay Union of Journalists case ; 35 only means that a writ of mandamus could be issued to the Government to re consider the matter.
[253F] (4) The reference of the dispute made by the Government in pursuance of the direction of the High Court cannot hold good, but the State Government may reconsider the matter and exercise its discretion either to refer the dispute or not within the ambit of well settled principles of law.
[254A B]
