The Government of Bihar sent to the Labour Court, Chota Nagpur Division, Ranchi, application in respect of 73 workers of the appellant for decision under sec.
33C(2) of the for retrenchment compensation.
The contention of the appellant was that it was a case of closer for reasons beyond its control and that, therefore, the workmen were entitled to compensation under the proviso to sub section (1) of sec.
25FFF of the Act and not to retrenchment compensation.
The workers contended that they were entitled to retrenchment compensation under sec.
25F. The Labour Court held that it was a case of retrenchment.
The writ petitions filed by the employer in the High Court has failed and these appeals have been preferred to this Court on the basis of the certificate of fitness granted by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD : (i) It was competent to the Labour Court to decade whether the case before it was a case of retrenchment compensation or the proviso to sub sec.
(1) of section 25FFF was attracted on closure of the establishment.
Even the employer does not dispute that the workmen are entitled to compensation.
It only says that the compensation should be calculated on a particular basis different from the basis on which the workmen claim.
The claim also falls under Chapter VA of the Act.
[266H; 267B C] Central Bank of India Ltd. vs P. section Rajagopalan ; relied on.
U.P. Electric Company vs R. K. Shukla [1970] 1 S.C.R. 507 and South Arcot Elect.
Co. vs N. K. Khan [1969] 2 S.C.R. 902, referred to.
(ii) Item No. 10 of the Third Schedule to the Act does not say that all questions arising out of retrenchment of workmen and closure of establishment have to be decided by Industrial Tribunal.
This entry refers to cases where the right to retrench workers or to lose an establishment is disputed and that question is referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal.
In that case the Tribunal will be competent to decide whether the closure or retrenchment was justified and whether the retrenchment workmen should be reinstated or the workers in the establishment purported to have been closed should be continued to be paid on basis that the so called closure was no closure at all.
In the present case the workmen do not ask for reinstatement.
They accept the termination of the services and ask for compensation.
The only dispute is about the compensation whether it is to be paid under section 25F or 25FFF.
Item 10 of Third schedule will not cover such a case.
[267D G]
