The State Bar Councils created by the have been entrusted with the functions inter alia of entertaining and determining cases of misconduct against advocates on their rolls and to safeguard their rights, privileges and interests.
The Bar Council of India which is a national body created by the Act is entrusted with the work of laying down standards of professional conduct and etiquette and overseeing the functioning of the State Bar Councils.
Under section 35 of the Act, if a State Bar Council, either on receipt of a complaint or otherwise has reason to believe that any advocate on its roll has been guilty of professional or other misconduct, it shall refer the case to its Disciplinary Committee which, after due inquiry may impose certain penalties.
An appeal from the decision of the State Bar Council lies to the Bar Council of India.
Any "person aggrieved" by an order of the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India may, under section 38, appeal to the Supreme Court.
In exercise of the Powers conferred by the Act the Bar Council of India framed rules relating to professional conduct and etiquette, r. 36 of which says that advocates shall not solicit work or advertise themselves.
The State Bar Council, in the present case, issued notices to the respondents suo motu alleging that they stood at the entrance of the court house at the Presidency Magistrate 's Court, Fort Bombay and solicited work etc., and that the said act amounted to professional and/or other misconduct. 'the Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council found the respondents guilty of conduct which absolutely lowered the reputation of the Bar in the eyes of the public and suspended them from practising as advocates.
The respondents ' appeal to the Bar Council of India having been allowed, the State Bar Council has come up in appeal to this Court under section 38.
Before the Bar Council of India the State Bar Council had not appeared.
F On the question whether the State Bar Council is a "person aggrieved," Allowing the appeals, Held: ^ [By the full Court], The State Bar Council is an "aggrieved person" to maintain an appeal under the Act.
per Ray, C.J., Khanna, Mathew, Gupta and Murtaza Fazal Ali, JJ): (1) The Bar Council is a "person aggrieved" because (i) the words "person aggrieved" in the Act are of wide import in the context of the purpose and provisions of the statute and should not be subjected to a restricted interpretation of possession or denial of legal rights or burdens or financial interests.
In disciplinary proceedings before the Disciplinary Committee there is no lis and there are no parties.
The word 'person ' will embrace the Bar Council which represents the Bar of the State; (ii) the Bar Council represents the collective conscience of the standards of professional conduct and etiquette.
The Bar Council acts as the protector of the purity and dignity of the profession; (iii) the function of the Bar Council in entertaining complaints against advocates indicates that the Bar Council is interested in the proceedings for the vindication of discipline.
dignity and decorum of the profession; (iv) when the Bar Council ini 307 tiates proceedings by referring eases of misconduct to the Disciplinary Committee, the Bar Council, in the performance of its function under the Act, is interested in the task of seeing that the advocates maintain proper standards and etiquette of the profession and (v) the Bar Council is vitally concerned with the decision, in the context of its functions.
The Bar Council will have a grievance if the decision prejudices the maintenance of standards of professional conduct and ethics.
[315G: 316D G] (2) (a) The Bar Council acts as the sentinel of professional code of conduct and is vitally interested in the rights and privileges of the advocates as well as the purity and dignity of the profession.
[316A B] (b) The grievance of the Bar Council is to be looked at purely from the point of view of standards of professional conduct and etiquette.
If any decision of the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India is according to the State Bar Council such as will lower the standards and imperil the high traditions and values in the profession the State Bar Council is an "aggrieved person" to safeguard the interests of the public, the interests of the profession and the interests of the Bar.
[316B C] (3) The most significant feature in the matter of initiation of proceedings before the Disciplinary Committee is that no litigant and no member of the public can straightaway commence disciplinary proceedings against an advocate It is the Bar Council of a State which initiates the disciplinary proceedings.
There is no lis in proceedings before the Disciplinary Committee The Bar Council, in placing a matteu.
before the Disciplinary Committee, does not act as a prosecutor in a criminal case.
A complainant who prefers a complaint against an advocate is not like a plaintiff in a civil suit.
The Bar Council may act on its own initiative on information which has come to its notice in the course of its duties.
There is no party to the disciplinary proceedings because the Bar Council, the Attorney General, the Advocate General act in protecting the interests of advocates and the interests of ' the public.
In so acting there is no conflict between the advocate and any other person because it is professional conduct, professional etiquette, professional ethics, professional morality, which are to be upheld.
transgression of which results in reprimanding the advocate or suspending him from practice or removing his name from the roll.
[314B F] Adi Pherozshah Gandhi vs H. M. Seervai, Advocate General of Maharashtra.
Bombay [1971] I S.C.R. 863, referred to Beg J. (concurring): (1) There is no objection to a participation of a State Bar Council in its executive capacity in a disciplinary proceeding against an advocate on its roll either at the initial or at the appellate stages.
Before it can become a "person aggrieved" by an order against which it could appeal, there must have been a lis or a dispute to be decided which gives rise to the order complained of.
To such a "lis" the State Bar Council, in its executive capacity, must be deemed to be a party.
There seems to be no legal obstacles in the way of its separate representation even before its own Disciplinary Committee.
Its right to appeal as a "person aggrieved" is squarely covered by the provisions of sections 37 and 38 of the Act.
In the present case the respondents themselves treated the Bar Council as a party interested in the lis when they impleaded the State Bar Council as a respondent in their appeals to the Bar Council of India.
Its statutory right to appeal under section 38 is not affected by the mere fact that it did not put in appearance before the Bar Council of India.
[319D G] (2) The State Bar Council operates through its committees.
Each committee has distinct and separable functions.
Each could be said to have a "persona" and an identity of its own, which is distinguishable from that of the Bar Council as a whole [317G] 3 (a) If the Bar Council has a separable interest as a guardian of the rights and privileges of the members of the Bar, specifically mentioned by section 6(1)(d) of the Act.
there is no reason why a right to represent this interest before its 308 own Disciplinary Committee as well as before the Bar Council of India, on an A appeal under section 37 of the Act, or., on further appeal to this Court under section 38 of the Act should be denied to it.
[318C D] 4(a) When the State Bar Council can have locus standi and rights of a "person aggrieved" affected by the results of such proceedings there is no reason why it should not be in the position of a party lo a lis or dispute ' between itself and the allegedly delinquent advocate.
[318D E] (b) The term 'lis ' is not confined to litigation by means of a suit in a court of law.
[318E] Butler vs Mountgarret 7 H.L. Ca.
641 and B. Johnson & Co. (Builders) vs Minister of Health 399, referred to.
The State Bar Council in its executive capacity acts as the prosecutor through its Executive Committee.
There is no incongruity in its Disciplinary Committee representing its judicial wing, functioning as an impartial judge whose decisions are binding upon the State Bar Council.
It is a "person aggrieved" within the meaning of that expression used in sections 37 and 38 of the Act.
[318G H] Krishna Iyer, J. (concurring): (1) The Bar is not a private guild, like that of 'barbers, butchers and candlestick makers ' but, a public institution committed to public justice and pro bono publico service.
The grant of a monopoly licence to practice law is based on three assumptions; (i) there is a socially useful function for the lawyer to perform; (ii ) the lawyer is a professional person who will perform that function; and (iii) his performance as a professional person is regulated by himself and more formally, by the profession as a whole.
The central function that the legal profession must perform is nothing less than the administration of justice.
[322G H] (2) In a developing country the pattern of public oriented litigation better fulfils the rule of law if it is to rule close to the rule of life.
The Bar Council clearly comes within this category of organisations when a lawyer is involved.
(3) A case of professional misconduct is not a lis in the British sense nor a case and controversy in the American meaning.
It is a public investigation about misconduct by one belonging to a public profession where every member of the Bar with a reputation to lose has a stake and everyone concerned with the justice administration is interested. 'the Bar has a share in being the sentinel on the qui vive when the legal dykes of right and justice are breached by authoritarianism or citizen wrongdoing.
[323F Gl (4) The possible apprehension that widening legal standing with a public connotation may unloose a flood of litigation which may overwhelm the judges is misplaced because public resort to court to suppress public mischief is a tribute to the justice system.
In this case to grant an exclusionary windfall on the respondents is to cripple the Bar Council in its search for justice and insistence on standards.
[326B] G A. P. Gandhi vs H. M. Seeravai, [1971] 1 S.C.R. refered to.
