By an order dated May 25, 1954, the Supreme Court granted the petitioners in the case special leave to appeal against the judgment and order of the High Court at Calcutta.
In accordance with the order, the petitioners furnished the security amounts directed to be deposited within the time specified in the order.
The Registrar of the High Court did not issue any notice of admission of 'appeal to be served by the Appellant 's Solicitor on the Respondents as envisaged in rule 9 of Order XIII, S.C.R. Nor did the Appellant following the practice of the High Court, move that Court for It admission" of the appeal until January 11, 1955.
The Respondents first moved the High Court complaining of default on the part of the appellants in due prosecution of the appeal and latter moved the Supreme Court for action under rule 13 of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules.
The application in the High Court was therefore kept pending.
Held: After the grant of special leave under article 136, the Registrar of the Supreme Court transmits, in accordance with the 244 provisions of rule 8 of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules, a certified copy of the Supreme Court 's order to the Court or tribunal appealed from, Rule 9 of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules enjoins upon the Court or tribunal appealed from to act, in the absence of any special directions in the order, in accordance with the provisions contained in Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code, so far as they are applicable.
Accordingly the Court or Tribunal to which the order is transmitted receives deposits on account of security for the Respondents ' costs, printing costs, and any other deposits if so ordered by the Supreme Court, and sets about preparing the record of the appeal for transmission to the Supreme Court.
Therefore, action under rule 13 of Order XIII, S.C.R., for rescinding the order granting special leave cannot be initiated unless the Court or tribunal appealed from reports to the Supreme Court that the appellant has not been diligent in taking steps to enable that Court to carry out the directions, if any, contained in the order of the Supreme Court and to act in accordance with the provisions of Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code so far as applicable to appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution.
In view of rule 9 of Order XIII of the Supreme Court Rules, the application of Order XLV of the Code of Civil Procedure to appeals under Article 136 of the Constitution is restricted.
The Court or tribunal appealed from, no doubt, has to carry out the directions contained in the order granting special leave, and to receive the security for the Respondents ' costs and other necessary deposits, but once the security is furnished and the other deposits are made, the formality of "admission" envisaged by rule 8 of Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code is unnecessary, because in such cases the order .granting special leave by itself operates as an admission of the appeal as soon as the conditions in the order relating to the furnishing of security or making of deposits are complied with.
Appeals under Article 136 thus stand on a different footing from appeals on grant of certificate by the High Court itself.
In the letter case, the High Court has exclusive jurisdiction over the matter until it admits the appeal under rule 8 of Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code.
Rule 9 of Chapter 32 of the Original Side Rules of the Calcutta High Court envisages "admission" of appeals to the Supreme Court whether by an order of the Supreme Court or under Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code.
And when an appeal arising from an order made by the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution, has been so "admitted", the said rule enjoins upon the Registrar to issue notice of such admission for service by the appellant on the Respondents.
In cases where special leave has been granted by the Supreme Court, it is not necessary for the appellant to move the High Court appealed from for the formal admission of his appeal.
As the order granting special leave itself lays down the conditions to be fulfilled by the appellants, the admission will be regarded as final only when the directions are complied with and as 245 soon as this is done it would be the duty of the Registrar to issue a notice of the admission of the appeal for service upon the respondents.
In default of the issue of such notice, the appellant cannot be held responsible for laches in the prosecution of his appeal with regard to the steps required to be taken after the admission of his appeal.
