The appellant increased the licence fee imposed on hoteliers respondents under s.321 (2), Madras District Municipalities Act, 1920, and they challenged the increase.
The appellant justified the increase on the basis that the fee under the section is a tax and falls under "tax on land and building ' in Entry 49, List II, VII Schedule of the Constitution.
The High Court held in favour of the respondents.
^ Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (l) The appellant would be competent to impose a property tax at any Particular rate it chooses.
the user of the land and building as a restaurant or hotel furnishing sufficient nexus for the legislature to impose a tax.
[339H, 340A] Ajoy Kumar vs Local Board ; , referred to.
(2) But the fec imposed under section 321(2) in this ease is not a tax.
[336G] (a) Section 321(2) authorises the collection of a fee in contradiction to tax.
1335B] (b) Section 321 is in a part of the Act different from the part dealing with taxation.
While the nomenclature of the levy or the location of a section in the Act is not conclusive.
they are relevant factors.
for deciding whether the fee imposed is a tax or not.
[335 CD] Liberty Cinema Case ; , referred to.
(c) Section 78(1A) authorises the levy of property tax.
Section 78(3) contains the mandatory procedural prescriptions for imposing taxes.
When the legislature has carefully provided in the sub section for previous invitation and consideration of objections to enhancement of tax levies, resort to section 321(2) to impose a tax as a fee would frustrate the processual protection written into the law in regard to fiscal measures, [338 BCE] (d) Schedule V with which section 321 is directly linked sets out a number of ' petty occupations all of which, theoretically cannot be carried on except on land or in buildings.
If the licence fee in section 321(2) is read as land tax the fee in relation to every item of activity set out in the Schedule would be tax on the basis of the trivial activity furnishing the legal nexus between the tax and the land.
But, it would be straining the language to justify the imposition of a tax on the land, on the basis of such a flimsy or casual connection
