The respondents are the owners of the land in question.
the land was sought to be acquired for an Engineering College at the instance of the Education Department of the State of Mysore.
Section 4 notification was issued in the year 1960.
After an enquiry into the objections filed under section 5A the land Acquisition officer sent his report to the Government.
Government over ruled the objection and issued a notification under section 6.
The Education Department at whose instance the land was sought to be acquired was not given notice as required by rule (b) of Madras Land Acquisition rules.
The respondents field a Writ Petition in the High Court challenging the validity or both the notifications on the ground that the Education Department was not consulted.
The High Court upheld the contention of ' the respondents and quashed the notifications issued under sections 4 and 6 of the Act on the ground that if the Department concerned filed any reply pursuant to the notice issued the objector would know what the Department has stated by way of reply and at the stage of hearing of objection.
tile objector might adduce evidence or address arguments to meet what is stated in such reply.
The objector.
could further urge before the Government that the reasons given by the department in reply to the objections should not be accepted: On appeal by Special Leave it was contended by the appellant.
Rule 3 (b) is inconsistent With section 5A (2) for the reasons that sub section (2) of section 5A provides for further enquiry in the discretion of the Collector and rule 3(b) if treated as mandatory would be to convert the discretionary power into a mandatory duty and is therefore, ultra vires the section.
The provisions of rule 3(b) were not mandatory and that therefore, failure to issue the notice to the department concerned was not fatal to the validity of the notification.
^ HELD: 1.
Section 5A requires the Collector to make a report after hearing the objections.
It does not mean that a rule cannot be framed which would enable the department concerned to place its view point before the Collector when considering the objection under section 5A.
The proceeding of the Collector are quasi judicial and it is only proper that he should be apprised of the attitude of the department requiring the land in the light of the objections filed.
It would be helpful to the Government in making the decision to have before it the answer to the objection by the department in order to appreciate the riv view point.
Rule 3(b) is not Ultra vires Section SA.
[372F H 373 A C] 2.
In determining the question whether a provision is mandatory or directory one must look into the subject matter.
and consider the importance of the provision disregarded and the relation of.
that provision to the general object intended to be secured.
One has to consider the nature the design and the consequence which will follow from construing a provision in one way or the other.
Rule 3(b) was enacted for the purpose of enabling the Collector to have all the 370 relevant materials before him for coming to a conclusion to be incorporated A in the report to be sent to the Government in order to enable the Government to make proper decision.
The High Court was right in holding that the provision WAS mandatory.
[373C F] The notification under Section 6 was quashed but the notification under section 4 was upheld.
[373 G] CIVIL APPEAL No. 1021 or 1973 The respondents raised further contention in the above appeal to the effect that notification under section 4 should be quashed since the public notice as required by section 4 is not given and the report under section 5A was not sent to the Government within the prescribed period.
HELD: The notification under section 4 was published on 13 4 1967.
Objections were filed by the respondent under section 5A of the Act.
The notification under section 6 was published in October 1968.
The Writ Petition was filed in July 1969.
The respondent was not entitled to challenge the validity of the notification under section 4 of the Act as Writ Petition challenging the notification was filed after an unreasonable lapse of time.
The respondent should have challenged the validity of the notification under section 4 within a reasonable time of ' the publication of the notification.
The respondent knew of the notification and file(l objections under section 5A of the Act.
There is no substance in the argument that the report under section 5A was not sent to the Government within the prescribed period.
In any event since a fresh enquiry is directed under section 5A the Collector will in any event have to send a fresh report to the Government.
[374D G]
