Section 2(v) of the defines an "undertaking" as an undertaking which is engaged in the production, supply, distribution or control of goods of any description or the provision of service of any kind.
Section 22 provides for the establishment of new under takings.
It says that no person or authority, other than government, shall, after the commencement of this Act.
establish any new undertaking which, when established would become an inter connected undertaking of an undertaking to which clause (a) of section 20 apples, except under, and in accordance with the previous permission of the Central Government, Sub section (2) of the section provides for an application for that purpose to the Central Government.
Section 23(4) lays down that if an undertaking to which Part A of Ch.
Ill applies proposes to acquire by purchase, take over or otherwise the whole or part of an undertaking which will or may result either (a) in the creation of an undertaking to which Part A would apply; or (b) in the undertaking becoming an inter connected undertaking of an undertaking to which Part A applies, it shall, before giving any effect to its proposals, make an application in writing to the Central Government in the prescribed form of its intention to make such acquisition.
stating therein information regarding its inter connection with other undertakings the scheme of finance with regard to the proposed acquisition and such other information as may be prescribed.
The appellant is a public limited company and is a subsidiary of United Breweries Ltd. and other companies interconnected with it.
The appellant 's undertaking consists of a sugar factory and a distillery for manufacture of liquor at Rosa, Shahjahanpnr and another distillery at Asansol.
The appellant 's sugar factory at Rosa had been facing difficulties for some years on account of inadequate supply of sugarcane and to ensure regular and adequate supply of sugarcane, the appellant proposed to float a company with a share capital of` Rs. 50 lakhs for the purpose of taking over the sugar unit of the appellant and for working it as an undertaking of the company to be formed.
The proposal was that the appellant would be entitled to an allotment of 100 percent shares in the new company and a further sum of Rs. 15,77,093/ as consideration for transfer of the sugar unit.
The appellant applied to the respondent for permission under section 372 of the Companies Act to acquire the 100 per cent shares of the new company upon its incorporation.
The appellant was told by the Central Government in its letter dated 5 1 1972 that sections 22 and 23 of the , would prima facie be attracted and that the appellant should file a separate application Under the relevant section.
The appellant filed an application dated 5 5 1972 purporting to be under section 23(4) of The Act.
The new company proposed to be set up by the appellant was incorporated on June, 15.
1973 under the name of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited.
By order dated July 2, 1973.
the Central Government, in the Department of Company Affairs rejected the appellant 's application under section 372(4) of the Companies Act for investing Rs.50 lakhs in the equity share of the Capital of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited.
By another order dated 30 6 1973, the central Government.
in the Department of company Affairs also rejected the appellant 's application under section 23(4) of the Act.
This appeal is against the order dated 30 6 1973 under section SS of the Act.
It was contended for the appellant that.
(i) in order that an enterprise may became an 'undertaking ' within the definition of the word 'undertaking ' in section 2(v) of the Act it is necessary that the enterprise must he engaged in produc 380 tion, supply, distribution or control of goods of any description or the provision Or service of any kind and that when the appellant proposed to form the new company for taking over the sugar unit of the appellant in consideration of 100 per cent shares in the new company, that company had not acquired the sugar unit of the appellant nor was it engaged in the production, supply, distribution or control of goods, etc.
as an enterprise of Shahjahanpur Sugar Privato Limited and so There was no proposal to acquire by purchase, take over or otherwise of the whole or part of any undertaking within the the meaning of section 23(4).
and (ii) in any event the proposal to acquire 100 per cent shares in Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited by the appellant would not involve a proposal to acquire an undertaking to be owned or even owned by Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited, as the acquisition of 100 per cent shares would only vest in the appellant, the right to control and manage the affairs of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited.
Accepting the contentions and allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (Per Ray C.J. and Mathew 1.) (i) The Sugar unit of the appellant was no doubt engaged in production of goods.
, when the proposal was made and was, therefore an undertaking but it was only an undertaking of the appellant.
as the sugar unit had not been transferred and had not become an enterprise of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited.
The sugar unit did not become an undertaking of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited ac it was not and could not be engaged in the production of goods, etc., on its behalf before it was transferred to it.
Sub section (4) of section 23 is confined to the case of a proposal to acquire an undertaking by purchase, take over or otherwise but, to become an undertaking, it must presently be engaged in the production of goods, etc.
The mere fact that the Memorandum of Association of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited contained an object clause which provided for production of sugar would not necessarily mean that the company would go into production and thus become the owner of an undertaking as defined in s.2(v) of the Act.
Even if the phrase 'engaged in business ' in the definition conveys thc idea of ' embarking on it, it is not correct to say that Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited had embarked on the business of production of sugar merely because its memorandum of association provided that the object of the company was to produce sugar.
[387B C, E F] The Union of India vs Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. Ltd., [1972] 74 Bombay Law Reporter, 1 and In re Canara Bank Ltd., A.I.R. referred to.
(ii) It is well settled that a company has seperate legal personality apart from its shareholders and it is only the company as a juristic person that could 1 own the undertaking.
Beyond obtaining control and the right of management of Shahjahanpur Sugar Private Limited, the purchase of 100 per cent shares had not the effect of an acquisition of the undertaking owned by it.
[388F G Per Krishna Iyer.
J. (concurring) (1) An `undertaking is defined as an undertaking. which itself disclosed the difficulty felt by the draftsmen in delineating the precise content.
Obviously, a dynamic economic concept cannot be , imprisoned into ineffectualness by a static strict construction.
`Is engaged in production ', in the context takes in not merely projects which have been completed and ,one into production but also blue prints.
It is descriptive of the series of ' steps culminating in production.
One is engaged in an undertaking of production of certain goods when he seriously set about the job of getting every thing essential lo enable production.
Economists, administrators and industrialists understand the expression in that sense and often times projects in immediate prospect are legitimately set down as undertakings engaged In the particular line.
Not the tense used but the integration of the steps is what is decisive.
What will materialse as a productive enterprise in futureo can be regarded currently as as undertaing, in the industrial sense.
[391F H] Massachusetts B & Insurance Co. vs U.S. ; , 138, and Gymkhana Club, [1968] 1 S.C.R. 742 referred to.
381 (2) Sections 22 and 23 (4), when placed in juxtaposition suggest that the appellant 's operation is to establish a new undertaking (out of its old sugar unit, though) which, in view of the share holding, will inevitably become an inter connected undertaking of Carew & Co. (the original undertaking, i.e. the appellant).
Not so much to acquire an existing undertaking as to establish, by a concealed expansionist objective, a new undertaking with sugar manufacture is the core of the operation.
Therefore, it is not section 23(4) that magnetizes the appellant 's proposal but, prima facie, Sec. 22.
[395EF] Per Fazal Ali, J. (Concurring) The object of the Act appears to be to pre vent concentration of wealth in the hands of a few and to curb monopolistic tendencies or expansionist industrial endeavours.
This objective is sought to be achieved by placing three tier curb on industrial activities to which the Act applies, namely: (1) By providing that if it is proposed to substantially expand the activities of a Company by issue of fresh capital or.
by installation of new machinery, then notice to the Central Government and its approval must be taken under section 21 of the Act.
(2) In the case of establishment of a new Company by insisting on the previous permission of the Central Government under section 22 of the Act.
(3) In the case of acquisition of an existing Company by another Company by requiring the sanction of the Central Government to be taken by such Company under section 23 of the Act.
The present case may fall within the second category.
[1398 H, 399AB]
