Messers Das Bank Ltd. instituted a mortgage suit against the responded on January 19, 1950 in respect of the tea garden mortgaged with them in 1943.
On reorganisation of the Judicial Administration in 'Tripura, the suit was transferred from the Tripura High Court to the court of the District Judge, Agartala.
On the application by the Bank for appointment of a receiver, an employee of the Bank was appointed as the receiver subject to his furnishing security in the sum of Rs. 50,000.
The Receiver took possession of the estate on 22nd January, on February 26, 1 950 the tea garden was damaged by a tire which destroyed over 3,000 tea saplings.
The respondent moved an application asking for damages from the Receiver on the ground that the fire had occured due to his negligence.
He also renewed his request that the receiver be asked to furnish security.
On August 26, 1950, the appellant M/s. Howrah Insurance Co. executed a surety bond in the sum of Rs. 50,000 in favour of Shri R. M. Goswami, District Judge, Agartala, his successors, successors in office and assigns.
The bond was approved and accepted by the District judge on October 10, 1950.
The bond was executed both by the Receiver and the appellant in favour of "Sri Ramani Mohan Goswami the District Judge of Agartala, his successors, successors in office and assigns.
" By the bond, the executants bound themselves jointly and severalty in the whole of the amount of Rs. 50,000 up to the District Judge Agartala, his successors, successors in office and assigns.
The bond, though executed on August 26, 1950, related back to January 22, 1950 being the date when the Receiver took possession of the property.
By virtue of the powers conferred by the Tripura (Courts) order of 1950 which came into force on December 31, 1950 the District Judge transferred the mortgage slit to the court of the Subordinate Judge.
Agartala.
The transferee court was created under the order of 1950.
The Subordinate Judge decreed the suit and also allowed the respondent 's application for damages to the extent of Rs. 32,525.
The appeal filed by the Receiver was dismissed for default by the Judicial Commissioner, 'Tripura, but he allowed the respondent 's cross objections and enhanced the damages to Rs. 41,525.
On the Execution Petition filed by the respondent, the Subordinate Judge directed that the damages awarded to the respondent be recovered from the appellant The appeal filed by the appellant against that order a, dismissed by the Judicial Commissioner and this appeal has been preferred on the basis of the special leave "ranted by this Court.
It was contended for the appellant that (l) 'The Subordinate Judge who tried the suit was incompetent to enforce the surety bond executed by the appellant as he was neither the successor nor the successor in office nor the assign of The District Judge; and (2) Under the terms of the bond, the appellant was not answerable for the loss caused to the tea garden by fire.
Rejecting the contentions and dismissing the appeal, HELD: ( I ) (i) Th Subordinate Judge of Agartala may not be the successor in office of the District Judge because "successor in office" would mean successor of the District Judge in the post or office of the District Judge.
But the Subordinate Judge, Agartala is, for the purposes of the present proceedings, a 357 successor of the District Judge who was seized of the suit and who transferred it to the Subordinate Judge under the Tripura (Courts) order of 1950.
The surety bond was executed in and for the purposes of the particular proceedings which were Pending before the District Judge, in order that the bond should be enforceable at the instance of the presiding other of the court.
"Successor", therefore, must in the context mean the court which for the time being is seized of the proceedings.
[359B C] (ii) By virtue of section 1 SO C.P.C., the Subordinate Judge was entitled to exercise the same powers in the matter of the enforcement of the bond as the District Judge himself.
[359D E] (iii) As laid down by section 145(c) of tho C.P.C., by the surety bond, the appellant rendered itself liable as a surety for the fulfilment of the conditions imposed on the Receiver under the orders passed by the Court, Therefore, the order for the recovery of damages obtained by respondent against the Receiver can be executed against the appellant to the extent to which it rendered itself personally liable under the terms of the bond.
[359 FG]] (2) 'The Receiver Was put in possession of the tea garden in his capacity as a Receiver and parties had made contentions from time to time as to whether the tea garden was managed by the Receiver economically and efficiently The surety bond which was given retrospective operation with effect from the date on which the Receiver had taken Possession of the mortgaged property including the tea garden, would therefore cover the loss occasioned to the tea garden due to the Receiver 's default.
[360B C]
