Section 13 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control.
Act, 1 VII of 1947 (which was the Act in force in Gujarat) enumerates the grounds on which a landlord may obtain possession of the premises let out to a tenant.
Clause (g) of that section provides that the landlord can obtain possession only if he satisfies the Court that the premises are reasonably and bona fide required for occupation by himself.
Section 25 provides that a landlord cannot use nor can he permit to be used for a non residential purpose any premises which, on the date when the Act came into force, were used for a residential purpose.
Sub section (2) of this Section makes contravention of the provisions of sub s.(1) punishable with imprisonment.
On the date on which the Act came into operation, the premises in dispute belonging to the respondent were used for residential purposes.
The respondent sought possession on the ground that it wanted them for its office for running a fair price shop, for establishing a godown, for conducting a tailoring and sewing class and such other purposes.
The trial cannot and the first appellate court found that the respondent needed the premises for its business: but dismissed the suits on the ground that in view of the provisions of section 25 of the Act The requirement could not be said to be reasonable and bona fide.
The High Court, while accepting that the premises were required by the respondent for its business, took the view that since the legislature dill not subject the right conferred on the landlord by s.13(1) to any other provision save the one contained in s 15 s.25 cannot be permitted to override s.13(1).
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Though the respondent required the premises for the purposes of its business, no decree for possession could be passed in its favour as its requirement could not be said to be reasonable.
The requirement runs across the statutory prohibition and is, therefore, not reasonable.
[415 E] (1) Under s.13(1)(g) it is not sufficient for a landlord to establish that the premises was e required by him but it has to be shown further that the requirement is reasonable and bona fide.
The requirement of the respondent in the instant case could not be called reasonable if the very statute under which it seeks relief contains an injunction that it shall not use residential premises for a non residential purpose.
Not only does the statute contain an injunction against the user of residential premises for a non residential purpose but it makes it penal For a landlord to use for a non residential purpose any premises which were used for a residential purpose on the date when the Act came into force.
[414C E] (2) (a) The approach of the High Court is misconceived.
The true question for consideration is not whether as between s.13(1) and s.25(1), one over rides the other, and indeed.
in view of the wording of the non obstane clause of section 13 (1), the provisions of that section must have priority over the rest of the Act except for what is contained in s.15.
But conceding to s.13(1) its rightful precedence and granting that it stands supreme except for s.15,.
according to its own terms the Court has to be satisfied that the requirement of the landlord is reasonable.
[415A B] (b) If the respondent fails it is not because s.25 overrides s.13(1) but because of its failure to prove the reasonableness of its requirement whether the requirement of the landlord ms reasonable or not ms to be judged from all the facts and circumstances of the case and a truly relevant circumstance 412 bearing on the reasonableness of the landlord 's requirement is that the purpose A for which the possession was sought was a purpose for which the premises could not be used save on pain of ' penal consequences.
[415 CD] (3) Courts sought not to construe a statute in a manner which will encourage the breach of any of its provisions and a decree ought not to be passed which, is ' honored, will attract penal consequences.
To pass a decree in favour of the respondent on the grounds accepted by the High Court is to invite the respondent to commit a breach of the statutory injunction contained in s.25(1).[415 D] Laxmi Co perative Bank Ltd. vs Mohan Govind Diwanji, 74 B.L.R 186, approved.
