The appellant who was a Lower Division Clerk in a department of the State Government had gone on transfer to another department on her own request.
Under a notification issued by the State Government.
a person could revert to his parent department (i) only if and when there is no vacancy for him to continue in the new unit or (ii) if for any reason his pay in the substantive post in the parent department becomes higher than the pay of the new post held by him.
The appellant was offered a temporary post of U.D.C. in the parent department but she declined.
The first respondent was therefore promoted to the post.
When a permanent vacancy of Upper Division Clerk occurred in the parent department the appellant was appointed to the post and was later promoted to higher post.
In a petition under article 226 of the Constitution filed by respondent No. 1 the High Court quashed the order of the appellant 's appointment and her promotion to the higher post.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court.
^ HELD: The order by which the appellant was appointed as an Upper Division Clerk in the parent department was illegal and was rightly quashed by the High Court.
The order promoting the appellant must fall with that order.
[378F] (I ) Since under paragraph of the notification an employee can come back to his old unit or department "only if and when" either of the two conditions is satisfied.
the appellant was not entitled to return to her parent department.
Unless she could validly revert to her old unit she could not be appointed to a roost higher than the one substantively held by her in that unit on the date of her transfer.
[378B C] (2) Pay in the substantive post in the parent department means the pay attached to the Post substantively held by an employee on the date of transfer to another department.
The pay which the appellant would have drawn as an Upper Division Clerk in her parent department on the date of her appointment was not higher.
than the pay which she was drawing in the new unit.
The substantive post held by the appellant apart from the impugned order of promotion was that of a Lower Division Clerk.
The comparison therefore has to be between the pay of that post and the pay of the post which the appellant was holding in the department to which she was transferred.
[377 H, 378E]
