Section 2(15) of the Income tax Act provides that 'charitable purpose ' includes relief of the poor, education medical relief.
and the advancement of any other object of general public utility.
The appellant is a sole trustee of the "Loka Shikshana Trust", holding properties mentioned in a schedule attached to a deed of trust executed on 19 2 1962 by himself purporting to re declare a trust of 15 7 1935.
The total assets of the earlier trust of 1935 consisted of a sum of Rs. 4308.109 only.
Under the provisions the earlier trust of the trustee had carried on a lucrative business of printing at Belgaum, and, thereafter, he started publishing a daily newspaper.
The value of the redeclared trust of 1962 stood at Rs. 2,97,658/ .
Clause 2 of the trust deed provided that the object of the Trust shall be to educate the people of India in general and of Karnatak in particular by (a) establishing conducting and helping directly or indirectly institutions calculated to educate the people by spread of knowledge on all matters of general interest and welfare; (b) founding and running reading rooms and libraries and keeping and conducting printing houses and publishing or aiding the publication of books, booklets, leaflets, pamphlets, magazines etc,, in Kannada and other languages, all these activities being started, conducted and carried on with the object of educating the people; (c) supplying the Kannada speaking people with an organ or organs of educated public opinion and conducting journals in Kannada and other language for the dissemination of useful news and information and for the ventilation of public opinion on matters of general public utility; and (d) helping directly or indirectly societies and institutions which have all or any of the aforesaid objects in view.
The Income tax officer sent a communication to the trust on April 27, 1963 to the effect that, since the only activity of the trust was printing, publication, and sale of newspaper.
weekly and monthly journal, the trust carried on an activity for profit.
The claim of the sole trustee was rejected, and, having been unsuccessful through out the appellant has preferred this appeal after certification of the case under section 261 of the Income tax Act, 1961.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (Per H. R. Khanna and A. C. Gupta, JJ.) (1) It is not correct to say that the word "profit" in section 2(15) of the Act means private profit.
The word used in the definition provision is profit and not private profit and it would not be permissible to read in the definition the word 462 "private" as qualifying profit even though such word is not there.
There is also no apparent justification or cogent reason for placing much a construction on the word "profit".
[472B] The words "general public utility" contained in the definition of charitable purpose are very wide.
These words exclude objects of private gain [472C] All India Spinners ' Association vs Commissioner of Income tax, , relied on.
It is also not correct to say that the newly added words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" merely qualify and affirm what was the position as it obtained under the definition in the Act of 1922.
If the legislature intended that the concept of charitable purpose should be the same under the Act of 1961 as it was in the Act of 1922, there was no necessity for it to add the new words in the definition.
The earlier definition did not involve any ambiguity.
and the position in law was clear and admitted of no doubt after the pronoumcement of the Judicial Committee in the Tribune case and in the case of All India Spinners ' Association.
If despite that fact, the legislature added new words in the definition of charitable purpose, it would be contrary to all rules of construction to ignore the impact or the newly added words and to so construe the definition as it the newly added words were either not there or were intended to be otiose and redundant.
[47CC E] (ii) The sense in which the word "education" has been used in section 2(15) is the systematic instruction, schooling, or training given to the young in preparation for the work of life.
It also connotes the whole course of scholastic instruction which a person has received.
The word "education" has, not been used in that wide and extended sense according to which every acquisition of further knowledge constitutes education.
According to this wide and extended sense, travelling is education, because as a result of travelling you acquire fresh knowledge.
Likewise, if you read newspapers and magazines, see pictures, visit art galleries, museums and zoos, you thereby add to your knowledge.
Again, when your grow up and have dealings with other people, some of whom are not straight, you learn by experience and thus add to your knowledge of the ways of the world.
If you are not careful, your wallet is liable to be stolen or you are liable to be cheated by some unscrupulous is liable to be stolen or you are liable to be cheated by some unscrupulous person.
The thief who removes your wallet and the swindler who cheats you teach you a lesson and in the process make you wiser though poorer.
If you visit a night club, you get acquainted wit and add to your knowledge about some to the not much revealed realities and mysteries of life.
All this in a way is education in the great school of life.
But, that is not the sense in which the word "education" is used in clause (15) of section 2.
What education connotes in that clause is the process of training and developing the knowledge, skill mind, and character of students by formal schooling.
[469C F] (iii) The fact that the appellant trust is engaged in the business of printing and publication of newspaper and journals and the further fact that the afore said activity vields or is one likely to yield profit and there are no restrictions on the appellant trust earning profits in the course of its business would go to show that the purpose of the appellant trust does not satisfy the requirement that it should be one "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit." [471C D] In re The Trustees of the 'Tribune , State of Gujarat vs M/s Raipur Mfg. Co., [1967] 1 S.C.R. 618, and Commissioner of Income tax vs Lahore Electric Supply Co. Ltd., , referred to.
(i) It has been declared repeatedly by the Courts, even before the addition of the words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" to the definition of "charitab1e purpose".
that activities motivated by private profit making fell outside the concept of charity altogether.
It is more reasonable to infer that the words used clearly imposed a new qualification on public utilities entitled to exemption.
It was obvious that, unless such a limitation was introduced, the fourth and last category would become too wide to prevent 463 its abuse.
Wide words so used could have been limited in Scope by judicial interpretations ejusdem generis so as to confine the last category to objects similar to those in the previous categories and also subject to a dominant concept of charity which must govern all the four categories.
But, the declaration of law by the Privy Council, in the Tribune case had barred this method of limiting an obviously wide category of profitable activities of general public utility found entitled to exemption.
Hence, the only other way of cutting down the wide sweep of objects of "general public utility" entitled to exemption was by legislation.
This, therefore, was the method Parliament adopted as is clear from the speech of the Finance Minister who introduced the amendment in Parliament.
[482F H] Income Tax Commissioners vs Pemsel, ; , 583; Morice vs Bishop of Durham, ; All India Spinners ' Association vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay, 1944(12) ITR 482, 486; commissioner of Income Tax, Madras vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce, 1965(55) I.T.R. 722, 732; In re Grove Gredy , 582; Cape Brandy Syndicate vs I.R.C. , 71; Rt.
Hon 'ble Jerald Lord Strickland vs Carmelo Mifud Bonnici, A.I.R. 1935 P.C. 34; The Englishman Ltd. vs Engineering Mazdoor Sang & Anr., A.I.R. 1975 S.C. p. 946 @ 949; Commissioner of Income tax Gujarat vs Vadilal Lallubhai, 1972 (86) I.T.R. p. 2; Commissioner of Income tax vs Sadora Devi, 1957 (32) I.T.R. 615 @ 627 [1958] 1 I.S.C. 1 and In re the Tribune, , referred to.
(ii) If the profits must necessarily feed a charitable purpose, under the terms of the trust, the mere fact that the activities of the trust yield profit will not alter the charitable character of the trust.
The test is the genuineness of the purpose tested by the obligation created to spend the money exclusively or essentially on "charity".
If that obligation is there, the income becomes entitled to exemption.
That is the most reliable test.
The governing idea of charity must qualify purpose of every category enumerated in section 2(15) of the Act of 1961.
[483 C D] (iii) Although the term 'education ', as used in section 2(15) of the Act, seems wider and more comprehensive than education through educational institutions, such as Universities, whose income is given an exemption from income tax separately under section 10(22) of the Act, provided the educational institution concerned does not exist "for purposes of profit", yet the educational effects of a newspaper or publishing business are only indirect, problematical and quite incidental so that, without imposing any condition or qualification upon the nature of information to be disseminated or material to be published, the mere publication of news or views cannot be said to serve a purely or even predeminantly educational purpose in its ordinary and usual sense.
Judging from the facts set out in the trust deed itself, the sole trustee had managed to make the satisfaction of the needs mentioned in clause 2(c) a highly profitable business.
The deed puts no condition upon the conduct of the newspaper and publishing business from which one could infer that is was to be on "no profit and no loss" basis.
The High Court was right in coming to the conclusion that the appellant is not entitled to claim exemption from income tax.
[485 E G, 486 D] East India Industries (Madras) Pvt. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax Madras, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce, ; Md. Ibrahim Riza vs Commissioner of Income tax, Nagpur, (1930) L.R. I.A. 260 and Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengla II vs Indian Chamber of Commerce, ARGUMENTS For the appellant (1) The objects clause of the Trust is so worded as to make it clear that the whole and sole object of the Trust is education of the people of India 464 in general and of Karnatak in particular by the four means or modes set out h in that clause.
Those four means or modes are not separate objects of the Trust but are merely the instrumentalities prescribed by the Settlor for achieving the specified object of education.
Even assuming for the purpose of argument that sub clauses (a) to (d) of clause 4 of the Trust Deed are separate and distinct objects of the Trust, clause (c) which covers a newspaper or a journal is itself an object falling within the category of "education".
(2) The words added in the 1961 Act "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" go only with the last head viz "any other object of general public utility" and not with the first three heads.
This is put beyond doubt by the comma which appears after each of the first three heads, there being no comma after the fourth head.
(3) The present case falls within the second head of "charitable purpose", viz. education.
The ruling of the Privy Council in the Tribune case does not apply to the facts of the present case.
(4) Assuming that the case does not fall within the category of "education" it falls within the last head "any other object of general public utility, and the qualifying words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" are satisfied.
First the word "profit" means private gain, and the qualifying words merely say expressly what was implicit in the 1922 Act at 423, and at 488).
Even assuming the word "profit" covers profit for the Trust, involving no private gain, the qualifying words are still satisfied.
They require that the object of the Trust should not involve, i.e. entail that the trustees should carry on the activity for profit.
No such condition about making profit is imposed by the trust deed.
That profit may result from the activities of the Trust in a particular year is wholly irrelevant.
Profit making is not the motive of the Trust.
(5) Provisions of section ll of the Act clearly reveal that it is implicit in the very scheme of the Act that a business undertaking can be held in trust for an object of general public utility.
For the respondent (i) The decision of the Privy Council in the Tribune case squarely applies to the facts of the present case; (ii) For ascertaining that true meaning of the expression "not involving the carrying on of an activity for profit" it was not only permissible but only proper for the Courts to refer to parliamentary debates and other proceedings of the legislature.
(iii) Where a business undertaking is held as property of the Trust and income resulting therefrom is wholly applied for charitable purposes such as education, medical relief of the poor, or for any other object of general public utility but with which object the production or income is not linked it would be still exempt.
But if that income is utilised only for the purposes of advancing the very object from the advancement of which it is derived it would cease to be exempt.
The means and processes adopted by the Trustee for the advancement of the object were such as rendered the object itself as non charitable.
(iv) The expression "activity for profit" was much wider in cope than merely a business activity.
The legislature had intentionally used the expression "activity" instead of business because in some cases the income produced from the activity may not be legally assessable under the provisions of the Income tax Act, 1961 under the head "Income, profits and gains of business" (Section 28).
The expression 'activity for profit" in the context meant activity for profit making; (v) Since the advancement of education was being achieved by means involving the carrying on of an activity for profit, the Trust would still be denied exemption.
In other words, the qualifying words added to the definition at the end did not govern merely the last category of charity i.e. the object of general public utility but equally governed the earlier three well known categories namely medical relief, relief of the poor, and education.
The effect of the qualifying words "not involving the carrying on an activity for profit" was to deny exemption to trusts which carried on a profit making activity for advancing the object of general public utility.
