The respondent manufactures hot rolled finished steel products in rectangular cross section, of thickness varying between 16.2 mm and 311.2 mm in coils (hereinafter a referred to as the Product) product as Strip whereas the appellant classifies it as a skelp.
to higher excise duty than Strip.
The Assistant Collector the product as Skelp.
On appeal to the Collector of and rolled The respondent describes the Sklip is subject Central Excise treated Central Excise, he confirmed it and in revision the Central Government also approved.
The respondent filed a Writ Petition in the High Court.
The High Court accepted the contention of the respondent.
On appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended before this Court : (i) That it is primarily for the Taxing Authorities to determine the head or nature under which any particular commodity fell.
(ii) The Court can interfere with the decision only if it is perverse.
if there were two constructions possible and if the Taxing Authority accepts one of them the Court cannot interfere.
The respondent submitted '.
(i) Assessment without application of an identifiable test is perverse and arbitrary.
(ii) In the present case.
there was no iden tifiable test before the Taxing Authorities.
There is no difference between Skelp and Strip.
Dismissing the appeal, Held : There are large number of definitions out of which one can be picked up to satisfy the definition of Skelp according to some.
authority and another definition to fit in with the concept of strip according to another authority.
Since there is no statutory definition for Skelp and Strip, different tests have been resorted to by the different authorities.
The question arises whether the High Court was right in interfering with the orders under article 226 of the: Constitution.
It is not for this Court to come to the conclusion on facts.
The absence of any identifiable standard naturally gives rise to the scope for arbitrary assessment at the hands of different authorities.
It is not possible to hold that: the High Court has gone wrong in granting the reliefs prayed for.
[422D F; 423C]
