Promotion from lower grades in the service to a higher grade is one on the methods of recruitment under r. 7 of the Punjab Educational Service Class III School Cadre Rules, 1955 Rule 10 of the rules states that members of the service would be entitled to such scales as may be authorised by the government from time to time.
The State Government issued letter dated 23rd July, 1957 on the subject of revision of scales of low paid government servants in which it was stated that the then existing scales of pay of certain categories of posts should, with effect from 1 May, 1957, be revised as shown therein.
In that letter teachers according to their qualifications were placed in categories A and B, and the respective scales o pay to which they were entitled were mentioned.
The letter dated 7 November, 1958 issued by the Deputy Director (Schools) to the Inspector of Schools stated that 25% of the posts of B.T./B.Ed.
masters should be filled by promotion from amongst teachers working in the lower grade who have passed the above examinations and that the selection was to be made on the basis of seniority cum merit.
The respondents who were teachers were promoted from time to time as masters but were never allowed continuously beyond six months to avoid continuity in service and were not given the revised scales.
They claimed the revised scales of pay as well as the posts of masters on the ground that they had taken the degrees in Bachelor of Teaching or its equivalent, that the letter dated 23 July, 1957 which became effective from 1 May, 1957 entitled them to the revised grade if they took the degree of Bachelor of Teaching or its equivalent and that the letter of 7 November 1958 entitled them to the posts of masters to the extent of 25% on the vacancies.
The High Court allowed their prayers.
In appeal to this Court it was con tended by the State that (1) there was not to be a mass increase of pay of all teachers to that grade of pay but what the letter dated 23 July, 1957 meant was that a teacher who passed B.T. examination would be entitled to be appointed a master and on being so appointed would be entitled to the scale of pay.
and (ii) that according to the letter of 7 November 1958 teachers who were qualified by possessing B.T./B.Ed.
degrees would be entitled to get 25% of the posts provided the respective posts, according to their subject combination, were vacant.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: The letter dated 23 July, 1957 fixed the scale of pay on the basis of academic qualifications while the letter dated 7 November 1958 recognised the right of promotion to the posts of masters to the extent of 25%.
[533E] 1.(a) Rule 10 entitles the teachers to such scales of pay as may be authorised by the Government from time to time.
Letter dated 23 July,.
1957 showed that teachers who possessed the degree of B.T. Or its equivalent on 1 May, 1957 would be entitled to scales of pay mentioned therein.
Those who will pass the examination of ' B.T. thereafter would be entitled to their revised scale of pay with effect from the date they passed the examination.
[532G] (b) The contention of the State that there was not to be a mass increase of scales of pay is unsound.
Teachers who possessed degrees became entitled to the scales of pay according to category A. [532H] 530 (c) The High Court rightly came to the conclusion that the scale of pay would be effective either from the date when the teachers would pass the examination of B.T. Or its equivalent or I May, 1957, whichever is later.
[533B] (2) The High Court rightly held that the letter dated 7 November, 1958 was subject only to two limitations namely (1) that teachers could not claim more than one fourth of the vacancies of posts of masters, and (ii) the claim by way of promotion would be considered by the appointing authority on the basis of seniority cum merit.
No condition of combination of subjects could be read into the letter of 7 November 1958.
The High Court was also correct in holding that the teachers were to be treated as serving in that scale of pay continuously and not on six months basis, and that the teachers were to be considered for appointment to the posts of masters to the extent of 25% quota as recognised for their category of teachers on the basis of seniority cum merit without being subjected to the condition of subject combination.
[534A D]
