The vendors sold the suit land,to the appellants (vendees) by a registered deed of sale for Rs. 43,000/ .
The ' respondents filed the suit for possession by pre emption of the land in payment of Rs. 30,000/ on the allegations that the respondents were on the date of sale tenants of the land under the vendors.
I They also alleged that the sale took place for Rs. 30,000/ only and the re maining amount was fictitiously mentioned in the deed of sale.
The suit was ' dismissed on the ground that one suit on behalf of the four plaintiffs who were tenants of different parts of the land, was not maintainable.
On appeal the suit was remanded for re trial.
At the trial on remand, two plaintiffs withdrew from the suit.
The trial court directed the remaining two plaintiffs respondents Sohan Lal and Nathi to deposit Rs. 6,300/_ and Rs. 5.670/ respectively on or before 1 April, 1969 less 1/5th of the pre emption amount already deposited by them.
The Trial Court gave the respondent Sohan Lal a decree for possession by pre emption in respect of Killa Nos.
14/1 .
17 and 18/1 of Rectangle 37.
The plaintiffs respondents, aggrieved by the order filed an appeal alleging that the decree should have been Passed for the whole of the land because the respondent Sohan Lal was also a tenant of Killa , No.
24 of Rectangle 37 under the vendors.
On 29 July 1969.
the Additional District Judge passed a decree for possession by pre emption in favour of respondent Sohan Lal of Killa No. 24 of Rectangle 37 on payment of Rs. 9,100/ and he was also directed to deposit this amount on or before 20 August, 1969.
The decree in favour of Nathi was maintained without charge.
The appellants filed an appeal before the High Court and it was contended before the High Court that respondents did not deposit the decretal amount by l April, 1969 as directed by the Trial Court and, therefore, the suit was liable to be dismissed under order 20 Rule 14 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The High Court accepted the appeal of the appellants against the plaintiff Nathi and dismissed the appeal against the plaintiff respondent Sohan Lal.
The High Court said that since the lower appellate court granted Sohan Lal decree for one more Killa and directed that the amount would be Rs. 9,100/ .
the respondent was to comply with the appellate decree and not the decree of the Trial Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: (1) The directions given by the Trial Court are mandatory under the provisions contained in order 20 Rule 14 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
A decree in terms of order 20 Rule 14, imposes obligations on both sides and they are so conditioned that performance by one is conditional on performance bt the other.
[600E F, G].
Naguba Appa vs Namdey reported in A.I.R. l 954 S.C. 50 and Dattaraya S/o Keshav Tawalay vs Shaikh Ali and Anr.[1969] 2 S.C.R. 514 relied on.
(ii) It is only if the plaintiffs respondents had obtained another order from the lower appellate Court granting any order of stay that the lower appellate court might have considered the passing of appropriate order in favour of pre emptors.
The High Court should have allowed the appellants ' appeal and not made any distinction in dismissing plaintiffs respondent Nathi 's suit and allowing Plaintiff respondent Sohan Lal any extension of time to make the payment.
[601F G] 599
