The respondents were small land owners within the meaning of Punjab Securrity of ' Land Tenures Act, 1953.
The respondents, later on inherited certain lands which together with the lands already held by them exceeded the ceiling area.
The respondents, therefore, ceased to be small land owners.
The respondents thereafter divested themselves of the excess lands by executing gift deed, mortgage with possession and pursuant to decrees passed in favour of their near relations.
The Collector after investigating into the matter declared the lands in excess of the ceiling area as surplus lands and ignored the subsequent transfers.
An appeal filed by the respondents was rejected by the Commissioner.
Respondents Revision Applications to the Financial Commissioner were also rejected.
The respondents thereafter filed Writ Petitions in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petitions holding that section 19B read with section 10A did not affect the transfers made by the respondents.
According to High Court the transfers affected during the period prescribed for filing returns are valid since they were consistent with the scheme of ' the act which requires that no one should hold land in excess of permissible limits.
Section 2(2) of the Act defines small land owner as a person owning less than certain area of land.
Permissible area is defined limiting the maximum permissible extent a person may hold land.
So long as a person does not hold lands in excess of permissible area he is a small land holder.
He can evict his tenants from the holding and be in actual enjoyment as provided by the Act.
If any person has lands beyond the permissible area he becomes a large land owner and he has to surrender the excess land after choosing the best area he desires to keep.
Such excess land goes to the surplus pool which is distributed for the rehabilitation of ejected tenants and landless persons.
The Act was amended by inserting section 10A and Section 19B with retrospective effect.
Section 10A provides that for the purpose of determining the surplus area of any person any judgment, decree or order of a Court or authority contained after the commencement of the Act and having the effect of diminishing the area of such person which could have been declared as his surplus area shall be ignored.
Section 19B provides that if after the commencement, of the Act any person whether as land owner or tenant acquires by inheritance or by bequest or gift from a person to whom he is an heir or if any person after the commencement of the Act acquires in any other manner any land and which with or without the lands already owned or.
held by him exceeds in the aggregate the permissible area such a person is required to file a return with the Collector in the prescribed form giving the necessary particulars and selecting the land not exceeding the permissible area which he desires to retain.
The section further provides that the surplus land in excess of the permissible area would be distributed among the tenants who are evicted or landless persons.
On an appeal by certificate under Article 133(1)(c) in one appeal and in an appeal by Special Leave in another allowing the appeals held ^ 1.
Land reform is so strategic that special constitutional concern has been shown for this programme.
The State naturally enacted the Act whereby ceiling on land ownership was set.
surplus lands were taken over for settling ejected tenants and others.
If constitutionally envisioned socio economic revolution is 627 not to be a paper tiger, agrarian lands have to be meaningfully enacted, interpreted and executed and the Court is not the anti hero of the Drama of limping land reform.
The decision of this Court in Amar Singh 's case A.I.R. , 996 followed.
[628 B C 631 A] 2.
It is settled law that Courts should favour an interpretation that promotes the general purpose of an Act rather than one that does not.
[634 E] 3.
The agrarian reform laws with special constitutional status, as it were warrant interpretative skills which, will stiffle the evasive attempts, specialty by way of gifts and bequests and suspect transfers.
[635 C D] 4.
The profound concern of the law to preserve the surplus stock is manifest from the obligation cast by section 19B to declare and deliver excess lands.
The agrarian policy is equitable ownership and the reform philosophy is redistributive justice, the rural goal being small peasant proprietorship.
What difference does it make as to how you came by a large holding from the standpoint above outline ? The thrust of section 19B is that even if the source of the excess area is inheritance.
bequest or gift the capacity to own is conditioned by the permissible limit.
Section 10A does not militate against the mandate of section 19B.
Section 19B had to be enacted because the High Court took the view that the area which became surplus subsequent to the commencement of the Act was not hit by the ceiling and land acquired by an heir by inheritance is saved from utilisation by the State.
[633H 634A C] 5.
The reasoning of the High Court that the scheme of the Act was that no one should held land in excess of the permissible area and since after the transfers the land held by the respondent was within permissible limits there was no frustration of the policy of the law is repugnant to the basic scheme because the Surplus pool would be adversely affected if gifts and other transfers which would skim off surplus were to be allowed.
A legislation which has provided for ignoring decrees diminishing surplus lands and has otherwise prevented the escape of excess area by voluntary transfers cannot conceivably be intended to permit inherited excesses.
[634 F G] 6.
The further reasoning of the High Court that since section 19B gives to the owner who by inheritance comes to own an excess area.
a certain time for making a declaration, that during this period land owner can effect transfers, is obviously absurd.
What is intended to give some time to the heir to ascertain the assets he has inherited, make the choice of his reserved area which he likes to keep and make the necessary declaration.
The processual facility cannot be converted into an opportunity to prevert and thwart the substantive object of the law.
After all courts faced with special case situations, have creatively to interpret legislation [634 H; 635 A B]
