In 1957, the Hindustan Steel Limited (Company) and the appellant (contractor) entered into a contract for execution of the foundation and civil engineering work of the hot and cold rolling mills at Rourkela.
The Company was to pay to the Contractor all costs of construction and in addition pay fixed overhead charges for the head office and general office of the contractor plus a fixed fee.
All payments in respect of wages and salaries and connected pay matter made to persons engaged upon the work as might be approved by the Company comprising wages of all operatives as well as all other payments connected with wages were to be paid by the Company.
Emoluments of Site Supervisory staff as well as all other payments connected therewith were also to be paid by the Company.
The payments made to statutory schemes, in connection with sickness, or accident, or Provident Fund, or Pension or other like schemes to the above categories, payments of overtime and additional remuneration for ' Sunday, holiday or night work etc., and payments for leave and traveling cost were all to be made by the Company.
In 1960, the Labour Union of workmen employed by the Contractor raised a dispute for adjudication about the bonus payable to the workmen for doing the aforesaid job. 'The stand of ' the contractor was that they would pay the bonus if it were given by the Company.
The Government referred the question whether the workers of the contractor were entitled to any bonus and if so what should be the quantum.
The question whether the Company or the Contractor was liable to pay the bonus was not referred.
A notice was served on the company and the Company contended that since the contractor did not complete the work according to the agreement, no bonus was due to the contractor and that the Company was not a necessary party to the reference.
The contractor in the written statement contended that under the terms of the Contract the Company had to bear all costs with reference to labour, all payments in respect of wages, salaries and other connected payments made to persons engaged in the works and that the contractors were paid a stated fee for professional services rendered by them and that therefore, the demand against the contractor was not sustainable in law.
the contractor made an application to the Tribunal that for the proper adjudication of the issues referred to the Tribunal it was necessary to bring on record the Company as a party to the proceedings.
The said application was rejected by the Tribunal.
The contractor thereupon filed a Writ Petition in the High Court of orissa against the said order of the Tribunal.
The High court dismissed the said writ Petition.
The contractor filed an appeal by Special Leave to this Court.
This Court in that appeal held: "That it would have been open to the State Government to ask the Tribunal to consider as to who was the employer of the workmen and in that case the terms of reference might have been suitably framed.
In the present case such a course has not been adopted.
The dispute between the Company and the contractor would be a substantial dispute and cannot be regarded as incidental to the industrial dispute which was referred The Company was therefore a necessary party.
" 668 The Contractor, thereafter, filed an application before the Slate Government asking, them to modify the earlier reference by adding whether the bonus was payable by the Company or the contractor and by adding the Company as a party to the reference.
It was pointed out in that application that it was the Company which would be liable to pay the bonus if at all it was payable.
The contractor also asked for a personal hearing.
The Government disposed of that application by observing "Government do not find any materials on the basis of the petition to include Hindustan Steel Limited, Rourkela, as a party in the above case. ' The Government did not apply its mind to the other prayer, namely, adding one more issue to the reference.
The Contractor filed a writ Petition against the said order of the State Government.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition Against the judgment of the High Court the appellants appealed to Court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
It is apparent from the Government 's reply that the Government did not apply its mind to the facts placed before them.
There was at least an arguable case on the point as to who was liable to pay the bonus and in that close the Company would have been a necessary and appropriate party.
Even if the Government thought that the company was not a necessary party.
the question as to who was liable to pay the bonus was a very relevant question and that made the Company a necessary or at least a proper party.
The attitude of the contractor throughout had been that their contract was a cost contract; that the Company had to pay labour and the Company was the real employer.
That contention may or.
may not be upheld by the Tribunal.
This was however, an appropriate question to be referred to the Tribunal [674 C F] 2.
The power of the courts in relation to the orders or ' the appropriate Government in the matter of referring industrial disputes for adjudication is no longer in doubt.
[674 G] State of Bombay vs K P Krishan & Ors.
[1961] (1) [S.C.R. 227] and Bombay Union of Journalists vs The State of Bombay [1964(6) S.C.R. 22@ 24].
followed.
The powers of the Court mentioned in the above two cases in relation to the orders of the Government under any statute are not the only powers of the courts.
In England, in earlier days, the courts usually refused to interfere where the Government or the concerned officer passed what was called a nonspeaking order.
Where a speaking order was passed the Courts proceeded to consider the reasons given to see whether the reasons given were relevant reasons or considerations.
Where there was a non speaking order they used to saw it was like the face of the sphnix in the sense that it was inscrutable and.
therefore, held that they could not consider the question of the validity of the order.
Even in England, the courts have traveled very fast since those say.
They no longer find the face of the sphinx incurable.
Needless to say that the courts in India which function under a written constitution which confers fundamental rights on citizens exercise, far greater powers than those exercised by the courts in England where there is no written constitution and there are no fundamental rights.
The decision of ' House of Lords in Padfield vs Minister of Agriculture.
Fisheries and Food ; , followed.
[675 F H, 676 A] 3.
The Executive have to reach their decisions by taking into account relevant considerations.
They should not refuse to consider relevant matter.
nor should they take into account wholly irrelevant or extraneous considerations 'they should not misdirect themselves on a point of law.
only such a decision will be lawful.
The Courts have power to see that the Executive acts lawfully.
It is no answer to the exercise of that power to say that the Executive acted 669 bone fide nor that they have bestowed painstaking consideration .
They cannot avoid scrutiny by courts by failing to give reason.
If they give reasons and they are not good reasons, the court can direct them to reconsider the matter in the light of relevant matters though the propriety, adequacy or satisfactory character of these reasons may not be open to judicial scrutiny.
Even if.
the Executive considers it inexpedient to exercise their powers they should state their reasons and there must be material to show that they have considered all the relevant facts.
[679 D F] 4.
Judged by this test the order of the State Government is unsustainable.
The Government does not seem to have Noticed that the contract in question us not one of the and wherein a contractor undertakes to do a certain work for a certain sum.
In thus contract, the Company had to pay for the material as well as for labour.
the Contractor to a paid only for his professional services.
There was in any case no provision in the contract that the contractor was to incur any item of expenditure or make any payment in relation to the workmen.
The Government did not realise that the dispute concerned of merely two parties but three.
The Government order in the present case really amounts to an outright refusal to consider relevant matters and the Government also misdirected itself in point of law in wholly omitting to take into account the relevant considerations which as held by the House of Lords us unlawful behaviour.
The Government does not appear to have applied their mind to any of the considerations set out in the contractor 's application.[679 F H, 680 D&F] Allowing the appeal the Court directed the Government of Orissa to reconsider the matter and take a decision in the matter of reference in the light of the relevant facts.
[680 G]
