An analysis of section 10(2) (xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922, shows that in order to be a deductible expenditure the amount has to fulfil two conditions, (i) that it must be laid out wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business, profession or vocation.
and (ii) that it should not be an expenditure of a capital nature.
Both these conditions have to be complied with before an assessee can claim deduction under the section.
[660 G] Some of the tests that have been evolved by courts for determining when.
an the facts and circumstances of a particular case, the expenses disbursed an assessee amount to a capital expenditure or revenue receipt arc: (a) Bringing into an asset or advantage of enduring nature would lead to the inference that the expenditure is of a capital nature.
The terms `asset ' or `advantage of enduring nature ' are descriptive and the question will depend upon the facts of each case.
(b) An item of disbursement may be regarded as of a capital nature when it is relatable to a fixed asset or capital, whereas circulating capital or stock in trade would be revenue receipt.
John Smith & Sons vs Moore , 282, referred to .
(c) Expenditure relating to frame work of the business is generally of a capital nature.
(d) When a managing agency is terminated the termination is in terrorem, that is if commercial expediency requires that the agency should the terminated as it had become one, or it was creating difficulties or the agents were guilty of negligence, etc., or if any payments were made as retrenchment compensation, or confirment of benefit an employees or for termination of other disadvantages or onerous relationship it would be a capital expenditure but if it is purely voluntary obtaining substantial benefits it would be revenue expenditure.
[659E 660D] In the present case, the appellant agreed to employ a firm as its managing agent for 20 years and to pay them commission at 2 1/2%.
But after two years the appellant terminated the agreement.
The managing agents received Rs. 25,000 as compensation and executed a release deed.
The appellant thereafter employed another managing agent at 2% commission.
There was nothing to show that the out going managing agents were guilty of any faches, negligence, or that they had cause and loss or disadvantage to the appellant so as to justify the sudden termination of their agency, or that they did not agree to reduce the commission.
On the other hand, the Board of Directors paid high compliments to the outgoing managing agents.
By employing the new managing agents at the lesser commission a net profit of Rs. 30,000 was made by the appellant per annum.
The members of the outgoing and incoming agents, belonged to the same family as the appellants, showing, that the appellants were interested in both of them.
The appellant contended that the expenses of Rs. 2,50,000 was incurred by the appellant wholly and exclusively for carrying on the business or the company and would therefore be an allowable deduction under section 10(2) (xv); but the department and the Tribunal negatived the contention.
On reference, the High Court held that the expenditure was incurred wholly and exclusively for the Purpose of `appellant 's business.
as the amount was in the nature of a capital expenditure, it was not deductible under the provision.
649 Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The High Court was right holding that the disbursement of compensation of Rs. 2,50,000 was of a capital nature and was therefore not a deductible expenditure under section 10(2) (xv ).
[661 (G] (1) Merely because the expenditure is incurred in the course of the business is in could not be said that it would never be a capital expenditure.
Section 37 of the 1961 Act corresponding to section 10(2)(xv) of the 1922 Act.
itself templates a contingency where, even though the expenditure us incurred wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the business, it may still be of a capital nature.
But the High Court was in error in this case in holding that the expenditure was wholly and exclusively the purpose of the business, because.
the finding is not borne out by the facts and circumstances of the case.
[660 H 661 A, G H] (2) The question whether compensation paid to the outgoing managing agents is capital or revenue expenditure depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
[662 A B] (3) The present case is covered by the decision of this Court in Godrej Company vs C.I.T. Bombay City (47 I.T.R. 381).
That case has considered all the previous decisions and has laid down that in circumstance such as in the instant case the expenditure would be a capital expenditure in the hands of the payer and a capital receipt in the hands of the payee company within the managing of section 10(2) (xv) .
The contention that the case was concerned any as with the nature of the payment in the hands of the payee company and that the observations regarding the nature of the payment in the hands of the payer company would be abiter, is without substance.
[654C, G H] (4)(a) The appellant has brought into existence an advantage of an enduring nature by the change in managing agency, because, the amount of Rs. 30,000 which the appellant got by way of recurring benefit per annum must be regarded as an advantage of an enduring nature so as to fall within its definition in Atherton vs British Insulated and Helsby Cables Ltd. (10 T.C 671) leading to the inference that the expenditure is of a capital nature.
[661 F] (b) It was not the case of the appellant reducing its expenditure by getting rid of the managing agency and taking over the management itself to save the middleman profit.
[653 B] (c) In the present case the only inference that could be drawn from the circumstances of the case is that the termination of the managing agency by the appellant was with the oblique motive of benefiting both the managing agents, in whom the appellant was interested, and not because of and commercial expediency.
[661 D] C.I.T West Bengal II Calcutta vs Coal Shipment (P) Ltd ; , 740 41.
The Commissioner of Income tax Madras vs M/s. Ashok Leyland Ltd ; 204 and M. K. Brothers (P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax Kanpur ; , 34 followed.
Anglo Persian oil Co. (India) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax 133; Commissioner of Income tax vs Shaw Wallace and Company L.R. 59 I.A. 206, 211; Karam Chand Thopar and Brothers.
(P) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax (Central) Calcutta , 171.
Commissioner of Income tax Calcutta vs Turner Morrison & Company.
Private Ltd. , 156 and Greaves Cotton & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax Bombay City , 134, explained.
