On 10 4 1968, a steamer arrived at the Madras port and landed inter alia a consignment or 202 bundles of black plain sheets of various sizes.
The appellants received the goods and stored them in the transit sheds.
The goods were imported by the first respondent under an authorisation issued by the State Trading Corporation of India which held a licence to import the goods from Hungary.
The clearing agents of the first respondent filed a bill of entry with the Collector of Customs.
But, the Customs authorities detained the goods as the specifications in the import licence did not tally with the description of the imported goods.
The Customs Authorities then issued a show cause notice to the 1st respondent and after considering his explanation passed an order confiscating the goods.
The first respondent preferred an appeal against that order to the Board which allowed the appeal.
On an application of respondent No. 1 the Customs Authorities issued a certificate stating that the goods were detained by the Customs Authorities from 24 4 1963 to 21 8 1964 for examination under sections 17(3) and 17(4) of the other than in the ordinary process of appraisement and that the detention was due to no fault or negligence on the part of the correspondent.
Acting on this certificate, the appellants waived the demurrage for the period covered by the certificate.
As a result of the said certificate, the appellant charged respondent No. 1, Rs. 1963/ instead of Rs. 3,20,951/ by way of demurrage.
Thereafter, the respondent No. I cleared the consignment.
In January, 1965, the appellants wrote a letter to the Customs Authorities stating that the certificate was issued erroneously and that the Customs Authorities should reconsider the matter.
In April, 1965, the Customs Authorities owned the mistake that the certificate was incorrect as the goods were detained in order to ascertain whether the Import Trade Control formalities were complied with and not for examination and assessment of duty under Sections 17(3) and 17(4) of the .
The appellants brought the present suit against respondent No. 1.
and the Union of India and Customs Authorities to recover the balance of ' demurrage amounting to about Rs. 3 Lacs.
The first respondent disputed is liability to pay the demurrage on the ground that it could not be penalised either for the delay caused by the Customs Authorities in clearing the goods or in the issuance by them of a wrong certificate.
The first respondent also contended that the scale of charges in the Port Trust Regulations under the heading Demurrage was void and ultra vires both for the reason that it was unreasonable and because the scale of charges was not within the authority of the appellants.
The High Court dismissed the suit for the following reasons (1) The Scale of rates fixed by the Board is in the nature of bye laws.
(2) Viewed as a bye law Rule 13(b) under which the Board can charge demurrage for the period during which the goods are detained for.
no fault or negligence of the importer or his agent, is unreasonable and therefore void.
(3) In principle, there can be no distinction between cases falling under clause (a) and those falling under clause (b) of Rule 13 and if 722 no demurrage is leviable in respect of cases falling within clause (a) no demurrage could be charged in respect of cases falling within clause (b).
The distinction made by the Board between the two kinds of cases was therefore arbitrary and unreasonable.
(4) 'Demurrage ', being a charge for wilful failure to remove the goods, can be levied only if the failure to remove the goods is due to the fault or negligence, of the importer or his agent.
(5) Having regard to this well accepted meaning of the word 'demurrage ', the authority given to the Board by section 12 of the Act to frame the scale of rates can be exercised only for the purpose of levying charges where the importer was not prevented by any lawful authority from clearing the goods from the transit area and he had defaulted or was negligent in clearing the goods.
(6) Since Rule 13(b) empowers the Board to charge demurrage even when the goods are detained for no fault or negligence of the importer or his agent, it is beyond the authority conferred by section 42 and is therefore, void.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD:(1) The High Court erred in holding that the sale of rates and statements of condition framed by the appellant under sections 42, 43, and 43A are by laws.
Those sections confer authority on the.
Board to frame a sale of rates at which and a statement of conditions under which any of the services specified therein shall be performed.
[732 C, 731 F] 2.
A bye law has been said to be an ordinance affecting the public, or some portion of the public, imposed by some authority clothed with statutory powers, ordering something to be done or not to be done and accompanied by some sanction or penalty for its non observance.
The Board 's power to frame a scale of rates and statement of conditions is not a regulatory power to order that something must be done or something may not be done.
The rates and conditions govern the basis on which the Board performs the services.
Those who desire to avail of the services of the Board are liable to pay for those services at prescribed rates and to perform the conditions framed by the Board.
In fact some of the services which the Board renders are optional.
Where services are offence by a public authority on payment of a price, conditions governing the offer and acceptance of services are not in the nature of bye laws.
They reflect or represent an agreement between the parties one offering his services at the prescribed rates and the other accepting the service at those rates.
[732 D H] 3.
Bye laws may be treated as ultra vires on the grounds, amongst others that they are repugnant to the statute under which they are made or that they are unreasonable.
But even a bye law cannot be declared ultra vires on the ground of unreasonableness merely because the court thinks that it goes further than is necessary or that it does not contain the necessary qualifications or exceptions.
Kruse vs Johnson , relied on.
[731 F. 733 B] 4.
Port Trusts are bodies of a public representative character who are entrusted by the Legislature with authority to, frame a scale of ' rates and a statement of conditions subject to which the shall or may perform certain services.
Port Trusts are not commercial organisations which carry on business for their own profit.
The Board of Trustees is broad based body representing a cross section of a variety of interests.
The requirement of sanction by the Central Government is a restraint on unwise, excessive, or arbitrary fixation of rates.
section or a variety of interests.
The requirement of sanction by the Central whole or any portion of rates or charges leviable according to any scale in force under section 44.
Thus the Statute provides for the necessary safeguards, checks and counter checks as an insurance against fixation and levy of harsh or unjust rates.
Section 49 of the Act confers power on the Assistant Collector of Customs if he is satisfied that the goods cannot be cleared within a 723 reasonable time to permit that the goods might pending clearance be stored in a public warehouse or in a private warehouse.
In face of these considerations it is impossible to characterise the scheme for the levy of rates as arbitrary or unreasonable.
[734 & G H, 735 A C] 5.
The High Court erred in equating cases falling under clause (h) with those falling under clause (a) of Rule 13.
The two classes deal with different sets of cases.
Clause (a) deals with cases where goods are detained for examination under sections 17(3) and 17(4) or for chemical test under section 144 whereas clause (b) deals with cases where the goods are detained on account of Import Trade Control formalities or for compliance of formalities prescribed under the Drugs Act.
There is no warrant for the court substituting its own view as to the allowance of three days in a technical matter like the fixation of rates which has been considered by an export Board of Trustees and whose decision has been confirmed by the Central Government.
Equating the two clauses of cases dealt with by clauses (a) and (b) of Rule 13 might seem to the court a more prudent or reasonable way of fixing scales of rates but that is not a correct test for deciding the validity of the impugned provision.
[735 D F] 6.
The High Court overlooked a fundamental aspect of fixation of rates.
The Board is under a statutory obligation to render services of various kinds and those services have not to be rendered for the personal benefit of this for that importer but in the larger national interest.
Congestion in the ports affects the free movement of ships and of essential goods.
The scale of rates has, therefore, to be framed in a manner which will act both as an incentive and as a compulsion for the expeditious removal of the goods from the transit area.
Ships, like wagons, have to be kept moving and that can happen only if there is pressure on the importer to remove the goods from the Board 's permises with the utmost expedition.
1735 F H; 736 A] 7.
As regards the appellants ' claim against the first respondent.
facts must come before the law because legal principles cannot be applied in a vacuum.
No oral evidence was let by the parties and documents do not prove them selves nor indeed is the admissibility of a document proof by itself of the truth of its; contents.
The Import Licence stood in the name of the State Trading Corporation.
It issued an authorisation in favour of the first respondent.
The first respondent was only entitled to charge a commission for the work done by it in pursuance of the authorisation issued by the Corporation.
If the appellants were to enforce the statutory lien.
the incidence of the demurrage would have fallen on the Corporation in whom the title to the goods was vested.
The appellants permitted the goods to be cleared without demanding the demurrage which they claimed later, thereby depriving the respondent of the opportunity and the right to reject the goods as against the supplier.
In the absence of any more faces, it is impossible on the record as it stands, to accept the appellants ' claim against the first respondent.
[737 F H, 738 A B]
