The appellant & Forest Contractor felled trees in excess of the permitted number authorised by the contract entered into by him with the State of Andhra Pradesh Certain penalty was imposed on the appellant under rule 29 of he Forest Contract Rules framed in exercise of the powers conferred by Hyderabad Forest Act The Forest Officer found that the appellant felled more trees and therefore, gave a show cause notice to the appellant The appellant prayed for re enumeration of the trees given from the forest.
He was given an opportunity which was not availed by him to check the stumps in the coupe as desired by him Consequently, a penalty was levied.
Thereafter, the contract was terminated After the termination of the contract the process for recovery of the penalty was started Rule 29 reads as under: (1) Penalty on termination of a contract for breach of conditions: Every forest contract shall be in writing in the form annexed hereto and shall contain a provision whereby the forest contractor binds him self to do all the duties and acts required to be done by or under the contract, and convenants that he and his servants and agents shall abstain from all the acts forbidden by or under such contract (2) The sums to be mentioned in a forest contract as payable in case of a breach of any such stipulation shall not exceed one quarter of the total consideration to be paid by the contractor, and shall be recoverable in accordance with the provisions of the Hyderabad Forest Act 1355 and of this rule Provided that where such consideration is not an ascertained amount the forest officer executing the contract shall make an estimate of the total amount that would be payable if the contract were fully complied with, and such estimate shall be deemed to be for the purpose of this sub rule the total consideration to be paid by the contractor.
(3) This sum shall be realized from the contractor if the contract has been duly terminated in accordance with the provisions of rule 30, and then only under the written order or the forest officer executing the contract" The appellant filed a Writ Petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the imposition of the penalty.
The learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petition but the Division Bench allowed` the appeal filed by the State In an appeal by certificate, it was contended by the appellant before this Court that the termination of the contract for breach of conditions mentioned in rule 29 should precede the impost of penalty.
It was further contended that the principles of natural justice were violated The respondent contended that ascertaining the amount which is to be levied as a penalty.
need not be preceded by the termination of the contract.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1 It is clear that in the absence of a statutory exclusion of natural justice any exercise of power prejudicially affecting another must be in conformity with the rules of natural justice.
In the present case.
we are satisfied 771 that there is no foundation for the grievance of the appellant on the score of natural justice since an opportunity was afforded to the appellant before finally quantifying the penalty to be levied but the appellant did not avail himself of the opportunity.
[773 E F] 2.
On a true construction of rule 29 once a Forest Authority detects a breach it must investigate the extent and estimate, the nature and degree of damage caused by the breach, If it is serious they must proceed to ascertain the sum to be fixed as penalty.
In doing this, a reasonable opportunity must be given to the affected party.
After that, the penalty shall be quantified and the contract shall be terminated in the event the authorities come to the conclusion that the breach is grave enough for that drastic step.
Once the contract is; terminated the last procedure is realisation which can in no case be before the termination of the contract.
[774H, 775 A B.]
