The appellant bought a car from the dealers on the basis of a hire purchase agreement.
He filed a report before the police alleging that Ran Singh and others had practised a fraud on him and had taken away his car and had not returned the same.
On 3 12 1969, the police during the course of investigation recovered the car and landed it over to the appellant on supurdnama on his executing a personal bond whereby the appellant undertook to produce the car in the court whenever necessary, and in the case of failure to do so, he bound himself to pay a penalty of Rs. 5000/ .
By the time the matter came to the Court, two years had elapsed and on 14 9 1971, the munsiff magistrate, Meerut, called upon the appellant to produced the car, and as he was unable to do so.
a notice was issued under section 514 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for forfeiture of the bond.
After hearing the appellant, the magistrate ordered the forfeiture of the bond and directed the appellant to pay a penalty of Rs. 5000/ .
He failed in his appeal and his revision petition to the High Court was also dismissed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD :(1) A perusal of section 514 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
1898 clearly shows that a bond for production of the property seized by the police must be executed before the Court, although a bond for the appearance of any person before the Court can be taken by the police under section 170(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
This section also clearly enjoins that a bond can be forfeited only if` it is executed before a Court or before a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class.
In the present case, therefore.
Once the car was seized by the police, it was the duty of the police under section 523 to report the matter to the magistrate and get an order from him regarding the custody of the car.
This was not done.
Even the bond which was executed by the appellant, was not before the Court or the magistrate but before the police officer, and in these circumstances, therefore, the aforesaid bond was not one as contemplated by section 514 and, therefore.
could not be forfeited.
Rameshwar Bhartia v The State of Assam, A.I.R. 1952 'S.C. 405, relied on.
[781 FH. 782 Al (ii) Though the provisions of Regulation 165(ii) of the Government of Uttar Pradesh Police Regulations read with section 423 of the Code undoubtedly authorizes the police to seize the property and to make a summary order.
Of the custody of ' the property, neither section 523 nor rule 165 (ii) authorize the police officer to take a bond from the person to whom the property is entrusted.
[781 D E] Observation: Even in the new Criminal Procedure Code, there is no express provision which empowers the police to get a bond from the person to whom the property seized is entrusted.
This may lead to practical difficulties, for instance in cases where a bulky property is seized and the magistrate is living at a great distance, it would be difficult for a police officer to report to the magistrate with the property.
The Government will be well advised to make suitable amendments in the code to fill up this serious lacuna by giving power to the police for taking the bond in such circumstances.
1782 E Fl
