Section 18(1) of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953.
lays down that, notwithstanding to the contrary contained in any law, usage or contract, a tenant of a land owner other then a small land owner shall be entitled to purchase from the land owner the land so held by him in the Case of a tenant falling within Cl.
(i) or cl.
(ii) at any time.
and in the case of a tenant falling within Cl.
(iii) within a period of one year from the date of commencement of this Act.
Section 18(4)(a) provided that the 'tenant shall be competent to pay the purchase price either in a lump sum or in six monthly instalments not exceeding ten in the manner prescribed.
Clause (b) provided that, on the purchase price or the first instalment thereof, as the case may be, being deposited, the tenant shall be deemed to have become the owner of the land.
Teja, the landlord was a large land owner under whom there were three tenants.
Each o them applied for purchase of ownership under section 18(1) of the Act.
The Assistant Collector found them eligible, fixed the price and the instalments of payment, and they duly deposited the first instalment.
After this Teja died.
Before the Financial Commissioner, the appellants contended that on the death of Teja, they as the heirs of 'Teja, became entitled to shares and, in this process of fragmentation, they became small landowners within the meaning of section 2(2) of the Act and therefore the tenants will be disentitled to purchase the land.
Their plea was that an appeal is a continuation of the original proceeding and, therefore is there is a change of circumstances in the landlord 's ownership during the pendency of the appeal, resulting in his legal representatives becoming small landowners ' the tenants will be disentitled to purchase the land.
The appellants succeeded before the Financial Commissioner, but failed before the High Court.
This appeal has been preferred on the basis of the special leave granted by this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: (i) It is absolutely plain that on the deposit of the first instalment of the purchase price, the tenant shall be deemed to have become the owner of the land.
In the present case, all these happenings had resulted in the respondents becoming the owners.
[849 H] (ii) Where rights have already vested in a party, they cannot be nullified or negated by subsequent events save where there is a change in law and it is made applicable at any stage.
[852 B] P. Venkataswarlu vs Motor & General Traders ; , 1410, Bhajan Lal vs State of Panjab , Patterson vs State of Alabama ( 1934) 294 U.S. 600, 607 Lachmeshwar Prasad Shukul v, Keshwar Lal Chau ; , 607 Lachmeshwar Prasad Shukul vs Keshwar Lal Chaudhuri and Ramji Lal vs The State of Panjab, I.L.R. [1966] Punj.
125 referred to.
The death of the large landowner occurred pending the appeal.
The right of the respondents is fixed under sub sections (1) and (4) of S 18 of the Act and that cannot be uprooted by supervening circumstances.
A plain reading of section 18 Yields the only conclusion that the rights of parties are determined on the date they come to court.
[853 D] 6 1127SCI/75 848
