(1) A partition effected between the members of an Hindu Undivided Family by their own volition and with their consent cannot be reopened unless it is shown that it was obtained by fraud, coercion, misrepresentation or undue influence.
In such a case.
the Court should require strict proof of facts, because, an act inter vivos cannot be lightly set aside.
(2) When the partition is effected between the members of the Hindu Undivided Family which consists of minor coparceners it is binding on the minors also, if it is done in good faith and in a bona fide manner keeping into account the interests of the minors.
(3) But if the partition is proved to be unjust and unfair and is detrimental to the interests of the minors the partition can be reopened after any length of time.
In such a case, it is the duty of the Court to protect and safeguard the interests of the minors and the onus of proof that the partition was just and fair is on the party supporting the partition.
(4) Where there is a partition of immovable and movable properties, but the two transactions are distinct and separable, or have taken place at different times, if it is found that only one of these transactions is unjust and unfair, it is open to the court to maintain the transaction which is just and fair and to reopen the partition that is unjust and unfair.
[873D 874B] In 1940, two brothers, defendants 1 and 5 partitioned their movable and immovable properties by two separate transactions.
At that time defendant S had two sons who were minors.
They and their minor brothers filed a suit in 1952 for cancellation of the partition and for re opening it on the ground that the partition was unjust and unfair and had the effect of depriving the minors of their legal shares in the properties.
The trial court passed a preliminary decree for re partition of the movable properties as it was ex facie unjust and unfair and directed appointment of the Commissioner to go into the valuation of the assets sought to be partitioned while holding that the partition of immovable properties was neither unjust nor unfair.
In appeal, the High Court agreed with the findings of the trial court but set aside the direction of the trial court for the appointment of Commissioner; quantified the value of the disparity in the share of the plaintiffs and passed a decree to the extent of 2/5th share of Rs. 17.700.
In appeal to this court, passing a decree for a sum of Rs. 46,500/ with future interest in modification of the High Court 's decree, ^ HELD: (1) The division of immovable properties was just fair and equal.
The properties were not actually valued according to the market rate and only a notional valuation had been given in the partition deed; but, in view of the detailed examination by the two courts of the facts regarding capitalised value of the properties allotted to the two brothers, it could not be said that the partition of the immovable properties was either unfair or unjust.
This court will not interfere with concurrent findings of the fact given by the courts below in the absence of any extraordinary or special reasons.
[868E F; 869B C] 2(a) But a perusal of the schedules to the partition deed relating to movable properties shows an ex facie disparity of about Rs. 10,000.
[874B] (b) Further, the evidence disclosed that a sum of Rs. 55.000 with defend ant 1, was agreed upon between the brothers to be divided later, but this 7 1127 SCI/75 864 amount was not included in the partition deed.
Assuming that defendant 5 had not taken any objection, since the amount was very large, his Silence or his acquiescence in allowing his elder brother to swallow the amount was not a prudent act and has caused serious detriment to the interests of the minors which he had to protect because.
he and his minor sons were member of an Hindu Undivided Family.
[870H 871B] (c) Taking these two sums into account and calculating the plaintiff 's share in 1940 and adding interest thereon till date of decree, the plaintiffs would be entitled to Rs. 46,500.
[874D E] (d) The High Court was right in holding that it would not be in the interest of the minors or.
Of justice to order the appointment of a Commissioner for re opening the entire partition when the shares of the plaintiffs are easily ascertainable in terms of money and can be quantified.
[874C D] Bishunodeo Narain and vs Seogeni Rai and Jagernath.
556, followed.
Devarain and ors.
vs Janaki Ammal and Ors.
C.A. No. 2298 of 1066 dated r March 20, 1967, Lal Bahadur Singh vs Sispal Singh and ors.
T.L.R. 14 All 498; Chanvira 'Pa ' vs Da 'Na ' 'Va ' & ors.
I.L.R. and Maruti vs Rama I.L.R. referred to.
