Sub section (2) of 9. 220 of the Income tax Act.
1961 makes an assessee liable to pay simple interest at 4% p.a.
if the amount specified in any notice of demand under section 156 was not paid within the period limited under sub section
Sub section (3) states that without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub section
(2) on an application made by the assessee before the expiry of the due date under sub section
(1) the Income tax officer may extend the time for payment or allow payment by instalments, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of the case.
Out of a large sum of money which became payable by the respondent as income tax, half the amount was paid and in respect of the remaining half which was allowed to be paid in three instalments, the respondent had under taken to pay interest at the rate of 5% p.a.
even though section 220(2) of the Income tax Act, 1961 prescribed 4% as the rate of interest payable on such arrears.
The Income tax Officer accepted the term.
By the Finance Act, 1965 the rate of interest payable under this section was raised from 4% to 6% p.a.
On receipt of a notice from the Income tax officer, that on the unpaid balance of the tax arrears the company was liable to pay interest at 6% p.a., the respondent moved the high Court contending that it was not open to the Income tax officer to vary the rate from 5% to 6% even in spite of the change made by the Finance Act, 1965, in that a vested right could not be taken away by a statute which did not apply retrospectively.
The High Court allowed the writ petition.
On appeal to this Court it was contended by the respondent that sub sections
(2) and (3) of section 220 were independent provisions which operated in fields of their own.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) Sub sections (2) and (3) form part of the same section namely, section 220 and are therefore closely allied to each other.
It is true that the two sub sections deal with separate issues but the non obstante clause of sub section (3) clearly restricts the order passed under sub section
(3) to the conditions mentioned in sub section
(2) of section 220 of the Act.
[860 B] (2) It is the Finance Act which fixes the rate of interest payable under sub section
(2) of section 220.
It is not within the competence of the Income tax officer to vary the rate of interest fixed by the Finance Act under subs.
(2) of section 220 from time to time.
[860C D] Esthuri Aswathaiah vs Commissioner of Income fax Mysore and 416, followed.
(3) Sub section (3) of section 220 does not empower the Income tax officer to enter into any indefeasible settlement with the assessee or to clothe the Income tax officer with any such ,power so as to vary the statutory inhibition contained 856 in sub section
Any order which is passed under sub section
(3) would be subject to the rate of interest mentioned in sub section (2) and as soon as the rate mentioned in sub section
(2) is varied or enhanced by the legislature it would have to be read into sub section
(2) from the date of the amendment and any order passed under sub section
(3 ) would be subject to the rate so fixed.
If this is not the position then the order passed under sub section
(3) being prejudicial to sub section
(2) becomes illegal and invalid and the Income tax officer exceeds the limits of his jurisdiction in passing such an order.
[860F H] In the instant case there was no question of the Finance Act operating retrospectively nor was there any question of the Finance Act taking away a vested right which had accrued to the assessee because the order of the Income tax officer under sub section
(3) of section 220 does not amount to any final settlement or agreement.
The notice had merely given effect to the legal provisions of the Finance Act.
[861 B] (4) In is manifest that the Income tax officer could not have passed any order against the statutory provisions of sub section
( 2) of section 220 either with or without the consent of ' the assessee.
Even the order of the Income tax officer accepting the Offer.
Of the assesse to pay interest at the rate of 5% p.a. was legally invalid because if the rate of interest fixed by the statute was 4% the parties could not be allowed to contract out of the statute.
The only relief which the assessee could get was to pay interest at 4% p.a.
prior to the Finance Act, 1965 and at 6% after 1st April, 1965.
[861D E] Biswanath Ghosh vs Income tax officer, Ward, B. and Another , 374, approved.
