The respondent landlord filed a suit for eviction against the appellant tenant on the ground of bona fide personal requirement and that he has no other resonably suitable accommodation of his own which is one of the grounds of eviction under the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act.
The appellant filed a Written Statement denying the claim of the respondent.
After some evidence was recorded the parties entered into a compromise and filed it in the Court.
The compromise deed mentioned that "due to the necessity of the plaintiffs for their own business opening grocery shop, the decree for ejectment may be granted to them against the defendant".
The Trial Court passed a decree in terms of the compromise after coming to the conclusion that the compromise was legal.
the appellant was given 3 years ' time to vacate the premises under the compromise.
On the appellant 's failure to vacate after the expiry of three years, the respondent filed Execution Application.
The appellant objected to the execution on the ground that the compromise decree was void and inexecutable as being against the provisions of the Act.
The Execution Court accepted the appellant 's objection and dismissed the Execution Case.
The District Judge dismissed the appeal filed by the respondent.
The High Court allowing the Second Miscellaneous Appeal came to the conclusion that the decree was not a nullity and that it was executable.
In an appeal by Special Leave the Appellant contended that the decree was nullity since the Court was not satisfied that the eviction was in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The counsel further contended that even if what is stated in the compromise deed might be accepted as admission, the admission is only about the bona fide requirement and that there is no admission about the landlord not having any other suitable accommodation. ^ HELD: dismissing the appeal: 1.
In order to get a decree or order for eviction against a tenant whose tenancy is governed by any Rent Restriction or Eviction Control Act the Suitor must make out a case for eviction in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
When the suit is contested the issue goes to trial.
The Court passes a decree for eviction only if it is satisfied on evidence that a ground for passing such a decree in accordance with the requirement of the Statute has been established.
Even when the trial proceeds ex parte, this is so.
If, however, parties choose to enter into a compromise due to any reason such as to avoid the risk of protracted litigation, expenses it is open to them to do so.
The Court can pass a decree on the basis of the compromise.
In such a situation the only thing to be seen is whether the compromise is in violation of the requirement of the law.
In other words, parties cannot be permitted to have a tenant 's eviction merely by agreement without anything more.
The compromise must indicate either on its face or in the background of other materials in the case that the tenant expressly or impliedly is agreeing to suffer a decree for eviction because the landlord, in the circumstances, is entitled to have such a decree under the law.
The case of K. K. Chari vs P. M. Seshadri, followed [882 A D] 2.
It is too late in the day to contend that the provisions of order 23 rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure cannot apply to eviction suits governed by the special statutes.
A compromise of suit is permissible under the said provisions of law.
[882 E F] 879 3.
If the compromise for the eviction of the tenant is found on the facts of a particular case to be in violation of a Rent Control Act, the Court would refuse to record the compromise as it would not be a lawful agreement.
If the Court is satisfied on consideration of the terms of the compromise and if necessary by considering them in the context of the pleadings and other materials in the case that the agreement is lawful as in any other suit in an eviction suit the court is bound to record the compromise and pass a decree in accordance therewith.
[882 F G] 4.
The meaning of the term the bona fide requirement in the compromise deed is clear and definite specially in the background of the pleadings of the parties and it makes out a case of eviction within the meaning of the Act.
[883 C]
