The Sales Tax Officer assessed tax for the assessment years 1958 1959 and 1959 60, on the respondent assessee by two separate orders.
The assessee filed appeals against those orders before the Appellate Authority.
On May 10, 1963, when the appeals came up for hearing, the assessee was absent.
The appeals were, therefore.
dismissed in default by virtue of Rule 68(5) of the U.P. Sates tax Rules.
Sub rule (6) of Rule 68.
provided for setting aside such dismissal and for re admission of the appeal.
On the same day (May 10, 1963), the assessee made two applications in accordance with Sub rule (6) for setting aside the dismissal.
During the pendency of those applications, Subrule (5) of Rule 68 was declared ultra vires the rule making authority by Manchanda J. of the High Court who further held that the Appellate Authority could not dismiss an appeal in default but was bound to decide it on merits even though the appellant be absent.
When these applications under r. 68(6) came up for hearing.
on 20 10 64, the Appellate Authority dismissed them outright in view of the ruling of Manchanda J. Against the order of dismissal of his appeals, the assesees on 16 12 1964 filed two revision petitions under section 10 of the Sales tax Act, before the [Judge (Revisions) Sales tax].
These revisions petitions having been filed more than 18 months after the dismissed of the appeals which was the maximum period of limitation prescribed by sub section
(3) of section 10 were prima facie time barred.
They were however, accompanied by two application 's in which the assessee prayed for exclusion of the time spent by him in prosecuting the abortive proceedings under r. 68(6) for setting aside the dismissal of his appeals.
The Revisional Authority found that the assessee had been pursuing his remedy under r. 68(6) with due diligence and in good faith.
It therefore excluded the time spent in those proceedings from computation of limitation by applying section 14, Limitation Act and in consequence, held that the revision petitions were within time.
On the motion of the Commissioner of Sales tax.
the Judge (Revisions) Sales *ax made two references under section 11(1) of the Sales_tax Act to the High Court for answering the following question of law "Whether under the Circumstances of the case, section 14 of the Limitation Act extended 'the period for filing of the revisions by the time during which the restoration applications remained pending as being prosecuted bona fid.
" The references were heard by a Full Bench of three learned Judges each of whom wrote a separate Judgment.
Dwivedi J. with whom Singh J. agree utter refraining the question held "that the time spent in prosecuting the application for setting aside the order of dismissal of appeals in default can be 744 excluded from computing the period of limitation for filing the revision by the application of the principle underlying section 14(2), Limitation Act.
" Hari Swarup J. was of the opinion : "The Judge (Revisions) Sales tax while hearing the revisions under section 10 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act does not act as a Court but only as a revenue tribunal and hence the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act cannot apply to proceedings before him.
If the Limitation Act does not apply then neither section 29(2) nor is 14(2) of the Limitation Act will apply to proceedings before him." The learned Judge was further of the view that the principle of section 14(2) also, could not be invoked to extend the time beyond the maximum fixed by the Legislature in sub section (3 B) of section 10 of the Sales tax Act.
These appeals have been preferred on the basis of the special leave granted by this court.
Allowing the appeals, HELD : (i) If the legislature wilfully omits to incorporate something of an analogous law in a subsequent statute, or even if there is a casus omissus in a statute, the language of which is otherwise plain and unambiguous, the Court is not competent to supply the omission by engrafting on it or introducing in it, under the guise of interpretation, by analogy or implication, something what it thinks to be.
a general principle of justice and equity.
To do so "would be entrenching upon the preserves of Legislature", the primary function of a court of law being jus dicere and not jus dare.
[749D E] (ii) If the ' legislature in a special statute prescribes a certain period of limitation for filing a particular application thereunder and provides in 'clear terms that such period on sufficient cause being shown, may be extended, in the maximum, only upto a specified time limit and no further, then the tribunal concerned has no jurisdiction to treat within limitation, an application filed before it beyond such maximum time limit specified in the statute, by excluding the time spent in prosecuting in good faith and due diligence any prior proceeding on the analogy of section 14(2) of the Limitation Act.
[751D E] Ramdutt Ramkissen Dass vs E. D. Sesson & Co. A.I.R. 1929, P.C. 103 and Purshottam Dass Hassaram vs Impex (India) Ltd. A.I.R. 1954 Bom.
309, referred to.
(iii) In view of the pronouncements of this Court in Shrimati Ujjani Bhai vs State of U.P., and jagannath Prasad vs State of U.P. ; , there is no room for argument that the Appellate Authority and the Judge (Revisions) exencising jurisdiction under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, are 'Courts '.
They are merely administrative Tribunals and "not courts".
Section 14, Limitation Act, therefore, does not, in terms apply to proceedings before such Tribunals.
[747E] (iv) Three features of the scheme of provisions of section 10(3)(i) and section 10(3B) are noteworthy.
The first is that no limitation has been prescribed for the suo matu exercise of its jurisdiction by the Revising Authority.
The second is that the period of one year prescribed as limitation for filing an application for revision by the aggrieved party is unusually long.
The third is that the Revising Authority has no discretion to extend this period beyond a further period of six months, even on sufficient cause shown.
The three stark features of the scheme and language of these provisions, unmistakably show that the legislature has deliberately excluded the application of the principles of Ss. 5 and 14 of the Limitation Act.
except to the extent and in the truncated form embodied in sub section
(3 B) of section 10 of the Act.
[748D F]
