The appellant Surjit Lal was the owner of an immovable property called "Kathoke Lodge".
He used to derive rent income from the said property in addition to deriving income under other heads.
In 1956, he made a declaration throwing the said property into the family hotchpotch.
The family consisted of himself his wife and an unmarried daughter.
The appellant contended before the Income Tax Officer that the rent income derived from the said property should be assessed in the status of a Hindu Undivided Family.
The Income Tax Officer held: 1.
In the absence of a nucleus of joint family property there was nothing with which the appellant could mingle his separate property.
There could not be a Hindu Undivided family without there being Undivided family property.
An appeal filed before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was dismissed but on the following grounds: (1) After the declaration the appellant was dealing with the income of the property in the same way as before and, therefore, the declaration was not acted upon.
(2) Even assuming that the property was thrown into the common stock and was therefore joint family property, the income from that property could still be taxed in the appellant 's hands as he was the sole male member of the family.
The matter was further taken to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal by the appellant.
The Tribunal accepted the declaration as genuine and differed from the A.A.C. that it was not acted upon.
The Tribunal however, held that though the appellant had invested his separate property with the character of joint family property, he being a sole surviving coparcener continued to have the same absolute and unrestricted interest in the property as before and, therefore, in law, the property had to be treated as his separate property.
Thereafter the Tribunal referred the question of law to the High Court.
Before the High Court it was contended by the appellant that it is open to a male member of a joint Hindu Family to convert his self acquire property into joint family property by throwing it into the common hotchpotch, and that it was not necessary that there should be an ancestral nucleus or that there should be more than one male in the joint family.
On the other hand, the department contended that it was contrary to the basic concept of a Hindu undivided family that a single male alongwith females could form a joint Hindu family and that it was necessary for the formation of a joint Hindu family that there should be more than one male entitled to claim partition of the joint family property.
165 The High Court did not go into the larger question and assumed for the purpose of argument that there need not be more than one male member for forming a joint Hindu family as a taxable unit.
The High Court held that since the assessee had no son, there was no undivided family.
According to the High Court, the case of the appellant fell within the ratio laid down by the Privy Council in Kalyanji 's case and that since under the personal law, the right to the income remained as it was before the appellant made the declaration, the income from Kathoke Lodge was liable to be assessed as the appellant 's individual income.
Dismissing an appeal by Special Leave, ^ HELD: (1) Even in the absence of an antecedent history of jointness, the appellant could constitute a joint Hindu Family with his wife and unmarried daughter.
True that the appellant could not constitute a coparcenary with his wife and unmarried daughter but under the Income Tax Act a Hindu undivided family, not a coparcenary is taxable unit.
A Hindu coparcenary is a much narrower body than the joint family.
[170F, 171B] (2) The joint family with all its incidents, is a creature of law and cannot be created by act of parties except to the extent to which a stranger may be affiliated to the family by adoption.
The appellant, however, was not by contract seeking to introduce in his family strangers not bound to the family by the tie of a sapindaship.
That it does not take more than one male to form a joint Hindu family with females, is well established.
[172A & G] (3) The contention of the Department that since prior to the declaration.
the family hotchpotch in the instant case was empty and there was nothing with which the property or its income could be blended and therefore, the declaration is ineffective to convert that property into joint family property was not raised before the Tribunal, and the same was not pressed in the High Court.
It was, therefore, not open to the department to take before this Court a contention which in the first place does not arise out of the reference and which the department 's counsel in the High Court raised but did not press.
[173G H, 174A C] (4) The cases of Kanji and Sewdas in Kalyanji 's case furnish a near parallel to the present case.
Though the property in their hands was assumed to be ancestral, income which Kanji and Sewdas received from it was treated as their separate property, as neither of them had a son who could take interest in the ancestral property by birth.
Applying that analogy, even if Kathoke lodge were to be an ancestral asset, its income would still have to be treated as the appellant 's separate property as he had no son who could take interest in that property by birth.
The ratio of Kalyanji 's case would, therefore, apply to the instant case.
The reason why the case of Kanji and Sewdas furnished a close parallel is the very reason for which their cases were held by this Court to be distinguishable from Lakshmi Narain 's case.
In Lakshmi Narain 's case the property was ancestral in the hands of the father, the son had acquired an interest by birth therein there was a subsisting Hindu Undivided family during the lifetime of the father and since that family did not come to an end on the death of the father, the Bombay High Court rightly held that the income continued to be the income of the joint family and was liable to be taxed as such.
The property of a joint family does not cease to belong to the family merely because the family is represented by a single coparcener who possesses rights which an owner of property may possess.
[176 D G, 177A, 178, G H, 179A] (5) There are thus two classes of cases each requiring a different approach.
In cases where the property belongs to a subsisting undivided family the property does not cease to have that character merely because the family is represented by a sole surviving coparcener who possesses rights which an owner of property may possess, or for that matter even if the family for the time being consists only of widows of deceased coparceners.
In cases where the property did not belong to a subsisting undivided family, whether any property has acquired the 166 character of joint family property has acquired the character of joint family property in the hands of an assessee depends on the composition of the family.
A joint Hindu family can consist of a man, his wife and daughter but the mere existence of a wife or daughter will not justify the assessment of income from the joint family property in the status of the head as a manager of the joint family.
Once it is realised that there are two distinct classes of cases which require a different approach there would be no difficulty in understanding the implications of the apparently conflicting tests evolved as guides for deciding the two classes of cases.
Kathoke Lodge was not an asset of a pre existing joint family.
It became an item of joint family property for the first time when the appellant threw what was his separate property into the family hotchpotch.
The appellant had no son.
His wife and unmarried daughter were entitled to be maintained by him from out of the income of Kathoke Lodge while it was his separate property.
Their rights in that property are not enlarged for the reason that the property was thrown into the family hotchpotch.
Not being co parceners of the appellant, they have neither a right by birth in the property nor the right to demand partition nor indeed the right to restrain the appellant from alienating the property for any purpose whatsoever.
The property which the appellant has put into the common stock may change its legal incidence on the birth of a son but until that event happens, the property in the eyes of Hindu Law is really his.
He can deal with it as a full owner, unrestrained by considerations of legal necessity or benefit of the estate.
He may sell it mortgage it or make a gift of it.
Even a son born or adopted after the alienation shall have to take the family hotchpotch as he finds it.
[180 G, H, 181 A D, 182 E H, 183A] (7) Since the personal law of the appellant regards him as the owner of Kathoke lodge and the income therefrom as his income even after the property was thrown into the family hotchpotch, the income would be chargeable to income tax as his individual income and not that of the family.
[183B C]
