The appellant, a member of the United Provinces Civil (Executive) Service, was suspended from service with effect from the 24th August, 1944, pending an enquiry into his conduct.
As a result of enquiry and report by the Commissioner, the Government passed an order on the 25th November, 1944, dismissing the appellant from service, which order was served on the appellant on the 1st December, 1944.
The appellant instituted a suit for a declaration that the order of dismissal passed against him was wrongful, illegal and inoperative, and that he continued to be in service and 'was entitled to a decree for recovery of arrears of his salary.
The plaint included an alternative prayer for a declaration that the order of dismissal was 50 392 wrongful and for a decree for Rs. 1,20,000/ by way of damages being passed in his favour.
The requisite court fee on the valuation of Rs. 1,20,000/ was paid.
The claim for damages was later on abandoned in view of the decision of the Privy Council in High Commissioner for India and High Commissioner for Pakistan vs I.M. Lal(1) and consequential amendments were made in the plaint.
The Civil Judge granted a declaration that the order of dismissal was illegal and that the appellant continued to be in service in spite of that order.
But he declined to grant a decree for arrears of salary on the ground that a suit therefor was not maintainable.
A prayer for the refund of the additional court fee paid in respect of the claim for damages was also refused.
The respondent did not appeal against the decision that the order of dismissal was illegal.
But the appellant took the matter in appeal to the High Court which, affirming the decision of the Civil Judge, negatived his claim for arrears of salary and also refused refund of court fee.
Leave was, however, granted to appeal to the Supreme Court.
In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The State of Bihar vs Abdul Majid(2), the respondent did not dispute the right of the appellant to recover arrears of pay.
But he sought to support the decision on the ground that the order of dismissal dated the 25th November, 1944, having been declared to be illegal and void, the order of suspension dated the 24th August, 1944, became revived and that that would bar the claim for arrears of salary.
Held that the order of suspension made against the appellant being one pending an enquiry, it lapsed with the order of dismissal and the subsequent declaration by the Civil Court that the order of dismissal was illegal could not revive an order which had ceased to exist.
The question whether the order of suspension dated the 24th August, 1944, was valid and whether it was passed after due enquiry, would be material only with reference to the claim for salary for the period between the 24th August, 1944 and the 1st December, 1944, and as the appellant did not press the claim for that period there was no need to direct an enquiry on that point.
Held further that the claim for refund of extra court fee could not be granted inasmuch as the decision of the Privy Council clarifying the position could not be a ground for the refund of excess court fee when at the time it was paid it was in accordance with the law as it then stood.
The State of Bihar vs Abdul Majid ([1954] S.C.R. 786), Shenton vs Smith ([1896] A.C. 229), B. Venkata Rao vs Secretary of State for India in Council (L.R. 64 I.A. 55), M. Gopal Krishna Naidu vs State of Madhya Pradesh (A.I.R. , Provincial Government, Central Provinces and Berar through Collector, Amraoti vs Shamshul Hussain Siraj Hussain (I.L.R. , referred to.
(1) [1948] L.R. 75 I.A. 225.
(2) 393
