The workmen of the Indian Standards Institution, a registered society, under the made certain demands which were not accepted by the management and the dispute arising therefrom was taken in conciliation.
Unable to settle it, the Conciliation Officer made a "Failure report" to the Lt. Governor, who referred the dispute for adjudication to the Industrial Tribunal sections 10(1) (d) and 12(5) of the Act.
Opposing the claim of the workmen on merits, the management raised before the Tribunal, a preliminary objection that the Institution was not an "Industry" within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Act and, therefore, the dispute between the management and its workmen was not an "Industrial dispute" as defined in section 2 (k) and the Lt. Governor had no jurisdiction to refer it for adjudication under the provisions of the Act.
The Tribunal applying the five tests laid down by the Supreme Court in "Gymkhana Club 's case" and "The Cricket Club 's case" found that though capital was employed in the Institution, it was not run with a profit motive and so the fifth test was not satisfied.
So viewing, the Tribunal held that (a) the Institution was not an "industry", (b) that the reference was outside the power of the Lt. Governor and (e) that its jurisdiction to entertain the reference and adjudicate upon it was ousted.
Allowing the appeal by special leave against the order of the Industrial Tribunal.
(Alagiriswami, J. dissenting), the Court ^ HELD: (Per Bhagwati and P. K. Goswami, JJ.) (i) The definition of an "industrial dispute" in section 2(k) does not in so many words refer to "industry".
But on the grammar of the expression itself an "industrial dispute" must necessarily be a dispute in an industry and moreover the expressions "employer" and "workman" used in the definition of "industrial dispute" carry the requirement of industry in that definition by virtue of their own definitions in sections 2(g) and 2(s).
[143A B] (ii) According to the dictionary meaning an "undertaking" means "anything undertaken; any business or work or project which one engages in or attempts: an enterprise".
It is a term of very wide connotation.
But an "undertaking" to be within the definition in section 2(j) of the Act must be read subject to a limitation viz., that it must be analogous to trade or business.
In order that an undertaking should be analogous to trade or business, profit motive and capital investment are not essential requisites.
There can be such an under taking without the presence of both or either of these attributes or features.
No rigid and doctrinaire approach can be adopted in considering the question 139 as to what are the attribute or features which make an undertaking analogous to trade or business.
Such an approach would fail to measure up to the needs of the growing welfare State which is constantly engaged in undertaking new and varied activities as part of its social welfare policy.
The concept of industry which is intended to be a convenient and effective tool in the hands of industrial adjudication for bringing about industrial peace and harmony.
would lose its capacity for adjustment and change.
It would be petrified and robbed of its dynamic content.
[145 B, D, 146A, C, D] (iii) An activity can be regarded as an "industry" within the meaning of section 2(j) only if there is relationship of employer and employees and the former is engaged in "business, trade undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers" and the latter "in any calling, service employment, handicraft or industrial occupation or avocation", Though "undertaking" is a word of large import and it means anything undertaken or any project or enterprise, in the Context in which it occurs, it must be read as meaning an undertaking analogous to trade or business.
In order that an activity may be regarded as an undertaking analogous to trade or business, it must be "organised or arranged in a manner in which trade or business is generally organised or arranged".
It must not be casual nor must it be for oneself nor for pleasure.
And it must rest on co operation with a view to production, sale or distribution of material goods or material services.
It is entirely irrelevant whether or not there is profit motive or investment of capital in such activity.
Even without these two features, an activity can be an undertaking analogous to trade or business.
It is also immaterial "that its objects are charitable or it does not make profits or even where profits are made, they are not distributed amongst its members", or that its activity is subsidised by the Government.
Again it is not necessary that "the employer must always be a private individual.
The Act, in terms, contemplates cases of industrial disputes, where the Government or a local authority or a public utility service may be the employer.
It also makes no difference that the material services rendered by the undertaking are in public interest.
The concept of public interest in a modern welfare State, where new social values are fast emerging and old dying out, is indeed so wide and so broad and comprehensive in its spectrum and range that many activities which admittedly fall within the category of "industry" are clearly designed to subserve public interest.
In fact, whenever any industry is carried on by the Government, it would be in public interest, for the Government can act only in public interest.
Whether an activity is carried on in public interest or not can, therefore, never be a criterion for determining its character as an industry.
[149D H,150A B] State of Bombay vs Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, ; ; Management of Safdarjung Hospital vs K. section Sethi ; , followed.
Federated Municipal and Shire Council Employees of Australia vs Melbourne Corporation ; Secretary, Madras Gymkhana Club Employees Union vs The Management of the Madras Gymkhana Club [1968] 1 S.C.R. 742; National Union of Commercial Employees vs M. R. Meher [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 157; University of Delhi & Anr.
vs Ramnath, [1964] 2 S.C.R. 703; Cricket Club of India Ltd. vs The Bombay Labour Union & Anr.
; , discussed.
HELD (Per Alagiriswami, J. contra): Even when a trade, business, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers results in production of material goods or rendering of material services, such an undertaking engaged in trade.
business, manufacture or calling of employers will not be an "industry, if it is run on charitable principles or is run by Government or local body as part of its duty.
In other words, whenever an undertaking is engaged in activity which is not done with a view to exploit it in a trading or commercial sense, but for public interest and without any profit motive or in the form of social service or in the form of activity intended to benefit the general public, it will not be an industry.
[161 G H. 162A] 140 HELD FURTHER (Per Bhagwati and Goswami, JJ ) (iv) The activities of the Indian Standards Institution fall within the category of undertaking analogous to trade or business and constitute an "industry" within the meaning of section 2(j) of the .
[157 E] Ahmadabad Textile Industry Research Association vs The State of Bombay and others; , Management of Safdarjung Hospital vs K. section Sethi, ; , Management of F.I.C.C.I. vs Its Workmen, , followed.
Per contra (Alagiriswami, J ) The Institution has no capital, it does not distribute profits and even when it is wound up, the assets would not go to any private individual.
It is not run with a profit motive.
It is thus not an enterprise analogous to business or trade.
In fact, its activity is only a manifestation of Government activity.
Instead of itself performing these duties, which the Government itself has to do in the service of the general public.
What the Institution does is to render material services.
The material service which the Institution renders is really a subsidised service and it is rendered in public interest.
It is an institution interested and engaged in service to the public.
Its activities do not go to swell the coffers of any body.
Applying the tests evolved and applied in the.
Gymkhana Club 's case and the Safdarjung 's case, it is obvious that the institution is not engaged in any industry.
The activities of the Indian Standards Institution are not intended to benefit any class of businessmen or to enable them to increase their income.
It is a public service institution and, therefore, is not an industry.
[162D F, 163 A]
