Rule 30 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Rules, 1955, prescribes that where property is in the occupation of more persons than one, it shall be offered to the person whose gross compensation is the highest.
A particular property was allotted under this rule to the first respondent.
A revision petition by the rival claimant, was dismissed ill September, 1963.
But on August 13, 1963, the rule had been abrogated.
The effect of the deletion was that a property in the occupation of more than one person was to be put to sale.
In an application under section 33 of the , by the rival claimant, the appellant held that the case should be governed by the rules as amended, that is, excluding r. 30, and set aside the order allotting the premises to the first respondent.
A writ petition filed by the first respondent in the High Court was allowed.
In appeal to this court, the appellant contended that the rule was one of procedure and its deletion affected only the mode of proceeding by which the rival claim was to be decided.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The rights of the two rival claimants must be governed by r. 30 which was in force when the dispute arose and was decided by the authorities under the Act.
[80 G H].
(a) Rule 30 deals, not with form of procedure, but with the substantive right conferred by the Act on displaced persons.
The Act provides for the payment of compensation and rehabilitation grants to displaced persons and matters connected therewith.
Rule 30 is in Chapter V of the Rules which deals with payment of compensation by transfer of acquired evacuee properties.
Assuming that the rule is only a mode or manner of payment of compensation, the form and manner in which compensation is payable is also a part of the right to get compensation.
The rule is not an instrument of machinery for asserting a right conferred by the A t. it does not regulate the procedure for settlement of disputes concerning that right.
Therefore, the deletion of the rule in 1963 cannot affect pending actions, [80 D G].
(b) Neither by express words nor by implication the amendment of the rules in 1963 deleting r. 30 has been made retrospective in operation.
[81 A B].
Dev Raj vs Union of India & ors.
, A.I.R. 1974 Pun 65, approved.
