By virtue of a Notification dated March 1, 1970, issued by the Central Government under r. 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules.
1944, preparations of milk, leviable to excise duty under the Excise Act, 1944, became exempt from the levy.
but from that exemption were excluded certain milk preparations, namely, items 12 and l 3 of the Schedule annexed to the Notification.
They refer to 'milk powder, but excluding such powder specially prepared for feeding of infants '.
and 'condensed milk, whether sweetened or not ', respectively.
The appellant challenged the levy of excise duty on condensed skimmed milk, which he manufactured, on the ground, that it fell within the exemption Notification and not within item 13 of the excluded items.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that condensed skimmed milk was also condensed milk.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) For the purpose of levy of excise duty or any other similar tax the description of goods as popularly and commonly understood has to be taken as the description of the same goods in the relevant provisions of the statute or the rules.
In common parlance milk means the full cream milk and it becomes skimmed milk when cream is extracted from it.
[95 A B].
(2) In the present case, there are materials to show that the Government itself treated 'Condensed milk ' and 'Condensed skimmed milk ' as different milk preparations, [95 H].
(a) In Annexure IV to the Hand Book of Self Removal Procedure under central Excise Rules, 1944, published in June 1972 by the Central Board of Excise, are items 13 and.
14 corresponding to items 12 and 13 of the Schedule to the exemption Notification.
Against each item certain important raw materials are mentioned of which the assessee has to maintain accounts.
Against milk powder, the raw materials shown are both fresh milk and skimmed milk, while, against condensed milk only fresh milk is mentioned.
[95 G H].
(b) Further, r. 42 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, prescribes various forms of labels to be put on tins of condensed milk and they also refer to condensed full cream milk and condensed skimmed milk separately.
[96, A D].
(3) The fact that the appellant had a manufacturing licence only for the manufacture of condensed milk while he was in fact manufacturing condensed skimmed milk will not take ' condensed skimmed milk out of the exemption notification and include it in the excluded item Under section 6 of the Act a licence would be required for the manufacture of condensed skimmed milk and the appellant by manufacturing condensed skimmed milk without a licence, may be committing an offence.
But, if condensed milk is exempt from the levy of excise duty by the Central Government in exercise of its power under r. 8(1), the exemption cannot be affected by the provision for taking a licence for its manufacture.
[96 F H].
(4) The fact that the appellant was showing separate prices in the list of prices for condensed milk (full cream) and condensed milk (skimmed) would not help in the determination of the question.
Unless and until skimmed milk is included in item 13 of the exemption Notification, it remains an item of goods exempt from the levy of excise duty.
[97 A Bl. 94
