The respondents in the above 13 appeals by Special leave alongwith 2 others filed 15 Writ Petitions in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana challenging.
the order dated 28 10 1966 made by the Government of the erstwhile undivided State of Punjab reverting the respondents to their substantive ranks.
The respondents were promoted and appointed as S.D.Os.
on officiating basis in the Punjab Public Works Department on the various dates between the 1st March, 1956 and 10th May, 1963.
The erstwhile State of Punjab was reorganised by the .
On 1st November, 1966 the former State of Punjab ceased to exist and the successor States of Punjab, Haryana, Union territory of Chandigarh and the transferred territory came into being.
According to section 82 of the every person who immediately before the appointed day was serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab would on and from that day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab unless he is required by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of any other successor State.
Section 83 provides that every person who immediately before the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Punjab in any area which on that day falls within any of the successor State shall continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State and shall be deemed on and from that day to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government or other appropriate authority in the successor State.
Sec 88 provides that the law applicable in the territory will continue to apply after reorganisation unless otherwise provided by a competent legislature.
Section 2(g) of the Act defines law as including any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, by law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument, having the force of law.
The impugned orders of reversion were communicated to the respondents after 1st November, 1966.
The orders were passed by the Government in consultation with the Punjab Public Service Commission before 1st November, 1966.
The Chief Engineer sent the said orders on 30 10 1966.
The orders were however received after 1st November, 1966.
Before the learned Single Judge of the High Court.
the respondents contended that they were governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers, Buildings and Roads Branch (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules 1942, under which they became automatically confirmed as members of the service and could not be reverted without complying with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution.
The learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions on that ground.
On an appeal before the Divisional Bench by the appellants, the Division Bench divided the respondents into three categories.
(1) those who were promoted after 1942 Rules were repealed: (2) those who were promoted within 3 years preceding the repeal of ]942 Rules: and (3) those who were 116 promoted more than three years prior to such repeal.
In the case of first category, the High Court held that the 1942 Rules did not apply.
In the case of the second category the Division Bench held that they were not entitled to get the benefits of 1942 Rules since they had not completed the period of 3 years probation to acquire the substantive post in accordance with the 1942 Rules.
Regarding those respondents who fell in the third category, the Division Bench held that they were promoted in the erstwhile Patiala and East Punjab States where the similar rules did not exist and could not be given the advantage of 1942 Rules.
The Division Bench held that Punjab Service of Engineers Class II 1965 Rules were applicable and therefore before the respondents could be absorbed and admitted to Class II service approval of the Public Service Commission was required.
In the present case, since the Commission did not find them suitable they had to he reverted to their substantive ranks.
On a consideration of large number of authorities the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the reversion of the respondents was not hit by article 311(2) of the Constitution since the reversion was not by way of punishment.
The Division Bench, however, held that the impugned orders were communicated to the respondents after 1 11 1966 and hence they remained ineffective and still born by reason of their not having been communicated to the respondents before 1st November, 1966.
The Division Bench, therefore, dismissed the appeals filed by the appellants.
In appeals by Special leave, the appellants contended that the decision of the Division Bench that the orders of reversion remained ineffective and still born was erroneous.
^ HELD: 1.
The Division Bench rightly held that the orders of reversion were not hit by article 311(2) of the Constitution.
This aspect of the matter is now clearly covered by the decision of this Court in the case of Shamsher Singh vs The State of Punjab ; This part of the judgment of the Division Bench was not seriously disputed.
[120 E F] 2.
The impugned orders were not law within the meaning of section 2 (g) and were, therefore not saved by section 88.
S.88 was introduced as a matter of abundant caution.
The law which was in force before the appointed day in the former State of Punjab were bound to continue until competent Legislature or authority of the successor States effect any change in those laws.
If this could be the position in the continuance of the law in the successor States on what principles one can say that the administrative orders made by the erstwhile State of Punjab automatically lapsed and came to an end on and from the appointed day on the coming into existence of the successor States.
When there is no change of sovereignty and it is merely an adjustment of territories by the reorganisation of a particular State, the administrative orders made by the Government of the erstwhile State continue to be in force and effective and binding on the successor States until and unless they are modified changed or repudiated by the Governments of the successor States.
No other view is possible to be taken.
The other view will merely bring about chaos in the administration of the new States.
The principles laid down by this Court in following cases: (1) Rajvi Amar Singh v The State of Rajasthan and (2) Rajkumar Narsingh Pratap Singh Deo v State of Orissa and Another ; are not applicable to the present case as this is not a case of absorption of one State in another by succession, conquest, merger or integration.
It would be chaotic if these principles were to be applied to the case of reorganization of States in the same country.
[123H, 124A D] 4.
On the facts and circumstances of this case the successor State far from repudiating or modifying the orders of reversion adopted those orders as their own.
The High Court was wrong in holding that the orders were communicated on or after 1st November, 1966 when they were actually received by the 117 officers concerned.
Following the judgment of this Court in the case of State of Punjab vs Khemi Ram, A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 214, it was held that the orders were communicated either on 29 10 1966 or surely on 30 10 1966.
The judgment of this Court in the case of Bachiter Singh vs The State of Punjab, ; , distinguished.
[125A C] 5.
It is one thing to say that in the case of dismissal or the like the order becomes effective only after it is received by the officer concerned and a different thing to say that an order has no effect at all before it is communicated in the sense of receipt of the order by the officer concerned.
The orders in the present case became effective as soon as they were sent out and for the purpose of section 83 of the Act the respondents must be deemed to be holding the posts to which they were reverted on 1st November, 1966.
[125 G H 126A] 6 .
About 9 years have passed after the impugned orders of reversion were passed.
After the High Court judgement, all the respondents were officiating in the higher posts.
After the reversion orders were passed and before the High Court judgment was delivered the respondents were not working in the higher posts.
The appellant, therefore, claimed the difference of salary paid to the respondents during this period when they were not working as S.D.Os.
The respondents contended that even during this period they were either working as S.D.Os or had gone on leave while continuing in such posts.
In the circumstances justice requires that the Government should not claim any refund of any part of the salary paid to the respondents up to date.
[126G H, 127A C]
