H & S filed a suit against the appellant for recovery of money and during the pendency of the suit a document was executed on the 7th February, 1949, whereby H & S transferred to the respondents all book and other debts due to them together with all securities for the debts and all other property to which they were entitled in connection with their business in Bombay.
One of the book debts was the subject matter of the suit, but there was no mention in that document of the suit or the decree to be passed in the suit.
The respondents did not take any steps under Order XXII, rule 10, of the Code of Civil Procedure to get themselves substituted as plaintiffs in the place of H & S, but allowed the suit to be continued in the name of the original plaintiffs, and on the 15th December, 1949, a decree was passed in favour of H & S against the appellant.
On the 25th April, 1951, the respondents filed in the City Civil Court, Bombay, an application for execution of the decree under Order XXI, rule 11 of the Code, and a notice under Order XXI, rule 16 was issued by the Court calling upon H & S and the appellant to show cause why the decree should not be executed by the transferees, the respondents.
The appellant contended inter alia that as the respondents were only the assignees of the debt which was the subject: matter of the suit and not of the decree itself they were not entitled to execute the decree.
Held, that the respondents as the transferees of the debt which was the subject matter of the suit were entitled to make an application for execution of the decree under section 146 of the Code of Civil Procedure as persons claiming under the decree holder.
The effect of the expression " save as otherwise provided in this Code" contained in section 146 is that a person cannot make an application under section 146 if other provisions of the Code are applicable to it.
Per DAs and IMAM JJ., BHAGWATI J. dissenting.
Order XXI, rule 16, by the first alternative, contemplates the actual transfer by an assignment in writing of a decree after it is passed and while a transfer of or an agreement to transfer a decree that may be passed in future may, in equity, entitle the transferee to claim the beneficial interest in the decree after it is passed, such 1370 equitable transfer does not render the transferee a transferee of the decree by assignment in writing within the meaning of Order XXI, rule 16.
Per DAS J.
The transfer in writing of a property which is the subject matter of a suit without in terms transferring the decree passed or to be passed in the suit does not entitle the transferee to apply for execution of the decree under Order XXI, rule 16, as a transferee of the decree by an assignment in writing.
If by reason of any provision of law, statutory or otherwise, interest in property passes from one person to another, there is a transfer of the property by operation of law.
There is no warrant for confining transfers "by operation of law" to the three cases of death, devolution or succession or to transfers by operation of statutory laws only.
If the document in question could be construed to be a transfer of or an agreement to transfer the decree to be passed in future, then on the decree being passed, by operation of equity, the respondents would become the transferees of the decree by operation of law within the meaning of Order XXI, rule 16.
Per BHAGWATI J. Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act defines a "transfer of property" as an act by which the transferor conveys property in present or in future to the transferee or transferees.
The words "in present or in future" qualify the word "conveys" and not the word "property" in the section.
A transfer of property that is not in existence operates as a contract to be performed in the future which may be specifically enforced as soon as the property comes into existence.
It is only by the operation of this equitable principle that as soon as the property comes into existence and is capable of being identified, equity taking as done that which ought to be done, fastens upon the property and the contract to assign becomes a complete equitable assignment.
There is nothing in the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure or any other law which prevents the operation of this equitable principle, and an assignment in writing of a decree to be passed in future would become a complete equitable assignment on the decree being passed and would fall within the "assignment in writing" contemplated by Order XXI, rule 16 of the Code.
A mere transfer of property as such does not by itself spell out a transfer of a decree which has been passed or may be passed in respect of that property and it would require an assignment of such decree in order to effectuate the transfer.
But where the property is an actionable claim within the meaning of the definition in section 3 of the Transfer of Property Act and is transferred by means of an instrument in writing, the transferee could by virtue of section 130 of the Transfer of Property Act step into the shoes of the transferor and claim to be the transferee of the decree and apply for execution of the decree under Order XXI, rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Per IMAM J. There must be a decree in existence which is transferred before the transferee can benefit from the provisions 1371 of rule 16.
The ordinary and natural meaning of the words of rule 16 can carry no other interpretation and the question of a strict and narrow interpretation of its provisions does not arise.
Case law reviewed.
