The President of India after the Chinese aggression in 1962, proclaimed emergency under Article 352 of the Constitution.
The Parliament passed the Emergency Risks (Goods,) Insurance Act, 1962 and the Emergency Risks (Factories) Insurance Act, 1962, which came into force from 1 1 1963.
It was realised after the Chinese aggression that it was necessary to make provision for reinstating the factories damaged or ruined by enemy action and for reimbursing the less or damage of goods and continue the commercial and economic activity with a view to stabilize the economy of the country.
The Acts, therefore, provided for compulsory insurance of factories and goods against loss or damage sustained by enemy action.
The Acts further provided that if any person failed to insure the goods or factories or insured for a lesser value than what was required by the Acts and thereby evaded the payment by way of permium such amounts would be payable by such person.
Proclamation of Emergency was revoked by the President on 10 9 1968.
After the expiry of the acts, notices were issued to the appellants stating that they evaded payment of Emergency Risk Insurance Premia in respect of goods or factories by undervaluing the goods or factories.
The appellant filed a writ petition, in the High Court challenging the said notices which were allowed by a learned Single Judge on the ground that after P the expiry of the Acts there could be no authorised officer to determine the quantum, of the evaded premia on the basis, of the correct value of the goods or factories.
In an appeal the Division Bench of the High Court held that the liability to pay the evaded premia arose during the currency of the Acts and that the extent of the liability could be ascertained by an authorised officer even after the expiry of the Acts.
In the present appellant filed said judgment of the Division Bench is challenged.
G The appellants contended: 1.
That the liability to pay the evaded premia was dependent on the ascertainment by the authorised officer of the insurable value of the factory or goods and that until the extent of the liability was so ascertained there can be no liability and, therefore, section 6 of the General Clauses Act was not attracted.
The provisions of the Acts contravened the Articles 14, 19 and 31 of the Constitution.
732 ^ HELD: (1) The duty to take out insurance policy for the full insurable value of the factory or goods was mandatory and that the failure to do so was an offence.
To effectuate this purpose the procedure for determination of the insurable value of the factory or goods and of the premium evaded was provided.
The scheme of the insurance envisaged by the Acts was different from a voluntary insurance.
There was no element of consensus on the fundamental terms of insurance.
The liability to take insurance policy for the full insurable value of the factory or goods was compulsory.
Terms and conditions of the policy to be taken were governed solely by the provisions of the Acts and the schemes.
The liability to pay premia in case of under valuation was not dependent on the subsequent determination of the full insurable value of the factory or goods insured.
The decision in the case of Ekambarappa vs Excess Profits Tax officer holding that the liability for excess profits tax arose at the close of the accounting year and was not dependent upon its ascertainment by order of assessment is approved.
[737 B, C, D, F,G] (2) The argument that the liability to pay premia on the basis of the full insurable value in case of under insurance was conditioned by the capacity on the part of the insurer to issue a supplementary policy negatived.
The obligation to insure for full insurable value was obligation which was not dependent upon corresponding liability of the insurer to indemnity.
[738 B E] (3) Since the liability to pay the premia on the full insurable value was incurred before the expiry of the Act, section 6 of the General Clauses Act would enable the ascertainment of the extent of liability for evaded premia by an officer who was authorised when the Act was in force or by an officer authorised after the expiry of the Act.
The principle behind section 6 of the General Clauses Act is that all the provisions, of the Acts would continue ill force for purposes of enforcing the liability incurred when the Acts were in force and any investigation, legal proceeding, remedy, may be instituted, continued or enforced as if the Acts had not expired.
[738 G H] (4) Article 19 is not available to the petitioner as these Acts were passed during the proclamation of Emergency under Article 352.
The liability incurred being acts or omissions during the currency of the proclamation of emergency f cannot be nullified even if it be assumed that provisions of the Acts were violative of Article 19.
The procedure for ascertaining correct insurable value of the factory or goods is reasonable having regard to the previsions of Third Schedule in that behalf and cannot, therefore, violate Article 19(1)(f) or (g).
[739 B, D E] (5) The petitioners were not deprived of any property without the authority of law.
There is, therefore.
no violation of Article 31(1).
The`provisions are not violative of any provisions in Part III of the Constitution.
[739 F)
