The appellant an owner of a hotel was prosecuted along with five others for forcibly dispossessing the complainant who was the Manager of the Hotel and further for misappropriating certain properties including some money belonging to the complainant.
According to the appellant, the complainant was merely a licensee.
The Trial Court acquitted accused Nos. 3 to 6 and convicted accused No. 1 and 2.
The High Court admitted the appeal of accused No. 2 and acquitted him.
The appeal of the appellant accused No. 1 was, however, rejected by the High Court it limine without giving any reasons for the rejection.
On an appeal by Special Leave, ^ HELD: 1.
There is a whole catena of cases which have come up to this Court from the Bombay High Court in which this Court has consistently disapproved of the practice followed by the Bombay High Court of not giving reasons when exercising its power of summary dismissal of criminal appeals which lie both on questions of fact and law.
In other High Courts such appeals are automatically admitted.
The power of summary rejection under section 421 of the Criminal Procedure Code should be only exercised when the Court is satisfied from a, perusal of the judgment as well as the record that there is absolutely no reasonable possibility of its success for reasons to be mentioned in the order of dismissal.
In the present case, it cannot be said that there are no arguable points.
It is difficult to believe that the judgments of this court have neither come to the knowledge of the Bombay High Court nor were cited on behalf of ' the appellant In any case, the law having been declared by this Court, it is the duty of the Bombay High Court to act in accordance with Article 141 of the constitution and to apply it by giving proper reasons to justify whatever be its view.
The judgment of the Bombay High Court was set aside and it was directed that the case should, be treated as admitted for regular hearing in she Bombay High Court and should be disposed of in accordance with law.
[688 C, E, F, G, 689 AB] F
