The secured creditor is outside the winding up and can realism his security without the leave of the winding up Court, though if he files a suit or takes other legal proceedings for the realisation of his security he is bound under section 171 of the Indian Companies Act to obtain the leave of the winding up Court before he can do so although such leave would almost automatically be granted.
375 It is a legitimate rule of construction to construe words in an Act of Parliament with reference to words found in immediate connection with them.
It is also a well recognized rule of construction that the legislature does not intend to make a substantial alteration in the law beyond what it explicitly declares either in express words or by clear implication and that the general words of the Act are not to be so construed as to alter the previous policy of the law, unless no sense or meaning can be applied to those words consistently with the intention of preserving the existing policy untouched.
Held therefore that having regard to the context in which the words "any sale held without leave of the Court of any of the properties" added in section 232(1) by the amending Act XXII of 1936 have been used in juxtaposition with "any attachment, distress or execution put into force without leave of the Court against the estate or effects" it would be a legitimate construction to be put upon them that they refer only to sales held through the intervention of the Court and not to sales effected by the secured creditor outside the winding up and without the intervention of the Court, and that the amendment was not intended to bring within the sweep of the general words sales effected by the secured creditor outside the winding up.
Held accordingly that in the present case the sale effected by respondent No. 2 as the receiver of the trustees of the debenture holders in July 1954 was valid and binding on all parties concerned and could not be challenged as it was sought to be done by the Official Receiver.
Food Controller vs Cork(1923 A.C. 647), Kayastha Trading and Banking Corporation Ltd. vs Sat Narain Singh ([1921] I.L.R. 43 All. 433), Baldeo Narain Singh vs The United India Bank Ltd. ([1915] , State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose and others ; , Angus Robertson and others vs George Day , Murugian, P. vs Jainudeen, C. L. ([1954] 3 W.L.R. 682), National Assistance Board vs Wilkinson ([1952] 2 Q.B. 648), Vasudeva Mudaliar and others vs Srinivasa Pillai and another ([1907] I.L.R. and The Governor General in Council vs Shiromoni Sugar Mills Ltd. (In Liquidation) (1946 F.C.R. 40), referred to.
