The Finance Act 1950 extended the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 to the Part State of ' Travancore Cochin and repealed the Cochin Tobacco Act, 1909 and the Tobacco Act (Travancore Act I of 1087).
Thereafter a system of licensing was introduced by which the licensees were required to pay a specified fee in respect of tobacco imported into the State.
The appellants challenged unsuccessfully in the High Court the collection of the licence fee for the period between August 1950 and December 1957.
The Act and rules having been declared by this Court as invalid ab initio, the State refunded a portion of the licence fee collected.
but the appellants filed writ petitions claiming refund of the remainder of the licence fee paid by them.
During the pendency of the writ petitions the Kerala Luxury Tax on Tobacco (Validation) Act of 1964 (Act 9 of 1964) was passed by the State legislature to provide for the levy of a luxury tax on tobacco and validate the levy and collection of fees for licences for the vend and stocking of tobacco for the period between August 17, 1950 and December 31, 1957 and it received the assent of the President.
The appellants then challenged the validity of the 1964 Act, but the State on the other hand demanded payment of the part of the fee earlier refunded to the parties The validity of the demand notice was questioned by the appellants on the question of validity of the 1964 Act, the High Court held that (1) the levy being in respect of goods produced outside the State, was not an excise duty falling within Entry 84 of the Union List; (2) the tax clearly answers the description of luxury tax falling within entry 62 of State, List; (3) however, the payment of the tax being a condition precedent to the bringing of the goods into the taxing territory, it was a direct impediment on the free flow of goods, and (4) even so, it is saved by Article 304(b) being n reason able tax levied in public interest.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD.
(1) The judgment of this Court in A. B. Abdullkadir & ors.
vs The State of Kerala & Anr.
[1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 741 does not operate as res.
judicata regarding the points in controversy in these appeals.
What was held in that case was that the Cochin Tobacco Act and the similar Travancore Act taken along with the rules framed under those Acts were in substance law corresponding to the Central Excise and Salt Act.
The Cochin Tobacco Act and the similar Travancore Act stood repealed on April 1, 1950 and there would be no power in the State Government thereafter to frame new rules in August 1950 and January 1951 for there would be no law to support the new rules.
In the instant case what is questioned is the constitutional validity of Act 9 of 1964 which was enacted subsequent to the above decision of this Court.
[698 C G] (2)(a) The argument that the provisions of the Act fell under Entry 84 of List I of the Seventh Schedule is bereft of force.
The liability to pay the tax is on stocking and vending of tobacco.
There is no provision in the Act which is concerned with production or manufacture of tobacco or which links the tax under its provisions with the manufacture or production of tobacco.
[699 D E] 691 (b) Excise duty is a tax on articles produced or manufactured in the taxing country.
Generally speaking, the tax is on the manufacturer or producer, yet laws are to be found which impose a duty of excise at stages subsequent to the manufacture or production.
[698H, 699A] A. B. Abdulkadir & Ors vs The State of Kerala & Anr.
[1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 741 referred to.
(c) Where, however, the levy imposed or tax has no nexus with the manufacture or production of an article, the impost or tax cannot be regarded to be B one in the nature of excise duty.
[699 B C] (3) The word `luxury ' has not been used in the sense of something pertaining to the exclusive preserve of ' the rich.
The connotation of the word `luxury ' is something which conduces enjoyment over and above the necessaries of life.
There is nothing static about what constitutes an article of luxury.
The luxuries of yesterday could well become the necessities of today.
Likewise, what constitutes necessity for citizens of one country or for those living in a particular climate may well be looked upon as an items of luxury for the nationals of another country or for those living in a different climate.
A number of factors may have to be taken into account in adjudging the commodity as an article of luxury.
[699 G, 701B] (4) (a) The High Court was right in its view that the levy of tax was violative of Article 301 of the Constitution.
But while the Parliament can impose restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or within any part of the territory of India as may be required in the public interest, so far as the State legislatures are concerned, restrictions must satisfy two requirements, firstly they must be in public interest, and secondly, the restrictions should be reasonable.
State of Madras vs N. K. Nataraja Mudaliar ; referred to, (b) To some extent every tax imposes an economic impediment to the activity taxed as compared with others not taxed.
But that fact by itself would, not make it unreasonable.
The law of taxation in the ultimate analysis is the result of ' the balancing of several complex considerations.
The legislatures have a wide discretion in the matter.
[702G, 703 AB] (c) In considering the question whether the restriction is reasonable in public interest the Court will have to balance the importance of freedom of trade as against the requirement of public interest.
[703 B] Khyerban Tea Co. Ltd. vs State of Madras [1964] S S.C.R. 975 referred to.
(d) The onus of showing that the restrictions on the freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse in the public interest are reasonable is upon the State.
[703D] In the present case the levy of luxury tax relates to tobacco the consumption of which is a health hazard.
Regulation of the sale and stocking of such an article and treating it as an article of luxury by imposing a licence fee is a permissible restriction in public interest within article 304(b) of the Constition.
[703 F] (e) The fact that the operation of the Act was confined to a particular area, and did not extend to the entire State was due to historical reasons.
The object of the Act was to validate the recoveries already made.
[704 B] Nazeeria Motor Service etc.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh (f) The levy of tax is protected by Article 304(b) of the Constitution as the requirement of the proviso regarding the sanction of the President has been satisfied.
Though the assent of the President was given subsequent to the 692 passing or the Bill by the State Legislature, that fact would not affect the validity of the impugned Act in view of the provisions of Article 255 of the Constitution.
[702 AB] (5)(a) Where a topic is not included within the relevant List dealing with the legislative competence of the State Legislature, Parliament, by making a law cannot attempt to confer such legislative competence on the State legislatures This principle would, however, have no application where what is sought to be done is to validate the recovery of licence fee for stocking and vending of tobacco.
The impugned provisions have nothing to do with the production and manufacture of tobacco.
The levy is sought to be made as luxury to which is within the competence of State legislature and not as excise duty which is beyond the legislative competence of the State legislature.
If the levy in question could be justified under a provision which is within the legislative competent of the State legislature, the levy shall be held to be validly imposed and cannot be considered to be impermissible.
[705 B D] (b) The impugned Act cannot be said to be a colourable piece of legislation.
Where a challenge to the validity of a legal enactment is made on the ground that it is a colourable piece of legislation what is to be proved is that though the Act ostensibly is within the legislative competence of the legislature in substance and reality it covers a field which is outside its legislative competence.
In the present case, in enacting the impugned provisions the Slate legislature has exercised power of levying luxury tax in the shape of licence fee on the vend and stocking of tobacco.
The enactment of a law for levying luxury tax is unquestionably within the legislative competence of the State legislature in view of Entry 62 in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
[705 E F] Jaora Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs State of Madhya Pradesh & ORS.
and Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.
; distinguished.
(c) The State legislature has sought to validate the recovery of the amounts already made by treating those amounts as luxury tax.
The fact that the validation of the levy entailed converting the character of the collection from an impermissible excise duty into permissible luxury tax would not make it an Inconstitutional.
The only conditions are that the levy should be of a nature which can answer to the description of luxury tax and that the State legislature should be competent to enact a law for recovery of luxury tax.
Both these conditions are satisfied.
[706 FG] (6)(a) Where the State legislature can make valid law it can provide not only for the prospective operation of the material provisions of the law but can also provide for the retrospective operation of the provisions.
[706 G] (b) In judging the reasonableness of the retrospective operation of law for the purpose of Article 304(b), the test of length of time covered by the retrospective operation could not by itself be treated as decisive.
[706H, 707A] (c) It is not correct to say that the legislation should be held to be invalid because its retrospective operation might operate harshly in some cases.
[707A] Rai Ramkrishna & Ors.
vs State of Bihar [1964] 1 S.C.R. 897 and Epari Chinnaa Krishna Moorthy, Proprietor, Epari Chinna Moorthy & Sons.
Berhampur, Orissa vs State of Orissa [964] 7 S.C.R. 185 applied.
