Under the statutes of the respondent University persons in service could take the three year degree course in law by attending the evening classes.
A candidate who had failed in some of the papers of one year could clear those papers before completing the three year course.
Under cl. 2(b) of Ordinance X contained in the University Calendar Volume I, a candidate should submit to the University an application seeking permission to appear for an examination which should be signed by the Principal of the College or the head of the department concerned certifying that the candidate had attended a regular course of study for the prescribed number of academic years.
But, this certificate is provisional and could be withdrawn at any time before the examination if the applicant failed to attend the prescribed course of lectures before the end of his term.
The appellant, a Government servant, joined the LL.B.
I year class of the University.
He failed in three papers, but was promoted to the second year.
Before appearing in the second examination, however, he wrote to the University stating that if he was not able to get the requisite permission from his employer to join the law classes he would abide by any order that the University might pass.
The appellant, however, wrote to the University later that this condition was not at all necessary and requested that his result in Part II might be announced.
In reply the University wrote to the appellant that since his percentage of marks in Part I was short, his candidature for Part II examination stood cancelled.
Having failed in his appeal to the Vice Chancellor, he moved the High Court which dismissed his writ petition in limine.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The impugned order of the university suffers from errors of law patent on the face of ' the record.
This was not a case which should have been dismissed by the High Court in limine.
[730 A] (1) The last part of cl. 2(b) clearly shows that the University could with draw the certificate if the applicant had failed to attend the prescribed course of lectures.
But, this could be done only before the examination.
Once an applicant was allowed to take the examination, the statute which empowers the University to withdraw the candidature of the applicant has worked itself out and the applicant cannot be refused admission subsequently for any infirmity which should have been looked into before giving permission to appear.
[727 E F] (2) It was the duty of the University to scrutinise the form for admission to the examination in order to find out whether it was in order.
It was also the duty of the head of the department of law, before submitting the form to the University, to see that the form complied with all the requirements of law.
Ff neither took care to scrutinise the admission form, then the question of the appellant committing a fraud did not arise.
Where a person on whom fraud is committed is in a position to discover the truth by due diligence, fraud is not proved. ' It was neither a case of suggestion, falsi nor of suppressio [728 A C] 723 Premji Bhai Ganesh Bhai Kshatriya vs Vice Chancellor, Ravishankar University, Raipur and others,, A.I.R. 1967 M.P. 194, 197, approved.
(3)(a) There is no provision of the University statutes which could have afforded jurisdiction to it to cancel the candiditure of the appellant on the ground that he had not obtained the previous permission of his superior officers.
The impugned order did not mention this ground at all.
[728G, 729 BC] (b) The undertaking given by the appellant that he would get the requisite permission of the employer did not put him out of court.
It was written because he was anxious to appear in Part II examination and was written in terrorem and in complete ignorance of his legal rights.
Any admissions made in ignorance of legal rights or under duress cannot bind the maker of the . admission.
[729 DE]
