'K ' was charged and tried for the offences under Ss. 465 r/w 471, for using a forged B.Sc.
Certificate and a Date of Birth Certificate Convicted under section 420 I.P.C. by the trial court and sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/ .
On an appeal the conviction was maintained, but the sentence was altered to one of six months Rigorous Imprisonment.
On an appeal by the State and the Revision by 'K ', the revision petition was dismissed and the appeal allowed convicting him under Sections 465 & 471 Indian Penal Code and sentenced to one year Rigorous Imprisonment.
D On an appeal by special leave, on the question of competency of the state appeal under section 417(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code 1898, in a case investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment, while dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (i) Under section 5 of the (Act XXV of 1946) the powers and the jurisdiction of the Government to other areas in a state, although not a Union Territory.
Once there is an extension of the powers and jurisdiction of the members of the Establishment, the members thereof while discharging such functions are deemed to be members of the Police force of the area and are vested with such powers functions and privileges and are subject to the liabilities of a police officer belonging to that force.
[756 BC] (ii) Investigation under the Delhi Act is a central investigation and the Central Government is concerned with the investigation of the cases by the Establishment and its ultimate result.
It is in that background that in 1955 section 417 Cr P.C. was amended adding sub section (2) in the section to provide for appeal against acquittal.
[756 CE] (iii) This, however, does not bar the jurisdiction of the State Government also to direct presentation of appeals when it is moved by the Establishment The Establishment can move either the Central Government or the State Government.
It will be purely a matter of procedure.
[756 E] (iv) The word "also" in sub section (2) of section 417 of the Criminal Procedure Code does not bar the jurisdiction of the State Government to direct the public prosecutor to present an appeal even in cases investigated by the Establishment.
Sub section (1) of section 417 is in general terms and would take in its purview all types of cases, since the expression used in that section is "in any case".
[756 G Hl (v) There is no limitation on the power of the State Government to direct institution of appeal with regard to any particular type of cases.
Sub section (1) of section 417 being in general terms is as such of wider amplitude Sub section (2) advisedly uses the word "also" when power is given to the Central Government is addition to direct the public prosecutor to appeal.
[756H, 757A] 754
