The respondent are co operative societies of growers of sugarcane who supplied sugarcane to the appellant which is a sugar manufacturing factory.
The use and supply of sugarcane is controlled under the provisions of the .
The Sugarcane Control order, 1955 empowers the Government to fix the minimum price payable by the manufacturer of sugar to the grower of sugarcane.
In 1962, the Sugarcane Control (Additional Powers) Act 1962 came into existence.
Pursuant to the Powers conferred by the 1962 Act, the Central Government amended the 1955 Control order by introducing clause 3A providing for payment of additional price for sugarcane purchased by the producers of sugar.
The 1955 Control order was repealed and replaced by the Sugarcane Control order 1966.
The respondent are recognised by the Government of India and the appellant for the purpose of 1966 Control order.
Under the 1966 order the Government was competent to denote an area where sugarcane is grown as a reserved area for factory.
The sugarcane grown in that area is required to be sold to the allotted factory.
The Government controls all aspects of the use of sugarcane grown in the reserved area.
The 1966 order provides for fixation of minimum price of sugarcane payable by manufacturers of sugar to the growers.
In determining the minimum price the Government is required to take into account (i) cost of production of sugarcane, (ii) return to the grower from alternative crops and the general trend of prices Of agricultural commodities; (iii) the availability of sugar to the consumer at a fair price; (iv) the price at which sugar is sold by the producers; and (v) the recovery of sugar from sugarcane.
The 1966 Control order further provides for payment of additional price in addition to the minimum price.
On determination of the price the same ` is required to be intimated in writing to the producers of sugar, growers Co operative Societies of Growers or the local Growers ' Association.
An appeal is provided to the Government of India against the determination of the additional price.
Clause 5(3) of the 1966 Control order provides that if the Central Government is satisfied that during any year a factory has made no profit or has made inadequate profit that Government may exempt either wholly or partially any producer of sugar from payment of the additional price.
The relevant authority under the 1966 Control order fixed additional price payable by the appellants to the respondent.
No appeal was preferred either by the appellant or the respondent.
The appellants did not pay the additional price.
appellant made applications seeking exemption on the ground that the appellants had made inadequate profits.
The Government exempted the appellants from paying whose of the additional price for the year 1961 62 and reduced the additional price for the year 1960 61 without giving any opportunity of being heard to the respondent The respondents challenged the validity of the grant of exemption by filing a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the said writ petition on the ground that the order of the Central Government was violative of principles of natural justice, since no opportunity was given to the respondents to be heard in the matter.
741 Dismissing the appeal by certificate, ^ HELD: (1) Clause 5(1) provides for the payment of additional price and II clause 5(3) provides for exemption from the payment of additional price.
Clause 5(5) provides for filing an appeal to the Central Government by any person feeling aggrieved by the decision of the fixation of additional price.
The power to grant exemption cannot be said to be independent of the provisions of clause 5 of tho order.
The object of 1966 control order is to promote sugar industry and to eliminate unnecessary impediments in The production of sugar.
It also ensures a fair deal to the growers of the sugarcane.
The provisions of the control order are intended to maintain harmony between the Growers of sugarcane and the producers of sugar and to enable both of them to share profits reasonably.
is necessary to give opportunity to be heard both to the growers of the sugarcane as well as the producers of sugar when the Government exercises powers under 1966 Control order for determining the additional price and granting exemption from payment of additional price.
[744 H, 745 A E] (2) The grant of exemption from payment of price affects rights and interests of the growers of sugarcane.
The order of exemption takes away rights which had accrued in favour of the growers of sugarcane.
It is, therefore necessary for the Government to consider the points of view or objections of the growers on the application made by the factories producing sugar seeking exemption from payment of additional price.
[745F, G, 746A] (3) The situations in which a duty will arise to act judicially according to.
natural justice cannot be exhaustively enumerated.
A duty to act judicially will arise in the exercise of power to deprive a person of legitimate interest or expectation that additional price would be paid.
The factors which point to an exercise of power judicially are the nature of interest to be affected.
the circumstances in which the power falls to be exercised and the nature of the sanctions, if any, involved.
[746 C] (4) It is clear that the purpose and purport of the 1966 Control order point to the inescapable conclusion that the sugarcane growers are to be heard not only when additional price is fixed but also when exemption is granted to factories from payment of additional price.
[746 D]
