The appellants were tried by the Sessions Judge on the charge of committing murder of Bahadur Singh.
The prosecution relied on the evidence of two eye witnesses and three dying declarations made by the deceased.
The two eye witnesses supported the prosecution case only partly and were, therefor, permitted to be cross examined by the Public Prosecutor.
The Sessions Judge thought it unsafe to rely on the testimony of the two eye witnesses and was also not impressed by and of the dying declarations.
Consequently he acquitted the appellants.
The High Court in appeal did not discard the evidence of the eye witnesses but utilised it by way of corroboration to the dying declarations.
The High Court set aside the order of acquittal and convicted the appellants under section 30 read with section 34 I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to imprisonment for life.
In an appeal under section 2(1) of the .
^ HELD: 1.
The Sessions Court rightly discarded the evidence of the hostile eye witnesses.
They resiled from their Police, Statements and it is evident that they have no regard for truth.
Their evidence cannot be used to corroborate the dying declarations.
[766 C] 2.
In regard to the dying declarations the Sessions Court wholly overlooked the earliest dying declaration which was made by the deceased soon after the incident.
The second dying declaration was the first information report lodged by the deceased at the Police Station.
The Sessions Judge was clearly in error in holding that the first information report cannot be treated as a dying declamation.
After making the statements before the police the deceased succumbed to his injuries and, therefore, the statement can be treated as a dying declaration, and is admissible under section 32(1) of the Evidence Act, The maker of tho statement is dead and the statement relates to the cause of his death.
[766DF] 3.
It is, well settled that though a dying declaration must be approached with caution for the reason that the maker of the statement cannot be subjected to cross examination, there is neither a rule of law nor a rule of prudence that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated.
[766G] 4.
Law does not require that the maker of the dying declaration must cover the whole incident or narrate the case history.
What is necessary is that the whole of the statement made by the deceased must be laid before the court without tampering with its terms or its tenor.
[767 C] 5.
The deceased did not bear any enmity or hostility towards the appellants nor did any other persons who were in the company of the deceased after the assault were shown to have any animus for implicating the appellants false.
[767E] 765 6.
The second dying declaration was not made to the Investigating officer.
It was made by way of First Information Report and it was only after the information was recorded that the investigation commenced.
The High Court was right in relying on the first and second dying declarations.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case these two dying declarations can be accepted without corroboration.
[767F, 768C] 7.
The High Court ought not to have relied on the third dying declaration which is said to have been made by the deceased in the hospital.
The Investigating officer ought to have requisitioned the services of a Magistrate for re cording that dying declaration, Investigating officers are naturally integrated in the success of the investigation and the practice of the Investigating Officer himself recording a dying declaration during the course of investigation ought not to be encouraged.
[768CD] 8.
The High Court in reversing the order of acquittal passed by the Sessions rt did not violate any of the principles governing appeals against acquittal.
[768E]
