Section 2 of the Part States (Laws) Act, 1950, empowered the Central Government to extend by notification in the official gazette, to any Part C State, or to any part of it, with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment in force in a Part A State.
In 1951, the Central Government, in exercise of this power, extended by a Notification the Bengal Finance (Sales Tax) Act, 1941, to the then Part State of Delhi with certain modifications in section 6.
The section, after such extension with modifications, provided: 6(1) No tax shall be payable under this Act on the sale of goods specified in the first column of the Schedule subject to the conditions etc: and (2) The State Government [Amended as Central Government in 1956] after giving by notification in the official gazette not less than 3 months notice of its intention to do so, may by like notification add to or omit from or otherwise amend the Schedule and thereupon the Schedule shall he amended accordingly A modified Schedule of goods exempted from tax under section 6 was also substituted for the original Schedule in the Bengal Act, by the Notification.
After the passing of the , the Part States (Laws) Act became .
with necessary adaptations.
In 1957, the Central Government issued a Notification in purported exercise of the powers under section 2 of the 1950 Act, amending the 1951 Notification.
By the 1957 Notification an additional modification of section 6 of the Bengal Act was introduced in the 1951 Notification, namely the words "such previous notice as it considers reasonable" were substituted for the words "not less than 3 months ' notice" in section 6(2).
In 1959, Parliament passed the Bengal (Sales Tax) (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1959, making some amendments in various sections of the Bengal Act but left section 6 untouched.
By various notifications, exemption from sales tax was granted to several commodities.
but subsequently, the exemption was withdrawn by other notifications after giving notice of less than 3 months.
Dealers in those commodities, who were aggrieved by the withdrawal of the exemption, challenged the validity of ' the withdrawal.
The High Court dismissed their petitions.
On the main ground that Parliament, while enacting the Amending Act of 1959, had put its seal of approval to the curtailed period of notice in section 6(2) and as such, it should be taken to have keen provided by Parliament itself in the Bengal Act.
786 Allowing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: The 1957 Notification purporting to substitute the words "such previous notice as it considers reasonable" for the words 'not less than 3 months ' notice" in section 6(2) of the Bengal Act, is beyond the powers of the Central Government, conferred on it, by section 2 of the ; and in consequence, the various notifications, in so far as they with drew exemptions from tax with respect to the several commodities, are invalid and ineffective, as the exemption was withdrawn without complying with the mandatory requirement of not less than 3 months ' notice enjoined by the section.
[808 D E] (1) (a) The primary power bestowed by section 2 of the , on the Central Government is one of extension, that is, bringing into operation and effect, in a Union Territory, an enactment already in force in a State.
The discretion conferred by the section to make "restrictions and modifications" in the enactment sought to be extended, is not a separate and independent power, which can be exercised apart from the power of extension, but is an integral constituent of the power of extension.
This is made clear by the use of the preposition "with" one meaning of which (which accords with the context) is "part of the same whole".
[801 E F] (b) There are 3 limits on the power given by section 2.
(i) The power exhausts itself on extension of the enactment.
It can be exercised only once, simultaneously with the extension of the enactment, but cannot be exercised repeatedly or subsequently to such extension.
(ii) The power cannot be used for a purpose other than that of extension.
In the exercise of the power, only such restrictions and modifications can be validly engrafted in the enactment sought to be extended, which are necessary to bring it into operation and effect in the Union Territory.
Modifications which are not necessary for, or ancillary and subservient to the purpose of extension, are not permissible.
Only such modifications can be legitimately necessary for such purpose, as are required to adjust, adapt, and make the enactment suitable to the peculiar local conditions of the Union Territory for carrying it into operation and effect.
(iii) The words "restrictions and modifications" do not cover such alterations as involve a change in any essential feature of the enactment or the legislative policy built into it.
[801G H, 802A] (c) If the words "such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit" are given the wide construction of giving an unfettered power of amending and modifying the enactment sought to be extended, as contended by the respondent, the validity of the section itself becomes vulnerable on account of the vice of excessive delegation.
Moreover.
such a construction would be repugnant to the context and content of the section, read as a whole.
[802 B C] Rajnarain Singh vs The Chairman Patna Administration Committee Patna and Re: Delhi Laws Act; , , referred to.
(2) The 1957 Notification transgresses these limits in two respects : (a) The power has not been exercised contemporaneously with the extension or for the purposes of the extension of the Bengal Act to Delhi but 6.6 years thereafter.
The power of extension with restrictions and modifications had exhausted itself when the Bengal Act was extended to Delhi with some alterations by the 1951 Notification.
[802D E] The power given under section 2 of the 1950 Act, cannot be equated to the "Henry VIII clause" of the Acts of the British Parliament because while the power under section 2 can be exercised only once when the Act is extended, the power under a "Henry VIII clause" can be invoked, if there is nothing contrary in the clause, more than once on the arising of a difficulty when the Act is operative [802F H] Observations of Fazal Ali, J. at p. 850 in Re: Delhi Laws Act case explained.
787 (b) The alteration sought to be introduced in section 6(2) by the 1957 Notification goes beyond the scope of the "restrictions and modifications" permissible under section 2 of the 1950 Act, because, it purports to change the essential features of section 6(2) and the legislative policy inherent therein.
[803F] Section 6(2) before the issue of the 1957 Notification, requiring the Government to give "not less than 3 months ' notice" of its intention to add to or omit from or otherwise amend the Schedule to the 1950 Act, embodies a determination of legislative policy and its formulation as an absolute rule of ' conduct could be diluted, changed or amended only by the legislature, in the exercise of its essential legislative function, which could not be delegated to the Government.
[803G 804E, F, G] (i) The language of the sub section as it stood is emphatically prohibitive and it commands the Government in unambiguous negative terms that the period of the requisite notice must not be less than 3 months, showing that the provision was mandatory and not directory.
[804 A B] (ii) The scheme of the Bengal Act is that the tax is to be quantified and assessed on the quarterly turnover.
and the period of not less than 3 months, notice conforms to the scheme and ensures that the imposition of a new tax of exemption does not cause dislocation or inconvenience either to the dealer or the Revenue.
[804B] (iii) By fixing the period at not less than 3 months, purchasers on whom the incidence of tax really falls have adequate notice of taxable items.
[804 C] (iv) Dealers and others likely to be affected by an amendment of the Schedule get sufficient time to make representations and adjust their affairs.
[804 D] The span of notice was thus the essence of the legislative mandate.
The necessity of notice and the span of notice both are integral to the scheme of the provision and it cannot be split up into essential and non essential components, the whole of it being mandatory.
[804 E F] Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Municipal Board, Rampur, ; , distinguished.
(3)(a) Pt.
Benarsi Das Bhanot vs State of Madhya Pradesh does not assist the respondent.
That was a case where the contention that 5.
6(2) of the C.P. & Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1947, was invalid on the ground of excessive delegation, was rejected, by the Court.
In the present case, it is the validity of a Notification purported to be issued under section 2 of the 1950 Act that is impeached as beyond the powers of modification conferred by the section.
[804H, 805A] (b) In the present case, the Central Government did not directly amend section 6(2).
More than 6 years after the extension of the Act by the 1951 Notification, it amended the sub section indirectly by amending the 1951 Notification.
But on the extension of the Act to Delhi, the 1951 Notification had exhausted its purpose, and the purported amendment, through the medium of such a "dead" Notification is an exercise in utility.
Further, an amendment which was not directly permissible could not be done indirectly.
[805 B, C] (4) The High Court was in error in holding that Parliament had validated or re enacted referentially, with retroactive effect, what was sought to be done by the 1957 Notification when it passed the Amending Act, 1959.
[807C] The Amending Act leaves section 6(2) untouched.
It does not even indirectly refer to the 1957 Notification or the amendment purportedly made by it in section 6(2).
Nor does it re enact or validate what was sought to be achieved by that notification.
No indication of referential incorporation or validation of the 1957 Notification or the amendment sought to be made by it, is available either in the Preamble or in any other provision of the Amending Act.
Parliament despite its presumed awareness of the 1957 Notification, has said nothing in the Amending Act indicating that it has in any manner incorporated, re enacted or 788 validated the 1957 Notification or the amendment sought to be made thereby, while passing the Amending Act, 1959.
[805 E F, 807 B C] Krishna Chandra vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1389, referred to, (5) A mere amendment of an Act by a competent legislature does not amount to re enactment of the parent Act.
[807D] Venkatarao Esajirao Limberkar 's case [1970] 1 S.C.R. 317, explained.
(6) The respondent cannot contend that if the withdrawal of exemption without giving 3 months" notice was illegal, then the grant of exemption without giving 3 months ' notice was also void.
[808 A] (a) Some of the goods were granted exemption by the 1951 Notification itself and, hence, there is no question of giving notice for giving those exemptions.
[807 G] (b) The validity of the notifications granting exemptions after the extension of the Act to Delhi is not in issue in the writ petitions.
and whether or not the requisite notice was given before granting exemption is a question of fact depending on evidence.
[807G] (c) To allow the respondent to take such a plea would be violative of the fundamental principle of natural justice, according to which a party cannot be allowed to take advantage of his own lapse or wrong.
[807 H] (7) The respondent cannot also rely on section 21 of the General Clauses Act, because, the source of the power to amend the Schedule to the 1950 Act.
is section 6(2) of the Bengal Act and not section 21 of the General Clauses Act, and the power has to be exercised within the limits of section 6(2) and for the purpose for which it we conferred.
[808 B] Gopichand vs Delhi Administration, [1959] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 87, referred to.
