A combined reading of sections 42(4), 78(1)(A)(a)(i), 79(1) and (3) of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, and r. 53 of the Rules made under the Act, shows that an application under section 79(1) to the Labour Court, in respect of a dispute falling under section 78(1)(A)(a)(i) must be made within 3 months of the arising of the dispute; and that the dispute would be deemed to have arisen if, within a period of 15 days from the receipt of a letter of approach under section 42(4) by the employer, or within such further period as may be mutually fixed by the employer and the employee, no agreement is arrived at in respect of the change desired by the employee.
In the present case, the letter of approach under section 42(4) claiming that his age was only 56 years and so he should not be retired, was sent by the employee (respondent) to the employer (appellant) on February 13, 1973.
Since there was no response, the respondent requested the Labour Commissioner on March 17, 1973, to intervene.
The Labour Officer of the appellant appeared before the Labour Commissioner and took adjournment in order to compromise the dispute.
As no compromise was arrived at, the respondent filed his application under section 78(1)(A)(a)(i) read with section 79(1) before the Labour Court on June 7, 1973.
The Labour Court and on appeal the Industrial Court, held, that the period of 15 days from the date of the receipt of the letter of approach expired on February 28, 1973; that the dispute between the parties should be deemed to have arisen at the latest on March 1, 1973; that the application under section 79(1) to the Labour Court should have been filed within 3 months of that date, that is, on or before June 1, 1973; and that, therefore, the application filed on June 7, 1973, was barred under section 79(3)(a).
The High Court, however took the view that by reason of the Labour Officer of the appellant asking for adjournment for compromising the matter on or after March 17, 1973, there was an extension of the period to some date beyond March 17, 1973 by mutual agreement between the parties, and that therefore.
the application filed on June 7, 1973, was within 3 months of the arising of the dispute.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended that (1) there was no valid extension of the period for settlement as such extension should have been fixed before the expiry of the initial period of 15 days, and (2) no period was mutually fixed between the parties.
Allowing the appeal on the second ground, ^ HELD: (1) The further period for arriving at a settlement under r. 53(2) can be mutually fixed between the parties even after the expiration of the initial period of 15 days; and in such a case, the dispute would be deemed to have arisen only on the expiration of the extended period if within that time no settlement is arrived at.
[824 G] (a) There is nothing in the rule which provides that the further period should be fixed before the expiration of the initial period.
The words in the rule "within 15 days of the receipt of the application by the employer or within such further period as may be mutually fixed between the employer and the employee" are sufficiently wide to cover a situation where the further period is fixed after the expiration of the initial period.
[824 B.C.].
819 (h) The object of the rule is that, as far as possible, the employer and the employee should arrive at an agreement by negotiation in respect of the change desired by the employee and it is only where such an agreement is not possible that the employee should approach the Labour Court for adjudication.
It is possible that even after the expiry of the initial period, the parties may arrive at a settlement and such settlement should not be discouraged by compelling the employee to apply to the Labour Court within 3 months of the expiration of the initial period of 15 days.
[824 D F] [Obiter: The further period cannot, however, be fixed after 3 months have elapsed from the expiration of the initial period of 15 days and the application has become barred under section 79(3)(a).] [825 B] (2) But, it cannot be said in the present case that the further period was mutually fixed by the appellant and the respondent before the Labour Commissioner.
[825 C] (a) There must be a specific period agreed upon between the parties but there is no reference to any specific period in the present case.
[825 E] (b) Even on a liberal view that the Labour Commissioner granted the adjournment to the Labour Officer of the appellant for arriving at a settlement up to a specific date implying a specific period, there is no averment in the application under section 79 to the Labour Court, that such specific period was mutually fixed between the parties, nor even a remote suggestion to that effect.
It is not even stated that the respondent consented to the adjournment as to enable an inference of mutual agreement to be made.
[825 EF] (c) In fact, it was not the case of the respondent that any further period was mutually fixed to save the application from the bar of limitation.
On the contrary, he prayed for condonation of delay, but the Labour Court has no power to condone the delay.
