While holding the post of Agricultural Inspector in the Agricultural Department, the appellant was appointed against a temporary post of Block development and Panchayat officer in the Development Department of the State, and was confirmed in that post with effect from April 1, 1964.
As a result of the partition of Punjab, the appellant and the respondents (who were also Agricultural Inspectors) were allocated to the State of Haryana.
On February 26, 1969 at the request of the appellant, the Governor of Haryana deconfirmed the appellant from the post of Block Development and Panchayat officer with effect from that date.
On March.
20, 1969, the Governor passed an order promoting the appellant temporarily as District Agricultural officer describing him as "Agricultural Inspector, now working as Block Development and Panchayat officer".
The respondents challenged the order, and the High Court allowed their writ petition holding that the appellant 's lien on the post of Agricultural Inspector from which post alone he could have been promoted to the post of District Agricultural officer automatically stood terminated under r. 3.12 Punjab.
Civil Service Rules, on his confirmation as Block Development officer.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: Under r. 3. 12 normally, a Government servant, on substantive appointment to any permanent post, acquires a lien on that post and ceases to hold any lien previously acquired on any other post.
But, the opening words of the rule show that it would apply unless it is otherwise provided in the Rules.
Rule 3.14 (a) (2) provides otherwise by carving out an exception.
It provides that a competent authority shall suspend the lien of a Government servant on a permanent post which he holds substantively, if he is appointed in d substantive capacity to a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne.
When the appellant was appointed as Block Development and Panchayat officer in a substantive permanent capacity, his case fell squarely within the ambit of r. `3 14(a) (2) as, the post of Block Development and Panchayat officer was outside the cadre of Agricultural Inspectors to which the appellant belonged.
The use of the word "shall" in cl.
(a) against the use of the word "may" in cl.
(b) of the rule shows that it was imperative for the competent authority to suspend the lien of the appellant on the permanent post of Agricultural Inspector which he held substantively.
He should not suffer because of the competent authority 's failure to do so.
[720 E, H, 721 A] Further, under r. 3.15, in a case covered by r. 3.14 (a) (2) the suspended lien of a Government servant may not, except on the written request of the Government servant,`be terminated while he remains in Government service; but no written request was made by the appellant in the presnt case for terminating his suspended lien on the post of Agricultural Inspector.
[712 B, C] Therefore, when the Governor deconfirmed the appellant from the post of Block Development and Panchayat officer, the suspended lien of the appellant on the post of Agriculture Inspector stood revived with effect from February 26, 1969, and his promotion in his parent Agricultural Department from the post of Agricultural Inspector to that of District Agricultural officer by the impugned order, does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
[721 D E] 717
