The appellant, a firm dealing in buying and selling jute with headquarters at Calcutta, used to purchase raw jute grown in Orissa and despatch them in bags from Cuttack and Dhanmandal Railway Station to the Railway Mills Siding Station in Calcutta.
The goods were booked in the name of the buyer "KB & Co" through its licensed broker "EIJ & HE Ltd." and on the arrival of the goods the buyer inspected the goods and if they were found in accordance with the specifications mentioned in the agreement of sale, accepted them and paid their price.
On the basis of these concluded transactions of sale the respondent State, levied sales tax under section 3(a) of the on the basis that the sales were interstate sales.
Since the assessing authorities negatived the contention of the appellant that the sale was merely an internal sale which took place in the State of West Bengal and since the Tribunal refused to make a reference, the appellant moved the High Court under section 24(3) of the Orissa Sales Tax Act to direct the Tribunal to make a statement of the case to the High Court.
The Tribunal referred two points, viz., (i) Did the title to the goods pass in Orissa or in West Bengal and (ii) Even if the title in the goods passed in West Bengal, whether in the facts and circumstances of this case, the transaction constituted "sale in the course of inter state trade" ? The High Court held that although the title in the goods passed in West Bengal and the sale took place there, since the sale occasioned the movement of goods from Orissa to West Bengal it was an inter State sale, and, therefore, it was clearly governed by section 3(a) of the .
Affirming the judgment of the High Court and dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) The definition of "sale" in section 2(g) of the postulates the following conditions.
(i) There must be a transfer of property in goods by one person to another; (ii) The transfer must be for cash or for deferred payment or for any other valuable consideration; and (iii) That such a transfer includes a transfer of goods on the hire purchase or other system of payment by instalment etc.
The word "sale" defined in cl.
(g) of section 2 and used in section 3(a), 4(2) (a) and (b) is wide enough to include not only a concluded contract of sale but also a contract or agreement of sale provided the agreement of sale stipulates that there was a transfer of property or movement 940 of goods.
An agreement to sell by which the property did not actually pass was also an element of sale.
[944H, 945A, C, G] Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar and others, , relied on.
Sales Tax Officer, Pilibhit vs Budh Prakash Jai Prakash, 5 S.T.C. 193, 196, followed.
(2) When the statute uses the words "sale or purchase of goods", it automatically attracts the definition of "sale of goods" as given in section 4 of the , and is to some extent pari materia to section 3 of the so far as the transactions of sale is concerned.
The inevitable conclusion that fellows from the combined effect of the interpretation of section 3 of the and section 4 of the is that an agreement to sell is also an essential ingredient of sale provided it contains a stipulation of transfer of goods from the seller to the buyer.
[946E F, 947A] (3) Since the word "sale" appearing in section 2(g) as also in section 3(a) of the Act includes an agreement to sell provided the said agreement contains a stipulation regarding passing of the property, if there is a movement of goods from one State to another, not in pursuance of the sale itself, but in pursuance of an agreement to sell, which later merges into a sale, the movement of goods would be deemed to have been occasioned by the sale itself wherever it takes place.
When the movement of goods start, they shed the character of either unascertained goods or future goods.
For the purpose of application of section 3(a) of the , the question whether the contract is a forward contract or not makes no material difference.
[947B, C D, 948F] (4) A statutory provision cannot be interpreted in a way which defeats the very object of the Act.
It is equally well settled that the Legislature does not waste words or introduce useless or redundant provisions.
The contention that section 3(a) of the was redundant or would apply to contingencies which may not happen at all, is not correct.
[948D] Indian Chamber of Commerce vs C.I.T., West Bengal II Calcutta, 1976(1) SCR 830, applied.
(5) The following conditions must be satisfied before a sale can be said to take place in the course of interstate trade or commerce: (i) that there is an agreement to sell which contains a stipulation express or implied regarding the movement of the goods from one State to another.
(ii) that in pursuance of the said contract the goods, in fact, move from one State to another; and (iii) that ultimately a concluded sale takes place in the State where the goods are sent which must be different from the State from which the goods move, because the tax is on sale and not on an agreement to sell or a forward contract.
If these conditions are satisfied then by virtue of section 9 of the it is the State from which the goods move which will be competent to levy the tax under the provisions of the .
The question whether the agreement to sell is in respect of ascertained or unascertained goods, existing or future goods, make no difference whatsoever so far as the interpretation of section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax is concerned.
[949A C, E] Cement Distributors (P) Ltd. vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Lalgudi and others, 23 S.T.C. 86, 94, distinguished.
Larsen and Toubro Ltd., Madras 2 & others.
vs Joint Commercial Tax Officer, 20 S.T.C. 150, 186 & 187; The State of Madras vs N. K. Nataraja Mudaliar ; , 391; Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. vs section R. Sarkar and others ; , 391; State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs State of Mysore, , 797 798; Tata Engineering & Locomotive Co. Ltd. 941 vs The Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Anr., ; , 866; M/s. Kelvinator of India Ltd. vs The State of Haryana , 560; The State of Tamil Nadu vs The Cement Distributors (P) Ltd. and others and Oil India Ltd. vs The Superintendent of Taxes and others, referred to.
