The appellant, who bought property from the respondent 's husband, covenanted that in case of non payment of the consideration, the amount due would be a charge upon the property.
The respondent, on the death of her husband, filed a suit on the ground that the appellant defaulted to pay the full purchase money of the property.
The trial court held that no decree could be passed for enforcing the charge against the property as it was held in occupancy right by the appellant, but gave a personal decree against the appellant for a certain sum.
On the appellant 's appeal the High Court held that the respondent was entitled to enforce the charge on the property but negatived the respondent 's claim for a personal decree.
On appeal to this Court, it was contended (1) that the Court was not competent to pass a decree creating a charge on the property since it was held by the appellant as an occupancy tenant and (2) that as the respondent did not appeal from the decree of the trial court negativing her claim in the suit for a charge on the property, the High Court was wrong in granting a decree for enforcement of the charge.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The High Court was right in holding that the prohibition to pass a decree for sale or for closure of any right of an occupancy tenant in his holding was not in existence in 1952 when the suit was filed, because, section 12 of the Central Provinces Tenancy Act, 1920, which contained the prohibition, had been repealed before the decree was passed.
[964 E F] (2)Even if the respondent did not file any appeal from the decree of the trial court, that was no bar to the High Court passing a decree in favour of the respondent for the enforcement of the charge.
Under Order XLI, r. 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the High Court was competent to pass a decree for the enforcement of the charge in favour of the respondent notwithstanding the fact that the respondent did not file any appeal from the decree.
[964 G, 965 E] Radhika Mohan vs Sudhir Chandra, A.I.R. 1937 Calcutta 10 and Giani Ram & Others, vs Ramji Lal and Others, ; , referred to.
