The appellants were assessees under the Income Tax Act under the jurisdiction of the Income Tax officer, Nellore since a number of years on 23 1 1973, the Central Board of Direct Taxes sent a notice to the appellants under section 127(1) of the Income Tax Act proposing to transfer their case files for facility of investigations" from the respective Income.
Tax Officer Nellore to the Income Tax Officer 'B ' Ward, Special Circle.
II, Hyderabad and called for objections, if any, to the proposed transfer within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice.
Despite their representations objecting to the transfer, the Central Board ordered the transfer on 26 7 1973.
The validity of the order was questioned before the Andhra Pradesh High Court by an application under Article 226 of the Constitution on the ground of violation of principles of natural justice inasmuch as neither the reasons were given.
nor communicated in the said order.
The writ petition was dismissed by a single Judge holding that mere failure to communicate the reasons which were found by him to have been recorded in the files, to the appellants was not fatal.
The Letters Patent Appeal before the Division Bench failed.
Allowing the appeal by special leave and rejecting the contentions of the Revenue.
namely.
(a) that the reasons given in the notice under section 127(1) calling for objections, namely, "facility for investigations can be read a part of the impugn ed order.
(b) that recording of the reasons in the file, although not communicated to the assessee, fully meets the requirements of section 127(1) and (c) that the orders under section 127 (1) being "purely administrative in nature, it was not necessary to give the assessee, an opportunity to be heard and there was consequently no need to record reasons for the transfer, the Court ^ HELD:(1) Unlike section 5(7A) of the 1922 Act, section 127(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, requires reasons to be recorded prior to the passing of an order of transfer.
Once an order is passed transferring the case file of an assessee to another area, the order has to be communicated.
Communication of the order is an absolutely essential requirement since the assessee is then immediately made aware of the reasons which impelled the, authorities to pass the order of transfer.
The Legislature has imposed the requirements of show cause notice and also recording of reasons to avoid a great deal of inconvenience and the monetary loss if a case file is transferred from the usual place of residence or office where originally assessments are made to a distant place.
[888A, 889A B] (2) The reason for recording of reasons in the order and making these reasons known is to enable an opportunity to the assessee to approach the High Court under its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution or even the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution in an appropriate case for challenging the order, inter alia, either on the ground it is mala fide or arbitrary or that it is based on irrelevant and extraneous considerations, irrespective of the result of such a writ or special leave application.
[889C D] 885 (3) Recording of reasons and disclosure thereof is not a mere formality.
The requirement of recording reasons under section 127 (1) of the Income Tax Act is a mandatory direction under the law and non communication thereof is not saved by showing that the reasons exist in the files although not communicated to the assessee.
[889 E] Pannalal Binjraj and Another vs The Union of India and Others, , applied.
Sunanda Rani Jain vs Union of India and Others, , overruled.
Shri Pragdas Umar Vaishya vs Union of India and others, [1967] 12 Madhya Pradesh Journal 868, discussed.
(4) When law requires reasons to be recorded in a particular order affecting prejudicially the interest of any person, who can challenges the order in Court, it ceases to be a mere administrative order and the vice of violation of the principles of natural justice on account of omission to communicate the reasons is not expiated.
[890 C] Kashiram Aggarwalla vs Union of India and others, , not applicable.
section Narayanappa and others vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bangalore, , distinguished.
(5) In the insant case, non communication of the reasons in the order passed under section 127(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 is a serious infirmity in the order and it is invalid.
[890 G]
