Kachnar Kuer, on whom the property of her late husband devolved, executed two registered deeds.
By one of these she adopted a son to her deceased husband and by the other, a deed of Arpan nama she created a religious endowment in the name of Shri Gopalji, appointing her mother in law Sheo Kuer, the appellant as the shebait.
The respondents claiming to be the reversioners filed a suit for declaration that the two deeds were void, illegal and not binding on their reversionary interest.
That suit was dismissed on the ground that the late husband of Kachnar Kuer had given authority to her to make an adoption and to create an endowment.
On appeal, the High Court reversed the findings of the trial court and decreed the Suit.
The High Court however, granted a certificate of fitness ' under article 133(1)(b) of the Constitution and since after obtaining the certificate, Kachner Kuer purported to compromise the suit with the reversioners, Sheo Kuer, the shebait came up in appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD.
(i) It is well settled that a Hindu widow possessing a widow 's estate cannot alienate tho property which has devolved on her except for special purposes.
The powers of a Hindu female to alienate property are wider in respect of acts which conduce to the spiritual benefit of her deceased husband.
The widow is entitled to sell the property, even the whole of it, if the income of the property is not sufficient to cover the expenses for such acts.
In regard to alienations for pious observations, which are not essential or obligatory, her powers are limited to alienations of only a small portion of her property.
[1004 F, H, 1005 A] (ii) Whether the alienation for a pious purpose is of a reasonable portion of the property must necessarily depend upon the total extent of the property t which has devolved upon the widow.
[1005 D] (iii) The reasonability of the alienation of a portion of the property depends on the facts and circumstances of each case, but an alienation of 1/5th portion cannot be said to be unreasonable or excessive.
[1005 F] Collector of Masulipatam vs Cavaly Vencata 8 M.I.A. 529, Sadar Singh vs Kunj Behari 491 I.A. referred to Kamala Devi vs Bachu Lal Gupta, [1957] S.C.R. P. 452 applied.
