The appellants ' telephones were disconnected and taken temporary possession of by the Superintendent of Police, North District and the General Manager, Telephones respectively on various dates acting under the instructions of the Administrator, Delhi, who was personally satisfied that illegal forward trading (satta) in agricultural commodities was being practised on a large scale by them through their telephones.
The Orders were purportedly made under section 5(1) of the Indian Telegraphs Act, 1895, and Rule 422 of the Indian Telegraphs Rules, 1951.
These orders were assailed by the appellants by a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution which was allowed by a single Judge of the High Court, resulting in a special appeal by the Union of India, which was accepted.
Negativing the contention of the appellants/respondents viz.; that the impugned action of disconnection and temporary taking over of the telephones was bad because: (a) No statutory notice was ever given as required under Rules 421 and 422.
(b) The Divisional Engineer did not apply his mind and record his own satisfaction about the existence of "any emergency" and as such there was a contravention of Rules 421 and 422 which had to be read together.
(c) The reason given in the order to the effect that the appellants were making illegal and improper use of the telephones by transmitting messages and information in regard to Satta business which had been banned, was irrelevant and extraneous to Rule 422.
(d) The emergency contemplated by Rule 422 is not the same as "public emergency" declared under section 5, but "any emergency", the existence of which was to be established to the satisfaction of the Divisional Engineer and not any extraneous authority, the appellate Bench of the High Court held, (i) that, the requirement of notice could be dispensed with under Rule 422 by the General Manager Telephones, if he was satisfied that the telephones were being used by the subscribers for illegal forward trading (ii) that, such use was contrary to public interest in view of the existence of "economic" emergency (iii) that the words " any emergency" in Rule 422 includes an "economic emergency" and (iv) that, on the basis of the certificate in regard to the existence of an 'economic emergency" the Divisional Manager was competent to pass the impugned order in exercise of his powers under Rule 422.
While allowing the appeals by special leave the Court, ^ HELD : (1) section 5(1) of the Indian Telegraphs Act, 1895, if properly construed does not confer unguided and unbridled power on the Central Government/State Government/Specially Authorised Officer to take possession of any telegraph.
[1065 C] 1061 (2) Conditions pre requisite for the exercise of power under this section and Rule 422 are: (a) the occurrence of a "public emergency" not any other kind of emergency.
(b) recording of its satisfaction as to the existence of such an emergency by the Government or the Authority concerned on grounds germane to an action under the rule [1065 C D] (3) The expression "public emergency" has not been defined in the statute.
Read as a whole, s.5, with the two phrases in sub section (i) viz. "occurrence of any public emergency" and "or in the interest of public safety", clarifies that a "public emergency", within the contemplation of that section, is one which raises problems concerning the interest of public safety", the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order, or the prevention of incitement to the commission of an offence.
It is in the context of these matters that the appropriate authority has to form an opinion with regard to the occurrence of a "public emergency" with a view to taking further action under section 5.
[1065 D F] (4) "Economic Emergency" is not one of these matters expressly mentioned in the statute.
Mere "economic emergency" may not necessarily amount to a "public emergency" and justify action under section 5 unless it raises problems relating to the matters indicated therein.
[1065 F G] (5) Notice under Rule 421 cannot be dispensed with.
The scope of the words "any emergency" in Rule 422 is wider than the expression "public emergency" under section 5.
The subjective satisfaction as to the existence of "any emergency" under Rule 422 is that of the Divisional Engineer, on a rational basis on relevant material which may include any certificate or report of the appropriate Government as to the occurrence of a "public emergency".
The requirement of recording such satisfaction by the Divisional Engineer with reasons therefor, is implicit in the Rule.
That will be a minimal safeguard against arbitrary exercise of the drastic power.
[1066 A, C D] (6) The ground for disconnection and taking over temporary possession of the telephones viz., 'that illegal forward trading (satta) in agricultural commodities is being practised" amounts to "improper or illegal use of telegraphs and is not a relevant consideration under Rule 422.
The appropriate course to be followed was that laid down in R. 427 read with Rr. 416 and 421, after giving an opportunity to explain their conduct, in consonance with the principles of natural justice.
[1066 F G] (6) It is well settled that where a power is required to be exercised by a certain authority in a certain way, it should be exercised in that manner or not at all, and other modes of performance are necessarily forbidden.
It is all the more necessary to observe this rule where the power is of a drastic nature and, its exercise in a mode other than the one provided, will be violative of the fundamental principle of natural justice.
Resort to the wrong and more drastic course provided in rule 422, on a ground which was not germane to an action under that rule violates the impugned order, particularly when it is manifest, in the instant case that the authority was influenced more by this ground and less, if at all, by the existence of "public emergency" certified by the State [1066 H, 1067 A B]
