Under the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act the holder of an outstill licence for country liquor pays a certain sum per mensem for manufacturing country spirit in his outstill and selling it by retail in his premises.
No definite area is fixed within which each outstill has the monopoly to supply country spirit but their number is regulated according to rules and five miles is taken as the minimum distance between one outstill and another.
The appellants in all the appeals were the holders of licences for the manufacturing and sale of country liquor.
In the first batch of cases the appellant could not open the outsill even after more than six months of its grant despite his best efforts.
The approval for opening the outstill was withdrawn and he was asked to pay the monthly licence fee according to the terms of licence.
The appellant 's claim for refund of the money deposited by him, together with compensation for loss of anticipated profits and damages, was rejected.
Despite this the appellant continued to bid for licences during the subsequent three years and claimed refund and damages, which claim was rejected by the authorities.
In the second batch of appeals the appellants claimed reduction of the licence fee for outstill liquor shops on the ground that they incurred losses because of the speculative bids at the auction should have been prevented by the authorities.
In the third batch of cases the appellants claimed refund of sums realised from them on the ground that there was no quid pro quo for the fees.
In all the cases the High Court dismissed their writ petitions.
On appeal it was contended that the High Court was wrong in holding that exclusive privilege had been granted under section 22 of the Bihar & Orissa Excise Act, 1915 but that the licences fell within the purview of section 30 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: (1) It is futile to contend that the licences were merely licences for the retail sale of spirit for consumption on the vendor 's premises within the meaning of section 30 of the Act.
The essential feature of the outstill system is that the holder of a licence acquires the right to manufacture country spirit in his outstill and sell it by retail "in his premises" without any 'restriction on the strength or prices at which the spirit is manufactured or sold.
He has a monopoly of manufacturing and supplying country liquor within his area.
The right is, therefore, an exclusive privilege within the meaning of section 22(1)(d) of the Act.
[38A C] (2) The licences of the appellants remained in force for the purposes for which they were granted and by virtue of the express provisions of section 45 they could have no claim to compensation.
[38 G] (3) Even though the High Court has held that what was granted was an exclusive privilege under section 22, it did not notice section 44(2) while taking the view that the petitioner was at liberty to surrender the licence.
Section 44(2) clearly provides that sub section
(1) of that section shall not apply in the case of a licence for the sale of any country liquor in exercise of an exclusive privilege granted under section 22(c).
[38 F G] (4) There is nothing wrong in the view taken by the High Court that the responsibility for finding a suitable site was that of the appellant.
There is no 35 justification for the argument that nothing was payable by the appellant because he could not locate the shop in spite of his best efforts.
The appellants retained the licence all through and continued to make higher bids at the subsequent public auctions thereby preventing others from undertaking the responsibility of establishing the outstills.
[40 B D] (5) It was permissible for the State to frame rules for the grant of licences on payment of fees fixed by auction, for that was only a mode or medium for ascertaining the best price for the grant of exclusive privilege of manufacturing and selling liquor.
[41 A 13] Nashirwar etc.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
; and Har Shankar & ors.
vs The Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner & Ors. etc. ; explained.
(6) In the second group of appeals, there is nothing in the rules which could be said to give rise to a right in favour of the appellants for reduction of the amounts demanded from them.
[43 A B] (7) Id the third group of appeals the High Court was right in holding that the amounts in question were payable for the licence which had been granted for the exclusive privilege.
The argument that there should be refund of fees because there was no quid pro quo is no longer available to the appellants in view of this Court 's decision in Nashirwar 's case and Har Shankar 's case.
[43 C D]
