The respondent landlord let out the building in question to the appellant tenant in the year 1954, when the Transfer of Property Act was not applicable to Delhi where the property is situated.
The Transfer of Property Act was made applicable to Delhi in the year 1962.
In 1967, the respondent filed a suit for eviction against the appellant without terminating the tenancy under the Transfer of Property Act on the grounds of unauthorised subletting and acquisition of alternative accommodation by the tenant.
A decree for eviction was passed by the Rent Controller which was affirmed by the Appellate Tribunal.
In the High Court it was contended by the appellant that neither notice to quit nor notice of forfeiture determining the tenancy was given by the landlord as required by sections 106 and 111 of the Transfer of Property Act.
The respondent contended that the lease had expired by efflux of time under section 111(a) and no notice terminating the tenancy was necessary and that forfeiture of the tenancy caused by the subletting contrary to the terms of the agreement can be availed of by the landlord even in the absence of a notice as contemplated by section 111(g).
The High Court dismissed the petition filed by the appellant but granted a certificate of fitness under Article 133 restricting it to one ground urged before the High Court.
The respondent raised a preliminary objection that since the certificate was granted only on one point the appellant could not be permitted to make any other submissions.
The appellant contended that the lease is one where the time is not limited and, therefore, is terminable only by 15 days notice as required by section 106 of Transfer of Property Act.
The respondent contended that the lease was for a fixed period and expired by efflux of time.
In any evnt a notice in writing is not necessary to terminate the lease.
Institution of legal proceedings serves that purpose.
^ HELD: (1) Once a certificate of fitness has been granted under Article 133, the appeal, in all its amplitude, is before the Court and every point may be urged by the appellant provided this Court permits it having regard to the circumstances.
It is however, within the court 's discretion not to allow a new point to be taken up.
[909D E] (2) The scheme of the Rent Control Law, is to put further fetters on landlords seeking eviction where in the absence of such acute barriers the landlords would be entitled to ejectment.
Even where under a particular Rent Control Statute the landlord makes out grounds for eviction he can institute proceedings in this behalf only if de hors the said grounds he has cause of action under the Transfer of Property Act.
The landlord cannot secure an order for eviction without first establishing that he has validly determined the lease under the transfer of Property Act.
[909G H,911C] (3) A lease merely stating that it is for a period less than one year is ex facie for an indefinite period and as such cannot expire by efflux of time.
907 Nor are we convinced that the acceptance of rent for the period of 11 years does not amount assenting to the holding over of the tenancy by the landlord.
[911E F] (4) The Rent Act contemplates no elaborate proceedings but filing out of the particulars in a proforma which takes the place of a plaint.
No specific averment of forfeiture and consequent determination of the lease is found in the petition.
The question arises whether a written notice of forfeiture for the breach of the condition of the lease is obligatory in terms of section 111(g) or whether written notice of forfeiture can be dispensed with as being no part of the equity or justice but a technical or formal statutory requirement.
Before the amendment of Transfer of Property Act in 1929 all that was necessary for the lessor to determine the demise on forfeiture was to do some act showing his intention to determine the lease.
The rule of English Law 'before the enactment of the law of Property Act, 1925, appears to be that a suit for ejectment is equivalent to a re entry.
The appellant did not urge in the High Court that the Transfer of Property Act was applicable in its own force.
We decline our discretion to allow the appellant to travel into the new statutory territory of section 111 (g).
[911G H, 913A, D E, 916C] (5) In India and in other colonies throughout the Imperial Era a tacit assumption had persuaded the courts to embrace English Law (the civilizing mission of the masters) as justice, equity and good conscience.
Unfortunately, even after liberation, this neo colonial jurisprudence was not shaken off.
Free India has to find its conscience in our rugged realities and no more in alien legal thought.
So viewed, the basic question is what is the essence of equity in the matter of determination of a lease on the grounds of forfeiture caused by the breach of a condition.
The substance of the matter the justice of the situation is whether a condition in the lease has been breached and whether the lessor has by some overt act brought home to the lessee his election to eject on the strength of the breach.
The touchstone is simply whether the formal requirement of the law is part of what is necessarily just and reasonable.
In this perspective the conclusion is clear that a notice in writing formally determining the tenancy is not a rule of justice or cannon of commonsense.
Realism married to equity being the true test, we are persuaded that pre amending Act provision of section 111 (g) is in consonance with justice.
The mere institution of the legal proceeding for eviction fulfills the requirements of law for determination of the lease.
The conscience of the Court needs nothing more and nothing less.
The essential principles, not the technical rules, of the Transfer of Property Act form part of justice, equity and good conscience.
[916D, 917A, D, E F,919B C, 920A]
