The appellant is the Executive Committee of an Educational Institution (a college) registered under the Registration of Co operative Societies Act, and the college was affiliated to a University.
The provisions of the University Act require that every decision of the management of an affiliated college to remove from service a teacher shall be reported forthwith to the Vice Chancellor and subject to the provisions contained in the Statutes made by the University, shall not take effect unless approved by the Vice Chancellor.
The respondent was appointed by the appellant as a Principal of the college but no agreement, as prescribed by the University Act, and the Statutes was executed between the parties.
Two years after his appointment.
the appellant served a notice on the Principal directing him not to discharge the duties of the Principal and shortly thereafter terminated his services.
Thereafter, the respondent did not work as Principal.
The respondent filed a suit contending that he must be deemed to be continuing in service, as there was no sanction of the Vice Chancellor for the termination of his services, and prayed for an injunction restraining the appellant from interfering with his duties as Principal of the institution.
The trial Court dismissed the suit but the first appellate Court reversed the decision and the High Court affirmed the decision of the first appellate Court.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that: (1) the appellant was not a statutory body; (2) in the absence of an agreement the requirement regarding the approval by the Vice Chancellor would not apply and the termination of the respondent 's services would be governed by the usual master and servant relationship.
(3) there are no special circumstances for enforcing the contract of personal service; and (4) the present case was not a fit one for granting the reliefs prayed for, they being equitable reliefs and in the discretion of the Court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD.
(Per Khanna and Fazal Ali, JJ.).
(1) Merely because the appellant followed certain statutory provisions of the University Act or the Statutes made thereunder, it cannot be held to be a statutory body.
[1014 A B] (a) Before an institution can be a statutory body, it must be created by or under the statute and owe its existence to a statute.
There is a well marked distinction between a body which is created by the statute and a body which, after having come into existence, is governed in accordance with the provisions of the statute.
The question in such cases to be asked is, if there is no statute would the institution have any legal existence.
If the answer is in the negative, then undoubtedly it is a statutory body but if the institution has a separate existence of its own without any reference to the statute concerned but is merely governed by the statutory provisions, it cannot be said to be a statutory body.
[1013 D 1014 A] 1007 Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi & Others, ; , followed.
(b) Merely because it was affiliated to the University.
that there were certain mandatory provisions of the University Act which were binding on the appellant; and the appellant was governed by the Statutes of the University would not be sufficient to alter the character and nature of the appellant and convert it into a statutory body.
[1014 B C] (i) The appellant had an independent status having been registered under the Registration of Co operative Societies Act and was a self governed or an autonomous body.
It was affiliated to the University merely for the sake of convenience and mainly for the purpose of recognition of its courses of study by the University.
[1014 C D] (ii) All that Statute 14A of the University required was that the Managing Committee of the college must co opt the Principal of the college and a representative of the teachers.
By co opting them the appellant did not lose its independent status but continued to remain a non statutory and , autonomous body.
[1011 F G] (iii) Similarly, the fact that the Statutes of the University were adopted by the appellant and it was, as a matter of convention, bound to follow the provisions of the University Act, would not clothe the appellant with a statutory status or character.
The adoption of the Statutes was only for better governance and administration and extension of the educational activities of the institution.
[1014 G H] D Sabhajit Tewary vs Union of India & ors.
and Kumari Regina vs St. Aloysius Higher Elementary School & Anr.
[1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 6, followed.
(2) The case of P.R. Jodh vs A.L. Pande [1965] 2 S.C.R. 713, on which the High Court relied, is distinguishable.
The High Court has not considered the basic facts present in that case, but which are not present in the instant case, namely, (a) the governing body in Jodh 's case was itself a creature of the statute; (b) in the instant case the Statutes did not apply proprio vigore but only after an agreement was executed between the employer and the employee as required by those provisions.
and (c) no agreement was ever executed between the parties in the prescribed form.
[1018 C D] Vidya Ram Mishra vs Managing Committee, Shri Jai Narain College, ; , 326. followed.
(3)(a) A contract of personal service cannot ordinarily be specifically enforced and a Court, normally, would not give a declaration that the contract subsists and that the employee even after having been removed from service, can be deemed to be in service against the will and consent of the employer.
This rule is subject to three exceptions, (i) where a public servant is sought to be removed from service in contravention of the provisions of article 311.
(ii) Where a worker after dismissal is sought to be reinstated under Industrial Law.
and (iii) Where a statutory body acts in breach or violation of the mandatory provisions of the Act.
[1020 E G] Sirsi Municipality vs Kom Francis ; Indian Airlines Corporation vs Sukhdeo Rai [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 510, 514.
R. Tewari vs District Board, Agra and Anr., ; , 59, Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation Ltd. vs Chandra Kiran Tyagi.
; , 265 and Bank of Baroda vs Jewan Lal Mehrotra , 55, referred to.
Since the appellant is not a statutory body, the present case does not fall within any of the excepted categories and the respondent is not entitled to any declaration or injunction.
[1020 G H] (b) Assuming that the Sirsi Municipality case has extended the scope of the exceptions to public or local bodies even if they are non statutory bodies so that, the appellant though a non statutory body, will still be bound by the statutory 1008 provisions of law, in view of the special circumstances of this ease, it will not be a proper exercise of discretion to grant a decree for declaration and injunction in favour of the respondent The grant of specific relief is, under sections 20 and 34 of the as well as under the Common Law, purely discretionary and can be refused where the ends of justice do not require the relief to be granted.
The exercise of discretion applies as much to a Court exercising writ jurisdiction as well as in suits.
The relief has to be granted by the Court according to sound legal principles and ex debito justitiae.
The Court has to administer justice between the parties and cannot convert itself into an instrument of injustice or an engine of oppression.
The Court must keep in mind the well settled principles of justice and fairplay and should exercise the discretion only if the ends of justice require it.
[1021 C D. 1022 A. 1023 H 1024 D, E F; 1025 F] Jerome Francis vs Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lumpur A. Francis vs Municipal Councillors of Kuala Lumpur , 637 and R.T. Rangachari vs Secretary of State for India in Council, L.R. 64 I.A. 40, 53 54, applied.
Mahant Indra Narain Das vs Mahant Ganga Ram & Anr., AIR 1965 All. 683, 684 and Bhairabendra Narayn Bhup vs State of Assam, A.I.R. 1953 Assam 162, 165, referred to.
Hill vs C.A. Parsons & Co. Ltd. (1971) 3 All.
E.R. 1345, distinguished.
In the present case, neither the first appellate Court nor the High Court while decreeing the respondent 's suit, considered whether it is a fit case in which the discretion should be exercised in favour of the respondent.
[1024 D E] (i) The respondent served the institution only for two rears.
If relief as prayed for is granted to him, he would have to be paid salary and interest for nine years which would amount to more than a lakh of rupees, even though he had not done any work for the college during those years.
and (ii) though the respondent is not at fault, the payment of such a large sum would undoubtedly work serious injustice to the appellant because it is likely to destroy the very existence of the Institution.
[1024 G 1025 B] Therefore, instead of granting the relief to the respondent as prayed for, it he is allowed to withdraw and keep the sum of about Rs. 21,000/ deposited by the appellant by virtue of interlocutory orders towards the salary of the respondent, it will vindicate his stand and compensate him for any hardship caused to him by terminating his services and will put a stamp of finality to any further litigation between them [1025 C F] (Per Bhagwati, J.): This Court has laid down three exceptions to the rule under the Common Law that the Court will not ordinarily force an employer to retain the services of an employee whom he no longer wishes to employ: (1) In the case of a public servant dismissed from service in contravention of article 311; (2) Under the Industrial Law.
and (3) When a statutory body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by a statute.
[1030 B C, F G] Dr. S.B. Dutta vs University of Delhi A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 1050.
Life Insurance Corporation of India vs Sunil Kumar Mukherjee A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 847.
Mafatlal Barot vs Divisional Controller, State Transport, Mahsana ; B.N. Tewari vs District Board, Agra, ; U.P. State Warehousing Corporation vs C.K. Tyagi ; Indian Airlines Corporation vs Sukhdeo Rai [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 510 and Bank of Baroda vs Jewan Lal Mehrotra referred to.
But, these 3 exceptions formulated in the statement of law laid down by this Court, are not intended to be and cannot be exhaustive.
The categories of exceptions to the general rule should not be closed, because, any attempt at rigid and exhaustive formulation of legal rules is bound to stifle the growth of law and cripple its capacity to adapt itself to the changing needs of society.
In fact, in the Sirsi Municipality vs Kom Francis ; , this Court 1009 pointed out that the third exception applied not only to employees in the service of "bodies created under statutes" but also to those in the employment of "other public or local authorities.
This exception is really intended to cover cases where by reason of breach of mandatory obligation imposed by law, as distinct from contract, the termination of service is null and void so that there in law no repudiation at all.
[1031 C F] Where the relationship between the employer and his employee is governed by statute or statutory regulations the termination of the service of the employee may, in a given situation, be null and void, and in that event, it would not have the effect of putting an end to the contract and the employee would be entitled to a declaration that his service is continuing.
What the employee would be claiming in such a case is not enforcement of contract of personal service but declaration of statutory invalidity of an act done by the employer.
[1029 A D] In the present case, it is not necessary to decide whether the appellant is or is not statutory body or a public authority or whether the Statutes of the University had the force of law conferring rights on the respondent as in the case of P. R. Jodh vs A. L. Pande [1965] 2 S.C.R. 713, or that they only set out the terms and conditions which conferred no legal rights unless and until they were embodied in a contract between the appellant and the respondent, as in the case of V. R. Mishra vs Managing Committee, Shri Lal Narain College ; , 326, because, the termination of the respondent 's services was ineffective and inoperative as it was not approved by the Vice Chancellor as required by the University Act.
The language of the section of the University Act is absolute and peremptory and provides in unambiguous terms that the termination shall be ineffective and inoperative unless approved by the Vice Chancellor; and this rule of law, enacted by the Legislature, operates irrespective of whether the management is or is not a statutory body.
When the Court refuses to recognise the termination as valid, it only enforces the law and there is no question of transgressing the principle that a contract of personal service cannot be enforced.
[1031F, 1032 D] Therefore, the termination of the services of the respondent by the appellant was ineffective and void and did not operative to put an end to the employment.
Hence, ordinarily the respondent, whose termination of service is thus null and void or ineffective by reason of a statutory provision or subordinate legislation which has the force of law, should be awarded a declaration that he continues; in service and the fact that he was in employment only for a short period of two years should be no ground for refusing him the declaration.
[1032 D F] But in view of the Peculiar facts and circumstances this case, and since the grant of tho relief is in the discretion of the Court, it must be held that this is not a proper case for the grant of such relief.
If the relief of declaration and injunction is granted to the respondent, it will involve the appellant in a financial liability of mere than a lakh of rupees and that would wipe out the educational institution of the appellant or in any event seriously cripple it and that, in its turn, would prejudicially affect the interests of the student community.
That is an important consideration which the Court cannot fail to take into account in exercising its discretion.
Moreover, the aggregate amount of about Rs. 21,000/ deposited by the appellant in Court would be a fair and just compensation to the respondent.
[1032 F G, H 1033 B]
