After recording a complaint dated 7 4 1969 by one "SDM" that the accused appellant, a head constable, demanded a sum of Rs. 10/ for not putting up a challan on 8 4 1969 before the SDM, Delhi in a case pending against him, (the said sum being payable by 3.00 p.m.
On 7 4 1969 and also a sum of Rs. 50/ For not challenging him in future, the Anti Corruption Department arranged a raid to detect the accused, as his name was not known to the complainant.
On a signal from the complainant, after the receipt of the G.C. Note of Rs. 10/ (the number of which was already noted by the Anti Corruption Department by the accused, the raid party including the trap witnesses surrounded the accused, recovered the G.C. note of Rs. 10/ which tallied with the number already noted besides a further sum of Rs. 51/ and two challans referred to in the complaint of "SDM".
The statement of the accused duly signed by him and witnessed by the trap witnesses and also a search memo duly signed by the accused and the trap witnesses, were produced as documentary evidence at the ", trial.
The accused was charged under s, 161, I.P.C. read with section 5(2) read with section (5) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, found guilty, convicted and sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment besides fine.
On appeal the High Court affirmed the conviction and the sentence.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) In a case under section 161 I.P.C. and section 5(2) read with s.(5)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, where there was a clinching factor that a particular already marked currency note was recovered from the left side front pocket of the shirt of the accused that too immediately after its receipt from the complainant and which fact is corroborated by the seizure memo duly signed by the accused about the state of its recovery duly witnessed and also by 9 L390SCI/76 120 the oral evidence, the defence story of the complainant giving a ten rupee note wrapped inside the "purchee" is absolutely false.
When such a conclusive proot is found with regard to this part of the case, viz. "seizure of the currency note; deficiency of corroboration with regard to the negotiation of the accused with the complainant pales into insignificance.
[126 A F] (2) When witnesses swear home through a two inch board and sometimes quantitatively the defence musters up a number of witnesses, the court has to be extremely cautious and careful to enter a verdict of guilty only if the complainant 's version is supported by some clinching circumstance of such character and quality as may reasonably assure the judicial mind about the truth of the real position against the accused.
[126 G H] (3) A defence plea of planting any incriminating object, in answer to a .
charge, to be successful must be or at any rate should reasonably appear to have been made without the knowledge or acquiesence of the accused.
Ram Prakash Arora vs State of Punjab [1972] 3 S.C.C. 652, distinguished.
(4) When, in a trial against a head constable for not challaning, evidence was clearly led regarding the said challan, which had been handed over to the accused by the complainant along with the currency note, and the accused was fully aware of the charge, he had to meet and made no mistake in taking a defence, a particular mention of the challan against the complainant instead of Charan Dass in the charge, does not result in any "material prejudice" to the accused.
[127 A B] (5) Where the complainant comes from a class of poor hawkers who some how eke out their living, unable to pay the demanded bribe for purchasing immunity from being challaned by the accused head constable, and out of desperation, takes recourse to public authorities against such illegal proposals he is an unwilling or forced bribe giver.
Such an unwilling or forced bribe giver may not even be stagmatised as an accomplice in the strict sense of the term of "participes criminis".
[127 D F] (6) There is no rule of law that even if a witness is otherwise reliable and independent his association in a pre arranged raid about which he had become acquainted makes him an accomplice or a partisan witness.
In the absence of anything to warrant a contrary conclusion, conviction is not untenable merely because it is based on the testimony of such a witness.
Every witness of a raiding party cannot be dubbed as an accomplice per se or even as an interested witness in total absence of materials justifying such an inference.
[128 A 13] (7) In a case, where on a complaint made to the Inspector of the Anti Corruption Department he recorded the same, arranged for the raid by noting each step taken, thereafter in a regular manner, the steps taken by him in order to detect the accused while taking the bribe comes within the term "investigation" under section 4 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898.
The fact that he, had also later on forwarded the complaint for formal registration of the case at the police station having the jurisdiction did not do away with the character of the "investigation" already commenced, by the Inspector on recording the Complainant 's statement disclosing a cognizable offence.
[128 F H] Therefore, any statement made by the accused in answer to questions put by the Inspector is inadmissible under section 162, Criminal Procedure Code and neither the prosecution nor the accused can take advantage of these answers.
[129 A] (8) For an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, the conduct of the accused would be relevant under section 8 of the evidence Act, if his Immediate reactions to the illegal overture of the complainant or his action in inserting unwanted something in his pocket were revealed in the form of acts accompanied then and there or immediately thereafter by words or gestures reliably established.
In the present case, there is no evidence to support an innocent Piece of conduct of the accused.
[129 B C] 121
