In the Civil Suit No. 203 of 1955, on the original side of the Bombay High .
Court, filed by the decree holder/respondent against the appellant/judgment, debtor for recovery of certain amount of money, summons were served on the judgment debtor who after filing his written statement absented himself, and did not take any further part in the proceedings of the Court resulting in a decree dated 29 6 1960 for Rs. 65,953.79.
On 20 12 1961, Goa became a part of India and was made a Union Territory of India by the Constitution (Twelth Amendment) Act, 1962 passed on 27 3 1962.
The decree holder applied to the Bombay High Court for transferring the decree to Goa Court for execution and by an order dated 28 8 1963 the decree was transferred to the Goa Court for execution.
The execution application before the Executing Court at Panjim filed on 21 1 1964 was dismissed on 26 4 1965, holding that the decree transferred to it by the Bombay High Court was not executable.
An appeal was preferred to the Additional Judicial Commissioner on 1 6 1965 and the appellant Judgment debtor filed his reply.
During the pendency of the appeal, the Code of Civil Procedure was extended to Goa on 15 6 1966 by the Goa, Daman and Diu Extension of the Code of Civil Procedure and Arbitration) Act (30) of 1965 and repealing the Portuguese Code.
The Additional Judicial Commissioner by its order dated 28 6 1967 held that in view of article 261(3) of the Constitution, the decree passed by the Bombay High Court could not be treated as nullity and, was therefore, executable.
On appeal by certificate, the appellant/judgment debtor contended (1) that the decree passed by me Bombay High Court qua Goa Court was a nullity being a decree of a foreign court.
Even if the decree was not a nullity it could be executed by a Goa court if the original decree had been approved by the Goa Court under section 50 of the Portuguese Code; (2) that`the Bombay High Court transferring the decree for execution to the Goa Court under sections 38 and 39 of the C.P.C. was without jurisdiction inasmuch as the C.P.C. had not been applied to Goa when the order of transfer was passed.
(3) that as the provisions of the C.P.C. were applied to Goa after the order of the Execution Court was passed and a vested right had accrued to the appellant/judgment debtor the 'J decree continued to be inexecutable and could not be validated by article 261(3) of the Constitution.
The respondent/decree holder contended (1) that inasmuch as the judgment debtor had appeared and participated in the suit for some time the decree passed by the Bombay High Court could not be said to be a nullity (ii) that as the C.P.C. was made applicable while the appeal was pending before the Additional Judicial Commissioner, Goa the decree became clearly executable and the order of transfer of the decree by the Bombay High Court stood validated.
and (iii) that in view of the provisions of article 261(3) of the Constitution of India, there was no bar to the execution of the decree, which was passed by a court which was in the territory of India.
150 Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Where a party appears before the court, the decree of the court, even mf it is a foreign court is not a nullity.
[154 D] Raj Rajendra Sardar Maloji Marsingh Rao Shitole vs Sri Shankar Saran and others; , , distinguished and held not applicable.
Shaligram vs Daulat Ram, ; and Lalji Raja & Sons vs Firm Hansraj Nathuram, ; , applied.
(2) The right of the judgment debtor to pay up the decree passed against him cannot be said to be a vested right, nor can the question of executability of the decree be regarded as a substantive vested right of the judgment debtor.
A fortiorary, the execution proceedings being purely a matter of procedure it is well settled that any change in law which is made during the pendency of the cause would be deemed to be retrospective in operation and the Appellate Court is bound to take notice of the change in law.
The Additional Judicial Commissioner was competent to take notice of the change in the law.
[154 E F, 155 G] Mohanlal Chunilal Kothari vs Tribhovan Haribhai Tamboli, ; , 715 716.
Gummalapura Taggina Matada Kotturswami vs Setra Veerava and others, A.T.R , 579 and Jose De Costa and another vs Bascora Sedashiva Sinai Naroornin and others, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1843, 1849, followed.
(3) The proposition adumbrated viz., that the executability of the decree was a vested right which could not be taken away by the applicability of the Code of Civil Procedure to Goa during the pendency of the appeal is wrong, since the executability of the decree could not be considered to be a vested right [155F G] Lalji Raja and Sons.
vs Firm Hansraj Nathuram ; , followed.
(4) The contention that as the Code of Civil Procedure was not applicable to Goa at the time when the Bombay High Court passed the order transferring the decree to the Goa Court, the order of transfer was absolutely without jurisdiction was wrong.[156 C D] As the decree was passed by the Bombay High Court, section 38 of the Code of Civil Procedure would clearly apply and the decree passed by the Bombay High Court was not a foreign decree.
It is true that at the time when the Bombay High Court passed the order of transfer, the Code of Civil Procedure had not been applied to Goa.
But, that does not put the respondent/decree holder out of Court.
The decree could be transferred and was valid and executable.
But, because of infirmity, it could not be executed so long as the C.P.C. was not made applicable to Goa.
Thus, the only bar which stood in the way of the execution of the decree was the non applicability of the provisions of the C.P.C. to Goa.
This was, however, not an insurmountable bar or an obstacle and the bar or the obstacle disappeared the moment the Code of Civil Procedure was applied to Goa on 15 6 1966.
[156 D F] HELD FURTHER: (5) The instant case is a fit case in which the doctrine A of eclipse would apply and the wall or the bar which separated Bombay from Goa having disappeared, there was no impediment in the execution of a decree.
The decree lay dormant only so far as no bridge was built between Bombay and Goa but as soon as the bridge was constructed in the shape of the application of the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure to Goa the decree became at once executable.
[156 F G] (6) In the instant case, the decree passed by the Bombay High Court having been passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction and not being a nullity because the judgment debtor had appeared and participated in the proceedings of the Court to some extent, and the order of transfer under section 38 of the Code of Civil Procedure also not having suffered from any inherent lack of jurisdiction, the decree became enforceable and executable as soon as the Code of Civil Procedure was applied to Goa.
[157 E F] 151 Bhagwan Shankar vs Rajaram Bapu Vithal, A.I.R. 1951 Bom.
125, 127, approved.
(7) article 261(3) of the Constitution enjoins that a decree shall be executable in ally part of the territory of India, according to law.
In the instant case, the decree was passed by the Bombay High Court after the Constitution came into force and article 261(3) would apply to the decree passed by the Bombay High Court.
The Article would also apply to Goa because at the time when the application for execution was made in Goa Court, the Constitution had already been made applicable to that State also.
[158 C D] (8) It is true that at the time when the Executing Court dismissed the suit of the decree holder/respondent, the Code of Civil Procedure had not been applied and the Portuguese Code continued to apply but after the application of the Code of Civil Procedure by virtue of the Goa, Daman and Diu (Extension of the Code of Civil Procedure and the Arbitration) Act, 1965.
the Portuguese Code which was in force in Goa was clearly repealed and the present case does not fall within any of the clauses mentioned in the saving provisions of section 4 of the Act.
Thus, when the Civil Procedure Code was made applicable to Goa during the pendency of the appeal, the appellate Court, namely, the Additional Judicial Commissioner was bound to decide the matter in accordance with the law that was in force.
Hence, the contention the matter in accordance with the law that was in force.
Hence, the contention that the words "according to law" in article 261(3) would mean that the decree would be executable only in accordance with the law in force in the Portuguese Code is not correct.
[158 B F] [Jose De Costa and another vs Bascore Sadashiva Sinai Narcornin and others, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1843, 1849 followed.]
