In the 1967 election to the State Legislative Assembly, the appellant and the 1st respondent claiming to be Adi Dravidas, stood as candidates for a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes.
The respondent was declared elected.
The appellant`s election petition challenging the election was allowed by the High Court.
This Court dismissed the respondent 's appeal holding, (1) that the respondent was converted to Christianity in 1949, (2) that on such conversion he ceased to be an Adi Dravida, (3) that he was reconverted to Hinduism but 4) assuming that membership of a caste can be acquired on conversion or reconversion to Hinduism, the respondent had failed to establish that he became a member of the Adi Dravida caste after reconversion.
In the 1972 elections, the appellant and respondent again filed their nominations as Adi Dravidas for the seat reserved for Scheduled Castes.
On objection by the appellant, the Returning officer rejected the nomination of the respondent on the view that on conversion to Christianity, he ceased to be an Adi Dravida and that on reconversion, he could not claim the benefit of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, 1950.
The appellant was declared elected.
The respondent challenged the election and the High Court held that the question (a) whether the respondent embraced Christianity in 1949, (b) whether on such conversion be ceased to be an Adi Dravida, and (c) whether he was reconverted to Hinduism, were concluded by the decision of this Court in the earlier case.
In fact, the respondent so conceded on the first two aspects.
The High Court, however, held that the respondent had established twelve cir circumstances, which happened subsequent to the earlier election showing that he was accepted into their fold by the members of the Adi Dravida caste, that he was, therefore, at the material time, an Adi Dravida professing Hindu religion as required by paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order, and that therefore, his nomination was improperly rejected.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The question whether the respondent abandoned Hinduism and embraced Christianity in 1949 is essentially a question of fact.
The respondent having conceded before the High Court, that in view of the decision of this Court in the earlier case, the question did not survive for consideration and the High Court, having acted on that concession, the respondent could not be permitted to raise an argument that the evidence did not establish that he embraced Christianity in 1949.
[89 D F] (2) Similarly.
the question whether the respondent was reconverted to Hinduism stands concluded by the decision of this Court in the earlier case and it must be held that since prior to January 1967, the respondent was reconverted to Hinduism, he was, at the material time, professing the Hindu religion so as to satisfy the requirement of para 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order [94C D] 83 (3) The High Court was right in the view that on reconversion to Hinduism, A the respondent could once again reconvert to his original Adi Deavida caste if he was accepted, as such, by the other members of that caste; and that, in fact, the respondent after his reconversion to Hinduism, was recognised and accepted as a member of the Adi Dravida caste by the other members of that community [97A B, 98G] (a) Since a caste is a social combination of person governed by its rules and regulations, it may, if its rules and regulations so provide, admit a new B. member just as it may expel an existing member.
The rules and regulations of the caste may not have been formalised they may not exist in black and white: they may consist only of practices and usages.
If, according to the practice and usage of the caste any particular ceremonies are required to be performed for readmission to the caste, a reconvert to Hinduism would have to perform those ceremonies if he seeks readmission to the caste.
But, if no rites or ceremonies are required to be performed for readmission of a person as a member of the caste, the only thing necessary would be the acceptance of the person concerned by the other members of the caste.
[95 C F] C (b) The consistent view taken by the Courts from the time of the decision in Administrator General of Madras vs Anandachari (ILR , that is, since 1886, has been that on reconversion to Hinduism, a person can once again become a member of the caste in which he was born and to which he belonged before conversion to another religion if the members of the caste accept him as a member.
If a person who has embraced another religion can be reconverted to Hinduism, there is no rational principle why he should not be able to come back to his caste, if the other members of the caste are prepared to re admit him as a member.
It stands to reason that he should be able to come back to the fold to which he once belonged, provided the community is willing to take him within the fold.
[96 C R] Nathu vs Keshwaji I.L.R. Guruswami Nadar vs Irulappa Konar A.I.R. 1934 Mad.
630 and Durgaprasada Rao vs Sudarsanaswami, AIR 1940 Mad. 513, referred to.
(c) It is the orthodox Hindu Society, still dominated to a large extent, particularly in rural areas, by medievalistic outlook and status oriented approach which attaches social and economic disabilities to a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste and that is why, certain favoured treatment is given to him by the Constitution.
Once such a person ceases to be a Hindu and becomes a Christian the social and economic disabilities arising because of Hindu religion cease and hence, it is no longer necessary to give him protection; and for this reason, he is deemed not to belong to a Scheduled Caste.
But, when he is reconverted to Hinduism.
the social and economic disabilities once again revive and become attached to him, because, these are disabilities inflicted by Hinduism.
Therefore, the object and purpose of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order would be advanced rather than retarded by taking the view that on reconversion to Hinduism, a person can once again become a member of the Scheduled Caste to which he belonged prior to his conversion.
[96 F 97 A] (d) out of the 12 circumstances relied on by the High Court, 5 are not of A importance, namely, (1) that the respondent celebrated tho marriages of his younger brothers in the Adi Dravida manner; (ii) that the respondent was looked upon as a peace maker among the Adi Dravida Hindus of the locality; (iii) that the funeral ceremonies of the respondent 's father were performed " according to the Adi Dravida Hindu rites; (iv) that he participated in the first annual death ceremonies of another Adi Dravida; and (v) that the respondent participated in an All India Scheduled Castes Conference.
The other seven circumstances, however, establish that the respondent was accepted and treated as a member of the Adi Dravida community, namely, (1) that he was invited to lay the foundation stone for the construction of the wall of an Adi Dravida temple: (ii) that he was asked to take part in the celebrations connected with an Adi Dravida temple.
(iii) that he was asked to preside at a festival connected with an Adi Dravida temple; (iv) that he was a member of the Executive Committee of the Scheduled Caste Cell in the organisation of the Ruling 84 Congress; (v) that his children were registered in school as Adi Dravidas and that even the appellant had given a certificate that the respondent 's son was an Adi Dravida.
(vi) that he was treated as a member of the Adi Dravida caste and was never disowned by the members of the caste; and (vii) that a Scheduled Caste Conference was held in the locality with the object of re admitting the respondent into the fold of Adi Dravida Caste and that not only was the purificatory ceremony performed on him at the Conference with a view to clearing the doubt which had been cast on his membership of the Adi Dravida caste by the earlier decision of this Court, but also an address was presented to him felicitating him on the occasion.
[97 C 98 F] (4)(a) The question whether on conversion to Christianity the respondent ceased to be a member of the Adi Dravida caste is a mixed question of law and fact and a concession made by him in the High Court on that question does not preclude him from re agitating it in the appeal before this Court.
r[89 G H] (b) Further, the decision given in the earlier case relating to the 1967 elections on the basis of the evidence led in that case, cannot operate as res judicata ill the present case which relates to the 1972 election and where fresh evidence has been adduced by the parties and moreover, when all the parties in the present case are not the same as those in the earlier case.
[89 H 90 B] (c) When a 'caste ' is referred to in modern times, the reference is not to the 4 primary castes.
but to the innumerable castes and sub castes that prevail in Hindu society.
The general rule is that conversion operates as an expulsion from the caste, that is, a convert ceases to have any caste, because, caste is pre dominantly a feature of Hindu Society and ordinarily a person, who ceases to be a Hindu, would not be regarded by the other members of the caste as belonging to their fold.
But it is not an invariable rule that whenever a person renounces Hinduism and embraces another religious faith, he automatically ceases to be a member of the caste in which he was born and to which he be longed prior to his conversion.
Ultimately, it must depend on the structure of the caste and its rules and regulations whether a person would cease to belong to the caste on his abjuring Hinduism.
If the structure of the caste is such that its members, must necessarily belong to Hindu religion, a member, who Ceases to be a Hindu, would go out of the caste, because, no non Hindu can be in the caste according to its rules and regulations.
Where, on the other hand, having regard to its structure, as it has evolved over the years, a caste may consist not only of persons professing Hinduism but also persons professing some other religion as well, conversion from Hinduism to that other religion may not involve loss of caste, because, even persons professing that other religion ca be members of the caste.
This might happen where caste is based on economic or occupational characteristics and not on religious identity, or the cohesion of the caste as a social group is so strong that conversion into another religion does not operate to snap the bond between the convert and the social group.
This is indeed not an infrequent phenomenon in South India, where, in some of the castes, even after conversion to Christianity, a person is regarded as continuing to belong to the caste.
What is, therefore, material to consider is how the caste looks at the question of conversion.
Does it outcaste or excommunicate the convert or does it still treat him as continuing within its fold despite his conversion.
If the convert desires and intends to continue as a member of the caste and the caste also continues to treat him as a member notwithstanding his conversion, he would continue to be a member of the caste, and the views of the new faith hardly matter.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) order.
read together.
also recognise THAT there may be castes specified as Scheduled Castes which comprise persons belonging to a religion different from Hindu or Sikh religion.
In such castes, conversion of a person from Hinduism cannot have the effect of putting him out of the caste, though.
by reason of para 37 he would be deemed not to be a member of the Scheduled Caste.
B G; 93 C E, F H] Cooppoosami Chetty vs Duraisami Chetty, I.L.R. 33 Mad. 67; Muthusami vs Masilamani, I.L.R. G. Michael vs section Venkateswaran.
AIR 1952 Mad.
Kothapalli Narasayya vs Jammana Jogi, ; K. Narasimha Reddy vs G. Bhupathi, ; Gangat vs Returning Officer, [1975 85 1.
S.C.C. 589 and Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani vs Moreshwar Prasahram, , referred to.
[It would therefore, prima facie, seem that on conversion to Christianity, the respondent did not automatically cease to belong to the Adi Dravida caste; but in view of the decision that on reconversion he was readmitted to the Adi Dravida faith, no final opinion was expressed on this point.] [94 B C]
