In the execution proceedings to satisfy a decree dated 14 10 1958 for title and recovery of possession of certain "ganju Bhogra lands" obtained by the appellant against the State, the Notified Area Council.
Rourkela claimed the suit lands by an application u/o XXI Rule 58 r/w sections 37 and 38 Code of Civil Procedure.
The said application was rejected.
A revision against it was also dismissed with the observation that the council was free to file a regular suit for adjudication of its rights.
When the appellant took out a fresh application for execution u/s 47 of the Code` of Civil Procedure, the Council which never filed any suit, and the respondent State which never appealed against the original decree, opposed the execution application on the ground that the decree became infructuous by virtue of section 3 of the orissa Merged Territories (Village offices Abolition) Act, 1963.
The Executing court upheld the objection and dismissed the execution petitition.
On appeal the Additional District Judge, by his order dated 2 5 1970, held that the decree was executable resulting in a second appeal to the High court by the respondent State.
The High Court allowed the appeal by its order dated 4 11 1974 holding that as the decree holder was not in actual physical possession of the land, the tenure has vested in the State free from all encumbrances u/s 3 of the Act and the decree was rendered "non est".
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: (1) As a result of the abolition of the village office under section 3 of the OMTA, all incidents of the appellant 's service tenure, e.g., the right to hold the "bhogra land" stood extinguished by virtue of the provision of clause (b) of section 3, and ail settlements, sanads and all grants in pursuance of which the tenure was being held by the appellant, stood cancelled under section 3(c).
The right of the appellant to receive emoluments was also deemed to have been terminated under Cl.
(d) and by virtue of Cl.
(f), his bhogra land stood resumed and "vested absolutely" in the State free from all encumbrances.
Section 3 of the Act, in fact, expressly provided that this would be the result, notwithstanding anything in law, usage, settlement, grant, sanad, order or "in any judgment, decree or order of a court.
" All these consequences ensued with effect from April 1, 1966 the date of coming into force of the orissa Merged territories (Village offices Abolition) Act, 1963.
From that date, the appellant suffered from these and other disabilities enumerated in section 3 of the Act, the "bhogra land" in respect of which he obtained the decree dated October 14, 1958 declaring his title and upholding his right to possession was, therefore, lost to him as it vested "absolutely" in the State Government free from all encumbrances.
The decree for possession also thus lost its efficacy by virtue of the express provisions of the Act and there is nothing wrong in holding that the decree was rendered incapable of execution by operation of law.
[77 D H] (2) Under sec.
5 of orissa Merged Territoies ((Village offices Abolition) Act, 1963, once a "bhogra land" stood resumed and vested absolutely in the State Government to the exclusion of the village officer concerned, it was required to be "settled" with rights of occupancy thereunder.
The settlement of the land contemplated by sec.
S had to be with the holder of the village office and the other persons who were enjoying it (or part of it) and as his co sharers, as tenants under him or his co sharers, but that was to be so on the condition 76 that "each such person, namely, the holder of the village office and his cosharers or the tenants under the holder of the office or his co sharers was in separate and actual cultivating possession" of the land immediately before April, 1966.
The words "each such person" occurring in sub section I of Sec. 5 include the holder of the village office so that in order to be eligible for settlement of the land with occupancy rights, he must also be in separate and cultivating possession of the "bhogra land" immediately before April 1, 1966.
There is nothing in sub section I of Sec. 5 to justify the argument that the interpretation of the words "each such person" should be such as to exclude the holder of v the village office from its purview.
[78 E, F H] State of orissa vs Rameswar Patabisi (Civil Revision Petition No. 257 of 1974) decided on 27 6 1975 (orissa High Court) over ruled; Meharabansingh and Ors.
vs Nareshaingh and ors.
(held not applicable).
(3) The provisions of sec.
9 do not justify the argument that the village officer was entitled to continue his possession of the "bhogra land" under that section in spite of the fact that the land.
stood resumed and vested absolutely in the State Government free from all encumbrances.
[80 E] (4) The normal consequences arising out of the rejection of the application under o. XXI, r. 58, Civil Procedure Code and the failure to institute the suit thereafter, were rendered nugatory by the express provisions of section 3 of the orissa Merged Territories (Village offices Abolition) Act, 1963.
The question of executability of the decree did not arise.
[81 A B] [The Court left open to the authorities concerned to examine the question of settlement of the land under section 5(1) of the orissa Merged Territories (Village Dr offices Abolition) Act, 1963, with liberty to the village officer to rely upon such matters as may be available according to law.]
