(A) The object of a family arrangement is to protect the family from long drawn litigation or perpetual strife which mars the unity and the solidarity of the family.
A family arrangement by which the property is equitably divided between the various contenders so as to achieve an equal distribution of wealth, instead of concentrating tho same in the hands of a few, is a milestone in the ad ministration of social justice.
Where by consent of the parties a matter has been settled, the courts have learned in favour of upholding such a family arrangement instead of disturbing it on technical or trivial grounds.
Where the courts find that the family arrangement suffers from a legal lacuna or 1 formal defect, the rule of estoppel is applied to shut out the plea of the person who being a party to the family arrangement, seeks to unsettle a settled dispute and claims to revoke the family arrangement under which he has himself enjoyed some material benefits.
1208 F H; 209 A B] (B) (1) The family settled must be bona fide so as to resolve family disputes.
(ii) It must be voluntary and not induced by fraud, coercion or undue influence; (iii) It may be even oral, in which case and registration is necessary; (iv) Registration is necessary only if the terms are reduced to writing but where the memorandum has been prepared after the family arrangement either for the purpose of record or for information of court, the memorandum itself do not create or extinguish any rights in immovable property and, therefore.
does not fall within the mischief of section 17(2) of the Registration Act and is not compulsorily registrable; (v) The parties to the family arrangement must have some antecedent title, claim or interest, even a possible claim in the property which is acknowledged by the parties to the settlement.
But, even where a party has no title and the other party relinquishes all its claims or titles in favour of such a person and acknowledges him to be the sole owner, then, the antecedent title must be assumed and the family arrangement will be upheld by the courts; (vi) Where bona fide disputes are settled by a bona fide family arrangement.
such family arrangement is final and binding on the parties to settlement.
[209 G H; 21 0 A E] Lala Khunni Lal & Ors vs Runwar Gobind Krishna Narain and Anr.
L.R 38 I.A. 8,.
102: Mt. Hiran Bibi and others vs
Sohan Bibi, A.I.R. 1914 P.C 44.
Saltu Madho Das and others vs Pandit Mulkand Ram another ; , 42 43.
Ram Charan Das vs Girijanandini Devi & Ors.
; , 850 851.
Tek Bahadur Bhujil vs Devi Singh and others, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 292, 295: Maruri Pullaiah and Anr.
vs Maturi Narasimham and Ors.
A.I.R ; Krishna Biharflal vs Gulabchand and others.
[1971] Supp.
SCR 27 34 and section Shanmugam Pillai and others vs K. Shanmugam Pillai and others,, , followed.
Ram Gopal vs Tulshi Ram and another, A.I.R. 1928 All. 641 649; Sitala Baksh Singh and others vs lang Bahadur Singh and others, A.I.R. 1933 Oudh 347, 348 349.
Kalawati vs Sri Krishna Prasad and others, I.L.R. 19 Lucknow 57.
Bakhtawar vs Sunder Lal and others.
A.I.R. 1926 All. 173, 175 and Awadh Narain Singh and others vs Narain Mishra and others, A.I.R. 1962 Patna 400, approved.
203 On the death of the father the family consisted of two unmarried daughters A respondents 4 and 5) and appellant No. 1 (son of the married eldest daughter, appellant No. 2).
After the marriage of respondents 4 and S the property left behind by the father was mutated in the name of appellant No. I who, under section 36 of the U.P. Tenancy Act; 1939, was the sole heir.
Eventually, however, the parties arrived at a family settlement allotting khatas 5 and 90 to the appellant No. 1 and khatas 53 and 204 to respondents 4 and section This family arrangement was not registered.
The revenue records were, how ever, corrected.
At the time of revision of records under the U.P. Consolidation of Holdings Act, ' 1953 appellant No. I found that he was shown as having ' one third share in all the properties.
The Consolidation officer removed his name from the records and substituted the names of the sisters namely appellant No. 2 and respondents 4 and 5.
On appeal the Settlement officer restored the names of appellant No. 1 in respect of khatas 5 and 90 and of respondents 4 and S in respect of khatas 53 and 204 which was in accordance with the family arrangement.
The Deputy Director of Consolidation reversed this finding.
The High Court dismissed the appellants ' appeal.
On further appeal to this Court, it was contended that (1) the High Court erred in rejecting the compromise on the ground that it was not registered but that in view of the oral family arrangement no question of registration of the compromise arose and (ii) even if the compromise was unregistered it would operate clearly as estoppel against respondents 4 and section Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Deputy Director of Consolidation as well as the High Court was wrong in taking the view that in the absence of registration the family arrangement could not be sustained.
The High Court also erred in not giving effect to the doctrine of estoppel.
1217 Cl (1) (a) In the instant case the facts clearly show that a compromise or family arrangement had taken place orally before the petition was filed for mutation of the names of the parties.
(b) The word family cannot be construed in a narrow sense so as to be confined only to persons who have a legal title to the property.
When the talks for compromise took place appellant No.
I was a prospective heir and a member of the family.
Secondly respondents 4 and S relinquished their claims in favour of the appellant in respect of Khatas 5 and 90.
The appellant would, therefore, be deemed to have antecedent title which was acknowledged by respondents 4 and section [217G] (c) There can be no doubt that the family arrangement was bona fide.
At no state of the case had the respondents raised the issue of bona fides.
[218D] (d) The allegation of fraud and undue influence must first dearly be pleaded and then proved by clear and content evidence.
In the present case, there ,, was neither pleading nor proof of this fact by respondents 4 and 5.
Respondents Nos. 4 and 5 who were parties to the family arrangement and, who, having been benefited thereunder, would be precluded from assailing the same [219A] Ram Gouda Annagouda & others vs Bhausaheb and others, J.R. 54 I.A. 396.
referred to.
(2) Assuming that tho family arrangement was compulsorily registrable, a family arrangement being binding on the parties to it, would operate as an estoppel by preventing the parties after having taken advantage under the arrangement to resile from the same or try to revoke it.
In the present case respondents Nos. 4 and 5 would be estoppel from denying the existence of the family arrangement or from questioning its validity.
[223 F] Kanhai Lal vs Brij Lal and Anr., L.R. 45 I.A. 118, 124.
Dhiyan Singh and Anr.
vs Jugal Kishore and Anr.[1952] S.C.R. 478.
Ram Charan Das vs Girja Nandini Devi & Ors, ; , 850 851.
Krishna Biharilal vs Gulab chand and others, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 27, 34 and section Shanmugam Pillai and others vs K. Shanmugam Pillai and others, referred to.
204 Rachcha V. Mt. Mendha A.I.R. 1947 All.
177 and Chief Controlling Revenue Authority vs Smt.
Satyawati Sood and others, A.I.R. 1972 Delhi 171, held inapplicable.
Mr. Justice Sarkaria concurred with majority view that the family arrangement was binding, but reserved his opinion with regard to the alternative proposition, that assuming the family arrangement was compulsorily regrettable under section 17 (1) (b) of the registration Act, it could be used to raise an estoppel against any of the parties to the suit.
[227 E]
