The respondents are dealers under the Tamil Nadu Sales Tax Act.
Section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act declares certain goods enumerated therein of ` ' special importance in inter state trade or commerce.
The list of goods given at serial No. IV reads as under: (IV) Iron and Steel, that is to say (a) pig iron and iron scrap .
(b) iron plates sold in the same form in which they are directly produced by the rolling mill; (c) steel scrap, steel ingots, steel billets, steel bars and rods, (d) (i) steel plates (ii) steel sheets, (iii) sheet bars and tin bars, (iv) rolled steel sections, I mill.
(v) tool alloy steel, J sole in the same from in which they are directly produced by the rolling mill.
The said clause IV was amended by the Central Sales Tax Amendment Act, Act 61 of 1972 by which certain more entries were added.
Section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act provides that the tax payable under a State Law on sale or purchase of declared goods shall not be levied at more than one stage.
Respondents used to purchase iron scrap and thereafter used to convert them into steel rounds, flats, plates etc.
The scrap was already subject to tax once.
The respondents contended that the entry Iron & Steel was wide enough to include scrap as well as the steel rounds, flats, plates, etc.
made out of the scrap which was subject to tax once and that, therefore, the sale of the steel rounds, flats, plates, etc., cannot be subjected to tax again under the Tamil Nadu Sales Tax Act.
The High Court accepted the contention of the respondents.
Allowing an appeal by certificate, ^ HELD: 1.
The intention was to consider each sub item in clause IV as a separate taxable commodity for purposes of sales tax.
The object was not to lay down that all the categories or sub items of goods specified separately were to be viewed as a single saleable commodity called iron and steel for purposes j of determining a starting point for a series of sales.
The note against sub division of Clause IV makes it clear that even each sub category of a sub item retains its identity as a commercially separate item for purposes of sales tax so long as it retains the sub division.
[171Gm, 172B C] 2.
The expression 'that is to say ' is employed to make it clear and fix the meaning of words to be explained or defined.
Such words are not used, as a rule, to amplify a meaning while removing a possible doubt for which purpose the word 'includes ' is generally employed.
The precise meaning of the words 169 that is to say ' must vary with the context.
The purpose of the expression in a sales A lax law would be to indicate the types of goods each of which would constitute separate class for a series of sales.
[172F H, 173B] 3.
The chemical composition of iron and steel cannot afford a clue to the meaning of iron and steel.
Sales Tax Law taxes sales of goods and is not a taxation on sales of substance out of which goods are made.
We prefer to follow the more natural and normal interpretation which follows plainly from the fact of separate specification numbering of each item.
State of Madhya Pradesh vs Hira Lal; (1966) 17 STC 313 315 distinguished.
The case cf Devidas applied.
[173C. E F] 4.
It has not been shown to, us that any provision of the Tamilnadu Sales Tax Act violates section 15 of the Central Sales Tax Act enacted in accordance with Article 286(3) of the Constitution.
Section 2(j) of the Tamil Nadu Act defines goods and section 4 imposes charge in respect of tax on declared goods.
The Tamilnadu Act borrows clause (IV) of section 14 of the Central Sales Tax Act.
[176 C H] C
