The appellant was an erstwhile member of the Indian Administrative Service in the cadre of the State of orissa.
At the relevant time in the year 1967, he was serving as Commissioner of Land Reforms, orissa.
According to the appellant he had disputes, differences and animosity with respondent No. 1, the Chief Secretary to the Government of orissa and respondent No. 2 who was at the relevant time Director of Vigilance and Additional Secretary to the Government of orissa.
The First Information Report was lodged against the appellant under section S(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, on 24 11 1967.
The appellant 's house was searched on 27 11 1967.
An order of suspension was made against the appellant by the Government of orissa on 28 11 1967 under rule 7(3) of the All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955.
The Writ Petition filed by the appellant against his order of suspension and investigation was dismissed by the High Court in limine.
This Court allowed an appeal filed by special leave by the appellant against the High Court judgment and directed the High Court to admit and dispose of the petition in accordance with law.
The State Government approached the Central Government to accord sanction for prosecution of the appellant.
In spite of reminders, the Central Government neither accorded the sanction nor refused it.
Appellant was compulsorily retired by the Government in 1971.
Thereafter, charge sheet was submitted against him in the Court of the Special Judge, Sambalpur.
The trial concluded but because of the stay order passed by this Court judgment could not be delivered.
Against the order of the compulsory retirement, the appellant filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court which was dismissed by a learned single Judge and against which a Letters Patent appeal is pending.
The orissa High Court dismissed the writ petition of the appellant on the ground of it having become infructuous since the appellant was no longer in suspension since he was compulsorily retired.
The High Court also did not think it necessary to examine the legality of the investigation against the appellant as chargesheet had already been submitted.
In an appeal by special leave the appellant contended: The suspension order may be quashed on the following grounds: (1) It was passed without following the various Governmental instructions on the point.
(2) The order was in violation of rule 7(3).
(3) The order was malafide.
^ HELD: (1) It is true that all the instructions contained in the circulars issued by the Central Government do not seem to have been strictly followed.
That would, however, not invalidate or nullify the order of suspension made under rule 7(3).
In dealing with the cases of high officers of the Administrative Service care ought to have been taken to follow the instructions as far as possible.
On the facts of the present case.
however.
failure to follow the instructions fully, does not render the order of suspension per se invalid.
[353GH] (2) Under rule 7(3) a member of the Service in respect of or against whom an investigation, enquiry or trial relating to a criminal charge is ponding, may at the discretion of the Government be Placed under suspension.
The 351 expression investigation, enquiry and trial are well known in the realm of the A criminal law under the Criminal Procedure Code.
In the present case, the First Information Report was lodged and the search warrants were issued before the suspension orders were passed.
Most of the allegations against the appellant were in relation to his alleged acts of corruption and misuse of his official position.
Whether the allegations are true or false is irrelevant.
Order under rule 7(3) was, therefore, legal and valid.
[354A E] (3) The suspension order came to an end by the compulsory retirement of the appellant.
After retirement from service he could no longer be deemed to be under suspension.
Since we are remitting the case back to the High Court we permit the appellant to raise the question of his salary and emoluments during the suspension period to be raised in the High Court.
The counsel for the appellant, however, assured this Court that if the appellant would be exonerated of the charges levelled against him and acquitted in the criminal proceedings the State Government would pay him his full pay and allowances for the period of suspension.
[354G H, 355B C] (4) We do not think it advisable to decide the point of malafide in the absence of the judgment in the criminal cases.
Since the two matters are so interwoven and interconnected that it would be expedient for the High Court to decide this issue after the judgment is delivered in the criminal trial.
[3 55D E]
