The respondent was declared elected on April 30, 1974, in the election to the State Legislative Council.
The period of limitation of 45 days, prescribed by section 81(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, for filing an election petition, expired on June 14, 1974, when the High Court was closed for the summer vacation.
The appellant, therefore, filed the election petition on July 8, 1974, the re opening day, challenging the respondent 's election.
The High Court dismissed the petition as having been filed out of time.
Allowing the appeal to this Court and remitting the matter to the High Court for disposal on merits.
^ HELD .
The High Court had issued a notification that the entire period of the summer vacation from May 25, to July 7, 1974 was a close holiday, As the period of limitation expired during the summer vacation, which was a closed holiday, the Registrar of the High Court was not competent to entertain the election petition nor could the appellant have presented the election petition legally to the Registrar during such period.
and so, it is a case to which section 10. , applies and.
the appellant was justified in filing the petition on the re opening day.
[312C D; 313D E, 318A B] (1) Under r. 3 of the Rules framed by the High Court under the Representation of the People Act, every election petition shall be presented to the Registrar.
and r. 4 lays down that after the office report is complete, the Registrar shall place the petition forthwith before the Chief Justice for reference to the concerned Bench.
But, from these rules it could not be held that there was no impediment in the way of the appellant in filing the election petition before the Registrar as the office of the High Court was open and the Registrar was available.
even though the Court was closed.
The presentation before the Registrar, required by r. 3, must be a legal presentation and not a mere physical presentation.
If on a day the office is open and only Judges do not sit, it would undoubtedly be a working day of the Court and the election petition could be presented to the Registrar or other officer.
But, if the Court was observing a closed holiday, then the Court is not open even though the office may remain open for conducting ministerial or administrative work.
Rules 3 and 4 refer to a situation where the Court is open, because, the Registrar has to take the legal steps of placing the petition immediately before the Chief Justice for reference to the Bench concerned and the assignment of a Judge.
This could not be done when the Court was observing a closed holiday Hukumdev Narain Yadav vs Lalit Narain Mishra, ; , explained.
Krishna Dhan Mullick vs Umratul Zohra Begam, I.L.R. [1949] All. 433, approved.
(2) (a) Further.
r. 10 of the High Court Rules which is the only provision which empowers vacation Judges to hear matters, has a very limited scope and does not empower the Registrar to entertain or to receive an election petition.
Under the rule normally.
Only criminal work shall continue to be dealt with during vacation, and it is only when other matters require immediate attention 309 that the vacation Judges have jurisdiction to entertain them.
Election petitions A do not come under these two categories, so as to be taken up when the Court is observing a closed holiday.
[315E, H 316B] (b) The mere fact that a practice has grown up of the Registrar or Deputy Registrars or other officers receiving a number of applications, which was not strictly justified by the Rules, would not have the effect of converting what is legally a closed holiday into a working day.
[316B C] (c) Rule 4 of the High Court Rules which provides that 'there any particular number of days is prescribed by these Rules, the same shall be reckoned exclusive of the first day and inclusive of the last day, unless, the last day shall happen to fall on a day on which the offices of the Court are closed, in which case the time shall be reckoned exclusive of that day also and of any succeeding day or days on which the offices of the Court continue to be closed ' cannot be relied upon by the respondent, because, it applies only where the period of limitation is prescribed by the Rules.
[316G] (3) For taking advantage of section 10, , it is necessary that.
(a) an act or proceeding is allowed to be done or taken in any court or office on a particular day or within a prescribed period; and (b) if the Court or office is closed on that day or the last day of the prescribed period then the act or proceeding will be deemed to have been taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day afterwards on which the Court or office is open.
The proviso to the section makes the section inapplicable to cases where the Limitation Act applies.
In Hukumdev Narain Yadav 's case [19741 3 S.C.R. 31, this Court held that ss 4 and 5, Limitation Act, do not apply to election petitions.
Therefore, section 10, applies in terms to the instant case.
[313A D] H.H. Raja Harinder Singh vs section Karnail Singh, ; , followed.
(4) 'Public holiday ' is defined in section 2(1)(h) of the Representation of the People Act to mean any day which is a public holiday for the purposes of section 25, .
But the term 'public holiday ' refers only to such contingencies as are mentioned in section 39(1)(a) of the Act, in the conduct of the actual elections.
Section 87(1) shows that so far as the disposal of election petitions is Concerned once section 80 confers power on the High Court to try them, section 2(1)(h) would have no application whatsoever to their trial which will be governed either according to the Rules framed by the High Court under the Act, or the general Rules of the High Court, or in accordance with the C.P.C.
In the instant case, the High ` Court having framed Rules under the Representation of the People Act, which provide for the presentation of the petition to the Registrar, which could only be on a day which is not a 'closed holiday ', the term 'closed holiday ' will have to be referred to and not 'public holiday ' defined in section 2(1)(h).
[317B H]
