The accused and the deceased are close relatives, as per the following pedigree: Ramcharan (1) Ram Khelawan (2) Balram (3) Khuddi (4) Vishwanath Shankar Kanker Channu Shivnath Jagannath (PW)SI S2 S3 S4 (PW2) (Deceased) Sheo Murat Ram Kishan Shobha Moti Lal Bhagwantia (Acd) SI (Acd) S2 (Acd) S3 (Acd) S4 (Sister) Dl Shyam Lal (Acd) Vishwanath, Kanker, deceased Channu, Jagannath.
accused Ram Kishan along with his mother and sister Bhagwantia were living in the ancestral house at village Bhiwanipur, while the rest lived in a nearby separate house.
On March 18, 1969, Vishwanath tried to pacify the quarrel between his brother Kankar 's wife and Bhagwantia his cousin sister and when she refused to heed to his words, he gave one or two slaps to Bhagwantia.
The real brothers of Bhagwantia viz., Ram Kishan, Shobha, Moti Lal and Shyamlal s/o Ram Krishan all accused, went the next day to Vishwanath 's house and demanded an explanation for beating Bhagwantia and wanted a settlement.
Since Vishwanath said there was nothing in fact to be settled, Ram Kishan instigated the rest to beat Vishwanath.
Shobha caught hold of Vishwanath while Sheo Murat dealt knife blows which resulted in two grievous incised injuries.
Channu who came to the rescue was caught hold of by Shyam Lal and Moti and Sheo Murat dealt knife blows causing five fatal incised wounds and two abrasions to which he succumbed.
On the above version of the incident by the injured Vishwanath, PW 1 in the complaint and in evidence at the trial, which was unerringly corroborated by PWs 9. 10. 13 and unshaken in the cross examination, the Sessions Court convicted Sheo Murat under section 302/149 I.P.C. for causing the death of Channu and under section 307 /149 I P.C. for attempting to murder Vishwanath, though the charges were under section 302, 307 and 148, I.P.C. and sentenced him to death under section 302, I.P.C. seven years ' rigorous imprisonment under section 307 I.P.C. and to two years ' rigorous imprisonment under section 148.
I.P.C. Accused Ram Kishan.
Shobha.
Moti Lal and Shyamlal, the respondents in this Court were convicted under section 302/149 I.P.C., under section 307 read with section 149 I.P.C. and section 147 I.P.C. They were sentenced to one year 's rigorous imprisonment under section 147 T.P.C. to seven year 's rigorous imprisonment under section 307/149 I.P.C. and to imprisonment for life under section 307 /149.
The accused appealed to the High Court and there was a reference under section 374 Cr.
P.C. for the confirmation of death sentence.
By a common judgment, the High Court (i) set aside the conviction and sentences 380 of all the present respondents and also that of Sheo Murat under section 148, I.P.C.; (ii) maintained the convictions under section 307 I.P.C. and also under section 302 I.P.C. but altered the death sentence to one of life imprisonment and rejected the reference.
This Court rejected the State 's special leave petition against the alteration of the death sentence but granted special leave against the acquittal of the respondents alone and issued non bailable warrants.
Allowing the appeal, and convicting the accused and sentencing them to different terms with the benefit of set off under section 428, Cr.
P.C. (Act 2 of 1973), tho Court, ^ HELD: (1) It is well established that in an appeal against acguittal, this Court is slow to interfere under article 136 of the Constitution with the decision of the High Court.
The possibility that it may just be reasonably feasible for the Court to take a different vie v of the evidence from that of the High Court is not the test in an appeal against acquittal.
[383 D E] (2) In the instant case, the injuries on the two victims are "res ipso loquitor ' and tell tale.
The prosecution case that Vishwanath was caught by Shobha and Channu was caught hold of by Motilal and Shyamlal is corroborated by the medical evidence.
None of the stab wounds are on any part of the hands or arms which would have necessarily been caused.
if the victims were not caught hold of by a person or persons, while they were attacked with a knife.
It would be unnatural to expect that the victims would not have exercised their natural instinct of self preservation by trying to stave off the stab injuries by raising their hands.
And in that process if they were not caught hold of by some person or persons, there would have been one or two injuries on the hands or arms.
The High Court completely ignored this most relevant and important aspect in the prosecution, when it observed: "It is not at all clear from the prosecution evidence whether Shobha k kept on holding Vishwanath till the very end i.e. till both the knife injuries had been caused to him, or whether he let go his hold as soon as Sheo Murat started the attack".
"There is nothing in the prosecution evidence to indicate what order those injuries were caused to Channu and whether or not the injuries on the back were caused first".
This erroneous view taken by.
the High Court of the prosecution evidence adduceed in this case and the introduction by the High Court of an extraneous gloss for the purpose of its conclusion viz., "After reaching the house of Vishwanath they (the accused persons) entered into a conversation which became heated and ultimately ended in exchange of abuses".
resulted in failure of justice.
[383G H, 384C E] (3) No prejudice is caused in the instant case to the accused by alteration of the conviction to sections 326/34 although they had been originally charged under section 302/149 and sections 307/149, I.P.C.
On the particular fact of the prosecution case which clearly pointed to participation by the respective accused with tho two attacks and which they had to meet in the trial.
[385F G]
