Sahu Jain was a private limited company during the assessment years l952 53 and 1953 54.
All the shareholders of the company are the family member J of Mr. section P. Jain except two employees who held 20 out of 50,000 shares and excepting the three Companies which were also sister concerns.
Under section 23A of the Income Tax Act, 1922, prior to its amendment in the year 1955, where the Income Tax officer is satisfied that in respect of any previous year the profits and gains distributed as dividends by any Company are less than 60 per cent of the assessable income of the company as reduced by the Income Tax and Super Tax payable by the company in respect there of, he shall unless he is satisfied that having regard to the loss incurred by the company in earlier years or to the smallness of the profit made, the payment of a dividend or a larger dividend than declared would be unreasonable, make an order in writing that the undistributed portion of the income of the company of that previous year as computed for income tax purposes and reduced by the amount of income tax and supertax payable by the company in respect thereof shall be deemed to have been distributed as dividends amongst the shareholders.
The proviso to the said section provides that the provisions of the section would not apply to any company in which the public are substantially interested if shares of the company carrying not less than 25 per cent of the voting power have been allotted unconditionally to or acquired unconditionally by the public or beneficially held by public.
The Income Tax officer held that the provisions of section 23A were attracted in the case of the company for both the years.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the order of the Income Tax officer.
The Tribunal held that section 23A was not applicable to the company in respect of both the assessment years.
The Tribunal held that unless.
it is presumed that because of relationship Shri section P. Jain, Smt.
Rama Jain and Shri A. K. Jain should be regarded as acting in concert there is no other material on record on the basis of which such a conclusion could be supported.
On a reference made by the Tribunal, The High Court answered the question in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
In an appeal by special leave the appellant contended: 1. 80 per cent of the share capital was held by section P. Jain and his wife and two sons.
One of whom was a minor throughout the period and another for a portion of the period and that the remaining shares were held by tho company which were under the control of section P. Jain and that only 20 share out of 50,000 shares were held by two employees under the control of section P Jain.
A. K. Jain was appointed as a Director when he was a minor and he became a Managing Director on a salary of Rs. 6,000/ per month when he was 20 years old.
3. section P. Jain who was a Director resigned making room for his Private Secretary for appointment as Director.
The Company showed a loss of Rs. 2 lacs and odd in a transaction in hessian and the same was shown as profit by Smt.
Rama Jain wife of section P. Jain.
section P. Jain, A. K. Jain.
R. Sharma and N. C. Jain were the promoters of the company ant were signatories to the Memorandum of Association.
399 The respondent contended: 1. Smt.
Rama Jain and A. K. Jain were independent assessees.
A. K. Jain was taking independent decisions as a competent Director.
Mere relationship would not lead to the conclusion that the said two shareholders acted in concert with section P. Jain.
A. K. Jain was an independent shareholder and was not under the control of section P. Jain or any other Director or shareholder.
N. C. Jain was Director from 1950 to 1954 and section P. Jain became Managing Director subject to the approval of the Government.
A. K Jain was appointed as Deputy Managing Director on a remuneration of Rs. 6,000/ per month subject to the approval of the Central Government.
The transactions like one of hessian are common transactions and no undue importance can be attached to it.
Merely because some persons are promoters or employees of a Company that would not affect their character as shareholders of the Company.
Allowing the appeals by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.
The controversy is whether the company is one in which the public has 25 per cent or more shares.
[404C] 2.
This Court held in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax West Bengal vs East Coast Commercial Co. Ltd., that the word 'public ' is used in the explanation to section 23A in contra distinction to one or more persons who act in unison and amongst whom the voting power constitute s a block.
This Court also held that the Tribunal had to decide in the first instance wreathe there was a group of persons acting in concert holding a sufficient number of shares which may control the voting as a block.
But the existence of block is not decisive.
The company would still be a company in which public are substantially interested if 25 per cent or more of the voting power has been allotted unconditionally to and beneficially held by the public.
This Court also held that the relationship and position as Director are not by themselves decisive.
But if the relatives act not freely but with others they cannot be said to belong to the public.
The test is not whether they have actually acted in concert but whether the circumstances are such that human experience tells us that it can safely be taken that they must be acting together.
[406A, C D, H, 407A] 3.
It is clear that this company was a family concern with only 20 shares out of 50,000 shares allotted to the two outsiders who again happened to be paid employees.
The presence of these two outsiders is of the least significance in the matter of management of the affairs of the company.
A. K. Jain became a Director even when he was a. minor.
He would not ordinarily be able to play the role he is supposed to have done in the Board meetings unless section P. Jain was confident that the Board was carrying out its mandates with regard to the affairs of the Company.
The fact that A. K. Jain and others were authorised to sign agreements on behalf of the Company is not of great significance.
There is no evidence whatsoever to show that Rama Jain wife of section P. Jain was at all independently acting.
[409G, H, 410] 4.
When a company is composed mostly of family member owning lion 's share in the entire share capital of the company the onus to keep clear of the reach of section 23A will be on the shareholders by adducing some positive evidence about the absence of control by the controlling shareholders.
[410 B] 5.
No single factor can be decisive but having regard to the totality of the circumstances revealed in the case and the conduct of the transactions of the company taken with the relationship which in the circumstances of this case is not a negligible element this Court is dearly of the opinion that it is a case in which it cannot be said that the public is substantially interested in 25 per cent or more shares of the company.
[410D E] 6.
Even if A. K. Jain is said to be a member of the public, his shares together with the shares of Ashoka Agencies Limited is 500 less than the r minimum shareholding requisite to earn the benefit of the third proviso to section 23A read with the explanation.
[410 E] 400 7.
Between August 11, 1951 and May 1, 1952, A. K. Jain and 2 employee Directors apparently took all decisions for the company in the Board 's meetings.
This is not ordinarily possible but for collaboration with the major shareholders.
This is a case where more is meant than meets the eye.
[410E F] 8.
It is A clear case of all the shareholders acting in concert and in unison and the two employee Directors were merely dummies.
There is not the slightest inkling of the public being interested far less substantially interested in this company.
[410G] 9.
The intimate relationship of the shareholders, with not the least evidence of disconcert amongst them, the ordinary expectation for individual profit in commercial undertaking, the history of the company and its continued smooth working is inconsistent with anything but full unison amongst the shareholders.
The Board 's meetings are evidence of well organised, well knit, close unity of vie vs in all affairs which in ordinary course of human conduct would not have been at all possible but for a single or concerted action in the company management by a controlling group.
[410D F]
