The respondent State Government was exercising powers delegated to it by the Central Government under the .
It introduced an 'Incentive Export Scheme ' under which, millers, who delivered 50% of their purchases to the Food Corporation of India towards mill levy, would be eligible for exporting rice either within the State from one block to another or to States outside.
On payment of administrative charges.
On the representation of the millers (appellants) that they could not sell rice locally because there was no demand, and that unless they were allowed to move rice outside the blocks or outside the State there would be deterioration of stocks resulting in loss to both trade and the consuming public, the State passed orders permittion the export of rice subject to the fulfilment of their commitments to the Food Corporation and the payment of administrative charges; and also set up the necessary administrative machinery for ensuring such export.
Permits were accordingly granted on terms and on condition of payment of the surcharge fixed.
and the millers paid the surcharge and received the benefits under the permits.
Thereafter, they claimed refund of the administrative surcharge on the ground that the State had no right to collect it and that they made the payments under mistake of law.
Where the State collected administrative charges but could not grant permits, the State refunded the money, but, where millers obtained permits and had taken advantage thereof, the State contended that there was no mistake on the part of the millers and that the payments were made voluntarily with full knowledge of facts and in discharge of their contractual obligations.
The millers filed writ petitions praying for directions to the State to refund the administrative surcharges collected from them, but the High Court held that they were not entitled to the relief on the grounds of delay, insufficiency of particulars regarding expenses and charges incurred by the Government, and the payments being voluntary.
Dismissing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: The petitions were rightly dismissed by the High Court.
Also, since various question of fact are involved as to whether there was really a mistake, or whether it was a case of voluntary payment pursuant to contractual rights and obligations.
the remedy under article 226 is not appropriate in the present cases.
[396C D] (a) A mandamus will go where there is a specific legal right.
If there is no other means of obtaining justice, the writ of mandamus is granted to enable justice to be done.
A writ of mandamus for recovery of money could be issued only when the petitioner was entitled to recover that money under some statute.
An order for payment of money may sometimes be made to enforce a statutory obligation.
A mandamus for refund of tax could be issued when the assessments were held to be illegal; but contractual obligations cannot be enforced through a writ of mandamus.
Normally, the parties are relegated to a suit of enforce civil liability arising out of a breach of contract or a tort, to pay an amount of money.
Mandamus may also be refused where there is an alternative remedy which is equally convenient, beneficial and effectual [395F 396C] 388 R. V. Bristol and Exeter Railway Co. 1845(3) Ry.
& Can.
Cas. 777; Lekh Raj v Deputy Custodian, ; Har Shankar & ors.
vs Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner & Ors., ; ; Sales Tax officer Banaras & ors.
vs Kanhaiya Lal Mukundalal Saraf, ; Suganmal vs State of Madhya Pradesh & ors., A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 1740; Burmah Construction Co. vs State of Orissa, [1962] Supp. 1 S.C.R 242 and State of Kerala vs Aluminium Industries Ltd., 16 S.T.C. 689, referred to.
(b) The ground of delay on which the High Court, in the exercise of its discretion, refused to grant a mandamus is not confined purely to the period of limitation.
Though some of the petitions were filed within 3 years from the date of payment, the delay is bound up with matters relating to the conduct of parties in regard to payments pursuant to agreements between the parties.
[395B C] (c) In the present cases, several petitioners have joined in the writ petitions.
Since each has an individual and independent cause of action, such a combination would be open to the objection of misjoinder even in a suit.
[395C D] (d) The issues regarding limitation, estoppel and questions of fact in ascertaining the expenses incurred by the Government for administrative purposes of the scheme and allocating the expenses with regard to the quality as well as quantity of rice covered by the permits, are triable more appropriately in a suit.
[395D] (e) The plea of mistake is a bare averment in the writ petition.
The payments did not disclose the circumstances under which the alleged mistake occurred nor the circumstances in which the legal position became known to the millers.
Whether there was a mistake in paying the amounts and when exactly the mistake occurred, are also issues triable in a suit.
[1396D E] (f) The Government did not support its demand for administrative charges either as a tax or a fee, but as a condition of the permit and as a term of agreement between the parties to meet the maintenance and supervision ex penses for the Scheme of export permits.
Under section 72, Contract Act, 1872 if one party, under a mistake of law, pays to another money which is not due by contract or otherwise, that money has to be repaid.
The mistake is material only so far as it leads to the payment being made without consideration.
But if a mistake of law had led to the formation of a contract.
section 21 of the Contract Act enacts that such a contract is not, for that reason, voidable; and if money is paid under that contract, it cannot be said that the money was paid under mistake of law.
It was paid because it was due under a valid contract, and if it had not been paid, payment could have been enforced.
[396E 397A] The State of Kerala etc.
vs K. P. Govindan Tapioca Exporter etc.
; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Bhailal Bhai ; and Shiba Prasad Singh vs Srish Chandra Nandi, 76 I.A. 244, referred to.
(g) Where the High Court has, in the exercise of its discretion refused to grant a writ of madamus, this Court does not ordinarily interfere [394E] Municipal Corporation of Greater Bomboy vs Advance Builders (India) Private Limited.
[1972] I S.C.R. 408 at p. 420 and D. Cawasji d Co. vs State of Mysore [1975] 2 S.C.R. 511 at p. 527, referred to.
