Section 10(26)(a), Income tax Act, 1961 provides that a person is entitled to exemption from income tax if (1) he is a member of a Scheduled Tribe as defined in article 366(25) of the Constitution, (2) he is residing in any area specified in Part A or Part of the Table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, or the State or Union Territories mentioned in section 10(26)(a).
and (3) the income in respect of which exemption is claimed is income which accrues or arises to him from any source in the area, State or Union Territories mentioned in the section.
The assessee belonged to the Jaintia Scheduled Tribe and was a permanent resident of the United Khasi Jaintia Hills Autonomous District referred to in para 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
He was employed in the Secretariat of the Assam Government, and his place of work was within the Shillong Municipality, and was not a part of the area described in para 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
The Income tax officer held that .
the income of the assessee from his salary arose in the non scheduled area and was not covered by the tax exemption provided under section 10(26) (a).
In a writ petition under article 226 the assessee challenged the validity of 8. 10(26) (a) on the ground that the classification of members of Scheduled Tribes into those having income from a source within the specified areas and those having income from the source outside the areas was arbitrary.
The High Court struck it down as violative of article 14 on the ground that the exemption clause which was enacted for the benefit of the Scheduled Tribes would be frustrated if the income of such person was made subject to tax merely because the source of that income was outside that area.
Allowing the appeals of the Department, ^ HELD: The High Court was in error in holding that the classification contemplated by section 10(26)(a), Income Tax Act, 1961, was artificial and was not based on any intelligible differentia.
[422D] 1 (a) .
A taxation law, like any other law.
has to pass the equality test of article 14, but given the legislative competence, the legislature has ample freedom to select and classify persons, incomes and objects which it would or would not tax.
The mere fact that a tax falls more heavily on some in the same category, is not by itself a ground to render the law invalid.
It is only when, within the range of its selection.
the law operates unequally and cannot be justified on the basis of a valid classification, that there would be a violation of article 14.
[420B D] " East India Tobacco Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1963] I S.C.R. 404; Vivan Joseph Ferriera vs Municipal Council of Greater Bombay, ; and Jaipur Hosiery Mills vs State of Rajasthan, , followed.
(b) Classification for the purpose of taxation or for exempting from tax with reference to the source of the income is integral to the fundamental scheme of the Income Tax Act.
The classification made by sub cl.
(a) for the purpose of exemption is not unreal or unknown but conforms to a well recognised pattern and is based on intelligible differentia.
The object of this differentiation between income accruing or received from a source in the specified areas and 12 522SCI/76 414 the income accruing or received from a source outside such areas IS to benefit not only the members of the Scheduled Tribes residing in the specified areas but also to benefit such areas economically.
[420F; 421E F] (c) If it is held that a member of the Scheduled Tribe residing in a specified area was entitled to the exemption irrespective of whether the source of his income lay within or outside such area, it may lead to mischievous results.
A non Tribal assessee in India may enter into a sham partnership with a member of the Scheduled Tribe residing in the specified area and ostensibly give him a substantial share of the profits of the business but really give him only a nominal amount and thus evade tax.
Also a tribal residing in the scheduled areas.
earning large profits from business located outside the specified areas would be totally exempt while a non tribal whose source of income is a share in the same business would be taxed and thus the exemption is likely to operate unequally between individuals similarly situated.
[421G H] (2) The decision in section K. Datta.
Income Tax officer and or$. vs Lawrence Singh Ingty; , , on which the High Court had relied is no authority for the proposition that the exemption granted under section 10(26) to the members of the Scheduled Tribes residing in the specified area, as a class, could not be validly subjected to the condition contained in sub cl.
(a) of that provision.
The sentence that "the exemption in question was not given to individuals either on the basis of their social status or economic resources.
it was given to a class" occurring in that case could not be torn out of the contest and used for spelling out a proposition different from what was actually decided in that case.
[419H; F] (3) The State is the best judge to formulate its policies and to decide how far and for what period and in what situations, the members of a particular Scheduled Tribe residing in a particular Tribal area should be afforded ` the protection and benefit in the matter of promotion of their educational and economic interests embodied in article 46 of the Constitution.
[422C]
