Nine accused were charged with offences of murder and causing hurt.
The trial Court acquitted two and convicted the others under sections 325 and 147, I.P.C. on appeal by the State, the High Court convicted the two appellants also under section 302 read with 8. 34.
I.P.C. Partly allowing their appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The High Court has not examined the liability of the accused with due regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.
Instead of giving a categorical finding, the High Court stated at one place in its judgment that the appellants must be taken to have had the knowledge that the injury which they intended to cause to the victim was "likely to result" in his death, and in an other place, that the appellant were guilty of an offence under section 300, fourthly, because they "ought to have known that their act was so imminently dangerous having regard to the age and condition of the victim that their act must in all probability cause death or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
" But the evidence on record shows that the appellants did not have the common intention of giving a beating to the deceased when they reached his house but were only bent upon settling scores with his son.
It was only when the deceased asked another witness to get ready a bullock cart for making a complaint about the beating of his son that the appellants inflicted injuries on him.
But there was nothing to show that their intention was to inflict any fatal injury.
Only one of the injuries was a forceful blow on the head of the deceased and it resulted on his death.
But the other injuries were on the back of the neck, knees and right elbow of the deceased and not on any vital part of the body.
Therefore, the appellants had only the common intention of causing Grievous hurt.
Since there was no reliable evidence to show which of the two appellants gave the fatal blow, the appellants could only be convicted of an offence under section 325 read with section 34, I.P.C. [431F; 432C D, P G; 433E 434C]
