Some villages made an application before the Assistant Commissioner of Endowments, Orissa, for appointment of non hereditary trustees under section 27 of the, Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments Act, 1951, for Shiva temple which is more than 100 years old and possesses about 24 acres of land.
A new temple was constructed in place of the old dilapidated temple by the money contributed by the villagers.
It was alleged that respondents Nos. 1 to 3 were mismanaging the affairs of the temple and were not regularly performing the puja or the duty.
An enquiry was ordered pursuant to which the Inspector submitted his report stating that the temple was a public temple and that respondents Nos.
1 to 3 did not show accounts to the Inspector and that, therefore, names of 5 persons were suggested for appointment of non hereditary trustees.
A proclamation inviting objections regarding the suitability of 5 persons was issued.
After making a summary enquiry in the presence of the villagers including respondents Nos. 1 to 3 the Additional Assistant Commissioner passed an order holding that the institution was a public one and appointed 5 non hereditary trustees under section 27 of the Act.
He, however, did not record any finding whether respondents Nos.
1 to 3 were hereditary trustees or not.
A revision Application filed to the Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments failed.
Respondent Nos.
I to 3 filed a writ petition in the High Court contending that the order of appointment of non hereditary trustees under section 27 of the Act encroached upon the property rights of the respondents and were without jurisdiction and void having been passed without determining under section 41 of the Act as to whether the institution was a private or a public one and without further determining as to whether the respondent were hereditary trustees.
The appellants contended before the High Court that the provisions of section 27 were independent and that it could be invoked without prior determination of the question under section 41.
The High Court allowed the writ petition holding that section 27 should be applied only where in respect of the disputed institution there had been a Prior determination of the controversial rights mentioned in section 41 and that before the Assistant Endowments Commissioner could proceed under section 27 of the Act to assess non hereditary trustees it was necessary for him to come to a finding that the institution was a public one and there were no hereditary trustees thereof in existence and in order to come to such a finding he should have completed an enquiry under section 41 which coupled with section 44 provided for a judicial determination of these very questions.
Under section 41 in case of a dispute the Assistant Commissioner has power to enquire into and decide whether an institution is a public religious institution and whether a trustee holds office as a hereditary trustee.
Under section 27, the Assistant Commissioner has power to appoint non hereditary trustees in respect of each religious institution in cases where there are no hereditary trustees, Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The Assistant Commissioner can appoint non hereditary trustees under section 27 of the Act only where two conditions are satisfied : (i) that the religious institution is not an excepted one, and (ii) there are no hereditary trustees of the institution.
436 For the exercise of the powers under.
section 27, therefore, either there should be no dispute about the two conditions or if there is a dispute a prior determination of such dispute under section 41 of the Act has to be made.
Without such preliminary determination an appointment of non hereditary trustees under section 41 since there is no specific prohibition.
[444D E] 2.
Under section 27.
the enquiry is of a summary character in which the affected person does not get a reasonable chance of presenting his entire case and evidence is not required to be recorded verbatim.
It is otherwise in case of Proceedings under section 41 where the enquiry has to be judicial and elaborate.
[442H. 443A] 3.
It is also not correct that a duly verified application on a proper court fee is necessary for the determination of the questions enumerated in section 41 of the Act.
An enquiry can be made suo moto by the Assistant Endowments.
Commissioner for determination of any of the disputes enumerated in section 41 since there is no specific prohibition.
[444D E]
