The appellant owned a land which was held for the of miscellaneous inferior services and was classified as a Huzur Sanadi Inam land.
The respondents were in possession of the land as tenarlts and were declared as purchasers under the Bombay Tenancy & Agricultural Lands Act, 1948.
The Tenancy Act provides by section 32 that on 1st April, 1957, every tenant subject to certain conditions shall be deemed to have purchased from his landlord the land held by him as a tenant.
The Bombay Legislature passed the Bombay Merged Territories Miscellaneous Alienations Abolition Act of 1955.
The appellant contended that in view of the provisions of the Abolition Act, the relationship of landlord and tenant came to an end between the appellant and the respondents and that, therefore, respondents have no right to purchase the land.
The contention of the appellant was negatived by the Agricultural Lands Tribunal which was confirmed in appeal by the special Deputy Collector and in revision by the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal.
A writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court of Bombay was summarily dismissed Dismissing the appeal by Special Leave, ^ HELD: 1.
By section 4 of the Abolition Act, all alienations in the Merged Territories were abolished with effect from the appointed date.
Sections 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the Abolition Act provide for the grant of occupancy rights hl respect of the erstwhile Inam Iands.
There is no provision in that Act by virtue of which the relationship of landlord and tenant between the ex lnamdar and his tenant would stand extinguished.
On the contrary, section 28 Provides that nothing contained in the Act shall in any way be deemed to effect the application of any of the provisions of the Tenancy Act to any alienated land or the mutual rights and obligations of a landlord and his tenants save in so far as the said provisions are in any way inconsistent with the express provisions of the Act.
The provisions of the Tenancy Act contained in section 32 are in no way inconsistent with any of the express provisions of the Abolition Act.
[495 A, B C, & D] 2.
Section 32(O) of the Tenancy Act applies only to tenancies created after the tiller 's day.
[495E] 3.
The object of the Abolition Act was the elimination of Inamdars as intermediaries and not the eviction of the tillers of the soil.
[495G] 4.
Section 32G(6) of the Tenancy Act shows that nothing contained in the Abolition Act can affect the tenant 's right of Purchase under section 32, even if any land is regranted to the holder under the Abolition Act on condition that it was not transferable.
[496A B]
