Section IOF of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Bonus Scheme Act 1948 is a penal section under which for default in the payment of any Provident Fund contribution, the Central Government may recover from such employer or person as the case may be, such damages, not exceeding 25% of the amount of arrears, as it may think fit to impose.
ln respect of tho period from July to September, 1968, the respondent employer was asked to pay a sum of Rs. 1455.50 as damages being 25% of the arrears of Provident Fund contributions by the appellant to which he filed an objection explaining the delay.
The employer ' request for waiving the damages was negatived.
The writ application of the employer against that order was allowed by the High Court on two grounds, viz. (i) that the computation of damages should arise upon consideration of the facts and circumstances, and (ii) the authorities should have given an opportunity to the employer to represent the case.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court. ^ HELD: ( I ) The provisions contained in a 78 of the Act indicate first that the Coal Mines Provident Fund Commissioner may determine the amount due from the employer, and second, for this purpose he may conduct such enquiry as he may deem necessary.
Therefore, an enquiry is contemplated.
Section 78 (3 ) speaks of reasonable opportunity being given to an employer to represent his case.
The provision in section 10F of the Act also indicates that determination of damage is not a mechanical process.
The words of importance in section 10F of the Act are "such damages not exceeding 25 per cent of tho amount of arrears as it may think fit to impose".
Here the two important features are these: First the words of importance are "damages not exceeding 25% show that the determination of damages is not an inflexible application of the rigid formula.
Second, the words "as it may think fit to impose" in section 10F show that the authorities are required to apply their mind to the facts and circumstances of the case.
[368A C] (2) When a body or authority has to determine a matter involving rights judicially, the principle of natural justice is implied if the decision of that body or authority affects individual rights or interest.
[368E E] Indian Sugars & Manufacturers Ltd vs Amravati Services Co operative Society Ltd. Anr.
r[1976] 2 S.C.R. 740 and State of Punjab vs K R. Erry k Sobhag Rai Mefta ; , applied.
