The State of Madras acquired land belonging to the respondent landlords.
The Land Acquisition officer gave his award determining the compensation payable.
On a reference made to the Subordinate judge certain compensation was determined.
Interest was awarded to the respondents on the compensation amount from 1st December, 1949 because in the opinion of the Subordinate Judge, possession of the land had been taken on that date.
On an appeal, the High Court affirmed the decision of the Subordinate Judge regarding the rate of compensation.
The High Court also rejected the contention of the appellant that the land had vested in the Government under the Madras States Abolition Act, 1948, and, therefore, the respondents were not entitled to compensation under the Land Acquisition Act.
The High Court found that there was no material on record to show that the possession of the land had been taken prior to the date of the award by the Land Acquisition officer.
Interest was accordingly directed to run from the date of the award, i.e. November, 1951.
In an appeal by certificate, the appellant contended: (1) The land in question vested under the Abolition Act in the State and the respondents were, therefore, not entitled to compensation under the Land Acquisition Act.
(2) The quantum of compensation awarded by the High Court was excessive.
(3) Interest should have been allowed from 1st December, 1949.
^ HELD: ( 1 ) There were .
two alternative courses open to the State either to proceed under the Land Acquisition Act or to take over the land under the Abolition Act.
Although the estate was notified under the Abolition Act, the proceedings under that Act were stayed and the matter proceed l under the Land Acquisition Act.
It was not open to the appellant in the particular reference made at the instance of the respondents to the Subordinate Judge to set up a claim adverse to the interest of the respondents.
The High Court rightly rejected the contention of the appellant in this behalf.
[538D E, G H] (2 ) Both the High Court as well as the Subordinate Judge awarded the compensation in accordance with the previous decisions which laid down a formula.
No cogent grounds have been shown to us to interfere with the concurrent findings in this respect.
[539B C] (3) There is no reason to disagree with the High Court judgment regarding the date on which the interest should run on the amount of compensation.
[539 G]
