The plaintiff appellants filed a suit against defendants for a declaration of their title to the land in question admeasuring 142 bighas.
The trial Court dismissed the suit in respect of land admeasuring 28 acres and decreed the suit in respect of the remaining land.
The plaintiffs ' suit was held to be barred in respect of that land on account of the doctrine of waiver and acquiescence.
The plaintiffs were also held entitled to recover mesne profits.
On an appeal filed by some of the respondents, the High Court accepted the appeal and dismissed the suit in its entirety.
The High Court held that it was not shown that the disputed land was the same as had been purchased by Mina Kuer in auction sale.
The High Court also held that the plaintiffs ' suit for possession was barred by limitation.
The appellants contended.
(1) The respondent did not dispute that the suit land was the same which was purchased by Mina Kuer as per sale certificate dated 26 2 1935.
(2) In any case the matter may be remanded for determining the above issdue.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The appellants have failed to establish that the land in dispute is the same as has been purchased in auction by Mina Kuer as per sale certificate dated 26 2 1935.
The contention of the appellant that the respondents did not dispute that the suit land is the same as the one purchased by Mina Kuer is not correct.
The respondents did deny this fact in their written statement.
The land which is the subject matter of the present litigation is situate in the State of Bihar on the right bank of the Ganges.
Although the land is subject to river action, the onus to prove that the land in dispute in Bihar State represents the land in U.P. which got submerged as a result of river action was upon the appellants.
The appellants have failed to discharge this onus.
[557F, H, 558A, E] (2) The prayer of the appellants for remand of the case is rejected because there was no valid basis for the assumption of the appellants that the appellants did not dispute the identity of the land.
The suit was filed as long ago as in January, 1950.
During the pendency of this litigation many of the original plaintiffs and defendants have died and are now represented by their legal representatives.
It is time that we draw the final curtain and put an end to this long course of litigation between the parties.
If the passage of time and laws of nature bring to an end the lives of men and women it would perhaps be the demand of reason and dictate of prudence not to keep alive after so many years the strife and conflict started by the dead.
To do so would in effect be defying the laws of nature and offering a futile resistance to the ravage of time.
If human life has short span, it would be irrational to entertain a taller claim for disputes and conflicts which are a manifestation of human frailty. 'the Courts should be loth to entertain a plea in a case like the present which would have the effect of condemning succeeding generation of families to spend major part of their lives in protracted litigation.
[558G H, 559A D] Sant Narain Mathur vs Rama Rrishna Mission ; reiterated.
