The respondent was reverted from the higher post in which he was officiating, to his substantive post, by an order which stated that he was 'not fit yet ' for the higher post.
His juniors continued to officiate in the higher post.
Till some time before the order of reversion, the respondent was praised by his superior officers, but, during a period of about six months before the reversion, there was a spurt of warnings, complaints, and adverse remarks, alleging disrespect, disobedience to orders, and that he cast aspersions on his superior officer.
the respondent asked for particulars to meet the allegations, but they were not given to him.
His representation against the last adverse entry was pending when the reversion order was passed.
He challenged the order and the High Court, following State of U.P. vs Sughar Singh , quashed the order, holding that the reversion was a punishment in the light of the circumstances preceding the order, from the terms of the order, and its effect on the respondent 's future and that there was a violation of rules of natural justice.
In appeal to this Court by special leave, the appellant contented that the High Court misunderstood Sughar Singh 's case.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELL): (1) As the reversion order was punitive and passed contrary to the rules of natural justice embodied in article 311(2), it must be quashed.
The authorities are, however, free to take action, either in accordance with applicable rules for a comparative assessment of the merits of the respondent and others who may be eligible, or to take disciplinary proceedings.
[550A B] (a) In Sughar Singh 's case, this Court was only following the law on article 311(2) as laid down repeatedly.
In that case also the reversion of Sughar Singh was apparently not punitive, but, since it could not be explained except as a result of an adverse entry made two years earlier, it was held to be by way of punishment.
On this view it was not necessary to consider whether there was a violation of article 16, but this Court held that there was.
What weighed with this Court was not only that there was a sufficient element of punishment in reverting him so that article 311(2) had to be complied with, but that there was also enough of impropriety and unreasonableness in the action taken solely for a very stale reason which had become logically disconnected and extraneous, to make out a case of 'malice in law ' if not 'malice in fact '.
[545H 546F] (b) Whether an apparently innocuous order is punitive or amounts to unjustifiable discriminatory action violating either article 311 or article 16 depends on the facts of the case.
[549E] (c) This Court has, in Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab ; , laid down authoritatively the conditions necessary in such cases for the applicability of article 311(2) after considering all the previous cases and there is no scope for any misapprehension of the law.
[544C] (d) As regards article 16, before it is held to have been violated, there must be discrimination between one Government servant and another, similarly placed.
which cannot be reasonably explained except on the basis of 'malice in law ' or 'malice in fact '.
But, the person who alleges such malice in law must 541 satisfactorily establish it on proved or admitted facts as in State of Mysore vs A Kulkarni (AIR When the allegations, are of 'malice in fact ' which are disputed and require a detailed adduction of evidence or examination of witnesses, the Court will leave the party aggrieved to an ordinary civil suit and will not exercise its discretionary power under article 226.
Reversion of an officer as a result of administrative exigencies, without any suggestion of malice in law or in fact, is unaffected by Sughar Singh 's case, and is not vitiated even if some Government servants, junior to him, have not been reverted.
[547B D, F G] (e) The facts of the present case are similar to those of Sughar Singh 's case and the High Court was right in holding that there was a violation of the principles of natural justice embodied in article 311(2).
[548F G] There were no administrative reasons for the respondent 's reversion.
If there had been anything really serious against him, proceedings under article 311(2) should have been instituted.
The sudden reversion for the reason given in the order amounts to unjustified stigma which could not be said to be devoid of the element of punishment.
[548G H, 549D L] (f) If he was really unfit as compared with his juniors there could have been a fair comparison with them at a time when such assessment is called for under the rules (rules should be made if there are none) and on such a comparative assessment of merits, the juniors could have been preferred ensuring that there was no violation of Act.
Dealings of superior officers with their subordinates in Government must be shown to be based on fair play and reason.
But it is not necessary to invoke the aid of article 16 to quash the order.
[549 C D, E , 550B] (2) Even if the High Court should not have interfered, it is not a fit ease for interference by this Court under article 136, as it is still open to the authorities to proceed in a just and legal way against the respondent if necessary.
[549F H]
