The respondent, who was a Muslim, was the Congress candidate for election to the State Legislative Assembly.
He challenged the appellant 's election and the High Court allowed the election petition on three grounds (1) that the appellant committed a corrupt practice under a 123(1), Representation of the People Act, 1951 in that he offered a bribe to the respondent to induce him not to contest the election; (2) that the appellant committed corrupt practice under section 123(3A) in that he issued and personally distributed a pamphlet containing communal allegations with a view to create ill feeling among the voters; and (3) that the appellant 's agents distributed that pamphlet with the appellant 's contest.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD :(1)(a) While it is necessary to protect the purity of elections by ensuring that the candidate do not secure the valuable votes of the people by undue influence, fraud, communal porpaganda.
bribery or other corrupt practices, the valuable verdict of the people at 'the polls must be given due respect and should not be disregarded or set at naught on vague, frivolous or fanciful allegations, or on evidence which is of a shaky or pre varicating character.
[450F G, H] (b) Tho onus lies heavily on the election petitioner to make out a strong case for setting aside the election.
He must, in order to succeed.
plead all material particulars and prove them by clear and Cogent evidence.
[450G; 451K] (c) The allegations of corrupt practice being in the nature of a quasicriminal charge, must be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
When the election petitioner seeks to drove the charge by purely partisan evidence of his workers; agents.
supporters and friends the court would have to approach the evidence with great care and caution, and would, as a matter of prudence, though not as a rule of law, require corroboration of such evidence from independent quarters, unless the court in fully satisfied that the evidence is so creditworthy and true, that no corroboration to lend further assurance Is necessary.
[451A] (d) The attempt of the agents or supporters of the defeated candidate is always to get the election set aside by fair means or foul and the evidence of such witnesses, must, therefore, be regarded as highly interested and tainted evidence.
[451C D] (e) When, the evidence led by the election petitioner, even though consistent, is fraught with inherent improbabilities and replete with unnatural tendencies, the court may refuse to accept such evidence, because consistency alone h not the conclusive test of truth.
It is, however, difficult to lay down any rule of universal application and each case will have to be decided on its facts.
[451D E], Bhanu Kumar Shastri vs Mohan Lal Sukhadia & Ors. ; Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & Ors.
; ; Abdul Hussain Mir vs Shamsul Huda and another; , and Ghasi Ram vs Dal Singh & Ors. ; , followed.
14 L522SCI/76 446 (2) In the present case, the High Court correctly adumbrated the legal propositions but had not correctly applied them to the facts and evidence.
It also applied different standards in appreciating the evidence.
It readily accepted ll the evidence of two witnesses on one issue while rejecting as partisan and interested on another issue.
[453A D] (3) The cumulative effect of the inherent improbabilities and the intrinsic infirmities of the evidence for the respondent, and the unnatural conduct of the respondent and his witnesses, lead to the conclusion that the respondent had failed to prove the allegation of the offer of bribe.
[465B C] (a) The respondent bore a serious animus against the appellant and yet it was alleged that the appellant offered him a bribe even though they were not well acquainted with each other.
[458G. 460D] .
(b) The offer was alleged to have been made in the presence of two witnesses, ' in a crowded` place ' and pressed upon the respondent even though he spurned it.
The High Court is not right in its view that an offer could have been made as alleged, and that only for actual payment a secluded place could be chosen.
[458F H; 459B C] (c) The High Court is also not right in its view that because the appellant was.
at the Taluk Office when the respondent went there the appellant would have offered the bribe.
On the contrary, the respondent, for that very reason, might have concocted this story of the offer of bribe.
[457E F] (d) The High Court failed to consider, (i) that while it is easy to make an allegation of offer of bribe, it is very difficult for the person against whom it is made to rebut it; [457G E] (ii) that the allegation was sought to be proved by the respondent, by the partisan and highly interested testimony of two witnesses and was sought to be corroborated by the equally interested testimony of two others to whom the incident was alleged to have been narrated shortly thereafter.
and that t he respondent had not examined any independent witness, even though such witness were available; [457H 458A] (iii) that the appellant would not have attempted to bribe the respondent because, the respondent had the, support of the Congress, and even if he with drew, the Congress would have put up another candidate.
[461B CI (iv) that the respondent had not complained about the bribe either to the local Congress committee or to the police; and [461F G; 464D E] (v) that there was no reference either to the corroborating witnesses or to the narration of the incident of the offer of the bribe to those witnesses, in the petition.
If it were true it is unlikely that the respondent would have omitted a reference to it.
[464A B] (e) Further.
the fact of repetition of the story of the offer of bribe to the two corroborating witnesses was a material particular or an additional fact pertaining to the averments In the petition and not a mere matter of evidence.
Since it was nob mentioned in tho petition it has to be excluded from consideration.
[464B C] (f) As the alleged offer is an electoral offence of a quasi criminal nature, the onus of proving it was initially on the respondent, but he failed to discharge the onus.
[464A H] (g) If such a serious allegation is allowed to be proved against a successful.
Candidate by partisan, interested and improbable evidence, without any independent corroboration, it would give an easy handle to the defeated candidates to destroy the sanctity of the electoral process.
[464A 465B] (4) The respondent has not 'adduced any satisfactory evidence that the r offending pamphlet was printed by the appellant or distributed by him personally, whereas, the appellant has, through his evidence, Though of a 447 negative character, shown that the probabilities are that the appellant did not A have it printed and that he did not distribute it.
[491E F] (a ) Distribution of an objectionable pamphlet is a corrupt practice under section 123(4) and the pamphlet in the present case, containing communal propaganda comes under section 123(3A) as well.
[471G H; 474E] (b) The allegation of publishing such an objectionable pamphlet is easy to make and difficult to rebut.
The court must subject the tainted and interested evidence regarding its publication to the strictest scrutiny because it can be printed by the defeated candidate in any press with secrecy.
circulated among his supporters and he can make them say that it was printed, published and circulated by the successful candidate.
[471H 472B] Baburao Bagaji Karemoga and ors.
vs Govind & Ors., , followed.
(c) The appellant had denied the printing or publication of the pamphlet and ' the respondent failed to discharge his initial onus of proving that the appellant printed and distributed it.
[472D E] (d) Since there were a considerable number of Muslim voters in the constituency, the appellant ' would not have taken the risk of 'offending them by circulating such a pamphlet.
The respondent, on the other hand, had a strong motive to reverse the appellant 's election by any possible means, and he had his own press.
[472H; 474F G, H] (e) The High Court was wrong in its approach that since the pamphlet contained anti Muslim propaganda it would not have been printed by the respondent.
An unsuccessful candidate, motivated by the desire to unseat a successful candidate, would stood to any device to show that the successful candidate was guilt of a corrupt practice.
[472G] (f) Merely because the respondent disclosed the name of the press where he got some other pamphlets printed, it could not be contended by him that he would have disclosed the name of the press which printed the offending pamphlet if he got it printed.
The contents of the pamphlet were so offensive that the printer would not have taken the risk of disclosing the name of the press and expose it to legal action.
[491B C] (g) Most of the witnesses for the respondent who stated that the pamphlet was given to them before or during the election were of the turn coat type, that is.
persons who claimed to have worked for the appellant but gave evidence for the respondent; and tho others were in some way or the other totally interested in the respondent or connected with him.
[479F] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed and others; , followed.
F (h) one witness gave evidence that he received the pamphlet from his wife during the election.
but since she was not examined, the evidence was rightly rejected by the High Court.
[490H 491A] (i) The High Court held that the pamphlet was in existence before or during the election, applying the test that the pamphlet was produced by tho witness who stated that it was given to him by the appellant.
But that cannot be a safe criterion because, the respondent could have handed it over to the witness before he have evidence.
Further.
the probabilities are that it was not then in existence.
[471C E] (i) Respectable witness of the appellant gave evidence that no such pamphlet was circulated, for then they would have known about it.
Also considering its provocative language, it is unlikely that the Government officials posted to prevent any communal propaganda by the candidates would have failed to notice it.
[473B: 474G H] (ii) Further, the respondent would not have failed to give in the petition or in the material particulars furnished by him later, the name of the persons from whom he came to know about the pamphlet.
The respondent collected materials for filing the election petition soon after the appellant was declared 448 elected and more than a month before filing it.
In spite of such a full and complete opportunity before filing the petition, and later when the appellant applied for further particulars regarding the distribution of the pamphlet, the respondent merely gave the names of certain villages and the dates on which the pamphlet was alleged to have been distributed; but he did not mention tho name of a single person to whom the pamphlet had`been distributed by the appellant personally, even though, according to the led by the respondent, he.
was in possession of such damaging evidence against the appellant.
[470B 471B; 475A B; 490C E] (iii) The respondent had made several complaints to the police about various matters but did not complain about the pamphlet either to the police or the local Congress committee.
If his silence was due to legal advice, as contended, he should have given the explanation in The petition or examined the lawyer who gave such an advice [487E F; 490E E] (5) (a) Section 81 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, provides that the election petition shall be filed within 45 days From tho date of the election of the returned candidate.
Therefore, any allegation of corrupt practice which is not made in the election petition filled within the time allowed by the statute cannot be allowed by way of an amendment under section 86(5) because, that would amount to extending the period of limitation peremp orily fled by the A.
The ambit of section 86(5) is extremely narrow.
It requires three essential conditions which arc the sire qua non to be fulfilled before an amendment could be allowed, namely (i) that the amendment seeks merely to amplify the particulars, of a corrupt practice; (ii) that the corrupt practice, whoso particulars are to be given, must have been previously alleged in the election petition itself, and (iii) that the amendment is, in the opinion of the court necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition.
The power of amendment or amplification is thus restrict ed only to amplify the material particulars of any corrupt practice which had been previously alleged in the election petition, and the court has no power to allow an amendment by permitting the election petitioner to amplify the material particulars of a corrupt practice which was specifically pleaded In the petition; for, that would amount to introducing a new corrupt practice after the expiry of the period of limitation a result which was never envisaged by the statute.
[466H; 467B C, E Hl Samant N. Balakrishna etc.
vs George Fernandez & Ors., etc.
; , , followed.
(b) In the present case, reading the averments in election petition as a whole, however broadly or liberally they are construed, the irresistible inference is that the respondent had laid special stress on the fact of distribution of the pamphlet by the appellant alone.
Wherever the averment of distribution of the pamphlet is made in the petition, it is stated that it was done by the appellant.
There is absolutely no averment that tho pamphlet was distributed by tho agent, workers or supporters or friends of the appellant.
Hence, it could not be con tended by the respondent that tho averments include not merely distribution by the appellant, but also by his agents and workers.
Since there was no pleading at all by the respondent that the pamphlet was distributed by his agents, etc., particulars supplied by the respondent in his application for amendment of his.
petition on the point of distribution by agents, etc., must be completely disregarded.
The court also has no jurisdiction to allow such particular to be given with respect to tho fact that the pamphlets were distributed by the agents and supporters of the appellant.
Therefore, the amendment, in respect of the third ground on which the judgment of the High Court was based, should not have been allowed, the particulars mentioned by the respondent on this item.
must be disregarded, the evidence given by him should be excluded from consideration, and the finding of the High Court should be set aside.
[468H 469D, E F] (c) The attention of tho High Court was not drawn by the appellant to this aspect but, as it is a pure question of law and amounts to violation of the statutory mandate in section 86(5) this Court can decide on the correctness of the order of the High Court, allowing particulars regarding distribution of pamphlet by the agents etc., of the appellant.
[469D E] 449
