The respondent assessee maintains accounts regularly.
In the accounts maintained by him adequate depreciation could not be provided in the balance sheet in regard to the depreciable fixed assets on account of paucity of profits and hence the depreciation as provided in the balance sheet was very much lower than the depreciation allowable under the Income Tax Act.
The assessee claimed before the Wealth Tax officer that in computing the wealth on the basis of the balance sheet he should reduce the book value of the assets by the difference between the written down value that would be determined for the purpose of Income Tax Act and the actual book figures disclosed by the balance sheet.
The Wealth Tax officer rejected the contention of the assessee and estimated the net value of the assets as shown in the balance sheets for the respective.
years.
The appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the orders of the Wealth Tax officer.
The Appellate Tribunal, however, took a contrary view and held that where proper depreciation has not been allowed in the balance sheet it is proper to accept the written down value of the assets as worked out for the purpose of income tax assessments.
On a reference made to the High Court, the High Court answered the question in favour of the assessee.
Allowing an appeal by certificate under section 29 (1) of the Wealth Tax Act.
^ HELD: Under Section 7(1) of the Wealth Tax Act the value of any asset is the market value.
Section 7(2) provides that notwithstanding anything in section 7(1) where the assessee carries on business for which accounts are maintained by him regularly the Wealth Tax officer may instead of determining separately the value of each asset held by the assessee in such business, determine the net value of the assets of the business as a whole having regard to the balance sheet of such business as on the valuation date and making such adjustments therein as the circumstances of the case might require.
The object of the Wealth Tax officer under section 7 is to arrive at the true value of the assets of the business.
If what is shown in the balance sheet is not the true value of the assets disclosed it is open to the assessee to satisfy the Wealth Tax Officer.
by producing relevant materials that the value given of the fixed assets in the balance sheets is not the true value, and, therefore a reduced value of the assets should be taken into account.
In case the assessee wants the written down value to be accepted it is open to him to establish, by acceptable reason that the written down value represent the proper value of the assets at the relevant date.
The onus in that case would be entirely on the assessee.
Merely a statement that on account of paucity of profits adequate depreciation would not be provided for in the balance sheet is not sufficient to discharge the onus which rests upon the assessee.
The judgment of the High Court is set aside and the question answered against the assessee.
[581E H, 582A B, H, 583A. 584C]
