The respondent obtained a money decree against the appellant, from the Subordinate judge, Gauhati, and applied for its execution.
The appellant applied for an adjustment of the decree, and the respondent 's application for execution was dismissed.
The appellant then obtained a decree from the Subordinate Judge, Nowgong, against the respondent, and in its execution, got his Gauhati decree attached.
The appellant then withdrew his adjustment application.
The High Court allowed the respondent 's appeal for execution of the Gauhati decree.
The Subordinate Judge, Gauhati, struck off his original execution application from the file.
Thereafter, the attachment order ceased to be operative on account of the High Court 's allowance of the respondent 's appeal in the Nowgong matter, and the respondent again applied for execution of the Gauhati decree, but the Subordinate Judge, Gauhati, dismissed the application as time barred.
The High Court allowed his appeal and directed the execution to proceed.
The appellant contended before this Court that attachment of the respondent 's decree did not amount to a 'stay ' within the meaning of section 15 of the Indian Limitation Act, and therefore, his second application for execution was barred by limitation, not having been filed within three years of the first one being struck off by the Subordinate Judge, Gauhati.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The order obtained by the appellant attaching the decree of the respondent precluded the respondent from executing the decree during the time the attachment was in force.
There was no question of limitation because the application was filed within three years from 28 April, 1964, when the bar against execution was raised and the attachment order ceased to be operative.
[627B C] (2) The order striking off the execution application was mere consigning it to the record room for statistical purposes.
The application for execution on 27th July, 1965, is a continuation of the old application.
[627D E]
