The respondents acquired appellant 's land under the Land Acquisition Act.
The Land Acquisition officer awarded compensation at the rate of Rs. 3000/ per acre.
In a reference under section 18, the Additional District Judge enhanced the compensation to Rs. 800/ per katha (1/32 of an acre).
On appeal by the State, the High Court reduced the compensation to Rs. 475/ per katha.
In an appeal by certificate the appellant contended that the High Court was in error in reducing the rate of compensation.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The Additional District Judge wrongly excluded certain sale transactions on the ground that the plots in those transactions were at some distance from the acquired land.
The High Court rightly held that the said transactions could not be excluded altogether from consideration.
The High Court also took into account 3 other sale transactions which were relied upon by the appellant.
The High Court rightly excluded from consideration certain sale deeds executed by the appellant.
These transactions related to small plots of land situated on road site and were entered into after the land in dispute had been notified for acquisition.
[586E H, 587C D] (2) Market value under section 23 means the price that a willing purchaser would pay to a willing seller for property having due regard to its existing condition with all its existing advantages and its potential possibilities when laid out in the most advantageous manner excluding any advantages due to the carrying out of the scheme for which the property is compulsorily acquired.
In considering market value the disinclination of the vendor to part with his land and the urgent necessity of the purchaser to buy should be disregarded.
[587E F] (3) There is an element of guess work inherent in most cases involving determination of the market value of the acquired land.
But, this in the very nature of things cannot be helped.
The essential thing is to keep in view the relevant factors prescribed by the Act.
The finding of the High Court is based upon consideration of the evidence adduced in the case and there are no grounds to interfere with that finding.[587F G]
