For a long period of time prior to 1950 the text books for recognised schools in the State of Punjab were prepared by private publishers with their own money and under their own arrangements and they were submitted for the approval of the Government.
The Government approved some books on each subject as alternative text books, leaving it to the discretion of the Head Masters of different schools to select any alternative book on each subject.
In May 1950 books on certain subjects (like agriculture, history, social studies, etc.) were prepared and published by the Government themselves without inviting offers from private publishers.
With respect to other subjects, offers were invited from "publishers and authors".
The alternative method was given up and only one text book on ,each subject was selected.
The Government charged as royalty 5% on the sale price of all the approved text books.
In 1952 a notification was issued by the Government which omitted the word "Publishers" altogether and invited only "authors and others" to submit books for approval by the Government.
The "authors and others" whose books were approved, had to enter into an agreement in the form prescribed by the Government the principal term of the agreement was that the copyright in these books would vest absolutely in Government and the authors and others" would get a royalty of 5% on the sale price of the text books.
It was contended that the publishing, printing and selling of text books was thus taken by the Government exclusively into its own hands and the private publishers were altogether ousted from the business.
The petitioners, who purport to carry on the business of preparing, printing, publishing and selling text books for recognised schools in the Punjab, pro29 226 ferred the present petition under article 32 of the Constitution praying for writs of mandamus directing the Punjab Government to withdraw the notifications of 1950 and 1952 on the ground that they contravened the fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed under the Constitution.
Held that the action of the Government, whether it was good or bad, does not amount to an infraction of the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
In the present case no fundamental rights of the petitioners were violated by the notifications and the acts of the executive Government of the Punjab done by them in furtherance of their policy of nationalisation of the text books for the school students.
A more chance or prospect of having particular customers cannot be said to be a right to property or to any interest or undertaking within the meaning of article 31(2) of the Constitution and no question of payment of compensation can arise because the petitioners have been deprived of the same.
Articles 73 and 162 of the Constitution do not contain any definition as to what the executive function is and what activities would legitimately come within its scope.
They are concerned primarily with the distribution of executive power between the Union on the one hand and the component States on the other.
They do not mean that it is only when Parliament or the State Legislature has legislated on certain items appertaining to their respective lists that the Union executive or the State executive, as the case may be,can proceed to function in respect of them.
On the other hand, the language of article 162 Clearly indicates that the powers of the State executive do extend to matters upon which the State Legislature is competent to legislate and are not confined to matters over which legislation has been passed already.
The same principle underlies article 73 of the Constitution.
The Commonwealth and the Central Wool Committee vs The Colonial Combing, Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd. (31 C.L.R. 421), Attorney General for Victoria vs The Commonwealth, ; and Motilal 1.
The Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh (A.I.R. 1951 Allahabad 257), referred to.
