Both the appeals raise a common question as to whether a tenant in order to resist passing of a decree of eviction under the provisions contained in section 12(3)(a) of the Bombay Rent Act 1947 must dispute the standard rent within one month from the date of receipt of the notice from the landlord terminating the tenancy on the ground of arrears of rent or whether a tenant can raise such a dispute in the written statement.
The Gujarat High Court took a view that the dispute as to standard rent has to be raised within one month from the service of the notice on the tenant.
The Bombay High Court has taken a contrary view and held that the tenant can raise a dispute as to standard rent in his written statement in answer to the suit and in such a case the provisions of section 12(3)(a) of the Act will apply.
In the Gujarat case, the High Court found that the tenant did not raise the dispute within one month of the service of the notice terminating the tenancy inter alia, on the ground of arrears of rent for more than 6 months.
In the Bombay appeal the dispute was not raised within one month from the date of the receipt of the notice.
It was, however, raised in the written statement.
Under section 11 of the Act, the court has power to determine standard rent when there is a dispute between the landlord and tenant regarding the amount of standard rent.
^ HELD: (1) Under section 12 of the Act the landlord is not entitled to recover possession of the premises so long as the tenant pays or is ready and willing to pay the amount of standard rent and permitted increases.
Section 12(2) provides that no suit for recovery of possession shall be instituted by a landlord against a tenant on the ground of non payment of the standard rent until the expiration of one month next after notice in writing of the payment of the standard rent.
Section 12(3)(a) provides for passing a decree for eviction of the tenant is in arrears for a period of 6 months and neglects to make the payment after the expiration of the notice period provided there is no dispute regarding the amount of standard rent.
Clause 12(3)(a) provides that in any other case no decree for eviction should be passed if the tenant pays or tenders in the court the standard rent and permitted increases which is due and thereafter continues to pay or tender in court regularly such rent till the suit is finally decided.
Explanation I to section 12 provides that where there is a dispute as to the amount of standard rent or permitted increases recoverable under this Act the tenant shall be deemed to be ready and willing to pay such amount if before the expiry of the period of one month from the receipt of the notice he makes an application under section 11 for the fixation of the standard rent and thereafter pays the rent fixed by the Court.
[632 B, G] (2) The Bombay High Court view overlooks the limitation of time within which a dispute is to be raised as to standard rent.
The view of the Bombay High Court that dispute within one month of the service of the notice terminating the tenancy is one mode of raising a dispute and there is another mode of raising the dispute at any stage of the suit, nullifies the provisions contained in section 12 and explanation thereto and confers a right on the tenant where the legislation does not contemplate such right.
The provisions in section 11(3) of the Act deal with orders which may be passed by the court during the pendency of the application disputing the rent.
Provisions of section 11(4) of the Act deal with orders which may be passed consequent upon dispute as to rent.
It is 629 only when an application disputing the rent is made within the time contemplated by Explanation I to section 12 of the Act that the provisions on sub sections (3) and (4) of section 11 are attracted.
[635F H, 636A]
