The Government of India was placing bulk purchase orders with the assessee company, a textile mill, which had, during the assessment years 1945 46, 1946 47 and 1947 48, its registered office in the Hyderabad State outside British India.
After the despatch of the goods, the assessee was submitting its bill in the prescribed form which also contained the receipt.
The receipt had the words 'Please pay by cheque to self/Banker on Bank/Treasury at. . ' and the assessee used to enter the words 'Hyderabad (Dn).
in the blank space after 'at '.
But on the back of the bulk purchase order form, there were instructions that the payment was to be made by the Controller of Supply Accounts, Bombay, and the Government of India had also issued general instructions to all textile mills in the Princely States that all payments were to be made 'by cheque on Government Treasury in Br.
India, or alternatively on a branch in Br.
India, which transacts Government business of the Reserve Bank of India.
All payments were made on behalf of the Government of India by cheques which were sent to the assessee by post.
Some of the cheques were drawn on banks in Br.
India and others on banks in the Hyderabad State.
^ HELD: The sale proceeds should be held to have been received by the assessee from the Government of India in British India and not in Hyderabad State, and hence were subject to Indian income tax.
[647F G] In the absence of a request by the creditor or an agreement between the parties regarding the sending of money by cheque by post, the mere posting of the cheque would not operate as delivery of the cheque to the creditor.
Where, however, a cheque is sent by post in pursuance of an agreement between the parties or a request by the creditor that the money be sent by cheque by post, the post office would be treated as the agent of the creditor for the purpose of receiving such payment.
Such an agreement or request need not be express and may be implied from the facts and circumstances.
[648A C] The facts of the case and the course of dealings show that it was the understanding between the Government of India and the assessee that the payment would be made on account of goods supplied by the assessee, by cheques.
The cheques were in the very nature of things to be sent from British India by post as that is the usual and normal agency for transmission.
As the cheques were sent to the assesseee on behalf of the Government of India by post from British India in pursuance of an understanding between the parties, the payment to the assessee shall be treated to have been made in British India to the agent of the assessee.
[647G 648A] Indo re Malwa United Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay South, Bombay vs Ogale Glass Works Ltd. and Shri Jagdish Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, , followed.
Commissioner of Income tax, Bihar & Orissa vs Patney & Co. , distinguished.
