The appellants are permanent servants of the Punjab State Co operative Land Mortgage Bank and were working as Assistants since the year 1968.
The grievance of the appellants is that the contesting respondents were directly recruited to the higher post of Inspecting officers, Junior Accountants and Accountants in violation of Service Rules.
What the appellants call Service Rules is nothing but a contract arrived at as a result of the collective bargaining with the management.
The writ petition filed by the appellants was dismissed by the learned single Judge as well as the Division Bench of High Court on the ground that no writ petition was maintainable against a Cooperative Society under Article 226 of the Constitution.
On appeal by special leave the appellants contended: (1) The co operative Bank in question is "other authority" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and, therefore, falls with in the definition of State.
(2) The Co operative Bank is a public authority.
(3) Co operative Societies registered under the Co operative Societies Act are subject to the jurisdiction of High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution, since this provision is widely worded writs may be issued for any purpose against any person.
Respondents contended: (1) that the Co operative Bank is not other authority or a public authority and no writ can lie against it.
(2) The appellants are trying to enforce the contractual obligation for which no writ can lie.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The Court did not decide the question whether a Co operative Society is other authority or public authority because it is clear from a close perusal of the writ petition that essentially the appellants are seeking merely to ensure an agreement entered into between the employees and the Co operative Bank.
At its best, the writ petition seeks enforcement of a binding contract but the neat and necessary repellant is that the remedy of article 226 is unavailable to enforce a contract qua contract.
We are aware of the wide amplitude of Article 226 and its potent use to correct manifest injustice but cannot agree that contractual obligations in the ordinary course without even statutory complexion can be enforced under Article 226.
[683F H, 684 D]
