The appellant Union of India objected to the attachment of certain provident fund and pension dues held by it (on behalf of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat) in trust for the fourth respondent, an ex employee of the Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
The attachment was sought in satisfaction of a money decree held by the first respondent.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's Civil Revision petition upholding the decision of the executing court.
In appeal by special leave, the appellant contended before this Court that although a third party to the suit, the state had acted pro bono publico, by objecting to the illegality of the proposed attachment, and that it was a question of principle, affecting a wide circle of government servants.
The respondent contended that the amounts having already fallen due, had lost the character of provident fund or pension under Ss. 3 and 4, and had become attachable, and also that the government had no locus standi to object to the attachment.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) So long as the amounts are Provident Fund dues then, till they are actually paid to the government servant who is entitled to it on retirement or otherwise, the nature of the dues is not altered.
The government is a trustee for those sums and has an interest in maintaining the objection in court, to attachment.
[767D E] Union of India vs Radha Kissen Agarwalla & Anr. ; , followed.
(2) Cases where public policy is involved and the court has a certain duty to observe statutory prohibitions, a wider concept of locus standi has to be taken.
Any public authority interested in the matter, and not behaving as an officious busy body may bring to the notice of the court the illegality of the steps it proposes to take.
When the court 's jurisdiction is so invoked, it may be exercised without insisting on some other directly affected party appearing to defend himself.
[767F G] (3) The argument that the Rajya Sabha Secretariat is different from the Union of India, has the merit of novelty, little else.
[767 G & 768H]
