The appellants bid at auction sales of some toddy shops.
The conditions of the sales, notified in pursuance of the statutory provisions, were: (a) It was incumbent upon the bidder to pay immediately 10% of the amount due; (b) The successful bidder had to deposit 30% of the amount payable, on demand by the Assistant Commissioner, and to execute agreements before getting the necessary licences; and (c) If the contract could not be executed, the whole amount was to be forfeited and the shop itself was to be resold.
The appellants deposited the necessary amounts on demand and were allowed to start business even before agreements were executed or licences were issued.
But the appellants failed to pay the balance due to the State.
The amounts were sought to be recovered under section 28, and the proceedings were challenged, but the High Court held against the appellants.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that as no agreement was executed between the appellants and the Government in the manner prescribed by article 299 of the Constitution, the appellants had not become the `grantees ' of any privilege and hence were not liable to pay the amounts sought to be recovered Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : The Government had to perform its duty of granting licences as soon as the appellants fulfilled the conditions by paying up the remainder of the amounts due.
In the present case, Government had performed its part by allowing the appellants to start selling liquor even before execution of the agreements and the grant of licences.
The appellants, therefore, became liable and bound to perform their corresponding obligations.
This reciprocity of obligations, quite apart from its basis in agreement, had thus acquired an operative force resting on statutory sanction and equity.
[784G 785B] (1) It is not a condition precedent to recovery of an amount due and recoverable under the Act that it should be due under a formally drawn up and executed contract.
Under the notification, in the event of the non execution of a contract, even if due to the unwillingness or inability of a bidder to pay, the whole amount due could be forfeited.
[782C; 783E F] 2(a) The acquisition of the status of a grantee for the purpose of section 18A, does not depend on the actual receipt of a licence.
Section 18A(2) lays down that no grantee of any privilege under sub section
(I) shall exercise it until the has received a licence.
This provision contemplates the statutory status of a `grantee ' even before the successful bidder becomes entitled, as of right, to exercise the privileges of a grantee on receipt of a licence even before he receives his licence he is described as a grantee.
[783F G, H 784A] 781 (b) The word `grantee ' used in section 28 carries this wider connotation of persons who have been permitted by the excise authorities, in recognition of their rights to receive and in anticipation of the receipt of licences, to exercise the privileges of grantees, and not necessarily only those who have executed the written contracts and received licences.
[784A C] Madhavan vs Assistant Excise Commissioner, Palghat I.L.R. [1969] 2 Kerala 71, approved.
