Under section 3(1) and (2) of the Bihar Taxation on Passengers and Goods (Carried by Public Services Motor Vehicles) Act, 1961, every owner shall pay to the State Government a tax on all passengers and goods carried by a public motor vehicle.
Under section 2(d), 'owner ' means not only the owner of the specified type of vehicle but also includes, inter alia, "any person for the time being in charge of such vehicle".
Under section 4(1) every owner liable to pay tax shall apply for registration, and under section 6 every owner shall furnish the prescribed return to the prescribed authority.
Section 18 provides for penalties for failure to apply for registration or to submit the return.
The assessee was the sole transporting company of the cement of a manufacturing company.
Since it did not have its own fleet of trucks, it used to engage trucks for use in its transport work.
It was providing petrol and oil for the running of the trucks in the transport work although the prices paid by the assessee were later on adjusted in the hiring charges.
The assessee was obtaining the receipts of delivery of the goods to the various stockists indicating the quantities of cement received through a particular vehicle.
On delivery to the appellant of the buyers ' receipt by the truck owner or his representative, the bills of hire charges of the truck owner were paid by the appellant as per the agreement between the appellant and the truck owner.
The assessee was maintaining a complete record of the trucks used by it for the transport work, of the charges realisable and realised from me stockists on account of freight payable by them, and of the charges actually paid to the truck owners.
The assessee was not registered under section 4.
After a surprise check, the total taxable amount of the assessee was determined and the tax and a penalty were imposed on the assessee.
The assessee 's appeal, revision to the tribunal, and reference to the High Court, were all decided against the assessee.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The appellant was in charge of the trucks for the purpose of its business during the entire course of transportation of the cement from the factory to the various stockists and, as such, came within the definition of owner under section 2(d).
[904 D E] (1) Whether a certain person is in charge of the vehicle for the time being depends on the particular facts of each case.
Being in charge ' of the vehicle, in the context of the provisions of the Act, does not relate to mere physical charge or control in the process of movement of the vehicle from one place to another but 'to charge or control ' for fulfilment of the legal obligation under the Act for payment of taxes for the carriage of goods or passengers.
The words "for the time being in charge of such vehicle" have to be comprehended in the context of the provisions of the taxing statute and these words have nexus with the actual realisation and appropriation of the freight for the goods carried by the vehicle.
In a given case, the person, who is for the time being in charge of the loaded truck and who or on whose behalf some one like a driver or conductor received the freight or fare.
is also a owner within the meaning of the definition in section 2(d).[903 C D; 904 C D] (2) On the facts of the present case the appellant took full responsibility for the carriage of the goods from the factory to various destinations.
The freight had been realised by the appellant from the stockists and the truck 898 owner received only 'hire charges. ' There is nothing to show nor is there any averment by the appellant that those charges included the taxes under the Act.
The matter might have been different if the truck owners had been given the tax collections in addition to the hire charges.
Further the absence of any provision for tax payment by the truck owners in the agreement militates against the contention that it is only the truck owners that are liable.
[902 B C, G 903 B] (3) The case of Jagir Singh vs State of Bihar ; was an application under article 32 of the Constitution and was concerned with booking agents and forwarding agents who were sought to be made liable under the Act at the instance the truck owners but the truck owners were held to be liable.
Unlike that case, the liability to pay taxes was entirely upon the appellants in the present case as the truck owners were entitled only to hire charges.
[903 F G; 904 A]
