Under section 14(vi), , among goods declared to be of special importance in inter State trade and commerce are mentioned oil seeds, that is to say, seeds yielding non volatile oils used for human consumption, or in industry, etc., or volatile oils used chiefly in medicines etc.
The Assistant Commissioner under the Orissa Sales Tax Act, the Tribunal, and the High Court on reference, held that jeera dhania, panmohuri, methi and postak are oil seeds within the meaning of section 14(vi) and liable to a lesser rate of tax.
The High Court relied on ordinary and technical dictionaries and a notification of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, Government of India, dated January 3, 1959 for its conclusion.
In appeal to this Court under article 136, it was contended by the State, relying on State of Andhra Pradesh vs Kajjam Ramchandraiah Gari Anantaiah (1961) 12 STC 795, that the Court should adopt the meaning given to these articles in common parlance by people who use them, that so understood they are spices and not oil seeds, and that though they yield non volatile oil to a certain extent, there is no evidence that they fall within the description in section 14(vi).
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: It cannot be said that the Tribunal was not right, and so it is not a fit case for interference under article 136, when the High Court held that the Tribunal was right.
[970C D, G] (a) Item 3, Schedule IV, A.P. General Sales Tax Act, 1957, is identical with section 14(vi) of the Central Act.
In Kajjam Ramachandriah 's case, the Andhra Pradesh High Court held that dhania did not come within the definition of oil seeds relying on some letters from (i) Director, National Chemical Laboratory, Poona, and (ii) Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore.
[968F] (b) The High Court was right in the present case in holding that the notification of the Government of India had no statutory force and was not binding on the Sales Tax Officer, but it cannot be said that the High Court and Tribunal were not right in preferring the opinion therein as good evidence for their conclusion to the opinions in the letters relied upon by the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
The Ministry of Finance, which issued the notification, is intimately conversant not only with the policy of legislation for the purpose of implementation of the provisions of the Central Act, but is also familiar with the nature and quality of the commodities and also their use from time to time.
[970D F] (c) Further, the letters of the Director, National Chemical Laboratory and the Central Food Technological Research Institute, do not indicate that the opinions expressed therein were firm or even final or whether all the uses mentioned in the definition of oil seeds were brought to their notice.
[970F] Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh, Indore vs Bakhat Rai and Co. (1966) 18 Sales Tax Cases 285 and The Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax and Sales Tax, Kozhikode vs Sreedhara Shenoy (1973) 32 Sales Tax Cases 181, referred to. 967
