The appellant (a Head Constable) and the Sub Inspector of Police were charged with offences under section 161 read with section 34 and section 165A, IPC, and under section 5(2) read with section 5(1)(d) Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The appellant admitted the receipt of money and its recovery from him but stated that PWS 1 and 4 came to the Police Station, that PW 4 claimed to be a relative of the Sub Inspector and that it was PW 4 and not PW 1 who gave him the money to be handed over to the Sub Inspector who was absent.
The prosecution adduced evidence to show that the two accused arranged for the production of PW 1 at the Police Station in connection with the investigation of a charge of abduction of a woman; that the Sub Inspector directed the appellant to take charge of PW 1 when he arrived; that the appellant demanded a bribe from PW 1 to save himself from the charge as well as the indignity of being handcuffed, locked up and paraded; that a trap was set the next day when PW 1 paid the amount in the presence of PW 4 and that the amount was recovered from the appellant in a raid.
The trial court acquitted both the accused, but on appeal, the High Court acquitted the Sub Inspector but convicted the appellant under section 161 IPC and section 5(2).
Prevention of Corruption Act.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant contended, (1) that PW 1 's evidence regarding the payment of gratification should not be accepted without independent corroboration, (2) that the statutory presumption under section 4(1).
Prevention of Corruption Act that the appellant accepted the gratification as a motive or reward such as is mentioned in section 161, I.P.C., should not be drawn against the appellant, because, (a) there was, in fact, no complaint whatever against PW 1 in respect of the commission of the offence of abduction; and (b) the effect of the acquittal of the Sub Inspector was that the money could not be held to have been paid to the appellant pursuant to any 161 demand of bribe; and (c) that since the two accused were charged under section 161 read with section 34, on the acquittal of the Sub Inspector the appellant could not be convicted under section 161 simpliciter.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The testimony of PW 1 stood fully corroborated by other independent and reliable testimony and hence could be safely acted upon.
The defence version that it was PW4 who paid the money was falsified by the fact that no anthracene powder, with which the notes used in the raid were smeared, was found on PW 4 's hands.
while it was found on the hands of the accused and PW1.
[1057E; 1059B C] (2)(a) The mere fact that no complaint of abduction or of any other offence had been made or registered against PW 1 could not take the act of the appellant in demanding and accepting the gratification from PW 1 in the context of the threat by the appellant out of the mischief of section 161, I.P.C. The section does not require that the public servant must,in fact,be in a 1053 position to do the official act, favour or service at the time of the demand or receipt of the gratification.
To constitute an offence under this section it is enough if the public servant who accepts the gratification takes it by inducing a belief or by holding out that he would render assistance to the giver, with any other public servant, and the giver gives the gratification under that belief.
It is also immaterial if the public servant receiving the gratification does not intend to do the official act, favour or forbearance which he holds himself out as capable of doing.
The last Explanation and Illustration (c) to the section show that the person who receives a gratification as a motive for doing what he does not intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, comes within the purview of the words "a motive or reward for doing".
When a public servant, being a police officer, is charged under section 161, I.P.C., and it is alleged that the illegal gratification was taken by him for doing or procuring an official act, the question whether there was any offence against the giver of the gratification which the accused could have investigated or not, is not material for that purpose.
If he has used his official position to extract illegal gratification the requirement of the law is satisfied.
[1059F 1060E] Mahesh Prasad vs State of U.P. ; ; Dhaneshwar Nariam Saxena vs Delhi Admn.
; ; Bhanuprasad Hariprasad Dave and anr.
vs State of Gujarat ; and Shiv Raj Singh vs Delhi Administration ; , followed.
In the present case, on the day of the payment the Sub Inspector was away and the appellant was actually in charge of the police station.
It was he who called PW 1 and asked if he had brought the money and when PW 1 replied in the affirmative but hesitated to hand over the money, represented that the money should be handed over to him, and that he would pass it on to the Sub Inspector, and that PW 1 would have nothing to fear.
[1059C F] (b) The only effect of the acquittal of the Sub Inspector is that it cannot be urged that the Sub Inspector had demanded any bribe from PW 1.
It does not in any way discount the evidence that PW 1 was called to the police station and was informed by the appellant that a charge of abduction was against him and that the appellant demanded and received a bribe from him.
[1058H 1059B] (c) The burden on the accused to displace a presumption is not as onerous as that on the prosecution to prove its case, but the accused has to discharge it by adducing evidence, circumstantial or direct, which establishes with reasonable probability that the money was accepted by the accused other than as a motive or reward such as is referred to in the section.
In the present case,the appellant had failed to show such a balance of probability in his favour.
[1060E G] (3) The language of the charge shows that in addition to the charge under s.161 read with section 34, the appellant was in substance also being charged under section 161 simpliciter.
All the material circumstances appearing in evidence, constituting an offence under section 161, were put to him during his examination under section 342, Cr.
The objection that he could not be convicted under section 161 simpliciter was not raised in any of the courts below.
No prejudice has, therefore, been caused to him because of this technical defect of there being no express charge under section 161 simpliciter, and the irregularity if any, is cured under section 537, Cr.
P.C. [1061B D]
