Rejecting the respondents ' plea that as persons governed by the Dayabhaga School of Hindu Law they had held definite and determined shares in the properties inherited by them from their father and were liable to separate assessment of wealth tax, the Wealth Tax Officer assessed them as a Hindu Undivided Family.
On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the properties should be taxed in the hands of the co sharers separately.
On further appeal, the Appellate Tribunal held that notwithstanding that there was no unity of ownership amongst members governed by the Dayabhaga School of Hindu Law in respect of family property and each member thereof had no definite share in it, such property, until partitioned, was assessable to wealth tax in the hands of the Hindu Undivided Family.
On reference, the High Court held in favour of the assesses.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: Dayabhaga means partition of heritage.
A Dayabhaga male 's wife or sons or daughters have no ownership in his property during his lifetime.
Ownership of wealth is vested in the heirs by the death of their father, when they become co heirs and can claim partition.
The heritage of a Dayabhaga male does not become the joint property of the heirs or of the joint family on the demise of the last owner but becomes the fractional property of the heirs in well defined shares.
That is why partition in Dayabhaga is defined as an act of particularising ownership.
In Dayabhaga, the sons become tenants in common and not joint tenants in respect of the estate inherited by them from their father.
While Mitakshara is known as the School of "aggregate ownership", Dayabhaga is known as the school of "fractional ownership".
The essence of a coparcenary under the Mitakshara Law is unity of ownership; under the Dayabhaga it is unity of possession, not unity of ownership at all.
Under the Dayabhaga school every coparcener takes a definite share in the property and he is the owner of that share which is defined immediately the inheritance falls in.[1099D G: 1100B H] Sreemutty Soorjeemoney Dossee vs Denobundoo Mullick, 6 M.I.A. 526 at p. 553.
Hindu Law by Colebrooke p. 9. 2.
Law relating to the Joint Hindu Family (Tagore Law Lecrures) by Krishna Kamal Bhattacharya p. 168 and 3.
Principles of Hindu Law by Mulla (14th Edition) p. 348.
Hindu Law & Usage, by Mayne,11th Edition 364, approved.
(i) Under section 3, the liability of wealth tax arises in respect of the net wealth of the assesses.
The term "net wealth" means all the assets belonging to the assesses, on the valuation date.
The expression "belong" according to the Oxford Dictionary means "to be the property or rightful possession of".
[1098G H] (ii) The liability to wealth tax arises out of ownership of the asset and not otherwise.
Mere possession or joint possession unaccompanied by the right to or ownership of property would, therefore, not bring the property within the 1097 definition of "net wealth", for it would not then be the asset belonging to the assesses.
[1099C] In the instant case, the property in question was the individual property of the father of the respondents and it devolved on the heirs according to the provisions of the .
The coparcenary had unity of possession but not unity of ownership on the property.
Each coparcener took a defined share in the property and was the owner of his share.
Each such defined share thus belonged to the coparcener.
It was his net wealth within the meaning of section 2(m) of the Wealth Tax Act and was liable to wealth tax, as such, under section 3.
[1102C D] Commissioner of Wealth tax West Bengal vs Gouri Shankar Bhar, explained.
