The respondent manufactured and supplied kiln burnt bricks to the appellant as per the works contract dated 8/9th December, 1970, which provided (1) that land would be given free, (ii) that the material shall remain at the contractor 's risk till the date of final delivery: and (iii) that the contractor had a right to sell to the third parties bricks subject to payment of 10 of the value of materials at the tender rates of the appellant.
the respondent was assessed to sales tax under the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, on the basis that these supplies were sales.
The Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax on an application under section 52 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act held the supplies as sales on appeal the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal confirmed it, following the ratio of the decision in 1964 (2) SCR p. 879 (C. B. Gosain vs State of Orissa and Ors.) But, the High Court, on a reference answered it in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
Allowing the Revenue 's appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: (1) It is well settled that whether a particular transaction is contract of sale or a works contract depends upon the true construction of the terms and conditions of the document, when there is one.
The question will depend upon the intention of the parties executing the contract.
There is no standard formula by which one con distinguish a contract of a contract from the contract for work or labour.
The question is not always easy and has always easy jurists all over.
The distinction between contract of sale of goods and a contract for work and labour is often a fine one.
A contract of sale is a contract whose main object is the transfer of property in and the delivery of the possession of, a chattel as a chattel to the buyer.
[160 E G] State of Gujarat vs Variety Body Builders applied.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, referred to.
(2) As per terms and conditions of contract, the land was given free for manufacture of bricks; the materials remained at the risk of the contractor till the date of final delivery; the respondent could not sell the bricks to third d parties but could do so under certain restrictions; the contracting parties have used the words as sale, purchase, delivery or rates of supply etc.
in the contract.
All these terms and conditions are almost identical to the conditions in Chandra Bhan Gosailn 's case and hence the decision in that case will govern the present case as well .
The various other terms in the contract, namely, maintenance of a qualified executive engineer for supervision of work, restriction on employment of children under 12 years of age, labour welfare provisions regarding wages, workmen 's compensation etc., provision relating to cruelty to animals, non payment of royalty for excavating earth etc.
relate to 159 a process of proper and efficient manufacturing of bricks and are not inconsistent in a contract of sale.
These terms do not appear to impinge on the character of the contract as one for sale of bricks manufactured.
The Government in its overall interest and anxiety could insist on compliance of certain beneficial legal measures.
Provision against sub letting when the land was given free by the Government was also understandable.
All these features do not negate the concept of a contract of sale of bricks that are ultimately manufactured.
The true test in this case is whether in making the contract, brick produced was transferred as a chattel for consideration and this has taken place in this case.
The essence of the contract was, therefore, the delivery of the bricks after manufacturing.
[164 A H, 165 A D] (3) The contract in this case is contract of sale and not a works contract and the assessee is liable to sale tax.
[165 E] C. B. Gosain vs State of Orissa and Ors. ; , followed.
