Tribunal If had power to admit evidence beyond the time limited by 57(4).
Rule 15 of the Andhra Pradesh State Transport Appellate Tribunal Rule 1971, states that parties to the appeal or application shall not be entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, before the Tribunal except in cases stated therein but it empowers the Tribunal to allow evidence or documents to be produced or witnesses to be examined for any other sufficient reason.
The Regional Transport Authority granted a stage carriage permit to the appellant.
Before the State Transport Appellate Tribunal another applicant produced certain information against the appellant which was not mentioned either in his history sheet or in the representations of any party under section 57(3) of the Act.
Rejecting the appellant 's objection that such new grounds could not be heard from an rejector at the stage of appeal, the State Transport Appellate Tribunal cancelled the appellant 's permit and gave it to respondent On appeal it was contended that a representation under section 57(4) could not be made at the appellate stage beyond the time limited by that section and if rule IS permitted it, it violated the substantive provisions of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Rule 15 is intra vires and it merely makes patent what is otherwise latent in the statutory provisions.
Rule 15 does not entitle parries to the appeal or application to produce additional evidence but clothes the Tribunal with dn creationary power to allow such evidence.
What is received is not qua representation under 8.
57(4) but qua evidence with public interest flavor.
[1041F 1039C] United Motor Works, A.l.
R. 1964 Pat.
154 and Cumbum Roadways, A.I.R. 1965 Mad.
79, approved.
(a) Public interest is the paramount consideration in transport business while private rights apparently constitute a quasi lis for decision.
The touchstone of better merit is solely the ability to serve the public and the hierarchy of transport tribunals, bearing true faith and allegiance to section 47 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
1948 have the duty and, therefore, the power to consider all factors pertinent to the larger scheme of efficient public transport.
The duplex scheme of the statute is the holding of a public enquiry to determine who will serve public interest best but ordinarily activated into that enquiry by private applicants for permits.
The pro bono publico character of the hearing cannot be scuttled in the name of competitive individual rights and narrow procedural trappings.
[1033E G] (b) Section 47 enjoins upon the Regional Transport Authority to have regard to the presiding idea of public interest generally and in ib ramification as set out in section 47(1)(a) to (f).
In addition, the RTA shall also receive representations as mentioned therein and take them into the reckoning.
It is not as if the sole source of decision making materials consists of the representations made under section 57(3) within the time stipulated in section 57(4).
The primary channel the information that the RTA may gather bearing on matters touched upon in 47(1)(a) to (f) supplemented by facts stated in representation referred to In 1033 section 57(3).
Under section 47 passengers ' associations, police officers, local authorities and existing operators who may have nothing directly to do with the rivalry for A a permit have a place in the scheme and may make representation on a variety of matters.
So also, in an appeal, the RTA itself may be heard.
Thus the consideration going into the judicial verdict are dominated by public interest.
non parties who have Only to present points germane to public interest are allowed to represent their point of view.
[1038C; 1035B C]
