The appellant 's great grandfather was granted a Sanad in respect of 2 rooms in the Jagannath temple by the Superintendent of temple at the annual rent of Rs. 7/ .
The Sanad provided that the grantee would be entitled to enjoy the said 2 rooms from generation to generation and in case a permanent structure was constructed thereon the rent would be enhanced to Rs. 14/ per year.
After the death of great grand father of the appellant the grand father and thereafter the father of the appellant continued storing and selling dry 'Mahaprasad ' in the said property and continued to pay Rs. 14/ per year.
The respondents who have the management of Jagannath temple at present under the Puri Jagannath Temple (Administration) Act, 1952, called upon the appellants ' father to close and to hand over the possession of the two rooms to the management on the ground that the storage and sale of Mahaprasad in the Bihar Bedha of the temple affected adversely the discipline and dignity of the temple.
The appellant 's father was threatened with imposition of a penalty of Rs. 100/ per day in case he did not vacate the premises in question.
The appellant 's father, therefore, tiled the suit in the civil court which after his death has been continued by the present appellant for permanent injunction restraining the respondents from interfering with his right of storing and selling dry Mahaprasad in the suit premises.
According to the plaintiff the permanent lease was granted to him by the Raja Dibyasingha and that since he was continuing to pay the rent regularly he was entitled to continue in the suit premises from generation to generation.
The respondents contested the suit on the ground that it was beyond the competence of Raja of Puri as Manager of the temple to grant a permanent lease and that, therefore, the Sanad was ineffectual, invalid and inoperative, and conferred no rights on the appellant and his ancestors which would bind the present respondents.
Secondly, since the act of storing and selling Mahaprasad at the suit premises constitute a breach of order and discipline, the respondents under the above statute had right to ask the appellant to vacate.
Thirdly what was granted by the Sanad was licence and not a lease.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
However, an appeal was allowed.
The High Court accepted the second appeal and dismissed the suit.
In an appeal by special leave it was contended by the appellants : (1) The suit property did not form part of the temple.
(2) The Sanad granted a permanent lease of the suit property and not merely a licence and therefore the appellant had an indefeasible right of storing and selling Mahaprasad.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) Section 2(d) of the Puri Sri Jagannath Temple (Administration Act, 1952, defines temple as including the temple of Lord Jagannath of Puri.
Other temples within its premises and all other appurtenant and subordinate shrines, other sacred places and tanks and any additions which may be 102 made there after commencement of the Act.
Records of right prepared under said Act also include the suit premises within the meaning of temple.
[104 H] (2) It is now well settled by a catena of decisions of the Supreme Court that it is the creation of an interest in immovable property that distinguishes a lease from a licence.
The intention of the parties is the real test for ascertaining the character of a document.
At one time it was thought that the test of exclusive possession was infallible and if a person was given exclusive possession of a premises it would conclusively establish that he was a lessee.
However, the result of the subsequent cases is that although a person who is let into exclusive possession in prima facie to be considered to be a tenant nevertheless he will not be held to be so if the circumstances negative any intention to create a tenancy.
To ascertain whether a document creates a licence or lease the substance of the document must be preferred to the form (entire English and Indian case Law reviewed).
[105 D H, 106 A, D] (3) A careful perusal of the recital in the Sanad, which does not revival the identity of the plot with precision would show that the Sanad did not create any interest in the rooms in question in favour of the grantee.
l he Sanad also did not confer the right of exclusive possession of the premises.
It is also evident from the right of "Dakhale Khas" of the respondents in the suit property as also from the proved facts that the Sarghara was not kept open by the temple authorities from mid night to 6 a.m. during which interval the plaintiff could in no case occupy it nor could he have access to it.
It proved that the employees of the Raja of Puri used to clean the refuse etc., which got accumulated in the suit premises.
The Sanad, therefore, created a licence and not a lease.
[107 E H] (4) Even if it is assumed that the Sanad created a lease it could not be valid lease since the Mohant or manager of a Hindu temple is prohibited from grantee a permanent lease except far legal necessity or benefit of the estate.
Tn the present case no such legal necessity or benefit of estate has been proved.
[108 B E]
