Under the Income tax Act 1961 one of the items not included in the total income of an assessee for purposes of tax is under s.11 income derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable purpose.
Charitable purpose is defined in s.2 (xv).
Chambers of commerce, promoting the trade interest of the commercial community, have been regarded as pursuing charitable purposes within the meaning of s.2 (xv).
But under cover of charitable purposes C ' they have been indulging in various activities, and deriving tax free profit.
Therefore, section 2 (xv) was amended by adding a clause at the end.
Under the amended definition, unless the context` otherwise requires, charitable purpose includes the advancement of any object of general public utility not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit.
^ HELD: The income of the assesses, which are chambers of commerce, from three sources, namely, (a) arbitration fees levied by them; (b) fees collected for issuing certificates of origin; and (c) share of profit in another company for issue of certificates of weighment and measurement, which services are extended to members and non members.
that is, to be trade generally, is not entitled to the exemption, and is liable to tax.[845E G] (1) The test is to ask for answers to the following questions: (a) Is the object of the assessee one of general public utility; (b) Does the advancement of the object involve activities bringing in money? (c) If so, are such activities undertaken (1) for profit or (ii) without profit.
Even if ' (a) and (b) are answered affirmatively, if (c) (1) is also answered affirmatively the claim for exemption collapses.
[844B C] (2) Section 2 (xv) must be interpreted in such a manner that every word is given a meaning and not to treat any expression as redundant or miss the accent of the amendatory phrase.
So viewed, an institution which carries out charitable purposes out of income 'derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable purposes ' may still forfeit the claim to exemption in respect of such takings or incomes as may come to it from pursuing any activity for profit.
By the new definition the benefit of exclusion from total income is taken away where, in accomplishing a charitable purpose, the institution engages itself in activities for profit If ' it wants immunity from taxation the means of fulfilling charitable purposes must be unsullied by profit making ventures.
The advancement of the object of general public utility must not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
otherwise, it will lead to the absurd conclusion that a Chamber of Commerce may run a printing press, advertisement business, market exploration activity or even export promotion business and levy huge sums from its customer whether they are members of the organisation or not and still claim a blanket exemption from tax on the score that the objects of general public utility which it had set forth for itself implied these activities even though profits or surpluses may arise therefrom.
If it runs special types of services for the benefit of manufacturers and charges remuneration from them.
it us undoubtedly an activity which.
if carried on by private agencies, would be taxable.
and there is no reason why a Chamber of Commerce should be exempt.
The policy of the statute is to give tax relief for charitable purposes.
An undertaking by a business organisation is ordinarily assumed to be for profit unless expressly or by necessary implication.
Or by eloquent surrounding circumstances the making of ' profit stands clearly negatived.
For example.
if ' there is a restructure provision in the bye laws which insists that the charges levied for services of public utility rendered are to be on a 'no profit ' basis, that is, that it shall not charge more 831 than is actually needed for the rendering of the services then it earns the benefit of s.2(xv).
It may not be an exact equivalent such mathematical precision being impossible in such case and there may be little surplus at the end of the year; but the broad inhibition against making profit is a good guarantee that the carrying on of the activity is not for profit.[839F 840D. G 841C] (3) The answer to the question whether an activity is one for or not for profit depends on the facts.
An activity which yields profit or gain in the ordinary course must be presumed to have been done for profit or gain There may be activities, where` without intent or purpose the activity may yield profit.
Even then it may legitimately be said that the activity is for profit in the sense that it is ` appropriate or adapted to such profit.
[844C E F] (4) If The activity is prone to yielding income and in fact results in profit the Revenue will examine the reality or pretence of the condition that the activity is not for profit But; if the broad basis that the activity is not for profit is made out, by the assessee, the Revenue will not be meticulous and charge every chance excess or random surplus.
[844G 845A] (5) The assesses contention that the Revenue should only look at the dominant intent or real object of the assessee and that if its activity is wrapped up entangled or intertwined with a public utility object then any incidental profit arising from it is not taxable.
does not afford a valid or satisfactory test.
[841D F.] (6) Equally The contention of the Revenue that all activities which are prone to produce profits should be excluded is not correct.
[840E F] (7) In the present case the issuance of weighment and measurement certificates the issuance of certificates of origin and the settlement of disputes by arbitration are great facilities for trader of general public utility.
There is however nothing in the memorandum or articles of association of the assesses which provides for only nominal fees and sets a limit on making large profits from the services.
[845B E G H] Loka Shikshana Trust vs C.I.T. Mysore [1976] 1 S.C.R: 471.
C.I.T. vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce [1965] 55 I.T.R. 722 applied.
C.I.T. vs Dharmodayam Co. overruled.
ARGUMENTS For the appellant l.
The primary or dominant or real objects of the Indian Chamber Of Commerce are to promote protect, aid and stimulate trade, commerce and industry in India.
(Clause 3 of the Memorandum of Association).
The Income received was to be applied solely for the promotion of the objects and upon dissolution no property was to be paid or distributed among the members but was to be given or transferred to some other institution having similar objects.
(Clauses 4 and 8 of the Memorandum of Association).
It is well settled that These objects which lead to economic prosperity and enure for the benefit of the entire community are objects of general public utility and as such as charitable.
See ITR 722 Commissioner of Income tax vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce.
The Indian Chamber of Commerce provides inter alia for arbitration facilities so that trade disputes may be speedily and efficiently settled.
It further provides for certificates of origin and certificates of weighment and measurement to be issued under the under Entry 18 and Entry 6 of the Schedule to the said Act respectively These certificates can only be issued by certain bodies such as recognised chambers of commerce.
The certificates are necessary for facilitating trade.
5 L1127SCI/75 832 The carrying on of the activities of granting certificate of origin and/or weighment and measurement and arbitration are not activities for profit hut are in he nature of services and/or facilities provided to the commercial community.
As fees are charged the result at the end of the year is sometimes a loss and on times surplus.
The dominant purpose for these service is not profit making but rendering a statutory service for trade and commerce generally.
The services cannot be gratuitous as the Chamber cannot be expected to be a charitable institution like as Dharamsala.
The fees charged are related to the services rendered by way of quid pro quo.
Quid pro quo does not mean an equivalent mathematically.
If incidental to the advancement of the objects of general public utility some services are rendered for fees as a result of which income results it does not means that the objects of the Chamber involves carrying on Any activity for profit in the sense of that being. the dominent object.
The dominant or real purpose is not to earn profit or income but to serve trade and help the commercial community.
As such the above mentioned activities carried on by the Chamber will not be activities for profit.
involving in the dominant object of the Chamber.
In order to be activities for profit the involvement of profit making should be by the object and must be of such a degree or to such an extent as to lead to the influence that profit making is the real object.
Since the real or dominant objects of the Chamber are not for profit and profit is not an essential ingredient but a mere bye product of the activities of the Chamber.
The income must be held to be exempt under section 11(1) d with section 2(15) of the Act.
See The Sole Trustee Loka Shikshana Trust vs Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore.
The purpose and/or dominant object must be distinguished from the powers which are incidental to the carrying out of the objects of The Trust.
See of Income tax vs Breach Candy Swimming Bath Trust.
[1918] Appeal Cases 514 Cotman vs Brougham 4.
Under section 2(15) of the Act the words carrying on of any activity for profit must mean an activity whose dominant object is profit making and not an activity which may incidentally result in some profit as a bye product.
Of this meaning is not given then there.
will be no activity of any institution doing work of general public utility which will he exempt including activities like those of All India Spinners Association.
If the primary and dominant purpose is charitable then even if there are some incidental powers which are not charitable it will not prevent the trust from being a valid charity.
The intention will have to be gleaned from the Constitution of the Trust or the Memorandum of Association.
See Re: Trustees of The Tribune.
All India Spinners Association vs Commissioner of Income tax of Income tax vs And/1/a Chamber of Commerce Andhra Pradesh State Transport Corporation vs Commissioner of Income tax.
Under Section 11 of the Income tax Act 1961 it is the income derived from property held under trust wholly for charitable purposes which is not to be included in the total income.
The word property is .
Of wide import and can include a business or an undertaking or fees and restaurant charges etc.
All India Spinners Association vs Commissioner of Income 833 of Income tax, Bombay City vs Breach Candy Swimming Bath Trust.
K Trust, Bombay vs Commissioner of Income tax, Excess profit Tax, Bombay.
of Income tax, Kerala & Coimbatore vs P. Krishna Warriar.
7 In any event the activities of arbitration and granting certificates of origin and weighment and/or measurement are not activities "for profit".
of Income tax, Kerala v Indian Chamber of Commerce.
Commissioner of Income tax vs Kochin Chamber of Commerce.
[1975] 40 Taxation (III) 15 Commissioner of Income tax Kerala vs Ernakulam Chamber of Commerce.
As such the Chamber is entitled to exemption under section 11 read with 2(15) of the Income tax Act.
For the Respondent 1.
The Appellant Chamber of commerce was deriving income by performing three kinds of services namely providing arbitration facilities for standard weights and measurements to traders in general.
This was in furtherance of its objects clause 2(a); 2(b); 2(c); 2(d); 2(z); 3(h); 3(i); 3(p); 2(q); 3(v) The performance of such services for remuneration clearly was an activity for profit and the said activity was closely linked with.
Or involved with the advancement of the aforesaid objects of the Chamber.
Such close linking and involvement by itself rendered the object non charitable within the meaning of section 2 (15) of the Income tax Act 1961.
If the Chamber of Commerce performed the same kind of services for it members for remuneration the income so derived was certainly liable to tax under section 28(iii) of the Income tax Act, 1961.
The position became worse if the income was so derived by rendering such services to non member traders in general.
It was assumed by the Tribunal and by the High Court for which there was no warrant that the income from the said three sources was income derived from property held under trust and the case proceeded on such assumption although the High Court doubted the validity of such an assumption as is clear from the text of their judgment at pp.
76 77 of the Paper Book.
The High Court.
therefore proceeded to consider only whether the production of the income from the aforesaid three sources was involved with the advancement of any object of general public utility.
The Tribunal had held that such income was derived by carrying out the ancillary object of the Trust and not the main object although it found as a fact that the income was deriv d from; carrying on an activity for profit.
The High Court did not recognise such .
distinction and it was urged that the High Court was right.
No valid reason could be found for making a distinction between any individual or any association of persons on the one hand, and the appellant on the other hand in respect of producing taxable income by carrying on identical activities for profit.
It was beyond any doubt that ii an Individual or an association of persons had carried on similar activities from profit they would not be entitled to any exemption from tax.
The appellant therefore could not be placed at a better level especially when the words of Statute themselves had debarred it from getting the exemption.
Prior to the introduction of the qualifying clause in section 2(15) of the Current Act such bodies or 834 Organisations were undoubtedly enjoying exemption by virtue of the repealed Indian Income tax Act of 1922.
The Legislature clearly intended to remove this unreasonable distinction by adding the qualifying clause as it is found in section 2(15) of the Income tax Act, 1961.
The effect of such amendment of the definition was that the institutions otherwise regarded as charitable trusts have now been placed at par with any private organisation or individual who would render the same kind of services to the public for profit.
Unless the memorandum or articles governing a Trust or any Institution prohibated the making of profit by carrying on any activity or the earning of the profits was not ruled out and in fact profit resulted, the Court would assume that the activity was carried on for profit.
In support of this the Revenue counsel relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court recently delivered in the case of Sole Trustee Loke Shikshana Trust There was no such prohibition in the regulations governing the activities of the Indian Chamber of Commerce and therefore its case fell squarely within the principles valid by the Supreme Court in the case of Loke Shikshana Trust.
In order that an activity might be called a business activity or any other activity for profit it was not necessary to show that it was an organised activity or that it was indulged in with a motive on making profit.
it was well established that it was not the motive of a person doing in act which decided whether the act done by him was carrying on an activity for profit .
If any activity.
business of otherwise in fact produced an income that was taxable income and was none the less so because it was carried on without the motive of producing an income.
Reference was invited in this connection to the observations o the Supreme Court in the case of P. Krishna Menon vs Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore (35 I.T.R. p.
Even in the ease of classical charities such as promotion of education and giving of medical relief no exemption is available if these two activities of charitable nature are carried on for purposes of profit.
A fortiori, the exemption will be denied in the case of advancement of an object of general public utility howsoever charitable it may otherwise be regarded in character if the advancement involved the carrying on an activity for profit.
The intention of Legislature was fully vindicated in the language employed ins.
2(15) of the Act.
