174 In exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution The President of India, by proclamation dated December 23, 1971 declared that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India is threatened by external aggression and the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (Act 26 of 1971), 1971 was published on July 2 1971, for effectively dealing with the emergency.
On November 16, 1974, the President of India, in exercise of the powers conferred by Clause (1) of article 359 of the Constitution declared: (a) that the right to move any court with respect to orders of detention which have already been made or which may hereafter be made under section 3(1)(c) of the (as amended by ordinance ll of 1974) for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Articles 14, 21 and Clauses (4) (5), (6) and (7) of Article 22 of the Constitution; and (b) All proceedings pending in any court or the enforcement of any of the aforesaid rights with respect to all orders of detention made under the said section 3(1)(c) shall remain suspended for a period of six months from the date of issue of the order.
Or the period during which the proclamation of emergency issued under Clause ll) of article 352 of the Constitution of India on December 3, 1971, is in force, whichever period expires earlier.
the order stood extended to the whole of the territory of India.
On June 20, 1975, the President of India, amended the above order by substituting 12 months for '6 months ' in the order.
On June 25, 1975, the President, in exercise of his powers conferred by Clause (2) of Article 352 of the Constitution declared that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India is threatened by internal disturbances.
On June 27, 1975, in exercise of powers conferred by Clause (1) of article 359 the President declared that the right of any person (including a foreigner) to move any court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Articles 14 21 and 22 of the Constitution and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the above mentioned rights shall remain suspended for the period during which the proclamation of emergency made under Clause (1) of Act.
352 of the Constitution on December 3, 1971, and on June 25, 1975, are both in.
force.
The Presidential order of June 27, 1975, further stated that the same shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any order made before the date of the aforesaid order under Clause (1) of article 359 of the Constitution.
on June 29, l 975, by another order, the President made the ordinance of June 27, 1975, applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as well.
On September 25, 1975, the last paragraph in the Presidential order dated June 27 1975, was omitted.
The President promulgated the amending ordinances No. i and 7 of 1975, and replaced by the Maintenance of Internal Security (Amending Act) (No. 39 of 1975) Act introducing a new section 16A, and .
giving a deemed effect to section 7 of the Act as on from June 25, 1975, while the rest having a deemed effect from June 29, 1975.
By the same Act a new section 18 was also inserted with effect from June 25, 1975.
By the Constitution (Thirty eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, Articles 123, 213, 239(b), 352, 356, 359 and 368 were amended.
Clauses (4) and (5) were added in article 352 of the Constitution.
Broadly stated, the Thirty eighth Con Constitution (Amendment) Act renders the satisfaction of the President or the Governor in the relevant Articles final and conclusive and to be beyond any .
question in any court on any ground.
The power conferred on the President by article 352 shall include the power.
to issue different proclamations on different grounds being war or external aggression or internal disturbance or imminent danger of war or external aggression or internal disturbance whether or not there is a proclamation already issued by the President By Constitution Thirty Eight Amendment Act l '1975 new Clause (1A) was also added after Clause (1) of Article 359.
The Constitution Thirty ninth Amendment Act was published on August 10 1975, amending Articles 71, 329 and 329(A) and added Entries after Entry 86 in the 9th Schedule and the (Act 26 of 1971) 1971 as item 92 in the said Schedule.
175 On October 17, 1975, on ordinance 16 of 1975 was issued making further amendments ill section 16A of the maintenance of internal Security Act introducing sub Clause (8) and (9) to section 16A. On November 16, 1975 ordinance 22 of 1975 was issued making certain amendments in the Maintenance of Internal security Act inserting also sub section 2A ill section 16A.
All the amendments made by the (ordinance were given retrospective effect for the purpose of validating all Acts done previously. 'The said ordinances were published as the Maintenance of Internal Security (Amendment) Act 1976 (Act 14 of 1976) on Janurary ' '5, 1976.
The respondents detained under section 3(IA)(ii) read with section 3(2) of the maintenance of Internal Security Act (Act 26 of 1971 j as amended by the (Amendment Act 39 of 1975), 1975 challenged in several High Courts, the vires of the ordinance issued on June 27, 1975, by the President of India as unconstitutional and inoperative in law and prayed for (a) the setting aside of the said order and (b) for directing their release forthwith.
In come cases, they challenged the validity of the Thirty eight and I thirty ninth constitution Amendment Acts.
When these petitions came up for hearing, the appellant raised the preliminary objection to the maintainability on the ground that in asking For l release by the issuance of a writ of habeas Corpus.
the respondents were, in substance, claiming that they have been deprived of their personal liberty in violation of the procedure established by law, which plea was available to them under.
article 21 of the Constitution only and in view of the Presidential order dated June 27 1975, suspending the right to move for enforcement of the right conferred by that article, the petitions were liable to be dismissed at the threshold.
While the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Madras have upheld The preliminary objection, this contention did not find favour with the High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay (Nagpur Bench), Delhi Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana respectively. 'I these High (courts broadly took the view that (a) despite the Presidential order it is open to the detenus to challenge their detention on the ground that it is ultra vires, as for example, by showing that the order, on the face of it, IS passed by an authority not empowered of pass it or it is not in exercise of the power delegated to the authority or that the power has been exercised in breach of the conditions prescribed in that behalf by the Act under which the order is passed, or that he order is not in strict conformity with the provisions of the Act.
Some of these High Court have further held that the detenus can attack the order of detention on the ground that it is mala fide, as for example, by showing that the authority did not supply its mind to the relevant considerations, or that the authority was influenced by irrelevant considerations or that the authority was influenced by improper motives.
The Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court read down section 16A(9) of the 1 implying an exception in favour of disclosure to the Court.
The High Court did not decide about the validity of the Thirty eighth and Thirty ninth Constitution Amendment Acts.
Accepting the States ' appeals, some by certificates granted by the High Court and some by special leave, the Court by majority (Khanna, J. dissenting), ^ HELD .
(Per majority A.N. Ray C.J. M.H. Beg.
Y.V. Chandrachud and P.N. Bhagwati JJ.) (1) In view of the Presidential Order.
Dated June 27, 1975, under Clause (1) of article 359.
no person has any locus standi to move any writ petition under Art 226 before a High Court for habeas corpus or any other writ or order or direction to challenge the legality of an order.
Of detention on the ground that the order is not under or in compliance with the Act or is illegal or is vitiated by mala fides factual or legal or is based on extraneous considerations.
[477 E F].
(2) Section 16A(9) of the is constitutionally valid.
[477 F] (3) Section 18 of the Maintenance of ' Internal Security Act, 1971 is not invalid.
[240 A D, 342 F G, 414 D] 176 (4)Article 21 of the Constitution is the sole repository of rights to life and personal liberty against State.
[246 B] Per A. N Ray J In view of the Presidential order dated June 27, 1975, under Clause (1) of article 359, no person has locus standi to move writ petitions under article 226 of the Constitution before a High Court for habeas corpus or any other writ or order or direction to enforce any right to personal liberty of a person detained under the on the grounds that the order of detention or the continued detention is for any reason not in compliance with the Act or is illegal or male fide [245 H, 246 A] Article 21 is the sole repository of rights to life and personal liberty against a State.
Any claim to a writ of hebeas corpus is enforcement of article 21 and .
is, therefore, barred by the Presidential order.
[246 B] Girindra Nath Banerjee v Birendra Nath Lal ILR 54 Cal. 727; Kinng emperor vs Shib Nath Banerjee 1972 Indian Appeals 241 and Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] (4) SCR 797 referred to.
Scope of judicial reivew in emergency.
In times of emergency the executive safeguards the life of the nation and, therefore, its actions either on the ground that these are arbitrary or unlawful cannot be challenged in view of the fact that considerations of security forbid proof of the evidence upon which the detention was ordered.
[219 B E] Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; Greene vs Secretary of State for Home Affairs ; Mohan Chaudhary vs Chief Commissioner Union Territory of Tripura ; and Makhan Singh vs ," State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 followed.
Queen vs Halliday Ex Parte Zadiq , referred.
Liberty is confined and controlled by law, whether common law or statute.
The safeguard of liberty is in the good sense of the people and in the system of representative and responsible Government which has been evolved.
If extraordinary powers are given, they are given because the emergency is extraordinary and are limited to the period of emergency.
Liberty is itself the gift of the law and may by the law forfeited or abridged.
[222 D, G] Zamora 's case [1916]2 Ac 107 and Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; , referred to.
The vital distinction between articles 358 and 359 is that Art 358 suspends the rights only in Article 19 to the extent that the Legislature can make laws contravening article 19 during the operation of a Proclamation of emergency and the Executive can take action which The Executive is competent to take under such laws Article 358 does not suspend any Fundamental Right.
While a proclamation of emergency is in operation the Presidential order under article 359(1) can suspend the enforcement of any or all Fundamental Rights.
Article 359(1) also suspends any pending proceedings for the enforcement of such Fundamental Right or Rights.
Another important distinction between the two Articles is that article 358 provides for indemnity.
whereas Article 359(1) does not: Article 359(1A) is on the same lines as article 358, but Article 359(1A) includes all Fundamental Rights which may be mentioned in a Presidential order aud is, therefore, much wider than article 358 which includes article lg only.
[223 E G] The purpose and object of article 359(1) is that the enforcement of any Fundamental Right mentioned in the Presidential order is barred or it remains suspended during the emergency.
The scope of article 359(1) is not only to restrict the application of the Article to the legislative field.
bet also to the acts of the Executive.
The object of Article 359(1) is not only that the right 177 to move this Court only is barred but also the right to move any High Court The bar created by article 359(1) applies to petitions for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights mentioned in the Presidential order whether by way of an application under article 32 or by way of application under article 226.
An application invoking habeas corpus under section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure cannot simultaneously be moved in the High Court.
[223 H, 224 D] Shri Mohan Chaudhary vs Chief Commissioner Union Territory of Tripura ; Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & ors. ; , applied.
The argument that jurisdiction and powers of this Court under article 32 and of the High Courts under article 226 are virtually abolished by the Presidential order without any amendment of the Constitution is incorrect.
No amendment to the Constitution is necessary because no jurisdiction and power either of this Court or of the High Court is taken away.
When a Presidential order takes away the locus standi of the detenu to move any court for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights for the time being, the jurisdiction and powers of this Court and of the High Courts remain unaltered.
[224 E F] Article 359(1) is not directed against any court, it is directed against an individual and deprives him of his locus standi.
If courts will in spite of the Presidential order entertain the applications and allow the detenu to enforce to start or to continue proceedings or enforce Fundamental Rights, Article 359(1) will be nullified and rendered otiose.
C D] Unlike the 1962 Presidential order, in the 1975 order, the suspension is not hedged with any condition of enforcement of any right under Articles 21 and 22.
The Presidential order is, therefore, a bar at the threshold.
[228 D E] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 and State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri & Anr. ; , distinguished.
There are no natural rights.
Fundamental Rights in our Constitution are interpreted to be what is commonly said to be natural rights.
[229 C D] H. H. Kesvananda Bharti Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala [1973] SUPP.
I SCR 702.
followed.
Law means law enacted by the State.
Law means positive State made law The phrase "Procedure established by law" in article 21 includes substantive and procedural law.
A law providing for the procedure depriving a person of liberty must be a law made by statute.
[229 D E] A K. Gopalan vs Stale of Madras ; ; P. D. Shamdasani & ors vs Central Bank of India Ltd. ; ; Smt.
Vidya Verma through next friend R. V. section Mani vs Dr. Shiv Narain Verma ; , applied.
There is no difference between the expression "except according to procedure established by law" in article 21 and the expression "save by the authority of law" in article 31(1) or the expression "except by authority of law" in article 265.
It is incorrect to suggest that when article 21 was enacted, the founding fathers only enshrined the right to personal liberty according to procedure and did not frame the constitutional mandate that personal liberty could not be taken except according to law.
[232 B D] Part III of our Constitution confers Fundamental Rights in positive as well as negative language.
A Fundamental Right couched Couched negative language accentuates by reason thereof the importance of that right.
The negative language is worded to emphasize the immunity from State action as Fundamental Right.
Fundamental Rights have the texture of Basic Human Rights.
[229 G, 230 A B] State of Bihar.
vs Maharaja Dhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Dhrbhanga & Ors.
at 988 989; A. K Gopalan vs State of Madras ; ; Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India 571 and 576 to 578: Shambhu Nath Sarkar vs The State of West Bengal & Ors.
[1974] 14 833SupCI/76 178 1 SCR; Haradahan Saha & Anr.
vs State of West Bengal ; and Khudiram Das .v State of West Bengal & ors.
; , referred to.
Article 21 is our Rule of Law regarding life and liberty.
No other Rule of Law can have separate existence as a distinct right.
The negative language of Fundamental Right incorporated in Part III imposes limitations on the power of the State and declares the corresponding guarantees of the individual to that fundamental Right.
Limitation and guarantee are complementary.
The limitation of State action embodied in a Fundamental Right couched in a negative form is the measure of the protection of the individual.
[230 C D] Rustom Cavasji Cooper vs Union of India , applied.
Personal liberty in Article 21 includes all varieties of rights which go to make personal liberty other than those in article 19(1)(d).
[230 C C] Kharak Singh vs State of U.P. and ors.
[1964] 1 SCR 332 and Rustom Cavasjee Cooper v Union of India ; , referred to.
If any right existed before the commencement of the Constitution and the same right with its content is conferred by Part III as a Fundamental Right the source of that right is in Part III and not in any pre existing right.
Such pre constitutional rights have been elevated in Part III as Fundamental Rights.
If there is a pre constitution right which is expressly embodied as a Fundamental Right under our Constitution, the common law right has no separate existence Under Our Constitution.
If there be any right other than and more extensive than the Fundamental Right in Part III, such right may continue to exist under article 372.
[230 F H] Dhirubha Devi Singh Gohil vs State of Bombay , referred to.
B. Shankara Rao Badami and ors.
vs State of Mysore and Anr. ; @ 11 13, applied.
Apart from the remedy under the common law of torts, by way of suit for false imprisonment and claim for damages, there was no civil remedy for unlawful infringement of the right to personal liberty in India before the Constitution.
Even this remedy, after the amendment of section 491 of the Code of criminal Procedure became a statutory right in the nature of a habeas corpus.
The provisions of section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code have been repealed by Act II of 1974 as being superfluous in view of article 226.
[231 C D] Waghela Rajsanji vs Sheik Masludin and ors.
14 I.A. 89 1) 96.
Satish Chandra Chakravarti vs Ram Dayal De I.L.R. @ 407 10, 425 426.
Baboo S/o Thakur Dhobi vs Mst.
Subanshi w/o Mangal Dhobi AIR 1942 Nagpur 99; Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797; District Magistrate Trivandrum vs K. C. Mammen Mappillai I.L.R. ; Matthen vs District Magistrate Trivandrum L.R. 66 I.A. 222.
Girindranath Banerjee vs Birendranath Pal ILR and King Emperor vs Sibnath Banerjee 72 1.A. 241, referred to.
There was no statutory right to enforce the right to personal liberty other than that in section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code before the commencement of the Constitution which could be carried over after its commencement under article 372.
Law in article 21 will include all post constitutional statute, law including and by virtue of article 372 all pre constitutional statute law, including the I.P.C. and the Cr.
P.C. [231 F G] The present appeals do not touch any aspect of article 20.
Article 20 is a constitutional mandate to the judiciary and article 21 is a constitutional mandate to the Executive.
The expression "no person shall be prosecuted for the same offence more than once" in article 20 would apply only to the executive.
It is 179 incorrect to say that "State" in article 12 will also include the Judiciary and article 20 is enforceable against the Judiciary in respect of illegal orders.
[232 E F, G H] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 and Narayan Singh vs State of Delhi and ors.
; not applicable.
Articles 256, 265 and 361 have no relevance to displace the proposition that article 21 is the repository of rights to life and liberty.
Nor does an appeal in a criminal proceedings have anything to do with article 21.
[233 C D] Garikapatti Veerayya vs N. Subbiah Choudhury ; and Ahmedabad Mfg. & Calico Ptg.
Co. Ltd. vs Ram Tahal Ramnand and ors.
; , referred to.
The right arising from a decree is not a Fundamental Right and, therefore, will not be prima facie covered by a Presidential order under article 359(1) [233 G] Fundamental Rights including the right to personal liberty are conferred by the Constitution.
Any pre constitution rights which are included in article 21 do not after the Constitution remain in existence which can be enforced, if article 21 is suspended If it be assumed that there was any pre constitutional right to personal liberty included in article 21 which continued to exist as a distinct and separate right then article 359(1) will be an exercise in futility.
[234 A B] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab explained.
The theory of eclipse is untenable.
The theory of eclipse refers to pre constitutional laws which were inconsistent with Fundamental Rights.
By reason of article 13(1) such laws did not became void but became devoid of legal force.
Such laws became eclipsed for the time being.
The theory of clipse has no relevance to the suspension of the enforcement of fundamental Rights under article 359(1).
The constitutional provisions conferring Fundamental Rights cannot be said to be inconsistent with article 13(1).
[234 B D] P. D. Shamdasani vs Central Bank of India Ltd. ; and Smt.
Vidya Verma through next friend R. V. section Mani vs Dr. Shiv Narain Verma ; , reiterated.
The Act in the present case is valid law and it has laid down procedure of applying the law.
The validity of the Act has not been challenged and cannot be challenged.
The Legislature has competence to make the law.
The procedure, therefore, cannot be challenged because article 21 and 22 cannot be enforced. 'The suggestion that the power of the Executive is widened is equally untenable.
[235 E F] The fact that section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code has been abolished in he new Code establishes that the pre existing right was embodied as a Fundamental Right in the Constitution.
The right to personal liberty became identified with Fundamental Right to personal liberty under article 21.
[236 A] The Presidential orders does not alter or suspend any law.
The rule of law is not a mere catchword or incantation.
The certainty of law is one of the elements in the concept of the rule of law.
The essential feature of rule of law is that the judicial power of the State is, to a large extent, separate from the Executive and the Legislature.
[236 B C] It is not correct to argue that if pre existing law is merged in article 21, there will be conflict in the Article 372.
The expression "law in force" in article 372 cannot include laws which are incorporated in the Constitution, viz. in Part III.
The expression "law" in Articles 19(1) and 21 takes in the statute law.
[235 B] The Presidential order under article 359(1) is not a law.
The order does not repeal any law either.
The contention that permanent law cannot be repealed by temporary law is misplaced.
[235 C] The entire concept in article 21 is against Executive action.
There is no question of infringement of Fundamental Right under article 21 where the detention 180 complained of is by a private person and not by a State or under the authority or orders of a State.
[235 D] The Executive cannot detain a person otherwise than under valid legislation.
The suspension of any Fundamental Right does not affect this rule of the Constitution.
Article 358 does not detract from the position that the Executive cannot act to the prejudice of a person without the authority of law.
[237 A F] Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur & ors.
vs The State of Punjab ; MP.
State vs Bharat Singh ; ; Dy.
Collector vs Ibrahim & Co. Bennet Coleman & Co vs Union of India ; and Meenakshi Mills vs Union of India , discussed and distinguished.
The Constitution is the mandate.
The Constitution is the rule of law.
No one can arise above the rule of law.
The suspension of right to enforce Fundamental Rights has the effect that the emergency provisions in Part XVIII are by themselves the rule of law during times of emergency.
There cannot be any rule of law other than the constitutional rule of law. 'There cannot be any pre constitution or post constitution rule of law which can run counter to the rule of law embodied in the Constitution, nor can there be any invocation to any rule of law to nullify the constitutional provisions during the times of emergency.
[224 B, 238 D E] Eshugbayi Eleko vs Officer Administering the Govt.
Of Nigeria ; and Christie and Anr.
vs Leachinsky ; not applicable.
The expression "for any other purpose" in article 226 means for any purpose other than the enforcement of Fundamental Rights.
A petition for habeas corpus by any person under article 226 necessarily invokes a question whether the detention is legal or illegal.
An executive action if challenged to be ultravires a statute cannot be challenged by any person who is not aggrieved by any such ultra vires action.
[239 D E] The expression "purported to be made under section 3 of the Act" in section 18 will include an Executive act made by the District Magistrate within the scope of his authority as District Magistrate even if the order is made in breach of the section or is mala fide.
[240 A B] Hari Ram Singh vs The Crown Bhagchand Dagadusa vs The Secretary of State for India L.R. 54 I.A. 338 @ 352; Albert West Meade vs The King AIR 1948 P.C. 156 at 157 59; Animistic vs Foreign Compensation etc. ; at 212, 213 and 237 and Dakshina Ranjan Ghosh vs Omar Chand Oswal I.L.R. SO Cal.
992 at 995 1003, applied.
Poona Municipal Corporation vs D. N. Deodhar ; ; Kala Bhandar vs Municipal Committee and Indore Municipality vs Niyamultulla AIR 1971 SC 97 and Joseph vs Joseph not applicable.
There is no question of excessive delegation in section 18 which lays down the law.
To contend that section 18 applies only to post detention challenge is wrong.
Section 18 applies to all orders of detention.
Section 18 of is only an illustration of the Act by the officers authorised by the Act.
[240 C E] Section 16A(9) of the Act is valid.
It is a rule of evidence and it is not open either to the detenu or the Court to ask for the grounds of detention.
[246 C] Materials and information on which orders of preventive detention are passed necessarily belong to a class of documents whose disclosures would impair the proper functioning of Public service and administration.
[242 D] Liversidge vs John Anderson ; at 221, 253, 254, 266, 267, 279, 280 and Roger 's case @ 400, 401, 405, applied.
181 Legislature has enacted 5.
16A(9) providing for a general exclusion from evidence of all such material as would properly fall within the classification instead of forcing the State to claim in individual cases privilege under sections 123, 162 of the Evidence Act or under article 22(6) of the Constitution.
[242 E F] Section 16A cannot be said to be an amendment to article 226.
The jurisdiction to issue writs is neither abrogated nor abridged.
Section 16A(9) enacts provisions analogous to a conclusive proof of presumption.
Such a provision is a genuine rule of evidence.
It is in the nature of an explanation to sections 123 and 162 of the Evidence Act.
Section 16A(9) is a rule of evidence.
When the detaining authority is bound by section 16A(9) and forbidden absolutely from disclosing such material no question can arise of adverse inference against the authority.
[242 G H] Section 16A(9) cannot be read implying an exception in form of disclosure to the Court.
Such disclosure to the Court alone and not to the detenu will introduce something unknown to judicial procedure and will bring in an element of arbitrariness and preclude both the parties from representing their respective cases.
The view of the detaining authority is not to be substituted by the view of the court.
[243 A C] State of Bombay v Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya ; ; Shiban Lal Saksena vs State of Uttar Pradesh and ors.
; ; Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate Burdwan and Anr. ; ; Jaichand Lal vs W. Bengal [1966] Supp.
SCR 464 and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar [1966] I SCR 709, referred to.
The theory of good return mentioned in the English decisions is based on the language of Habeas Corpus Act and the Rules of the Supreme Court of England.
The practice of our Court is different.
[243 C D] M. M. Damnoo vs J. K. State ; and A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; , distinguished.
It is not competent for any court to go into questions of malafides of the order of detention or ultra vires character of the order of detention or that the order was not passed on the satisfaction of the detaining authority.
Section 16A of the Act contains definite indications of implied exclusion of judicial review on the allegations of mala fide.
The reason why section 16A has been enacted is to provide for periodical review by Government and that is the safeguard against any unjust or arbitrary exercise of power.
The production of the order which is duly authenticated constitutes a peremptory answer to the challenge.
[243 G H, 244 A, 245 B] In view of the inability of the court to grant any relief on the basis whether order of detention is the result of malice or ill will, the detention of malafides is not only ineffective but also untenable.
[244 DE] Lawrence loachim Joseph D 's Souza vs The State of Bombay ; @ 392, 393; Smith vs East Elloc Rural District Council & ors.
at 776 and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar and ors.
; , referred to.
A decision on a point not necessary for the purpose or which does not fall to be determined in that decision becomes obiter dictum.
[227 F] Maharaja Dhiraja Madhav Rao Jivaji Rao Scindia Bahadur and 193 to 194, referred to.
Per M. H. Beg, 1.
A prima facie valid detention order, that is to say, one duly authenticated and passed by an officer authorised to make it recording a purported satisfaction to detain the petitioner under the , which is operative either before or after its confirmation by the Government, is a 182 complete answer to a petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
Once such an order is shown to exist in response to a notice for a writ of habeas corpus, the High Court cannot inquire into its validity or vires on the ground of either mala fides of any kind or of non compliance with any provision of the in habeas corpus proceedings.
[371 G H, 372 A] The fundamental law found in the Constitution is paramount.
The Constitution provides the test for the validity of all other laws.
It seeks to determine the spheres of executive and legislative and judicial powers with meticulous care and precision.
The judicial functions though wider in range when interpreting or applying other articles of the Constitution, particularly Articles 14 and 19, the enforcement of which is also suspended during the current emergency, is especially constricted by the elaborate provisions of Articles 21 and 22, which deal with personal liberty and preventive detention.
The wider the sweep of the provisions of Articles 21 and 22 the more drastic must be the effect of suspending their enforcement.
Suspension does not and cannot mean retention under a disguise.
[312 F H] Marbury vs Madison [1803] I Cranch 137; A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; @ p. 109, referred.
The only Rule of Law which can be recognised by courts of our country is what is deducible from our Constitution itself.
The Constitution is an embodiment of the highest "positive law" as well as the reflection of all the rules of natural or ethical or common law Lying behind it which can be recognised by courts.
The spirit of law or the Rule of Law Cannot hover ominously around like some disembodied ghost serving as a substitute for the living Constitution.
It has to be found always within and operating in harmony with and never outside or in conflict with what our Constitution enjoins.
[313 A, D E] The most important object of making certain basic rights fundamental by the Constitution is to make them enforceable against the State and its agencies through the Courts.
[329 F] Under our constitutional jurisprudence courts cannot, during a constitutionally enjoined period of suspension of the enforceability of fundamental rights through courts, enforce hat may even be a Fundamental Right sought to be protected by Part III of the Constitution.
[314 C D] The enforceability of a right by a constitutionally appointed judicial organ has necessarily to depend upon the fulfillment of two conditions: firstly, its recognition by or under the Constitution as a right; and, secondly, possession of the vower of its enforcement by the judicial organs.
Article 226 of the Constitution is not meant for futile and unenforceable declarations of right.
The whole purpose of a writ of habeas corpus is to enforce a right to personal freedom after the declaration of the detention as illegal when it is so found upon investigation.
Enforceability of rights, whether.
they are constitutional or common law or statutory, in constitutionally prescribed ways by constitutionally appointed judicial organs is governed solely by the terms of the written instrument in n Constitution such as ours.
The scope for judicial law making on the subject of enforcement of the right to personal freedom was deliberately restricted by our Constitution makers.
It is difficult to see any such scope when enforcement itself is suspended.
[314 E F, 315 B C] What is suspended is really the procedure for the enforcement of a right through courts which could be said to flow from the infringement of a statutory procedure.
If the enforcement of a right to be free, resulting derivatively from both the constitutional and statutory provisions based on an infraction of the procedure.
which is statutory in cases of preventive detention, is suspended, it is impossible to lay down that it becomes enforceable when that part of the procedure which is mandatory is violated but remains unenforceable so long as the part of the procedure infringed is directory.
Such a view would introduce a ' distinction which is neither warranted by the language of Article 359 of the Constitution nor by that of the Presidential order of 1975.
[315 F G] 183 If the protection of enforceability is validly suspended for the duration of an Emergency, declared under constitutional provisions, the courts will have nothing before them to enforce so as to able to afford any relief to a person who comes with a grievance before them.
[329 G] A court cannot.
in exercise of any supposed inherent or implied or unspecified power, purport to enforce or, in substance enforce, a right the enforcement of which is suspended.
To permit such circumvention of the suspension is to authorise doing indirectly what law does not allow to be done directly.
[317 E F] [His Lordship felt that it was unnecessary to consider "any other purpose" in article 226 of the Constitution in view of the fact that each of detenus asked for a writ or habeas corpus and for no other kind of writs or orders.] The Constitution given unto themselves by the people, is legally supreme.
A notional surrender by the people of India of control over their several or individual rights to a Sovereign Republic by means of a legally supreme Constitution only means that the Constitution is supreme and can confer rights and powers.
One has to look to it alone and not outside it for finding out the manner in which and the limits subject to which individual citizens can exercise their separate freedoms.
A satisfactory explanation of the language of conferment used with reference to rights is that there has to be necessarily, as a result of such a process of Constitution making, a notional surrender of individual freedom so as to convert the possibility of "licence" to all, which ends in the exploitation and oppression of the many weak by the few strong into the actuality of a freedom for all regulated by law or under the law applicable to all.
[318 F H] Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain [1976] 2 SCR referred to.
Rules of natural justice, which are impliedly read into statutes from the nature of Functions imposed upon statutory authorities or bodies have sometimes been placed on the same footing as "Fundamental Rights of men which are directly and absolutely safeguarded" by written Constitutions.
The implied rules of natural justice do not override the express terms of a statute.
They are only implied because the functions which the statute imposes are presumed to be meant to be exercised in accordance with these rules, and therefore treated as though they were parts of enacted law.
The principles of natural justice which are so implied must always hang, if one may so put it on pegs of statutory provisions or necessarily flow from them and have no independent existence.
[319 G H, 320 A] State of Orissa vs Dr. Miss Binapani Dei & ors.
; , applied.
Fundamental Rights are basic aspects of rights selected from what may previously have been natural or common law rights.
These basic aspects of rights are elevated to a new level of importance by the Constitution.
Any other co extensive rights, outside the Constitution, are necessarily excluded by their recognition as or merger with Fundamental Rights.
[329 B] The object of making certain general aspects of rights fundamental is to guarantee them against illegal invasions of these rights by executive, legislative.
Or judicial organs (i e. Article 20) of the State.
This necessarily means that these safeguards can also be legally removed under appropriate constitutional or statutory provisions, although their suspension does not, by itself, take away the illegalities or their legal consequences.
The intention was to exclude all other control or to make the Constitution, the sole repository of ultimate control over those aspects of human freedom which are guaranteed in Part m. [319 A C & 329 C] Article 21 of the Constitution has to be interpreted comprehensively enough to include, together with article 19 practically all aspects of personal freedom.
It embraces both procedural and substantive rights.
Article 22 merely makes it clear that deprivations of liberty by means of laws regulating preventive detention would be included in "procedure established by law" and indicates what that procedure should be.
In that sense, it could be viewed as, sub 184 stantially, an elaboration of what is found in Article 21, although it also goes beyond it inasmuch as it imposes limits on ordinary legislative power.
[329 D E] Taken by itself, article 21 of the Constitution is primarily a protection against illegal deprivations by the executive action of the State 's agents or officials although, read with other Articles, it could operate also as a protection against unjustifiable legislative action purporting to authorise deprivations of personal freedom.
[329 F] Article 21 was only meant, on the face of it, to keep the exercise of executive power, in ordering deprivations of life or liberty, within the bounds of power prescribed by procedure established by legislation Article 21 furnishes the guarantee of "Lex", which is equated with statute law only, and not of "jus" or a judicial concept of what procedural law ought really to be.
The whole idea in using this expression was to exclude judicial interference with executive action in dealing with lives and liberties of citizens and others living in our country on any ground other than that it is contrary to procedure actually prescribed by law which meant only statute law.
According to well established canons of statutory construction, the express terms of "Lex" (assuming, of course, that the "Lex" is otherwise valid), prescribing procedure, will exclude "Jus" or judicial notions of "due process" or what the procedure.
Ought to be.
[321 H. 322 A C] A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; referred to.
The suggestion that 'jus", which has been deliberately excluded from the purview of "procedure established by law", can be introduced by courts, through a back door, as though it was an independent right guaranteed by Chapter III or by any other part of the Constitution, cannot be acceded to.
[322 E F] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India ; , 578, distinguished.
Neither rights supposed to be recognised by some natural law nor those assumed to exist in some part of Common Law could serve as substitutes for those conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
They could not be, on any principle of law or justice or reason, virtually added to Part III as complete replacements for rights whose enforcement is suspended, and then be enforced, through constitutionally provided machinery, as the unseen appendages of the Constitution or as a separate group of rights outside the Constitution meant for the emergency which suspends but does not resuscitate in a new form certain rights.
[325 B D] His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala [1973] Supp.
SCR @ 1.
Satish Chandra Chakraworti vs Ram Dayal De ILR P @ 407 410, 425 and 426: Waghela Rajsanji vs Sheikh Masludin and ors.
14 Indian Appeals p. 89 and Baboo Seo Thakur Dhobi vs Mst.
Subanshi w/o Mangal Dhobi, AIR 1942 Nagpur 99, referred to.
Not only all steps leading up to the deprivation of personal liberty but also the substantive right to personal freedom.
by implication, is covered by Article 21 of the Constitution.
[328 E F] 1.
C. Golaknath & ors.
vs Sate of Punjab and Another Even if article 21 is not the sole repository of all personal freedom, it will be clear, that all aspects of freedom of person are meant to be covered by Articles 19, 21, and 22 of the Constitution.
If the enforcement of these rights by Courts is suspended during the emergency, an inquiry by a court into the question whether any of them is violated by an illegal deprivation of it by executive authorities of the State seems futile.
[328 H, 329 A] A. K. Gopalan State of Madras ; and Kharak Singh vs State of UP & ors.
[1964] I SCR 332, applied.
The power to issue a writ is conferred upon courts exclusively by our Constitution All the powers of our courts flow from the Constitution which is the source of their jurisdiction.
If any provision of the constitution authorises the 185 suspension of the right to obtain relief in any type of cases, the power of courts is thereby curtailed even though a general jurisdiction to afford the relief in other cases may be there.
If they cannot issue writs of habeas corpus to enforce a right to personal freedom against executive authorities during tho emergency, the original nature of this writ issuing power comparable to a "prerogative" power cannot help the detenu.
[330 G H] It is a well recognised principle of law that whatever could be formerly even said to be governed by a common law prerogative power becomes merged in the Constitution as soon as the Constitution takes it over and regulates that subject.
[331 A] Principle in Attorney General vs De Keyser 's Royal Hotel Limited, ; @ 526 applied.
If there is no enforceable right either arising under the Constitution or otherwise, it is useless to appeal to any general power of the court to issue a writ of habeas corpus.
If the effect of suspension of the right to move the court for a writ of habeas corpus is that no inquiry can take place beyond finding out that the cause is one covered by the prohibitions mere possession of general power will not assist the detenu.
[331 C D] If the right to enforce personal freedom through a writ of habeas corpus is suspended, it cannot be said that the enforcement can be restored by resorting to "any other purpose".
That other purpose could not embrace defeating the effect of suspension of the enforcement of a constitutional guarantee and if held so would be making a mockery of the Constitution.
[331 D E] Nothing in the nature of a writ of habeas corpus or any power of a High Court under article 226 could come to the aid of a detenu when the right to enforce a claim to personal freedom, sought to be protected by the Constitution is suspended.
[331 E F] Provision for preventive detention in itself aptly described as "jurisdiction of suspicion" is a departure from ordinary norms, and resorted to either in times of war or of apprehended internal disorders and disturbances of a serious nature, with the object of preventing a greater dager to national security and integrity than any claim which could be based upon a right, moral or legal, to individual liberty.
[332 B C] Haradhan Saha & Anr.
vs The State of West Bengal and ors.
; ; Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal [1975] 2 SCR p.832 @ p. 842; State of Madras vs V.G. Row AIR 1952 SC 197 @ 200 and Rex vs Halliday ; @ 275, referred to.
It is true that the Presidential order of 1975 like the Presidential order of 1962, does not suspend the general power of this Court under article 32 or the general powers of High Courts under article 226, bot the effect of taking away enforceability of the right of a detenu to personal freedom against executive authorities is to affect the locus standi in cases which are meant to be covered by the Presidential order.
Courts, even in habeas corpus proceedings, do not grant relief independent of the rights of the person deprived of liberty.
If the locus standi of a detenu is suspended, no one car.
claim to get his right enforced.
, [338 E F] If a case so patently gross and clear of a detention falling, on the face of the order of detention or the return made to a notice from the court, outside the provisions of the Act on the ground of personal malice of the detaining authority, or, some other ground utterly outside the Act, arises so that no further investigation is called for, it may be possible to contend that it is not protected by the Presidential order of June 27, 1975, and by the provisions of article 359(1) of the Constitution at all.
The mere presence of an official seal or signature on a detention order, in such a purely hypothetical case, may not be enough to convert it into a detention by the State or its agents or officers.
That is the almost utterly inconceivable situation or type of case which could still 186 be covered by the general power to issue writs of habeas corpus.
The remedy by way of a writ of habeas corpus is more general than relief against official action.
It lies even against illegal detentions by private persons although not under article 32 which is confined to enforcement of Fundamental Rights.
[339 A E] Shrimati Vidya Verma, though next friend R.V.S. Mandi vs Dr Shiv Narain Verma [1955] 2 SCR p. 983, referred to.
Courts must presume that executive authorities are acting in conformity with both the spirit and the substance of the law: The maxim "omnia praeswumuntur rite esse actus" means that all official acts are presumed to have been rightly and regularly done.
If the burden to displace that presumption is upon detenu, he cannot, in a habeas corpus petition under article 226 of the Constitution, ask the court to embark upon an inquiry, during the emergency, and allow him to lead evidence to rebut this presumption.
To do so would be plainly to countenance a violation of the Constitutional mandate suspending the procedure.
[340 A C] Eshughayi Eleko vs Officer Administering the Government of Nigeria & Anr.
@ 670; Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson and Anr.
[1942] A.C. p. 206 @ 217 and 219 and 273.
Rex vs Secretary of State of Home Affairs, Ex parte Lees and Green vs Secretary of State of Home Affairs, @ 293, discussed.
Decisions on what restraints should be put and on which persons during a national emergency, in the interests of national security, are matters of policy which are outside the sphere of judicial determination.
[344 G] Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; and Rex vs Halliday Ex Parte Zadiq ; , referred to.
Under our Constitution, there is no distinction between the effects of a declaration of emergency under article 352(1) whether the threat to the security of the State is from internal or external sources.
Presidential declarations under article 352(1) and 359(1) of ' our Constitution are immune from challenge in courts even when the emergency is over.
A noticeable feature of our Constitutions is that, whereas the consequences given in article 358 as a result of a Proclamation under article 352(1) are automatic, Presidential orders under Article 359(1) may have differing consequence, from emergency to emergency depending upon the terms of the Presidential orders involved.
And then, Article 359(1A) made operative retrospectively by the 38th Constitutional amendment of 1st August 1975, makes it clear that both the legislative and executive organs of the State are freed for the duration of the emergency from the limits imposed by Part III of the Constitution.
[348 A D] The striking differences in the terms of the two Presidential orders are: (1) The Presidential order of 1962 did not specify Article 14 of the Constitution, but article 14, guaranteeing equality before the law and equal protection of laws to all persons in India, is mentioned in the 1975 order.
This does make some difference between the intentions behind and effects of ' the two Presidential orders.
[352 B C] (ii) The President Order of 1962 expressly hedges the suspension of the specified Fundamental Rights with the condition, with regard to deprivations covered by Article 21 and 22 of the Constitution that the detenu should be deprived of his rights "under the Defence of India Act, 1962 or any rules or order made thereunder".
In other words.
On the terms of the 1962 Presidential Order, the courts were under a duty to see whether a deprivation satisfies these conditions or not.
They could adjudicate upon the question whether a detention was "under " the Act or a rule "made thereunder".
On the other hand, the Presidential order of 1975 unconditionally suspends the enforcement of the rights conferred upon "any person including a foreigner" to move any court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Articles 14, 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
The Courts are.
therefore, no longer obliged or able to test the validity of a detention by examining whether they conform to statutory 187 requirements.
They will have to be content with compliance shown with forms of the law.
[352 C E] (iii) Presidential order of 1962 makes no mention of pending proceedings, but.
the 1975 order suspends all pending proceedings for the enforcement of the rights mentioned therein.
This further clarifies and emphasizes that the intention behind the Presidential order of 1975 was to actually affect the jurisdiction of courts in which proceedings were actually pending.
the inference from this feature also is that all similar proceedings in future will similarly be affected.
[352 E F] There can be no doubt whatsoever that the Presidential order of June 27, 1975, was a part of a unmistakably expressed intention to suspend the ordinary processes of law in those cases where persons complain of infringement of their fundamental rights by the executive authorities of the State.
The intention of the Parliament itself to bring about this result so that the jurisdiction of courts under article 226 in this particular type of cases is itself affected for the duration of the emergency, seems clear enough from the provisions of section 16A(9) of the Act, introduced by Act No. 14 of 1976, which received Presidential assent on January 25. 1976, making section 16A(9) operative retrospectively from June 25, 1975.
[352 F H] There is no doubt that the object of the Presidential (order of June '27, 1975, by suspending the enforcement of the specified rights, was to affect the powers of courts to afford relief to those the enforcement of whose rights was suspended.
This was within the purview of Article 359(1).
Hence objections that powers of the courts under.
article 226 may indirectly be affected is no answer to the direct suspension of rights which was bound to have its effect upon the manner in which jurisdiction is or could reasonably be exercised even if that jurisdiction cannot be itself suspended for all types of cases.
[353 A B] The term Rule of Law is hot a magic wand which can he waved to dispel every difficulty.
It is not an Aladin 's lamp which can be scratched to invoke a power which brings to any person in need whatever he or she may desire to have It can only mean what the law in a particular State or country is and what it enjoins.
This means that the Rule of Law must differ in shades of meaning and emphasis from time to time and country to country.
It could not be rigid, unchanging, and immutable like the proverbial laws of the Medes and Persians.
It cannot be like some brooding omnipotence in the skies.
Its meaning cannot be what anyone wants to make it.
It has to be, for each particular situation.
indicated by the courts as to what it means.
[353 F H, 354 A] The Rule of Law includes the concept of determination by courts, of the question whether an impugned executive action is within the bounds of law.
It pre supposes, firstly, the existence of a fixed or identifiable rule of law which the executive has to follow as distinguished from a purely policy decision open to it under the wide terms of the statute conferring a discretionary power to act.
and secondly the power of the courts to test the action by reference to the rule.
[354 E F] Even in emergencies provided the power of the court to so test the legality of some executive act is not curtailed, courts will apply the test ' of legality "if the person aggrieved brings the action in the competent court".
But, if the locus standi of the person to move the court is gone and the competence of the court to enquire into the grievance is also impaired by inability to peruse the ground of executive action or their relationship with the power to act, it is no use appalling to this particular concept of the Rule of Law.
It is just inapplicable to the situation which arises here.
Such a situation is governed by the emergency provisions of the Constitution.
[354 F H] Youngs Town Sheet & Tube Co. vs Sawyer, ; , 655 and Chief Settlement Commissioner, rehabilitation Department Punjab & Ors. etc.
vs Om Prakash & Ors.
; @ [354 F H] Whereas article 358, by its own force.
suspends the guarantees of article 19, Article 359(1) has the effect of suspending the operation of specified Funda 188 mental Rights.
If, however, the application of Articles 14, 19, 21 and 22 of the Constitution is suspended it is impossible to say that there is a Rule of Law found there which is available for the courts to apply during the emergency to test the legality of executive action.
[355 A C] Mohd. Yaqab etc.
vs The State of Jammu & Kashmir [1968] 2 SCR p. 227 @ 234, referred to.
The suggestion that a common law remedy by way of writ of habeas corpus exists, even after section 491 was introduced in the.
Criminal Procedure Code in 1923, is incorrect.
The sweep of article 359(1) of the Constitution taking in the jurisdiction of "any court" is wide enough to cover any kind of relief claimed by a petitioner for the enforcement of a specified Fundamental Right.
[355 D E] Pleas which involve any adduction of evidence would be entirely excluded by the combined effect of the terms of The Presidential order of June 27, 1975 read with the amended provisions of section 16A(9) of the Act.
In a case in which the officer purporting to detain had in fact, not been invested at all with any authority to act, the detention would be on the same footing as one by a private person who has no legal authority whatsoever to detain.
[357 C E] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 @ 821 822 and 5.
Pratap Singh vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
The suspension of enforcement of specified Fundamental Rights operates only to protect infringements of rights by the State and its authorised agents, acting or purporting to act, in official capacities which they could and do hold.
A claim to an order of release from such a patently illegal detention, which is not by the State or on its behalf, could be enforced even during the current emergency.
[357 G] The presumption of validity of a duly authenticated order or an officer authorised to pass it is conclusive in habeas corpus proceedings during the current emergency.
By means of a differently phrased Presidential order of June 17, 1975 and the amendments in the Act, introducing rather drastic provisions of section 16A of the Act, the intention has been made clear that preventive detention should be a matter controlled exclusively by the executive departments of the State.
[358 B, 361 B C] State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr.
vs Thakur Bharat Singh ; State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri and Anr. ; Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar and ors.
; ; K. Anandan Nembiar and Anr.
vs Chief Secretary, Government of Madras and ors.
; ; Durga Das Dhirali vs Union of India and ors ; Jai Lal vs State of West Bengal [1966] Supp.
SCR p. 4, 64, discussed and distinguished.
lt is very difficult to see the bearing of any such doctrine that the Rule of Law under our Constitution is embodied in the principle of Separation of Powers on a pure and simple question of determination of the meaning of constitutional and statutory provisions couched in words which leave few doubts unresolved.
[361 C D] If an order of preventive detention is not quasi judicial, as it cannot be because of the impossibility of applying any objective standards to the need for it in a particular case, there could be no question of violating any principle of Separation of Powers by placing preventive detention exclusively within the control of executive authorities of the State for the duration of the emergency.
[361 H. 352 A] Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur and ors.
vs The State of Punjab, , referred to.
Means of redress in cases such as those of mistaken identity or misapprehension of facts or of detenus due to false and malicous reports circulated by enemies are still open to detenu by approaching executive authorities.
There 189 is no bar against that.
What is hot possible is to secure a release by an order in habeas corpus proceedings after taking the courts behind a duly authenticated prima facie good return.
[366 B C] If the meaning of the emergency provisions in our Constitution and the provisions of ' the Act is clearly that what lies in the executive field should not be subjected to judicial scrutiny or judged by judicial standards of correctness the courts cannot arrogate unto themselves a power of judicial superintendence which they do not, under the law during the emergency, possess.
[362 H] It does not follow from a removal of the normal judicial superitendence even over questions of vires, of detention orders, which may require going into facts behind the returns that there is no Rule of Law during the emergency or that the principles of ultra vires are not to be applied at all by any authority except when, on the face of the return itself, it is demonstrated in a court of law that the detention does not even purport to be in exercise of the executive power or authority or is patently outside the law authorising detention The intention behind emergency provisions and of the Act is that although such, executive action as is not susceptible to judicial appraisement, should not be subjected to it, yet, it should be honestly supervised and controlled by the hierarchy of executive authorities themselves.
It enhances the powers and therefore, the responsibilities of the Executive.
[363 F H] In actual practice, the grounds supplied always operate as an objective test for determining the question whether a nexus could reasonably exist between the grounds given and the detention order or whether some infirmities had crept in.
The reasonableness of the detention because the justiciable issue because it related to the decision.
It is doubtful whether this could be said to be an object of preventive detention authorised by the Constitution and embodied in the Act.
[334 D E] The object of the amending Acts 39 of 1975 and 14 of 1976 was to affect the manner in which jurisdiction of courts in considering claims for reliefs by detenus oh petitions for writs of habeas courts was being exercised so that the only available means that has been developed for such cases by the courts, that is to say, the scrutiny of grounds supplied under section 8 of the Maintenance.
Of Internal Security Act may be removed from the judicial armoury, for the duration of emergency.
[336 C D] Prabhu Dayal Deorah etc.
vs District Magistrate Kamrup and ors.
; , referred to.
The contention that section 16A(9) affects the jurisdiction of High Courts under article 226 which an order under article 359(1) could not do, is untenable.
A Presidential Order which prevents a claim for the enforcement of a Fundamental Right from being advanced in a court, during the period of an emergency could possibly be said not to be intended to affect the exercise of jurisdiction of courts at all, is not correct.
[336 F G] That section 16A(9) amounts to a general legislative declaration in place of judicial decisions which courts had themselves to give after considering, on the facts of each case, whether article 226 could be applied, is also not acceptable.
the result of section 16A(9) to be valid would be to leave to the presumption of correctness of an order under section 3 of the Act untouched by any investigation relating to its correctness.
Now if this be the object and effect of The amendment, it could not be said to go beyond it to rebut a presumption of legality and validity or an order under section 3 of the Act, if prima facie case is made out.
[336 G H, 337 A] Observation [The same result could have been achieved by enacting that a detention order under section 3, prima facie good, will operate as "conclusive proof" that the requirements of section 3 have been fulfilled.
But, as the giving of grounds is not entirely dispensed with under the Act even as it now exists, this may have left the question in doubt, whether courts could call upon the detaining authorities 190 to produce the grounds.
Enactment of a rule of conclusive proof is a well established form of enactments determining substantive rights in the form of procedural provisions].
[337 A B] Section 16A(9) makes it impossible for courts to investigate questions relating to the existence or absence of bona fides at least in proceeding under An. 226, It is clear that the validity of section 16A(9) cannot be challenged on the ground, of any violation of Part III of ' the Constitution in view of the provisions of article 359(1)(A).
[353 C D] A challenge to the validity of section 16A(9) based either on the submission on hat grounds for detention do not call for secrecy or that the provision is an unwarranted invasion of judicial power, even in an emergency, is not well founded.
There is no such strict separation of power under our Constitution No particular provision of the Constitution could be pointed out in support of the proposition that preventive detention is a matter in which judicial superintendence must necessarily be preserved as a part of the doctrine of separation of powers.
[365 E F] Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur and ors vs State of Punjab , referred to.
Section 16A(9) imposes a bar which cannot be overcome in habeas corpus proceedings during the emergency.
In addition, a specific suspension or enforcement of the right of personal freedom against executive authorities places the presumption arising from a duly authenticated order of a legally authorised detaining officer on a higher footing than merely ordinary rebuttable presumption for purposes of proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.
[367 F G] [His Lordship felt it unnecessary to consider the validity of section 16A(9) if it was to be applied at a time not covered by the emergency, or whether it should, be read down for the purposes of a suit for damages where the issue is whether the detention was ordered by a particular officer out of malice in, fact and for reasons completely outside the purview of the Act itself.
[337 C D] Section 16 of the Act seems to leave open a remedy by way of suit for Damages for wrongful imprisonment in a possible case of what may be called "malice in fact".
In the cases for habeas corpus, proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution where "malice in fact" could not be investigated.
as it is bound to be an allegation subsidiary to a claim for the enforcement of a right to personal liberty, a Fundamental Right which cannot be enforced during the Emergency.
[337 G H] Sree Mohan Chowdhury vs The Chief Commissioner, Union Territory of Tripura ; @ 450, followed.
Even the issue that the detention order is vitiated by "malice in fact ' will not be justifiable in habeas corpus proceedings during the emergency although it may be in an ordinary suit which is not filed for enforcing a Fundamental Right but for other reliefs.
The question of bona fides seems to be left open for decision by such suits on the language of section 16 of the Act itself.
[368 D E] In the case of preventive detention, placing the burden upon the executive authorities of proving the strict legality and correctness of every step in the procedure adopted in a case of deprivation of personal liberty, and asking the executive authorities to satisfy such a requirement, in accordance with what has been called the principle in Eschugbayi Eleko 's case; , @ 670, would be to nullify the effect of the suspension of the enforceability of the procedural protection to the right of Personal freedom.
To do so is really to take the Presidential order under Article 359(1) of the Constitution ineffective.
[368 B C] No question of "malice in law" can arise in habeas corpus proceedings when such a protection is suspended.
As regards the issue of "malico in fact" it cannot be tried at all in a habeas corpus proceedings although it may be possible to try it in a regular suit the object of which is not to enforce a right to personal freedom but only to obtain damages for a wrong done which is not 191 protected by the terms of section 16 of the Act.
The possibility of such a suit should be another deterrent against dishonest use of these powers by detaining officers.
[1368 D E] Section 18, though unnecessary, appears to have been added by way of abundant caution.
It cannot be assailed on the ground of violation of basic structure.
[342 F G] The theory of basic structure oil the Constitution cannot be used to build into the Constitution an imaginary part which may be in conflict with the constitutional provisions.
The Constitution cannot have a base out away from the superstructure.
Indeed, the emergency provisions could themselves be regarded as part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
[366 E F] The theory of basic structure of the constitution cannot be considered as anything more than a part of a well recognised mode of constructing a document The Constitution like any other document has to be read and constructed as a whole.
The theory was nothing more than a method of determining the intent behind the constitutional provisions it could not and did not build and add a new part to the Constitution.
It cannot imply new tests outside he Constitution or be used to defeat constitutional provisions.
[366 G, 367 A] His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp SCR 1, applied.
There is no provision in our Constitution for a declaration of Martial Law except article 34 of the Constitution which recognises the possibility of Martial Law in this country.
There is no separate indication in the Constitution of conditions in which Martial Law could be "proclaimed".
A Presidential order under article 359(1) of the Constitution would, ordinarily, have a wider range and effect throughout the country than the existence of Martial Law in any particular part of the country.
The Presidential proclamations are meant generally to cover the country as a whole.
Martial Law is generally of a locally restricted application.
The conditions in which what is called "martial law" may prevail result in taking Military Courts of powers even to try offences: and, the ordinary or civil courts will not interfere with this special jurisdiction under extraordinary conditions.
Such a taking over by Military courts is certainly outside the provisions of Alt.
359(1) of the Constitution taken by itself.
It could perhaps fall under Presidential powers under Articles 53 and 73 read with article 355.
[368 F H. 369 A C] Judicial proceedings in criminal courts not meant for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights, are not either at the initial or appellate or revisional stages, covered by the Presidential order of 1975.
Habeas corpus petitions are not maintainable, in such cases since the prisoner is deemed to be in proper custody under orders of a court.
[371 F G] Neither Article 136 nor Art 226 of the Constitutional is meant for the exercise of an advisory jurisdiction.
Attempts to lay down the law in an abstract form, unrelated to the facts of particular cases, not only do not appertain to the kind of jurisdiction exercised by this Court or by the High Courts under the provisions of article 136 and 226 respectively, but may result in misapplications of the law declared by courts to situations for which they were not intended at all.
[306 D E].
Per Chandrachud, J. The order issued by the President on June 27, 1975, under Article 359(1) does not suspend the fundamental principle that all executive action must have the authority of law to support it.
Nor does the Presidential order give to the executive a charter to disobey the laws made by the Parliament which is the supreme law making authority.[413 B C] The aforesaid Presidential order, however, deprives a person of his locus stand; to move any court, be it the Supreme Court or the High Court, for enforcement of his Fundamental Rights which are mentioned in the order 192 Such deprivation or suspension enures during the period that the proclamation of emergency is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified in the order.
[413 C D] The dominant purpose of the present petitions is to obtain an order of release from detention by enforcing the right to personal liberty.
The purpose is not to obtain a mere declaration that the order of detention is ultra vires the Act under which it is passed.
The former plea is barred by reason of the Presidential order.
The latter is also barred because regard must be had to the substance of the matter and not to the form in which the relief is asked for.
[413 E F] The Presidential order dated June 27, 1975, bars any investigation or inquiry into the question whether the order of detention is vitiated by mala fides, factual or legal, or whether it is based on extraneous considerations or whether the detaining authority had reached his subjective satisfaction validly on proper and relevant material [413 F G] Whether or not article 21 of the Constitution is the sole repository of the right to personal liberty, in a petition filed in the High Court under article '226 for the release of a person detained under the , no relief by way of releasing the detenu can be granted because no person has a legal capacity to move any court to ask for such relief.
The Presidential order takes away such legal capacity by including article 21 within it.
The source of the right to personal liberty is immaterial because the words "conferred by" which occur in article 359(1) and in the Presidential order are not words of limitation.
[413 G H, 414 A] The Presidential order does not bring about any amendment of article 226 and is not open to challenge on that ground.
[414 B] The contention that article 226 which occurs in Chapter V, of the Constitution is an entrenched provision and, therefore, under article 368 no amendment can be made to article 226 without ratification by the Legislatures of not less than one half of the States is untenable.
It is true that article 226 is in entrenched provision which cannot suffer an amendment except by Following the procedure prescribed by the proviso to article 368(2).
But the presidential order is issued under the Constitution itself and if its true constitutional produces a certain results it cannot be said that some other Article of the Constitution stands thereby amended article 359(1) provides for the passing of an order by the President declaring that the right to move for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights mentioned.
in the order shall be suspended.
That may, in effect.
affect the jurisdiction of the High Courts to entertain a petition for the issuance of the writ of habeas corpus.
But, that does not bring about any amendment of Article 226 within the meaning of article 368, which speaks of amendments to the Constitution by the Parliament in the exercise of its constitutional power.
Article 226 and Article 359(1) are parts of the same fundamental instrument and a certain interpretation of one of these Article cannot amount to an amendment of the other.
1;385 G H, 386 A B] The Presidential order neither bars the right of an accused to defend his personal liberty in the court of first instance or in a higher court nor does it bar the execution of decrees passed against the Government, nor dos it bar the grant of relief other than or less than the release of the detenu from detention.
[414 B C] Detention without trial is a serious on personal freedom but it bears the sanction of our Constitution.
The "clear and present danger test" evolved by Justice Holmes in Schenck vs United States, may well be extended to cases where there is a threat of external aggression.
[384 D E] The object of Art 359 is to confer wider powers on the President than the power merely to suspend the right to file a petition for the writ of habeas corpus.
Article 359 aims at empowering the President to suspend the right to enforce all or any of the Fundamental Rights conferred be Part III.
It is in order to achieve that object that Article 359 does not provide that the President may declare that the remedy by way of habeas corpus shall be suspended during emergency.
Personal liberty is but one of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Part m and the writ of habeas corpus is neculiar to the enforcement of the 193 right to personal liberty and, therefore the suspension of the right to enforce the right conferred by article 21 means and implies the suspension of the right tc file a habeas corpus petition or to take any other proceeding to enforce the right to personal liberty conferred by Article 21.
[384 G H, 385 A B] The true implication of the Presidential order is to take away the right of any person to move any court for the enforcement of the rights mentioned in the order.
In strict legal theory the jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme Court and the High Courts remain the same as before since the Presidential order merely take away the locus standi of a person to move these courts for the enforcement of certain Fundamental Rights during the operations of the Proclamation of Emergency.
The drive of Article 359(1) is not against the courts but is against individuals, the object of the Article being to deprive the individual concerned of his normal right to move the Supreme Court or the High Court for the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution [386 C E] Sree Mohan Chowdhury vs The Chief Commissioner, Union Territory of Tripura ; , 451, referred to.
The argument that the limited object of article 359(1) is to remove restrictions on the power of the Legislature so that during the operation of the Emergency it would be free to make laws in violation of the Fundamental Rights specified in the Presidential order loses sight of the distinction between the provisions of article 358 and article 359 (1A) on the one hand and of Art 359(1) on the other.
Article 358, of ' its own force, removes the restrictions on the power of the Legislature to make laws inconsistent with article 19 and on the power of the Executive to take action under a law which may thus violate article 19.
Article 358 does not suspend any right which was available under article 19 to any person prior to the Proclamation of Emergency.
Article 359(1) is wider in scope than article 358.
In view of the language of article 359(1) and considering the distinction between it and the provisions of article 358, there is no justification for restricting the operation of article 359(1) as against laws made by the Legislatures in violation of the Fundamental Rights.
[386 G H, 387 A E] Sree Mohan Choudhary vs The Chief Commissioner, Union Territory of Tripura ; and Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797.
referred to.
Article 359(1) is as much a basic feature of the Constitution as any other, and it would be inappropriate to hold that because in normal times the Constitution requires the Executive to obey the laws made by the Legislature, therefore.
Article 359(1) which is an emergency measure, must be construed consistently with that position.
The argument of basic feature is wrong for yet another reason that article 359(1) does 'not provide that the Executive is free to disobey the laws made by the Legislature.
To permit a challenge in a court of law to an order of detention, which is an Executive action, on the ground that the order violates ar Fundamental Right mentioned in the Presidential order, is to permit the detenu to enforce a Fundamental Right during emergency in manner plainly contrary to article 359(1).
[388 E H, 389 A] All executive action which operates to the prejudice of any person must have the authority of law to support it.
article 358 does not purport to invest the State with arbitrary authority to take action to the prejudice of citizens and other.
It provides that so long as the Proclamation of Emergency subsists laws may be enacted and executive action may be taken ill pursuance of such laws, which if the provisions of article 19 were operative would have been invalid.
Article 359(1) bars the enforcement of any Fundamental Right mentioned in the Presidential order, thereby rendering it incompetent for any person to complain of its violation, whether the violation is by the Legislature or by the Executive.
[389 H, 390 A, 391 E F] State of Madhya Pradesh and Anr.
vs Thakur Bharat Singh ; ; District Collector of Hyderabad & ors.
vs M/s. Ibrahim & Co. etc. ; Bennett Coleman & Co. and ors.
vs Union of India & ors.
[1973] 833SCI/76 194 2 SCR 757, 773, 775 and Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, , 405, 406 and 428, distinguished.
The Rule of Law rejects the conception of the dual State in which governmental action is placed in a privileged position of immunity from control be.
Such a notion is foreign to our basic constitutional concepts.
[392 F] Chief Settlement Commissioner, Rehabilitation Department, Punjab and ors vs Om Parkash & ors. ; 660 661 and Eshugbayi Eleka vs Officer Administering the Government of Nigeria ; 670.
distinguished.
The Rule of Law argument like the "basic feature" argument is intractable.
Emergency provisions contained in Part XVIII of the Constitution which are designed to protect the security of the State are as important as any other provision.
Of the Constitution.
The Rule of Law during an emergency, is as one finds it in the provisions contained in Chapter XVIII of the Constitution.
There cannot be a brooding and omnipotent Rule of Law drowning in its effervescence the emergency provisions of the Constitution.
[393 B D] Article 359(1) neither compels nor condones the breaches by the executive of the laws made by the Legislature.
Such condonation is the function of an act of indemnity.
[393 G] The object of empowering the President to issue an order under Alt.
359(1) suspending the enforcement of the right to personal liberty conferred by Part III of the Constitution cannot be to save all other rights to personal liberty except the one conferred by Part III which seems totally devoid of meaning and purpose.
Their is nothing peculiar in the content of the right to personal liberty conferred by Part III so that the Constitution should provide only for the suspension of the right to enforce that particular kind of right leaving all other rights to personal liberty intact and untouched.
This purpose cannot ever be achieved by interpreting Article 359(1) to mean that every right to personal liberty shall be enforceable and every proceeding involving the enforcement of such right shall continue during the emergency except to the extent to which the right is conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
The existence of the right to personal liberty in the pre constitution period was surely known to the makers of the Constitution.
[395 H, 396 A D] The right to personal liberty is the right of the individual to personal freedom, nothing more and nothing less.
That right along with certain other rights was elevated to the status of a Fundamental Right in order that it may not be tinkered with and in order that a mere majority should not be able to trample over it Article 359(1) enables the President to suspend the enforcement even of the right which were sanctified by being lifted out of the common morass of human rights.
If the enforcement of the Fundamental Rights can be suspended during an emergency it is hard to accept that the right to enforce no Fundamental Rights relating to the same subject matter should remain alive.
[396 G H 397 A] The words "conferred by Part Ill ' which occur in article 359(1) are not intended to exclude or except from the purview of the Presidential Order rights of the same variety or kind as are mentioned in Part III but which were in existence prior to the Constitution or can be said to be in existence in the post Constitution era.
apart from the Constitution.
The words "conferred by Part III are used only in order to identify the particular rights the enforcement of which can be suspended by tho President and not in order to impose a limitation the power of the President so as to put those rights which exist or which existed apart from the constitution beyond the reach of that power.
It therefore does not make any difference whether any right to personal liberty was in existence prior to the enactment of the Constitution either by way of a natural right statutory right common law right or a right available under the law of port.
Whatever may be the source of the right and whatever may be its justification.
the right in essence and substance is the right to personal liberty.
That 195 right having been included in Part III, its enforcement will stand suspended if it is mentioned in the Presidential order issued under Article 359(1).
[397 E H 398 A C] The rights conferred by article 21 and 19 cannot be treated as mutually exclusive But the suspension of the right to enforce the right of personal liberty means the suspension of that right wherever it is found unless its content is totally different as from one Article to another.
The right conferred by Article 21 is only a description of the right of personal liberty in older to facilitate its exact identification and such a description cannot limit the operation of the Presidential order to those cases only where the right to personal liberty is claimed under Article 21.
[398 F G] Rustom Cavasajee Cooper vs Union of India ; , 578, referred to.
The circumstance that The pre constitution rights continued in force after the enchantment of the Constitution in view of article 372 does not make any difference to this position because even assuming that certain rights to personal liberty existed before the Constitution and continued thereafter as they were not repugnant to any provision of the Constitution all rights to personal liberty.
having the same content as the right conferred by article 21 would fall within the mischief to the Presidential order.
[398 C H, 399 A] The theory of eclipse has no application to such cases because that theory applies only when a pre Constitution law becomes devoid of legal force on the enactment of the Constitution by reason of its repugnancy to any provision of the Constitution.
Such laws are not void but they are under an eclipse so long as the repugnancy lasts.
When the repugnancy is removed the eclipse also is removed and the law becomes valid.
[399 A B] As regards the doctrine of merger, every prior right to personal liberty merged in the right to personal liberty conferred by Part III.
But whether it merged or not, it cannot survive the declaration of suspension if the true effect of the Presidential order is the suspension of the right to enforce all and every right to personal liberty.
In that view, it would also make no difference whether the right to personal liberty arises from a statute or from a contract or from a constitutional provision contained in some Part other than Part III.
[399 B C] Article 361(3) speaks of a process for the arrest or imprisonment of a Governor issuing from any court.
Fundamental Rights can be exercised as against judicial orders but the circumstances in which such a Process may come to be issued.
if at all, may conceivably affect the decision of the question whether a Presidential Order issued under Article 359(1) can bar the remedy of an aggrieved Governor.[400 B C] A failure to comply with Article 256 may attract serious consequences but no court is likely to entertain a grievance at the instance of a private party that article 256 has not been complied with by a State Government.
[400 D] [As regards the claim to personal liberty founded on a challenge to an order on the ground of excessive delegation His Lordship preferred to express no firm opinion though, the greater probability is that such a challenge may tail in face of a Presidential order of the kind which has. been passed in the instant case.
[400 D E] The existence of common law rights prior to the Constitution will not curtail the operation of the Presidential order by excepting.
those rights from the purview of the order.
[400 E] Dhirubha Devisingh Gohil vs The State of Bombay [1955] 1 SCR and Makhan Singh v State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797, 818 819, applied.
The Presidential order dated June 27, 1975, does not contain any clause like the one in the order dated November 3, 1962 Article 359(1) is only an 196 enabling provision and the validity of a plea cannot be tested with reference to that Article.
The right to move a court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III is not taken away by Article 359(1).
It is the Presidential order passed in pursuance of the powers conferred by that Article by which such a consequence can be brought about.
The Presidential order in the instant case is not subject to the preconditions that the detenu should have been deprived of his right under any particular Act and therefor, there is no scope for the enquiry whether the order is consistent or in conformity with any particular Act.
[405 B H, 406 A, 407 B C] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797; Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar ; K. Anandan Nambiar and Anr.
vs Chief Security Government of Madras & ors.
; State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri & Anr. ; , discussed and distinguished.
A mala fide exercise of power does not necessarily imply any moral turpitude and may only mean that the statutory power is exercised for purposes Other than those for which the power was intended by law to be exercise.
In view of the fact that an unconditional Presidential order of the present kind effects the locus standi of the petitioner to move any court for the enforcement of any of his Fundamental Rights mentioned in the order, it would not be open to him to show that the statutory power has been exercised for a purpose other than the one duly appointed under the law.
So long as the statutory prescription can be seen on the face of the order to have been complied with no further inquiry is permissible as to whether the order is vitiated by legal mala fides.
[409 E F] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797; Jai Chand Lall Sethia vs State of West Bengal & ors.
[1966] Supp.
SCR 464 and Durgadas Shirali vs Union of India & ors.
; , referred to.
As regards mala fides in the sense of malice in fact, the same position must hold good because the Presidential order operates as a blanket ban on any and every judicial inquisition into the validity of the detention order.
If in any given ease an order of detention appears on the very face of it to be actuated by an ulterior motive, the court would have jurisdiction to set it aside because no judicial inquiry of any sort is required to be undertaken in such a case.
But, short of such ex facie vitiation, any challenge to a detention order on the around of actual mala fides is also excluded under the Presidential order dated June 27, 1975.
1407 G H, 408 A B] Section 16A(9) is not unconstitutional on the ground that it constitutions an encroachment on the writ jurisdiction of the High Court and article 226.
There is no warrant for reading down that section so as to allow the courts to inspect the relevant files, to the exclusion of all other parties.
[409 D, D] Section 16A (9) is in aid of the constitutional power conferred by article 359(1) and further effectuates the purpose of the Presidential order issued under that Article.
If so, it cannot be declared unconstitutional.
[410 A] The rule enunciated in section 16A(9) is a genuine rule of evidence.
[410 B] A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; and Mohd. Maqbool Damnoo vs State of Jammu & Kashmir ; , distinguished.
The principles of res judicata and estoppel, the conclusive presumptions of law and various provisions of substantive law deny a free play to courts in the exercise of their jurisdiction.
These are not for that reason unconstitutional qua the High Court 's jurisdiction under article 226.
[410 F] The limits of judicial review have to be co extensive and commensurate with the right of an aggrieved person to complain of the invasion of his rights.
Section 16A(9) cannot be said to shut out an inquiry which is otherwise within the jurisdiction of the High Court to make.
[411 B] 197 Section 18 does not suffer from the vice of excessive delegation and is a valid piece of legislation.
[414 D] That section only declares what was the true position prior to its enactment on June 25, 1975.
The amendment of section 18 by the substitution of the words "in respect of whom an order is made or purported to be made under section 3", in place of the words "detained under this Act", does not render the section open to a challenge on the ground of excessive delegation.
The words "purported to be made" have been inserted in order to obviate the challenging that the detention is not in strict conformity with the Act.
Such a challenge is even otherwise barred under the Presidential order.
The object of he said provision is not to encourage the passing of lawless orders of detention but to protect during emergency orders which may happen lo be in less Than absolute conformity with the .
[412 B C] His Holiness Kesvananda Bharati Sripadagalarvaru vs State of Kerala [1973] Supp.
SCR I and Makhan Singh.
v State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797 referred.
A jurisdiction of suspicion is not a forum for objectivity.
The only argument which the court can entertain is whether the authority which passed the order of detention is duly empowered to pass it, whether the detenu is properly identified and whether on the face of its order, the stated purpose of detention is within the terms of law.
[414 E F] Zamora 's case ; Rex vs Halliday ; , 271.
liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; and Greene vs Secretary of State , referred to.
No judgment can be read as if it is a statute.
The generality of the expressions which may be found in a judgment are not intended to be expositions of the who 's law, but are governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found.
It is not a profitable task to extract a sentence here and there from a judgment and to build upon it because .
the essence of the decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein.
[401 C E] Quinn vs Leatham, ; , 506 auld State of Orissa vs Sudhansu Sekhar Misra & Ors.[1968] 2 SCR 154, 163, reiterated.
Per P. N. Bhagwati, J.
The Presidential order dated June 27, 1975, bars maintainability of a petition for a writ of habes corpus when an order of detention is challenged on the ground that it is vitiated by mala fides, legal, factual or is based on extraneous considerations or is not under the Act or is not in compliance with it.
[477 B C] The suspension of the privilege of the writ does not legalise what is done while it continues: it merely suspends for the time.
being the remedy of the writ.
[461 A B] The words "the right to move any court" are wide enough to include all claims made by citizens in any court of competent jurisdiction where it shown that the said claims cannot be effectively adjudicate upon.
without examining the question as to whether the citizen is, in substance, seeking to enforce any of the specified Fundamental Rights.
There can be no doubt that in view of the Presidential order which mentions article 21, the detenus would have no locus standi to maintain the writ petitions if it could be shown that the writ petitions were for the enforcement of the rights conferred by article 21.
[424 C E] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797, followed.
When a Presidential order is issued under article 353, clause (1), the Fundamental Right mentioned in the Presidential order is suspended so that the restriction on the power of the executive or the legislature imposed by the Fundamental Right is lifted while the Presidential order is in operation and 198 the executive or the legislature is free to make any law or to make any action which it would, but for the provisions contained in Part 111, be competent to make or to take.
the words 'but for the provisions contained in that part" that is, but for the Fundamental Rights, mean "if the Fundamental Rights were not there in the Constitution, the executive being limited by law would still be unable to take any action to the prejudice of a person except by authority of law and in conformity with or in accordance with law and, therefore, even the Presidential order mentions article 21, clause (1A) of article 359 Would not enable the executive to deprive a person of his Personal liberty without sanction of law and except in conformity with or in accordance with law.
It ' an order or dentention is made by the executive without the authority of law it would be invalid and its invalidity would not be cured by clause (IA) or article 359 because that clause does not protect executive action taken without lawful authority.
An unlawful order of detention would not be protected from challenge under article 21 by reason of clause (IA) of article 359 and the detenu would be entitled to complain of such unlawful detention as being, in violation of ' article 21 except in so far as his right tor move the court for that purpose may be held to have been taken away by clause (1) of article 359.
[427 C H] State of Madhya Pradesh v Thakur Bharat Singh ; ; District Collector of Hyderabad vs M/s Ibrahim & Co. ; Bennett Coleman & Co. vs Union of India ; and Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India , applied.
Even though a Presidential Order issued under clause (1) of Art, 359 mentions article 21, where it is found that a detention has not been made in pursuance of lawful authority or in other words, the detention is without the authority of law, whether by reason of there being no law at all or by reason of the law under.
which the detention is made being void, clause (1A) of Art, 359 would not protect it from challenge under article 21 and it would be in conflict with that Article [429 H. 430 A] , The words "rights, conferred by Part III" cannot be read in isolation nor can they be construed by reference to theoretical or doctrinaire considerations.
'They must be read in the context of the provisions enacted in Part 111 in order.
to determine what are the rights conferred by the provisions in that Part, It is true that Art, 21 is couched in negative language.
It is not uncommon in legislative practice to use negative language for conferring a right.
That is often done for lending greater emphasis and strength to the legislative enactment.
Article 21 confers the Fundamental Right of personal liberty.
[430 F H] Punjab Province vs Daulat Singh 73 Indian Appeals 59; Basheshar Nath vs The Commissioner of Income Tax Delhi & Rajasthan [1959] Supp.
(1) SCR 529; State of Bihar vs Maharajidhiraj Kameshwar Singh of Derbhanga & Ors.
at p.988; P.D. Shamdasani vs Central Bank of India Ltd. ; AND R.C. Cooper vs Union of India ; referred to If article 21 were construed as not conferring a right to personal liberty, then there would be no Fundamental Right conferred by article 21 and even if a person is deprived of his personal liberty otherwise than in accordance with the procedure established by law and there is infringement of Art .21, such person would not be entitled to move the Supreme Court for a writ of habeas corpus under article 32, for that Article is available only for enforcement of the rights.
conferred by Part III.
That would be a starting consequence, as it would deprive the Supreme Court of a wholesome jurisdiction to protect the personal liberty of an individual against illegal detention, resulting in a departure from the well settled constructional position of article 21.
[432 B D] No attribute of personal liberty can be regarded as having been calved out of article 21.
That Article protects all attributes of persona; liberty against, executive action which is not supported by law.
When a person is detained.
there is deprivation of personal liberty within the meaning of article 21.
1433 A BI Kharak Singh vs State of U.P. & Ors.
[1964] 1 SCR 332.
referred to 199 The protection under article 21 is only against State action and not against private individuals and the protection, it secures, it is a limited one.
The only safeguard enacted by article 21 is that a person cannot be deprived of his persona liberty except according to procedure prescribed by "State made" law.
It is clear on plain natural construction of its language that article 21 imports two requirements: first, there must be a law authorising deprivation of personal liberty and secondly, such law must prescribe a procedure.
The first requirement is indeed implicit in the phrase "except according to procedure prescribed by law".
When a law prescribes a procedure for depriving a person of personal liberty, it must a fortiori authorise such deprivation.
Article 21, thus, provides both substantive as well as procedural safeguards.
Two other ingredients of article 21 are that there must not only be a law authorising deprivation of personal liberty there must also be a procedure prescribed by law or in other words law must prescribe a procedure.
[433 C F; 434 A C,H: 435 B] P. D. Shamdasani vs Central Bank of India Ltd. ; Smt.
Vidya Verma vs Dr. Shiv Narain and A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; , followed.
Article 21, operates not merely as a restriction on executive action against deprivation of ' personal liberty without authority of law, but it also enacts d check on the legislature by insisting that the law, which authorises depravation, must establish a procedure.
What the procedure should be is not laid down in this Article, but there must be some procedure and at the least, it must conform to the minimal requirements of article 22.
"Law" within the meaning of article 21 must be a valid law and ' not only must it be within the legislative competence of the legislature enacting it, but it must also not be repugnant to any of the Fundamental Rights enumerated in Part III.
[435 C D] Shambhu Nath Sarkar vs The State of West Bengal ; ; and Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal & ors.
; , referred The constitutional principle in Eshugabayi E eko vs The officer Administrating the Government of Nigeria has been accepted by the courts in India as part of the law of the land.
In our country, even in pre Constitution days, the executive was a limited executive, that is, an executive limited by law and it could act only in accordance with law.
[438 B, 439 A] Liversidge vs Sit.
John Anderson , Vimlabai Deshpande vs Emperor AIR 1945 Nag. 8.
Jitenderanath Ghosh vs The Chief Secretary to the Government of Bengal, ILR at 377; In re: Banwarilal Roy 48 Cal.
Weekly Notes 766 at 780; Secretary of State for India vs Hari Bhanji Mad. 373; Province of Bombay vs Khushaldas Advani ; and P. K. Tare vs Emperor AIR 1943 Nag. 26, referred.
Even prior the Constitution, the principle of rule of law that the executive cannot act to the prejudice of a person without the authority of law was recognised as part of the law of the land and was uniformly administered by the courts.
It was, clearly "law" in force" and, ordinarily, by reason of article 372 it would have continued to subsist as a distinct and separate principle of law hr even after the commencement of the Constitution, until some aspects of ' this principle of Law were expressly recognised and given constitutional embodiment in different Articles of the Constitution.
[439 B C] When this principle of rule of law that the executive cannot deprive a person of his liberty except by authority of law, is recognised and embodied as a Fundamental light and enacted as such in article 21, it cannot continue to have a distinct and separate existence, independently and apart from this Article in which it has been given constitutional vesture, unless it were also enacted as a statutory principle by some positive law of the State.
It cannot continue in force under article 372 when it is expressly recognised and embodied as a Fundamental Right in article 21 and finds a place in the express provisions of the Constitution When the Constitution makers have clearly intended 200 that this right should be subject to the limitation imposed by article 359, clause (1) and (1A), it would be contrary to all canons of construction to hold that the same right continues to exist independently, but free from the limitation imposed by article 359, clauses (1) and (1A) Such a construction would defeat the object of the constitution makers in imposing the limitation under article 359, clauses (1) and (1A) and make a mockery of that limitation.
The Presidential order would in such a case become meaningless and ineffectual.
[439 F H, 440 A C] The only way in which meaning and effect can be given to the Presidential order suspending the enforcement of the right of personal liberty guaranteed under article 21 is that the principle of Rule of Law, on what the executive cannot interfere with the personal liberty of any person except by.
authority of law, is enacted in article 21 and it does not exist as a distinct and separate principle conferring a right of personal liberty independently and apart from that Article.
Consequently, when the enforcement of the right of personnel liberty conferred by article 21 is suspended by a Presidential order the detenu cannot circumvent the Presidential order and challenge the legality of his deletion by falling back on the supposed right of personal liberty based on the principle of Rule of Law.
[440F H] The executive is plainly and indubitably subordinated to the law and it cannot flout the mandate of the law but must act in accordance with the law.
[441 B] Eastern Trust Company vs Mckenzie Mann.
& Co. ; Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur vs The State of Punjab and State of Madhya Pradesh vs Thakur Bharat Singh ; referred to The Presidential orders issued under article 359 clause (1) do not give any power to the executive to alter or suspend or flout the law nor do they enlarge the power.
Of the executive so as to permit it to go beyond what is sanctioned by law.
As soon as the emergency comes to an end and the Presidential order ceases to be operative, the unlawful action of the executive becomes actionable and the citizen is entitled to challenge it by moving a court of law.
[161 A C] Whilst a Presidential Order issued under article 359, clause (1) is in operation, the Rule of Law is not obliterated and it continues to operate in all its vigour.
The executive is bound to observe and obey the law and it cannot ignore or disregard it.
If the executive commits a breach of the law its action would be unlawful but merely the remedy would be temporarily baned where it involves enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights specified in the Presidential order.
[461 C D] When the right of personal liberty based on the Rule of Law which existed immediately prior to the Commencement of the Constitution has been enacted in the Constitution as a Fundamental Right in article 21 with the limitation that when there is a Proclamation of Emergency, the President may by order under article 359, clause (1) suspend its enforcement, that right of personal liberty based on the Rule of law cannot continue to exist as a distinct and independent right free from the limitation as to enforcement contained in article 359 clause (1).
It would be meaningless and futile for the Constitution makers to have imposed this limitation in regard to enforcement of the right of personal liberty guaranteed by article 21, if the detenu could with impunity, disregard such limitation and fall back on the right of personal liberty based on the Rule of Law.
[445 E G] Attorney General vs De Keyser 's Royal Hotel, ; , discussed.
Dhirubha Devisingh Gohil vs The State of Bombay [1955] I SCR 691, followed.
On an application of the maxim expressum facit cessare tacitum.
that is what is expressed makes what is silent cease a principle of logic and common 201 sense and not merely a technical rule of construction the express provision in article 21 that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure prescribed by law will necessarily exclude a provision to the same effect to be gathered or implied from the other provisions of the Constitution.
[447 D E, 448 D] Shankara Rao Badami vs State of Mysore ; and State (Walsh and ors.) vs Lennon and ors.
1942 Irish Report.
of 112, applied.
The contention that the principle of Rule of Law that the executive cannot act to the prejudice of a person except by authority of law continues to exist as a distinct and independent Principle unaffected inter alia by the enactment of article 21, is not correct.
[451 Al State of Madhya Pradesh vs Thakur Bharat Singh [19671 2 SCR 454; District Collector, Hyderabad vs M/s. Ibrahim & Co. ; Bennet Coleman & Co. vs Union of India ; ; Shree Meenakshi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India & ors. ; Bidi Supply Co. vs Union of India ; ; Bishan Das & Ors.
v State of Punjab ; ; State of Bihar vs Kameshwar Prasad Verma ; ; Eshugbayi Eleko vs The officer Administering the Government of Nigeria AIR 1931 PC and Makhan Singh V. Sate of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797, distinguished.
The words 'any court in Article 21 must be given their plain grammatical meaning and must be construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction which would include the Supreme Court and the High Courts before which the specified rights in article 359 clause ( 1 ) can be enforced by the citizens.[454 Al Makhan Singh V. State of Punjab , followed.
When the Presidential order is without any condition, in a detenu contends that the order of detention has been made mala fide or that it has been passed by a delegate outside the authority conformed on him under the Act or that it has been exercised inconsistently with the conditions prescribed in that behalf, that is, it is not in accordance with the Provisions of law, such a plea would be barred at the threshold by the Presidential order.
[458 B C] Quinn & Leathen ; , State of Orissa vs Sudhansu Sekhar Misra ; Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs 'The State of Punjab ; A. Nambiar vs Chief Secretary ; and Sate of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri ; , distinguished.
There is no scope for the contention that even if the enforcement of the Fundamental Right conferred by article 21 is suspended by the Presidential order, the detenu can still enforce a supposed natural right of personal liberty in a court of law.
[459 D] His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala [1973] Supp.
SCR 1 and Golak Nath & Ors.
vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
If the positive law of the State degrees that no person shall be deprived of his personal liberty except according to the procedure described by law, the enforcement of such statutory right would not be barred by the Presidential order.
But, there is no legislation in our country which confers the right of personal liberty by providing that there shall be no deprivation of it except in accordance with law.
(in the contrary, section 18 of the , enacts that no person in respect of whom an order of detention is made or purposed to be made under section 3 shall have any right to personal liberty by virtue of natural law or common law, if any.
h Because the Indian Penal Code in section 342 makes it penal to would fully confine any person and the offence of wrongful confinement postulates that no one shall be deprived of his personal liberty except by authority of law, it cannot 202 be said on that account that section 342 of the Indian Penal Code confers a right of personal liberty.
The utmost that can be said is that this section proceed on a recognition of the right of personal liberty enacted in article 21 and makes it an offence to wrongfully confine a person in breach of the right conferred by that constitutional provision [459 E H, 460 A] The words four any other purpose in article 226 greatly enlarge the jurisdiction of the High Court and the High Court can issue a writ of habeas corpus if it finals that the intention of a person is illegal.
It is not necessary for this purpose that the court should be moved by the detenu.
It is sufficient if it is moved by any person affected by the order of intention.
When it is so moved and it examines the legality of the order of detention it does not enforce the right of personal liberty of the detenu, but it merely keeps the executive within the bounds of law and enforces the principle of legality.
The words .
any other purpose cannot be availed of for the purpose of circumventing the constitutional inhibition flowing from the Presidential order.
[460 B G] Article 359 clause (1) and the Presidential order issued under it do not have the effect of making unlawful actions of the executive lawful.
[461 F G] When a person takes proceedings under the Code of Criminal Procedure in connection with the offence of wrongful confinement or murder or launches of prosecution for such offence, he cannot be said to be enforcing the fundamental Right of the detenu or the murdered man under article 21 so as to attract the inhibition of the Presidential order.
[461 F G] An application seeking to enforce a statutory obligation imposed on the police officer and a statutory right created in favour of an arrested person by section 57 of the Criminal Procedure Code would not be barred, because what is suspended by a Presidential Order specifying article 21 is the right to move the court for enforcement of the Fundamental Right conferred by that article and not the right to move the court for enforcement of the statutory right to be released granted under section 57, Cr.
P C. [462 G] If a positive legal right is conferred on a person by legislation and he seeks to enforce it in a court, it would not be within the inhibition of a Presidential Order issued under article 359, clause (1).
[463 G H] This does not mean that whenever a petition for a writ of habeas corpus comes before the court it must be rejected straightaway without even looking at the averments made in it.
The court would have to consider where the bar of the Presidential order is attracted and for that purpose the court would have to the whether the order of detention is one made by an authority empowered to pass such an order under the Act.
If it is not, it would not be State action.
and the petition would not be one for enforcement of the right confirmed by article 21.
[463 G H, 464 A] Once it is held that the obligation of the executive is not a deprive a person of his personal liberty except in accordance with law, is to be found only an article 21 and no where else it must follow necessarily that in challenging the legality of the detention, what the applicant claims is that there.
is, , in fact fact, by the executive of the right of personal liberty conferred by Art 21 and that immediately attracts the applicability of the Presidential order.
[460 D E] It is the basic characteristic and essence of martial law that during the time that it is in force, the individual cannot enforce his right to life and liberty by resorting to judicial process and the courts cannot issue the writ of habeas corpus or pass any suitable orders [442 G] John Allen 's case (1921) 2 Irish Reports 241, referred to: Merely by declaring martial law would not by itself deprive the courts of the power to issue the writ of habeas corpus or other process for the protection of the right of the individual to life and liberty.
[443 A] 203 The declaration of martial law, which is not even expressly provided in the Constitution, cannot override the provisions of the Articles conferring the right to life and liberty as also of Articles 32 an l 226 and unless the right of an individuals to move the courts for enforcement of the right to life and liberty can be suspended or taken away by or under an express provision of the Constitution, the individual would be entitled to enforce the right to life and liberty under article 32 or article 226 or by resorting to the ordinary process w. even during martial law.
[443 A C] Article 34 clearly postulates that during the time that material law is in force no judicial process can issue to examine the legality of an act done by the military authorities or the executive in connection with the maintenance of restoration or order.
[443 E F] During the martial law, the courts cannot and should not have the power to examine the legality of the action of the military authorities or the executive on any ground whatsoever, including, the ground of mala fides.
But, if the courts are to be prevented from exercising such power during, martial law the situation can be brought about only by a Presidential order issued under C. Act 359 clause (i) and in no other way, and the Presidential Order.
in so far as it suspends the enforcement of the right of personal liberty confirmed under article 21 must be constructed to bar challenge to the legality of detention in am, court including the Supreme Court and the High Courts whilst the Presidential Order is in operation, [444 A C] Ex parte Milligan (1866) 4 Wallace 2; Moyer vs Peabody , and Duncan vs Kohanmeku ; , referred to.
There are two rights which the detenu has in this connection: one is the Fundamental Right conferred by article 22, clause (5) and the other is the statutory right conferred by section 8.
Though the content of both these rights is the same, they have distinct and independent existence and merely because enforcement of one is suspended, it does not mean that the other also cannot be enforced.
[463 B C] The theory of reflection is clearly erroneous.
If the right conferred under section 8 were a reflection of the Fundamental Right conferred by article 22, clause (5) which is the object reflected must necessarily result in the effacement of the right under section 8 which is said to constitute the reflection.
But even if article 22 clause (5) were deleted from the Constitution, section 8 would still remain on the statute book until repealed by the legislature.
The Presidential Order would not therefore, bar enforcement of the right conferred by section 8.
[463 C D] Fathima Beebi vs M. K. Ravindranathan (1975) Crl.
1164, over ruled.
It is true that sub sec.
(9) (a) of section 16A does not specifically refer to any court.
But, there is inherent evidence in the sub section itself to show that it is intended to prevent disclosure of such grounds, information and materials before a court.
There is clearly an echo of section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act.
Sub section (9) of section It is must also be held to be designed to achieve the same intention as prohibiting disclosure even to a court.
Sub section (9) (a) of section 16A cannot, therefore, be read down so as to imply an exception in favour of disclosure to a court.
[469 D, F] Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal & Ors.
[1375] ` SCR 832; , Lee vs Burrel 170 English Reports 1402 and Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; referred to.
There can be no doubt that article 226 is a constitutional provision and it empowers the High Court to issue a writ of habeas corpus for enforcement of the Fundamental Right by article 21 and also for any other purpose.
The High Court has.
therefore, constitutional power to examine the Legality of detention and for that purpose to inquire and determine whether the detention is in accordance with the provisions of law.
The constitutional Power cannot be taken away or abridged by a legislative enactment.
If there is any legislative.
204 provision which obstructs or retards the exercise of this constitutional power it would be void.
It is, therefore, clear that if it can be shown that sub section (9) (a) of section 16A abridges or whitles down the constitutional power of the High Court under article 226 or obstructs or retards its exercise, it would be void as being in conflict with article 226.
If there is a legislative provision which prohibits disclosure of the grounds, information and materials on which the order of detention is based and prevents the court from calling for the production of such grounds, information and materials, it would obstruct and retard the exercise of the constitutional power of the High Court under article 226 and would be void as offending that Article.
[470 C D, 471 A B, E F] Hari Vishnu Kamath vs Syed Ahmad Ishaque & Ors. ; ; Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh & Ors.
[1955] 1 SCR 267; Raj Krushna Bose vs Binod Kanungo & Ors.
; ; The Kerala Education Bill 1957, [1959] SCR 995; Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad [1963] Supp.
1 SCR 885; Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal ; ; Biren Dutta & Ors.
v, Cheif Commissioner of Tripura & Anr.
; ; M.M. Damnoo vs J & K State ; and A.K. Gopalan vs State of.
Madras [1950] SCR p. 80, referred.
A rule of evidence merely determines what shall be regarded as relevant and admissible material or the purpose of enabling the court to come to a decision in the exercise of its jurisdiction and it does not in any way detract from or affect the jurisdiction of the court and it cannot, in the circumstances, be violative of article 226.
But in order that if should not fall foul of article 226, is must be a genuine rule of evidence.
If in the guise of enacting a rule of evidence the legislature in effect and substance disable and impedes the High Court from effectively exercising its constitutional power under article 226.
such an enactment would be void.
It will be colourable exercise of legislative power.
The legislature cannot be permitted to violate a constitutional provision by employing an indirect method.
It a legislative provision, though in form and outward appearance a rule of evidence, is in substances and reality something different obstructing or impeding the exercise .
The jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226, the form in which the legislative provision is clothed would not safe it from condemnation.
[474 B C] It is well settled that in order to determine the true character of a legislative provision.
the court must have regard to the substance of the provision and not its form.
Sub section (9)(a) of section 16A is in form and outward appearance a rules of evidence which says that the grounds, information and materials on which the order of detention is made or the declaration under sub section) or sub section (3) is based shall be treated as confidential and shall be deemed to refer to matters of State and be against the public interest to disclose.
Sub section
(9) (a) of section 16A assumes valid declaration under sub section
(2) or sub section
(3) and it is only when such a declaration has been made that sub section
(9)(a) of section 16A applies or in other words.
It is only in cases where a person is detained in order to deal effectively with the emergency.
that the disclosure of the grounds, information and materials is prohibited by sub sec.
(9)(a) of section 16A. [474 E F 475 B C, E F] The rule enacted in sub section
(9)(a) of section 16A bears close analogy to a rule of conclusive presumption and in the circumstance it must be regard as a genuine rule of evidence.
[476 D] If the grounds, information and materials have no relation to matter of State or they cannot possibly be of such a character that their closure would injure public interest, the legislature cannot, by merely employing a legal function, deem them to refer to matters of State which it would be against public interest to disclose an 1 thereby exclude them from the judicial ken.
That would not be a genuine rule of evidence: it would be a colourable legislative device a fraudulent exercise of power.
There can be no blanket ban on disclosure of the grounds, information and materials to the High Court of this Court irrespective of their true character in such cases [476 E F] 205 M. M. Damnoo vs State of J & K ; ; A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; and Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; referred to.
The grounds, information and materials in almost all cases would be of a confidential character falling within the class of documents privileged under section 123 and hence the rule enacted in sub section genuinely partakes of the character of a rule of evidence.
Sub section
(9) (a) of section 16A enacts a genuine rule of evidence and it does not detract from or affect the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 225 and hence it cannot be successfully assailed as invalid.
[476 G H, 477 A] There is no warrant for reading down sub section 9A of section 16 so as to imply a favour in favour of disclosure to the court The provision does not constitute an encroachment on the constitutional jurisdiction or the High Court under article 226 and is accordingly not void.
[477, C D] If the declaration under sub section (2) or sub section
(3) is invalid, subs 9(a) of section 16A will not be attracted on the grounds of information and materials on which the order of detention is made, would not be privileged under sub section therefore, sub section 9(a) of section 16A enacts a genuine rule of evidence.
[477 A B] [His Lordship thought it unnecessary to go into the question of construction and validity of section 18 of the .] [464 A] An obiter cannot take the place of the ratio.
Judges are not oracles.
It has no binding effect and it cannot be regarded as conclusive on the point when considering the observations of a High judicial authority like this Court, the greatest possible care must be taken to relate the observations of a Judge to the precise issues before him and to confine such observations, even though expressed in broad terms, in the general compass of the question before him unless he makes it clear that he intended his remarks to have a wider ambit.
It is not possible for Judges always to express their judgments so as to exclude entirely the risk that in some subsequent case their language may be misapplied and any attempt at such perfection of expression can only lead to the opposite result of uncertainty and even obscurity as regard the case in hand.
[1455 F H, 456 A C] H. M. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Bahadur & Ors.
vs Union of India ; , applied Per H. R. Khanna, J. (dissenting) Article 21 cannot be considered to be the role repository of the right to life and personal liberty.
The right to life and personal liberty is the most decisions right of human beings in civilised societies governed by the rule of law.
H] Sanctity of life and liberty was not something new when the Constitution was drafted.
It represented a facet of higher values which mankind began to cherish in its, evolution from a state of tooth and claw to a civilized existence.
The principle that no one shall be deprived of his life and liberty without the authority of law was not the gift of the Constitution.
It was a necessary corollary of the concept relating to the sanctity of life and liberty, it existed and was in force before the coming into force of the Constitution.
[268 C D] Even in the absence of article 21 in the Constitution, the State has got no power to deprive a person of his life or liberty without the authority of law.
That is the essential postulate and basic assumption of the Rule of Law and not of men in all civilised nations.
Without such sanctity of life and liberty, the distinction between a Lawless society and one governed by laws would cease to have any meaning.
the principle that no one shall be deprived of his life or liberty without the authority of law is rooted in the consideration that life and liberty are priceless possessions which cannot be made the plaything of individual whim and caprice and that any act which has 206 the effect of tampering with life and liberty must receive substance from and sanction of the laws of the land.
Article 21 incorporates an essential aspect of that principle and makes it part of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed in part III of the Constitution.
It does not, however, follow from the above that if article 21 had not been drafted and inserted in Part III, in that even would have been permissible for the State to deprive a person of his life or liberty without the authority of law.
There are no case, to show that before the coming into force of the Constitution or in countries under Rule of Law where there is no provision corresponding to article 21, a claim was ever sustained by the court, that the State can deprive a person of his life or liberty without the authority of law.
[302 H, 269 H, 270 A C] Olmstead vs United States ; (1928); James Sommersett 's case (1772), 16 Cr.
Pract.
Fabrigas vs Mostyn ; Ameer Khan 's case 6 Bengal Law Reports 392.
Eshugbai Eleko vs Officer Administering the Government of Nigeria, ; Prabhakar Kesheo Tare & Ors.
vs Emperor AIR (1943) Nag. 26; Vimlabai Deshpande vs Emperor A.I.R. 1945 Nag. 8: Jitendranath Ghosh vs The Cheif Secretary to the Government of Bengal ILR ; In re: Banwari Lal Roy & Ors.
Bidi Supply Co. vs The Union of India & Ors. ; and Baheshar Nath vs The Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi & Rajasthan & Anr.
[1959] Supp.
(1) 528, referred to.
The view, that when right to enforce the right under article 21 is supplied the result would be that there would be no remedy against deprivation of a persons life or liberty by the State even though such deprivation is without the authority of law or even in flagrant violation of the provisions of law is hot acceptable.
the facts that the framers of the Constitution made an aspect of such right a part or the fundamental Rights did not have the effect of determining the independent identity of such right and of making article 21 to be the sole repository.
Of that right.
The real effect was to ensure that a law under which a per on can be deprived of his life or personal liberty should prescribe a procedure for such deprivation or such law should be a valid law not violation of Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution Recognition as Fundamental Right of one aspect of the pre constitutional right cannot have the effect of making things less favourable so far as the sanctity of life and personal liberty is concerned.
compared to the position if an aspect of such right had not been recognised as Fundamental Right because of The vulnerability of Fundamental Rights accruing from article 359.
1271 D G] A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; and Dhirubha Devisingh Gohil vs The State of Bombay [1955] I SCR 691, referred to.
After the coming into force of the Constitution a detenu has two remedies one under article 226 or article 32 of the Constitution and another under section 491 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The remedy under an earlier statutory provision would not get obliterated because of the identical remedy by a subsequent Constitutional provision and that the two can co exist without losing their independent identity.
1272 D E] Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797, applied.
Dhirubha Devisingh Gohil vs The State of Bombay [1955] I SCR 691, not invokable.
The principle that no one shall be deprived of his life or liberty without the authority of law stems not merely from the basic assumption in every civilised society governed by the Rule of Law of the sanctity of life and liberty, it flows equally from, the fact that under our penal laws no one, is empowered to deprive a, person of his life or liberty without the authority of law [272 l I, 273 A] The fact that penal laws of India answer to the description of the word law which has been used in article 21 would not militate against the inference 207 that article 21 is not the sole repository of the right to life or personal liberty.
Nor is it the effect of article 21 that penal laws get merged in article 21 because of the act that they constitute law as mentioned in article 21, for were it so the suspension of the right to move a court for enforcement of Fundamental Right contained in article 21 would also result in suspension of the right to move any court for enforcement of penal laws.
At one time the Constitution came into force, the legal position was that no one could be deprived of his life or liberty without the authority of law.
[273 A C] Director of Rationing and Distribution vs 'The Corporation of Calcutta & ors.
; , relied on.
It is difficult to accede to the contention that because of article 21 of the Constitution, the law which was already in force that no One could be deprived of his life or liberty without the authority of law was obliterated and ceased to remain in force.
No rule of construction or interpretation warrants such an inference.
The constitutional recognition of the remedy of writ of habeas corpus did not obliterate or abrogate the statutory remedy of writ of habeas corpus.
Section 491.
Of the Code of Criminal Procedure continued to he a part of that Code till that Code was replaced by the new Code.
Although the remedy of writ of habeas corpus is not now available under.
the new Code of Criminal Procedure.
1973, the same remedy is still available under article 226 of the Constitution.
[273 H, 274 A Ci Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797, relied on.
According to the law in force in India before the coming into force of the Constitution, no one could be deprived of his life and personal liberty without the authority of law.
Such a claw continued to be in force after the coming into force of the Constitution in view of article 372 of the Constitution.
[303 The word law has been used in article 21 in the sense of State made law and not as an equivalent of law in the abstract or general sense embodying, the principles of natural justice.
The procedure established by law means the procedure established by law made by the State, that is to say, the Union Parliament or the legislatures of the States.
Law meant a valid and binding law under the provisions of the Constitution and not one infringing Fundamental Rights.
[266 C D] A, K. Gopalan vs State of Madras ; , explained.
The effect of the suspension of the right to move any court for the enforcement of the right conferred by article 21 is that when a petition is filed in a court, the court would have to proceed upon the basis that no reliance can be placed upon that Article for obtaining relief from the court during the period of emergency.
[266 D E] Starting consequences would follow from the acceptance of the contention that consequent upon the issue of the Presidential order in question, no one can seek relief from courts during the period of emergency against deprivation of life and personal liberty.
If two constructions of the Presidential order were possible, the court should lean in favour of a view which does not result in such consequence.
The construction which does not result in such consequences is not only possible, it is also pre eminently possible.
1303 B C] Equally well established is the`rule of construction that if there be a conflict between the municipal law on one side and the international law or the provisions of any treaty obligations on the other, the courts would give effect to municipal law.
however, two constructions of the municipal law are possible, The court should lean in favour of adopting such construction as would make the provisions of the municipal law to the in harmony with the international law or treaty obligations.
While dealing with the Presidential Order under article 359(1) such a construction should be a adopted.
as would, if possible, not bring it in conflict with the above Articles 8 and 9 of U.N Charter.
It is plain that such a constructional is not only possible, it is a also pre eminently 208 reasonable The Presidential orders therefore, should be so constructed as not to warrant arbitrary arrest or to bar right to an effective remedy by competent national tribunals for acts violating basic right of personal liberty granted by law.
1276 A B. 277 D E] Corocraft Ltd. vs Pan American Airways Inc ; Article 51 of` the Constitution, H. H. Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala [1973] Supp.
SCR I, referred to.
The argument that suspending the right of a person to move any court for the enforcement of right to life and personal liberty is done under a constitutional provision and, therefore, it cannot be said that the resulting situation would mean the absence of the Rule of law.
cannot stand close scrutiny for it tries to equate illusion of the Rule of Law with the reality of Rule of Law.
A state of negation of Rule of Law would not cease to be such a slate because of the tact that such a state of negation of Rule of Law has been brought About by a statute.
Absence of Rule of Law would nevertheless be absence of Rule of Law even though it is brought about by a law to repeal all laws.
The Rule of Law requires something, more the legal principle "quod principi placuit legis habet vigorem." [277 E H, 278 A Bl Freedom under law is not absolute freedom.
It has its own limitations in its own interest, and can properly be described as regulated freedom.
The truth that every man ought to be free has for its other side the complementary and consequential truth that no man can be absolutely free.
The need of liberty for each is necessarily qualified and conditioned by the need of liberty for all Liberty in the State, or legal liberty.
is never the absolute liberty or all, but relative and regulated liberty.
Rule of law is true antithesis of arbitrariness.
The rule of law has come to be regarded as the mark of a free society.
Its content is different in different countries.
It is, however, identified with the liberty of 'he individual.
It seeks to maintain a balance between the opposing notions of individual liberty and Public order.
1267 C D; 268 B C] In a long chain of authorities the Supreme Court has laid stress upon the prevalence of the Rule of Law in the country, according to which the executive cannot take action prejudicial to the right of an individual without the authority of law.
There is no valid reason to depart from the rule laid down in those decisions.
1278 E. 281 E, 303 C D] Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur & Ors. vs The State of Punjab State of Madhya Pradesh & Anr.
vs Thakur Bharat Singh ; Chief Settlement Commissioner, Rehabilitation Department Punjab & Ors.
vs Om Parkash & Ors.
; ; District Collector of Hyderabad & Ors.
vs M/s. Ibrahim & Co. etc.
; Bennett Coleman & Co. and Ors.
vs Union of India ; Shree Meenaksi Mills Ltd. vs Union of India ; Naraindas Indurkhya vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; Director of Rationing and Distribution vs The Corporation of Calcutta & Ors ; ; Bishan Das & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab & Ors. ; ; section G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors. ; United States vs Wunderlick ; ; John Wilkes 's case at 2539 and Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Shri Rai Narain. , referred to.
According to article 21.
no one can be deprived of his right to personal liberty except in accordance with the procedure established by law.
Procedure for the exercise of power of depriving a person of his right of personal Liberty necessarily postulates the existence of the substantive power.
When article 21 is in force, law relating to deprivation of life and personal liberty must provide both for the substantive power as well as the procedure for the exercise of such power.
When right to move in court for enforcement of right guaranteed by Art 21 is suspended, it would have the effect of dispensing with the necessity of prescribing procedure for the exercise of substantive power to deprive a person of his life and personal liberty, it cannot have the effect of permitting an authority to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty without the existence of such substantive power.
[303 D F] 209 The difference in phraseology of the Presidential order dated June 27, 1975 and that of the earlier Presidential orders would not, however, justify the Conclusion that because of the new Presidential order dated rune 27, 1975, a detention order need not comply with the requirements of the law providing for preventive detention.
Such a detention order would still be liable to be challenged in a court on the ground that it does not comply with the requirement of law For preventive detention if ground for such challenge be permissible in spite of and consistently with the new Presidential order.
The effect of the change in phraseology would only be that such of the observation made by his Court fn the context of the language of the earlier Presidential orders cannot now be relied upon.
Reliance, however, can still be placed upon the observations made in various cases which were not linked with the phraseology of the earlier Presidential orders.
[263 F H] Makhan Singh vs Stare of Punjab [1964] 4 SCR 797; State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri & Anr. ; and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & Ors. , referred to.
A Presidential order.
under article 359(1) can suspend during the period of emergency only the right to move any court for enforcement of the Fundamental Rights mentioned in the order.
Rights created by statutes being not Fundamental Rights can be enforced during the period of emergency despite the Presidential order.
Obligations and liabilities flowing from statutory provisions likewise remain unaffected by the Presidential order.
Any redress sought from a court of law on the score of breach of statutory provision would be outside the purview of article 359(1) and the Presidential order made thereunder.
1303 C Hl Anandan Nambiar & Anr.
vs Chief Secretary, Govt.
Of Madras ; @ 410, referred to.
Clause (1A) of article 359 protects laws and executive actions from any attack on validity on the score of being violation of the Fundamental Rights mentioned in the Presidential order in the same way as article 358 protect the laws and executive actions from being challenged on the ground of being violative of article 19 during the period of emergency.
The language of clause (IA) of It.
359 makes it clear that the protection which is afforded by that clause h is to such law or execute action as the State would but for the provisions contained in Part 111 of the Constitution be competent to make or take.
The word competent has a significance and it is apparent that despite the Presidential order under article 359(1) in the case of executive action the competence of the State to take such action would have to be established.
Such competence .
Would, however, be judged ignoring the restriction placed by the provisions or Part III of tho Constitution.
To put it in other words, clause (IA) of article 359 does not dispense with the necessity of competence to make laws.
Or take executive action.
But it would still be necessary to establish the competence de hors the restrictions of the Fundamental Rights.
[283 D E] Though, there is no reference to substantive power in article 21, it would cover both the existence of the substantive power of depriving a person of his life and personal liberty as well as the procedure for the exercise of that power [284 D] The suspension of the right to move a court for the enforcement of the right contained in article 21 cannot have the effect of debarring an aggrieved person from approaching the courts with the complaint regarding deprivation of life or personal liberty by an authority on the score that no power has been vested in the authority to deprive a person of life or liberty.
The pre supposition of the existence of substantive power to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty in article 21 even though that article only mentions the procedure, would not necessarily point to the conclusion that in the event of the suspension of the right to move any court for the enforcement of article 21, the suspension would also dispense with the necessity of the existence of the substantive power The co existence of substantive power and procedure established by law for depriving R person of his life and liberty which is implicit in article 21 would not lead to the result that even if there is suspension of the right regarding 16 833 SCI/76.
210 procedure, suspension would also operate upon the necessity of substantive power.
What is true of a proposition need not be true of the converse of that proposition.
The suspension of the right to make.
any court for the enforcement of the right contained in article 21 may have the effect of dispensing with the necessity of prescribing procedure for the exercise.
Of substantive power to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty, it can in no case have the effect of permitting an authority to deprive a person of his life or personal liberty without the existence of substantive power.
The close bond which is there between the existence of substantive power of depriving a Person of his life or personal liberty and the procedure for the exercise of that power, if the right contained in article 21 were in operation, would not necessarily hold good if that right were suspended because the removal of compulsion about the prescription of procedure for the exercise of the substantive power would not do away with the compulsion regarding the existence of that power.
[284 G H, 285 A G] In considering the effect of Presidential order suspending the right of a person tn move my court for enforcement of right guaranteed by Art, 21, the words "except according to procedure established by law should not be treated to be synonymous with save by authority of law .
[285 D] A Presidential order under article 359(1) cannot have the effect of suspending the right to enforce rights flowing from statutes, nor can it bar access to the courts of persons seeking redresses on he s ore of contravention of statutory provisions.
Statutory provisions are enacted to be complied with and it is not permissible to contravene them.
Statutory provisions cannot be treated as mere pious exhortations or words of advice which may be adjured or disobeyed with impunity.
Nor is compliance with statutory provisions optional or at the sufference of the official concerned.
It is the presence of legal sanctions which distinguished positive law from other systems of rules and norms.
To be a legal system a set of norms must furnish sanctions for some of its precepts.
A legal sanction is usually thought of as a harmful consequence to induce compliance with law.
Non complince with statutory provisions entails certain legal consequences.
The Presidential order cannot stand in the way of the courts giving effect to those consequences.
To put it differently, the executive authorities exercising power under a statute have to act in conformity with its provisions and within the limits set out therein.
When a statute deals with matters effecting prejudicially the rights of individuals, the ambit of the power of the authorities acting under the Statute would be circumscribed by its provisions and it would not the permissible to involve some indefinite general powers of the executive.
[286 D H] Attorney General vs De Keyser 's Royal Hotel Ltd. , Jaichand Lall Sethia vs State of West Bengal [1966] Supp.
SCR 464; Durgadas Shirali V. Union of India & ors. ; and G. Sadanandan vs State of Kerala .
& Anr. , referred to.
Article 226 under which the High Courts can issue writs of habeas corpus is an integral part of the Constitution.
No power has been conferred upon any authority in the Constitution for suspending the power of the High Court to issue writs in the nature of habeas corpus during the period of emergency.
Such a result cannot be brought about by putting some particular construction on the Presidential order in question.
[288 B, 304 A B] Greene vs Secretary of State for Home Affairs , Secretary of State for Home Affairs vs O 'Brien (609) and Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab , referred to.
Article 226 of the Constitution confers power upon the High Courts of issuing appropriate writs in case it is found that the executive orders are not in conformity with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws of the land.
Judicial scrutiny of executive orders with a view to ensure that they are not violative of the provisions of the Constitution and the laws of the land being an integral part of our constitutional scheme.
it is not permissible to exclude judicial scrutiny except to the extent such exclusion is warranted by the provi 211 sions of the Constitution and the laws made in accordance with those provisions.
[290 F &] There is a clear demarcation of the spheres of function and power in our .`Constitution.
The acceptance of the contention advanced on behalf of the appellants would mean that during the period of emergency, the courts would be reduced to the position of being helpless spectators even if glaring and blatant instances of deprivation of Life and personal liberty in contravention of the statute are brought to their notice.
It would also mean that whatever it may be the law passed by the legislature, in the matter of life, and personal liberty of the citizens, the executive during the period of emergency would not be bound by it and would be at liberty to ignore and contravene it.
It is obvious that the acceptance of the contention would result in a kind of supremacy of the executive over the legislate and judicial organs of the State, and thus bring about a constitutional imbalance which perhaps was never in the contemplation of the framers of the Constitution.
The fact the the government which controls the executive has to enjoy the confidence so the legislator does not d tract from the above conclusion.
The executive under our constitutional scheme is nob merely to enjoy the confidence of the majority in the legislature it is also bound to carry out the legislative as manifested by the statutes passed by the legislature.
The Constitution further contemplated that the function of deciding whether the executive has acted in accordance with the legislative intent should be performed by the Courts.
[290 G H, 291 A C] No one can call deny the power of the State to assume vast powers of the detention in the interest of the security of the State.
It may indeed the necessary to do so to meet the peril acing the nation.
The consideration of security of the State must have a primacy and be kept in the forefront compared to which the interests of the individual can only take as secondary piece.
The motto has to be who lives, if the country dies.
Extraordinary powers are always assumed by the Government in all countries in times of emergency because of the extraordinary nature of the emergency.
The exercise of the power of detention.
it is well settled depends upon the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority and the courts can neither act as courts of appeal over the decisions of the detaining authority nor can they substitute their own opinion for that of the authority regarding the necessity of detention.
There is no antithesis between the power of the State to detain a person without trial under a law or preventive detention and the power of the court to examine the legality of such detention.
Tn dealing with an application for a writ of habeas corpus, the courts only, ensure that the detaining authorities act in accordance with the law of preventive detention.
The impact upon the individual of the massive and comprehensive powers of preventive detention with which the administrative officers are armed l has to be cushioned with legal safeguarded. against arbitrary deprivation of personal liberty if the premises of the rule of law is not to lose its content and become meaningless.
The chances of an innocent person being detained under a law providing for preventive detention on the subjective satisfaction of an administrative authority are much greater compared on the possibility of an innocent person being convicted at trial in a court of law.
1291 F H, 292 A, D E] Rex vs Halliday Ex parte Sadiq ; @ 272 and Liversidge vs Sir John Anderson ; referred to 7 The Presidential order of June 27.
1975, did not aspect maintainability of the habeas corpus petitions to question the legality of the detention orders and such petitions could be proceeded with despite that order.
[293 F] Principle in James Commersett 's case 1772 State Trials p. 1, referred to.
A law of preventive detention is not punitive but precautionary and preventive.
The power of detention under such law is based on circumstance of suspicion and not on proof of allegation as is required at a regular trial for the commission of an offence.
[294 F] A court cannot go behind the truth of the alleged facts.
If The material is germane to the object for which detention is legally permissible and an 212 order.
for detention is made don the basis of that material, the courts cannot sit as a court of appeal and substitute their own opinion for that of the authority concerned regarding the necessity of detention.
[295 E F] Sharpe vs Wakefield at p. 179 and Ross vs Papadopollos (on P. 33), referred to.
Malice in fact is quite a different thing: it means an actual malicious intention on the part of the person who has done the wrongful act, and it May be, in proceedings based on wrongs independent or contract, a very material ingredient in the question of whether a valid cause of action can be stated.
[269 C D] Shearer vs Shields Bhut Nath vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
In view of the Presidential Order suspending the right of the person to move any court for enforcement of specified Fundamental Rights including the one under article 22(5), it may with plausibility be argued that the vagueness of grounds of detention would not warrant the quashing of such detention order during the pendency of the Presidential order on the score of violation of article 22(5).
The Presidential order would.
however not stand in the way of the infirmity of the vagueness of grounds of detention because of the contravention of section X(l) of .
[297 E F] Every law providing for preventive detention contains certain procedural safeguards.
It is imperative that there should be strict compliance with the requirements of those procedural safeguards to sustain the validity of detention.
Detention without trial results in serious inroads into personal liberty of an individual.
In such case it is essential to ensure.
that there is no deviation from the procedural safeguards provided by the statute.
In the matter of even a criminal trial.
it is procedure that spells out much of the difference between the rule of law and the rule by whim and caprice.
The need for strict adherence to`strict procedural safeguards is much greater when we are dealing with preventive detention which postulates detention of a person even though he is not found guilty of the commission of an offence.
To condone or allow relaxation in the matter of compliance with procedural requirements would necessarily have the effect of practically doing away with even the slender safeguards is provide by the legislature against the arbitrary use of the provisions relating to prevention detention.
The history of personal Liberty is largely the history of insistence upon procedure.
It would.
therefore be wholly inappropriate to countenance and laxity in the mutter of strict compliance with procedural requirements prescribed for preventive detention.
[297 G H, 9`s A B] Once substantial disquieting doubt: are raised by the detenue in the mind of the court regarding the validity or his detention.
it would be the bounden duty of the State to dispel those doubts by placing sufficient material before the court with a view to satisfy it about the validity of the detention by filing a good return.
[299 C D] Kishori Mohan vs State of West Bengal AIR 1974 SC` 1749; king Emperor vs Sibnath Banerji 71 IA 241 and G. Sadanandan vs State of Kerala & Anr., , referred to.
[His Lordship did not express any opinion on the question of the validity of s 16A(9) of the .
[ 301 A] The appropriate occasion for the High Court to go into the constitutional validity of section 16A(9) and external all judicial scrutiny in writs of habeas corpus would be when the State or a detenu whoever is aggrieved upon, comes in appeal against the final judgments in any of the petitions pending in the High courts.
The whole matter would then be at large before the Supreme Court and it would not be inhibited by procedural or other constraints.
It would not be permissible or proper for the Supreme Court to short circuit the whole 213 thing and decide the matter by by passing the High Courts who are seized of the matter.
[302 F G and 304 D E] Section 18 of the would not detract from the view that article 21 is not the sole repository of the right to personal liberty.
The principle that no one shall be deprived of his life and personal liberty without the authority of law is also an essential facet of the Rule of law.
Section 18, therefore, cannot be of much assistance.
The view that section 18 would have the effect of enlarging the ambit of the power of the detaining authority for the purpose of passing an order for detention is not correct.
There has been no amendment of section 3 of the Act.
[274 D F] Section 18 cannot be construed to mean that even if an order for detention is made on grounds not warranted by section 3 of the Act, it shall be taken to be an order under section 3 of the Act.
Apart from the fact that such an inference is not permissible on the language of section 18, the acceptance of this view would also render the validity of section 18 open to question on the ground that it suffers from the vice of excessive delegation of legislative power.
The legislature is bound to lay down the legislative policy by prescribing the circumstances in which an order for detention can be made.
It is not permissible for the legislature to confer a power of detention without laying down guidelines and prescribing the circumstances in which such order should be made.
To do so would be tantamount to abdication of Legislation function for in such an event it would be open to the detaining authority to detain a person on any ground whatsoever.
[274 F H, 275 A] This Court in appeal by the State enlarge the area of the Unfavourable decision qua the state and make its position worse compared to what it was before the filing of the appeal.
Procedural propriety in matters relating to appeals forbids such a course.
The question of event of judicial scrutiny in the light of section 16A should be gone into when the whole matter is at large before this court and this court is not inhibited by procedural and other constraints from going into certain aspects which have a vital bearing.
It is primarily for the High Courts before which the matters are pending to decide the question of the of judicial scrutiny in the light of section 16A(9), as amended by Act.
14 of 1976.
A course which has the effect of bypassing the High Courts and making this Court in appeals from orders on preliminary objection to decide the matter even before the matter has been considered by the High Court in the light of section 16A(9), as, amended by Act 14 of 1976 should be avoided.
[301 F H] There is no sufficient ground to interfere with the view taken by all the nine High Courts which went into the matter that the Presidential order dated June 27, 1975, did not affect the maintainability of the habeas corpus petitions to question the legality of the detention orders.
[304 C] The principles which should be followed by the courts in dealing with petitions for writs of habeas corpus to challenge the legality of detention are well established.
1304 D] Unanimity obtained without sacrifice of conviction commends the decision to public confidence.
Unanimity which is merely formal and which is recorded at the expense of strong conflicting views is not desirable in a court of last resort.
[304 E] A dissent in a court of last resort is an appeal to the brooding spirit of the law, to the intelligence of a future day when a later decision may possibly correct the error into which the dissenting Judge believes the court have been betrayed.
[304 G] Prophets with Honor by Alan Barth 1974 Ed.
p. 3 6.
referred to.
Observation: Judges are not there simply to decide cases, but to decide them as they think they should be decided, and while it may be regrettable that they cannot always agree, it is better that their independence should be maintained and recognise than that unanimity should be secured through its sacrifice.
