Rayon tyre cord fabric which is a textile consisting of rayon threads in the warp and cotton threads in the weft is manufactured on weaving looms in the same manner as any other ordinary textile.
The tyre manufacturers to whom the product is supplied.
impregnate the fabric with rubber and weave it into fabric.
Under Entry 18 of Schedule of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954, rayon fabrics were exempt from sales tax.
When the Commercial Tax officer rejected the petitioners ' objections to sales tax being levied on rayon tyre cord fabric, the e petitioners filed a petition under Article 32 of the Constitution alleging breach of Fundamental Rights.
In respect of certain earlier assessment years, however, the view of the Commercial Tax officer was that the goods were not the end product.
when, the matter was taken to the High Court, it held that, until the statutory remedies had been exhausted, no case for interference under article 226 arose.
It did not find any error apparent on the face of the record.
Hence, the appeals by special leave.
E In the write petition as well as in the appeals it was contented that the goods constituted the end product which the petitioners sell in the market and, therefore, were exempt from sales tax.
Dismissing the petition and appeals.
^ HELD: (1)(a) It is difficult to find fault with the view of the, High Court there was no error apparent on the face of the record and that the taxing authorities should be left tb determine whether the tyre cord fabric is more correctly capable of being described as a fabric or as merely cord passing of as a textile fabric.
This is really a technical question.
In any case.
it is a question on which two views may be possible.
[503C] (b) The fact that the tyre cord fabric manufactured by the petitioners is woven by its purchases into a fabric in the same way as is being done by the petitioners means that the tyre cord fabric serves also as raw material for another fabric which ultimately emerges by subjecting the goods to a process of impregnating it with rubber.
The essential question to determine is the stage at which the goods under consideration became textile fabrics if they do become that at all.
[502C; 503A] (2) This Court cannot interfere under article 32 with the decision of the Commercial Tax Officer, because no Fundamental Right is shown to be affected by the mere determination of the question.
There was no absence of jurisdiction of the taxing authorities who had the power to decide the question either rightly or wrongly.
[503E] 34 833 SUP CI/76 498 ARGUMENTS For the petitioners Respondent No. 1 did not produce or get any evidence from the commercial community dealing with rayon tyre yarn and cord and rayon tyre fabric for the purpose of controverting the conclusive evidence produced by the petitioners to the effect that in the commercial community dealing with the said goods these goods were different both from the point of view of manufacture and also from the point of view of ultimate end product and are considered to be different by the commercial community, which heats rayon tyre cord fabric as fabric.
There was no evidence on the contrary to come to the conclusion that the rayon tyre fabric was not fabric.
The High Court wrongly relied on 25 STC 407 which had no application in the present case, ignoring the decision in 22 STC 470 and 28 STC 431.
It was therefore not a case of disputed question of fact, but a case of admitted fact by the commercial community against which there was no evidence before the respondent.
The alternative remedy of appeal is not at all efficacious in the facts and circumstances of the present case inasmuch as the Commissioner and the State Government having already made up their mind to levy tax, no relief could be expected by the appellants from him and the High Court should have interfered under articles 226 and 227.
Further ill this case there was no question of disputed facts.
The sample was admitted.
There was uncontradicted evidence that the product of the petitioners is known as rayon cord fabric by the commercial community and by common parlance.
The case is a misdirection of law on the part of the assessing authority.
For the respondents There was no error of law apparent on the face of the record as contended by the petitioners.
The High, Court rightly rejected the writ petitions on the ground that there were disputed facts and there are alternative remedies and full and adequate machinery under the Act itself.
The assessee mills, when paying excise duty, paid it only as on yarn under entry 18 of the First Schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act.
The mills did not pay additional duty under the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act 1956 on the ground that the material was not fabric.
When it suited the mills the material wag said to be yarn and in case of sales tax it contended that it was fabric.
This fact itself was a strong indication that this was a disputed question of fact.
