The late R. Sridharan married Rosa Maria Steinbichler, a christian Austrian of descent, under the and a son Nicolas Sundaram was born out of the wedlock.
In the assessment proceedings i respect of income tax, wealth tax and expenditure tax, Sridharan claimed to be assessed in the status of a member of Hindu Undivided Family consisting of himself and his son, contending that the property held by him was ancestral and Nicolas Sundaram was a Hindu.
The officers dealing with these taxes rejected the contention and assessed him as an individual on the ground that succession to the property of a person married under the , is governed by the and not by ordinary Hindu Law and Nicolas Sundaram could not become a member of Hindu Undivided Family With his father.
these orders were affirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commission i the Appellate Tribunal in appeals by Sridharan against the assessments.
On further applications made by Sridharan, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal referred the matter to the High Court which decided in favour of Sridharan but granted a certificate of fitness.
Meanwhile, Sridharan died, and his widow filed wealth tax returns, claiming the status of a member of Hindu Undivided Family.
The Revenue authorities followed their earlier decisions, and ultimately the matter was referred to the High Court which decided in favour of respondent Mrs. Sridharan, but granted Leave to appeal to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: ( 1 ) Under the codifying, Acts.
the orthodox concept of the term "Hindu" has undergone a radical change and it has been given an extended meaning.
The Acts not only apply to Hindus but also to a large number of other persons.
Any child legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents is a Hindu by religion and who is brought up as a Hindu, is a Hindu.
[478D E] (2) Section 21 of the has no bearing on the present case.
The section does not in any way impair or alter the joint family structure between n assessee and his son.
Nor does it affect the discretion vested in a Hindu assessee to treat his properties as joint family properties by taking into his fold his Hindu sons so as to continue joint family properties [479 A C] Shastri Yagnapurushdasji & Ors.
vs Muldas Bhundardas Vaishya and Anr. ; ; Bhagwan Koer vs J. C. Bose & Ors.
11; Lingappa vs Esudasan ; Mothey Anja Ratna Raja Kumar vs Koney Narayana Rao & Ors.
AIR 1953 SC 433 and Ananthaya vs Vishnu , referred to.
Webster 's 3rd New International Dictionary of the English Language; Encyclopaedia Britannica (15th Edn.); Gitarahasya by B. G. Tilak Principles of Hindu Law (14th Edn.) pp. 671 and chap.
I para 6 by Mulla, and Hindu Law & Usage (11th Edn.) pp. 290 by Mayne, referred to.
