The appellant filed a complaint before the Magistrate alleging that the police did not deliberately charge sheet unrespondents 1 and 2 despite the fact that they abetted in the murder of her son because they were influential persons.
After the inquiry the Magistrate issued a process to respondents 1 under 2 under section 204(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The revision petition of respondents I and 2 filed under section 482 Cr.
P.C. was allowed by the High Court.
in appeal to this Court it was contended for.
the appellant that the High Court was in error in examining the order of the Magistrate on merits after taking into consideration the documents filed by the respondents, which did not form part of the complaint or evidence recorded in support thereof before the Magistrate.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The order of the High Court suffers from a serious legal infirmity and the High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering in revision by question the order of the Magistrate.
[129 H] (1) In the following cases an order or the Magistrate can be quashed or set aside: (a) Where the allegations made in the complaint or the statements of the witnesses recorded in support of the same taken at their face value make out absolutely no case against the accused or the complaint does not disclose the essential ingredients of an offence which is alleged against the accused; (b) Where the allegations made in the complaint are patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(c) Where the discretion exercised by the Magistrate in issuing process is capricious and arbitrary having been based either on no evidence or on materials which are wholly irrelevant or inadmissible; and (d) Where the complaint suffers from fundamental legal defects, such as, want of sanction, or absence of a complaint by legally competent authority and the like.
[128 C E] (2) (a) At the stage of issuing the process the Magistrate is mainly concerned with allegations made in the complaint or the evidence led and he is only.
to be prima facie satisfied whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused.
It is not the province of the Magistrate to enter into a detailed discussion on the merits or demerits of the case.
The scope of the inquiry under section 202 Cr.
P.C. is extremely limited limited to the ascertainment of the truth or falsehood of the allegations made in the complaint: (1) on the materials placed by the complainant before the court (ii) for the limited purpose of finding out whether a prima facie case for issue of process had been made out and (iii) for deciding the question purely from the point of view of the complainant without at all adverting to any defence that the accused may have.
In proceedings under section 202 the accused has got absolutely no locus standing and is not entitled to be heard on the question whether the process should be issued against him or not.
E F] 124 Chandra Deo Singh vs Prokash Chandra Bose, ; and Vadilal Panchal vs Dattatraya Dulaji Ghadigaonker and Another, followed.
(b) In coming to a decision as to whether a process should be issued the Magistrate can take into consideration inherent improbabilities appearing on the face of the complaint or in evidence led by the complainant in support of the allegations.
Once the Magistrate has exercised judicially the discretion given to him it is not for the High Court or even this Court to substitute its own discretion for that of the Magistrate or to examine the case on merits with a view to find out whether or not the allegations in the complaint, if proved, would ultimately end in conviction of the accused.
These considerations are totally foreign to the scope and ambit of inquiry under 5. 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which culminates in an order under section 204 of the Code.
[127G H; 128A B] (3) In the instant case the High Court should not have quashed the proceedings.
The order of the Magistrate was a reasoned one which took into consideration the allegations in the complaint as also the evidence adduced in support of it.
It was not a case where the Magistrate had passed an order ill a mechanical manner or just by way of routine.
The High Court could not to into this matter in its revisional jurisdiction which is a very limited one.
[ 128 F G]
