The State of Uttar Pradesh has under the U.P. Excise Act, 1910.
the exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing and selling liquor in that State.
Section ' '4 of the Act provides that subject to the provisions of section 31 the Excise Commissioner may grant to any person a licence for the exclusive privilege of manufacturing or of supplying any country liquor etc.
Section 31 provides for the conditions for the grant of licence.
Section 33 invests the authority granting a licence to require the grantee to execute a counterpart agreement in conformity with the tenor of the licence.
Section 28 authorises imposition of an excise duty or a countervailing duty by The local Government on any excisable article.
Sections 40 and 41 of the Act empower the State Government and the Excise Commissioner subject to the previous sanction of the Government to make rules.
Para 38 of the Excise Manual which contains the rules made under the Act shows that there are 4 licence fee systems in vogue.
One of such systems is the auction fee system under which the amount of licence fee is determined by competition amongst bidders at an auction.
The respondents were the highest bidders at various auctions.
Before holding the auctions, the rates of excise duty and prices of different varieties of country liquor and also the conditions of licence were announced.
No announcement was made as to whether the exemption from sales tax in respect of sale of country liquor granted by the notification dated 6 4 1959 was or was not likely to be withdrawn.
one of the conditions of the licences was that the licensee shall lift each month certain quota of liquor and on the failure to lift the monthly quota the licensee shall be liable to pay compensation to the state Government calculated at the rate of duty per litre on the unlifted quota.
On the day following the day when the licences were granted, the Government of U.P. issued a notification under section 3A and 4 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, superseding the earlier notification exempting the payment of sales tax and imposing sales tax on the turnover in respect of country spirit at the rate of 10 P. per rupee.
The respondents having failed to lift and sell the minimum quotas of liquor the appellant called upon them to pay by way of compensation the amount; of excise duty on the shortfalls.
Aggrieved by the demand, the respondents moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution for issue of appropriate writ or direction restraining the appellants from recovering the aforesaid amounts.
The respondents in special appeals also challenged the notification issued under the sales Tax Act on the ground that the State Government did not announce at the time of the action that the earlier notification was likely to be withdrawn and that the appellant informed the respondents at the time of the auction that there was no sales tax on the sale of country liquor.
The appellants were, therefore, estopped from making the demand in respect of the sales tax and recovering the same from them.
The High Court allowed all the petitions in toto.
On appeal by special leave, 533 ^ HELD: (1) Neither section 28 nor section 29 nor any other provisions of the Act authorise the levy of the amounts sought to be recovered from the respondents.
The demand made by the appellant though disguised as compensation is in reality a demand for excise duty on unlifted quantity of liquor which is not authorised by the provisions of the Act.
[538 A C] Bimal Chandra Banerjee vs Stale of Madhya Pradesh, ; , followed.
Panna Lal and Ors. etc.
vs State of Rajasthan and others, [1976] I S.C.R. 219.
distinguished.
Appeal dismissed.
(2) Sections 3A and 4 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act clearly authorise the State Government to impose sales tax.
The fact that sales of country liquors had been exempted from sales tax by the earlier notification could not operate as estoppel against the State Government and preclude it from subjecting the sales to tax if it felt impelled to do so in the interest of the revenues of the State.
There can be no question of estoppel against the Government in exercise of its legislative sovereign or executive powers (case law reviewed).
The Government cannot divest itself of the right incidental to its office by conduct which in the case of a private person would amount to estoppel.
The six appeals therefore, are partly allowed
