Section 12(1) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961, enacts that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract no suit shall be filed in any civil court against a tenant for his eviction from any accommodation except on one or more of the grounds given in the section.
The ground given in cl.
(a) is that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of the rent legally recoverable from him within two months of the date on which the notice had been served on him by the landlord and the ground in cl.
(f) is that the accommodation let for non residential purpose is required bona fide by the landlord for the purpose of continuing or starting his business.
The appellants brought a suit under section 12(1)(a) and (f) of the Act for ejectment of their tenants.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court on the ground (i) that since the dispute as to the amount of rent payable by the tenants had not been determined during the pendency of the suit under section 13(2) no order for eviction could be made; (ii) that there was no bona fide requirement of the premises by the appellants for their own business and (iii) that the refusal by the appellant to accept the arrears of rent by cheque was valid because tendering by cheque was not valid tender in the absence of an agreement to that effect.
The first appellate court decreed the suit.
During the pendency of the second appeal in the High Court the tenants died.
The High Court allowed substitution of their legal representatives over ruling the appellants ' objection that the deceased tenants were mere statutory tenants and that the right to resist ejectment on the basis of the Rent Control Act was merely a personal right which was not heritable.
On merits, the High Court held that (i) offer of rent by cheque amounted to valid tender by the tenant and (ii) the appellants had failed to prove their case of bona fide requirement of the premises for their own use.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: There is no force in the contention that the defendants who were statutory tenants had no heritable interest in the demised premises and on their death the right to prosecute the appeal in the High Court had not survived to their heirs and legal representatives.
The predecessors in interest of the respondents had a heritable interest in the premises and consequently the respondents had the right to prosecute the appeal in the High Court.
[655A] (1) (a) The concept of statutory tenancy under the English Rent Acts and under the Indian statutes rests on different foundations.
The term statutory tenancy which is used for referring to a tenant whose tenancy has been terminated and who would be liable to be evicted but for the protecting statute, is 646 borrowed from the English Rent Acts.
Courts in England have held that a statutory tenant has no estate or property in the premises he occupies because he retains possession by virtue of the Rent Acts and not as being entitled to a tenancy.
But in this country it is not possible to proceed on the basis that a tenant whose contractual tenancy has determined but who is protected against eviction by the statute, has no right of property but only personal right to remain in occupation without ascertaining what his rights are under the statute.
[654H: 653A C] Anand Nivas (Private) Limited vs Anandji Kalyanji Pedhi vs Sri Kishan & Anr.
, ; ; Roe vs Russel, ; Haskins vs Lewis ; Keeves vs Dean (207) and Boyer vs Warbey , referred to.
(b)Tenancy has its origin in contract.
A contracual tenant had an estate or property in the subject matter of the tenancy and heritability is an incident of tenancy.
It cannot be assumed that with the determination of the tenancy, the estate must necessarily disappear and the statute can only preserve his status of irremovability and not the estate he had in the premises in his occupation.
[653D] (c) The definition of a tenant contained in section 2(i) makes a person continuing in possession of a premises after the determination of his tenancy a tenant, unless a decree or order for eviction had been made against him, thus, putting him on par with a person whose contractual tenancy still subsists.
[653] (d) Section 14 which deals with restrictions on sub letting read with the definition contained in section 2(i) makes it clear that the so called statutory tenant has the right to sub let in common with contractual tenant and this is because he also has an interest in the premises occupied by him.
[654D] (2)(a) The High Court rightly held that the cheques sent to the appellants amounted to valid tender of rent.
It is well established that a cheque sent in payment of a debt on the request of the creditor, unless dishonoured, operates as a valid discharge of the debt and if the cheque was sent by post and was met on presentations the date of payment is the date when the cheque was posted.
[655B D] (b) Rent is payable in the same manner as any other debt and the debtor has to pay his creditor in cash or other legal tender, but there can be no dispute that the mode of payment can be altered by agreement.
In the contemporary society it is reasonable to suppose payment by cheque as implied unless the circumstances of a case indicate otherwise.
[655C] (3) The High Court was within its jurisdiction in setting aside the finding of the lower appellate court and restoring that of the trial court on the question of bona fide requirement of the premises by the appellants.
The lower appellate court overlooked a very material part of the evidence bearing on the question.
It is well established that if a finding of fact is arrived at ignoring important and relevant evidence the finding is bad in law.
[651B C] Radha Nath Seal vs Haripada Jana & Ors.
AIR 1971 S.C. 1049, followed.
Madan Lal Puri vs Sain Das Berry AIR 1973 S.C. 585; Mattulal vs Radhey Lal AIR 1974 S.C. 1956; and Sarvate T. B. vs Nemi Chand , refered to.
