The appellant was a Veterinary Compounder serving under the Panehayat Samiti, Hansi.
The Zilla Parishad Tribunaul tranferred him from Hansi to Singhani.
The Chairman of the Panchayat Samiti.
Hansi requested the Chairman of Zilla Parishad Tribunal served a notice on the appellant to show cause why he should not be dismissed for not having handed over the charge of the dispensary to the person who was appointed in his place and also on the ground that when the Secretary of the Zilla Parishaod Tribunal with the help of the compounder, who was directed to take charge from the appellant, was prepaering a list of stock, the appellant and others entered the office and one of the persons out of the appellant 's group snatched the papers from the Secretry and manhandled him.
The appellant submitted an interim explanation and reserved his right to submit a final reply after inspection of certain records was given to him.
The Zilla Parishad Tribunal did not give any opportunity to the appellant for inspecation of record nor sent any communication to him rejecting the request giving any justifiable reasons.
However, the appellant was served with a letter dismissisng him from service.
Section 124(2) of the Punjab Panchayat.
Samitis & Zilla Parishad.
Act, 1961, authorises the Tribunal to impose any punishment including the punishment of dismissal on any servant of the Panchayat Samiti or Zilla Parishad.
The proviso,howvever.
requires the Tribunal before passing any order of dismissal or removal to give a notice to the servant to show cause against the action proposed to be taken against him The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court challengaing the dismissal order.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: (1) A perusal of section 124(2) goes to show that before any action is taken for dismissal or removal of an employee the Tribunal has to enquire into his conduct justifying such action.
This enquiry must necessarily be made in the presence of the employee giving him an opportunity to rebut the allegations made against him.
It is only after affourding him a reasonable opportunity to rebut the allegations in the charge and after the Tribunal is satisfied that the misconduct is established, the question of final punitive action either of dismissal or removal has to be considered.
The employee must be given a full and fair.
reasonable opportunity to meet the charges.
[633D E] (2) In the instant case apart from giving the show cause notice no other communication was made to the appellant except the order of dismissal.
This is a clear case where the reasonable opportunity envisaged under section 124(2) has not been afforded to the appellant for making an effective representation to establish his innocence.
Even in respect of the incident of 15 8 1967, the appellant was acquitted in a criminal case lodged against him.
In the instant case the provisions of section 124(2) which embody the principles of natural justice and which are of a mandatory character have been violated vitiating the order of dismissal.
[633G. 634A C] (3) In the ordinary course it would have been open to the authority to institute a fresh enquiry after the reinstatement.
But in this case, that procedure was not permitted because the appellant was dismissed in December, 1967, and 631 has been out of employment for over 8 years.
Secondly, he does not have many years to serve.
Thirdly, the serious allegations regarding the incident of 15 8 1967 have not been found to be established in a judicial trial.
The Court, therefore, quashed the order of dismissal and directed that the appellant should be treated on leave without pay and further directed that no further enquiry into the allegations forming the subject matter of charge should be made.
[634C E]
