Sections 53A and 53B of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, were inserted in that Act by the Bombay Industrial Relations and Industrial Disputes (Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1972.
They relate to the constitution of joint management councils, which include representatives of the employees also, for the purpose of forestalling and preventing industrial disputes.
Consequent amendments were made in the Bombay Industrial Relations (Gujarat) Rules.
The appellants challenged the two sections on the ground that the State Legislature was incompetent to enact them.
According to the appellants, the impugned legislation falls under Entries 43, 44 and 52 of List I, VII Schedule to the Constitution, which relate to matters of incorporation etc.
The High Court held that they fall under Entries 22 and 24 of List III, which relate to labour welfare and industrial disputes, and that the State Legislature was competent to enact them.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: It has been recognised during the last hundred years that the wage earners should have an effective voice in the management of the industry in which they are working.
The concept of joint management of industry by the employer and the employee may have a wide connotation, because, the joint management councils may not only perform such functions as pertain to welfare of labour, that is, those relating to the various objectives mentioned in cls.
(a) to (f) of section 53B(1) but may also claim to exercise such functions as can be discharged by the board of directors.
This wider aspect of the joint management would however be impermissible under the impugned provisions, because the provisions should be so construed and implemented as would sustain their constitutional validity.
They have been enacted by the State Legislature and so the functions which can be performed by the joint management councils have to be of such a character as would pertain to welfare of labour or prevent industrial disputes.
If the impugned legislation, in pith and substance, relates to subjects which are within the competence of the State Legislature, the fact that there is an incidental encroachment on matters which are the subject matter of Entries in List I, would not affect the legislative competence of the State Legislature to pass the impugned legislation.
[628A, 629E] Rules in the very nature of things can operate only in that field in which the parent Act can operate, and hence, the impugned rules, likewise, relate to subjects which are within the competence of the State Legislature.
[628D]
