The respondent terminated the appellant 's services on the ground of habitual absence which is a misconduct under the company 's standing orders.
Although there was a dispute pending before the Tribunal, the respondent did not make an application under section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act for its approval.
On an application by the appellant under section 33A of the Act, the Tribunal ordered his reinstatement.
A few months after the appellant rejoined duty the respondent terminated his services purporting to act under the agreement of service with him.
On a complaint by the appellant under section 33A, the Tribunal ordered his reinstatement.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition of the respondent holding that the discharge was nothing but dismissal for misconduct.
On appeal, the Division Bench held that since the employer invoked the terms of the agreement, it was not a case of discharge for misconduct and as such the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain the complaint under section 33A.
Allowing the appeal. ^ HELD: The Tribunal has not committed any error of law or of jurisdiction in entertaining the application under section 33A and the Single Judge was right in not interfering with the award under Article 226 of the Constitution and the Division Bench was wrong in doing so.
[641H; 641E] (a) The Tribunal has found as a fact that the termination was on account of misconduct of the employee.
It is, therefore, difficult to hold that there was any manifest error of law committed by the Tribunal in reaching that conclusion only because the misconduct, as found, was not within the four corners of the various misconducts mentioned in the standing orders.
[641H] (b) Standing orders only describe certain cases of misconduct and they cannot be exhaustive of all the species of misconduct.
Even though a given conduct may not come within the specific terms of misconduct described in the standing orders, it may still be a misconduct in the special facts of a case, which it may not be possible to condone and for which the employer may take appropriate action.
[641F] (c) Termination simpliciter under the conditions of service or under the standing orders is outside the scope of section 33 of the Act.
This does not mean that the employer has the last word about the termination of service of an employee.
It is also not a correct proposition of law that in case of a complaint under section 33A, the Tribunal would be debarred from going into the question whether notwithstanding the form of the order.
in substance, it is an action of dismissal for misconduct and not termination simpliciter.
[642 A B] Management of Murgan Mills Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Madras and Another ; , held inapplicable.
Air India Corporation, Bombay vs V. A. Rebellow & Anr. ; , referred to.
636 Shyamala Studios vs Kannu Devar (S.S.) and Others, and Sri Rama Machinery Corporation (P) Limited, Madras vs Murthi (N.R.) and Others, , partly approved.
(d) Section 33(2)(b) makes it obligatory upon the employer to make an application to the Tribunal under the proviso when he discharges or dismisses the workman for misconduct.
From the provisions of section 33, it is manifest that punitive action of the employer in whatever form it may be passed, is permissible against an ordinary workman as distinguished from a protected workman even during the pendency of proceedings before the Tribunal provided that the employer pays one month 's wages and also applies to the concerned Tribunal for approval of his action.
Since the action is punitive, namely, dismissal or discharge for misconduct, the Tribunal has to oversee the action to guarantee that no unfair labour practice or victimisation has been practised.
If the procedure of fair hearing has been observed, the Tribunal has to find in an application under section 33 that a prima facie case is made out for dismissal.
If, on the other hand, there is violation of the principles of natural justice in the enquiry, the Tribunal can go into the whole question relating to the misconduct and come to its own conclusion whether the same is established.
[641E; 640H] (e) In the instant case even though the employer invoked the agreement for terminating the service of the employee it was open to the Tribunal to pierce the veil of the order and have a closes look at the circumstance and come to a decision whether the order was passed on account of certain misconduct.
This is a finding of fact which could not be interfered with under article 226 of the Constitution unless the conclusion is perverse.
[643F]
