The assessee made a full disclosure of his income and claimed expenses incurred for the maintenance of his immature rubber plantations as deductions.
The Agricultural Income Tax Officer, after considering the matter, allowed such deductions as he thought proper.
The appellant Commissioner, in exercise of his revisional powers under section 34, Kerala Agricultural Income Tax Act, 1950, issued notice to the respondent (widow of the assessee) proposing to revise the assessment on the ground that the deductions allowed were excessive.
The appellant, after considering the respondent 's objections, held that the deductions allowed were excessive and remanded the matter to the Agricultural Income Tax Officer for fresh disposal according to law.
At the instance of the respondent, the question whether the appellant had jurisdiction to pass the order under section 34 was referred to the High Court, and the High Court, on the view that it was a case of re opening escaped assessment held, relying on Maharajadhiraj Sir Kameshwar Singh vs State of Bihar, , that the power of revision vested in the Commissioner under section 34 could not be invoked for the purpose of assessing income that had escaped assessment, and that such income could be assessed only by resorting to the procedure prescribed by section 35.
within the time limit prescribed therein.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD:(1) Every case of under assessment is not a case of escaped assessment.
The Agricultural Income Tax Officer may have committed an error in allowing the deductions to the extent he did, but he did so after applying his mind to the claims.
This is not a case where the officer omitted to assess any item of income disclosed in the assessee 's return as in the case relied on by the High Court and as in kamal Singh vs C.I.T.
Therefore, it is not a case of reopening escaped assessment.
[662F H] Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income tax and Sales Tax, Quilon and another vs Dhanalakshmi Vils Cashew Co., (1969) 24 S.T.C. 491, followed.
(2) Since it is not a case of escaped assessment, the appellant had jurisdiction to make the order under section 34.
[663B]
