The Joint Director of Food stationed in the Port of Visakapatnam sold food grains and fertilizers to the Andhra Pradesh State and other States at the price fixed by the Central Government.
The Sales Tax Officer of the Andhra Pradesh imposed the tax under the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, on the intra State sales and imposed tax under on the inter State sales.
The Joint Director of Food claimed immunity from the tax on the ground that the element of profit motive was absent.
Under the Andhra Pradesh Act, the profit motive is irrelevant.
The High Court of Andhra Pradesh, therefore, dismissed the appeals filed by the Central Government as far as they related to the tax under the Andhra Pradesh Act.
The High Court, however, remanded the three appeals which per tained to the tax under the for deter mining the presence of profit motive in the Central Govern ment while undertaking the dealings in question.
In appeals by Special Leave the appellant contend ed: 1.
Since the sales were by the Central Govern ment, the Joint Director could not be the assessee.
Section 2(b) of the Central Act read with section 9 excludes the Central Government as an exigible entity.
An undertaking to distribute essential com modities by the State in implementation of its governmental obligations cannot be described as trading activity or carrying on of business without doing violence to the concepts of governmental functions and business operations.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) Since the Joint Director represented the Central Government in the sales he can legitimately be dealt with for sales tax proceedings as representing the Union Government.
[61 C] (2) Section 2(b).
of the Central Act in terms states that a dealer means any person who carries on the business of buying and selling goods and includes a Government which carries on such business.
[61 F] (3) Section 9(3) of the Central Act provides that the tax and penalty collected shall be assigned to the State which recovers the tax.
Therefore, the real beneficiary of the Central Act i.s the State concerned.
In any event there is no flaw in the reasoning of the High Court that the Central Government way tax itself.
[62 A B] (4) The State has the power to carry on the trade or business as is manifest from article 19(6)(ii) and other provi sions.
Systematic activity of buying foodgrains and ferti lizers and selling them by the State although in fulfilment of the beneficiant national policy is never the.
less trade or business.
Necessarily Government may become a dealer which carries on business within the meaning of the different definitions in one Central Act and the State Act.
[62 B E] (5) The question of profit motive is relevant for the purpose of Central Act.
Since the question has not been investigated by the fact finding authorities, the High court has rightly directed the authorities below to go into the said question.
So far as the Andhra Act is concerned since the profit motive is 60 irrelevant because of the special definition in the Act the State Sales Tax Officer is entitled to collect sales tax from appellant in regard to intra State sales even assuming that there is no profit motive.
[62 E H] (6) The Court observed that it is conscious of the social implications of the Sales Tax being leviable on the essential commodities like foodgrains and fertilizers.
Any tax on food and fertilizers is bound to cause an extra burden on the poor who are the ultimate consumers but the court has to interpret the law and apply it.
Necessary objective can be achieved by appropriate notifications or if need be, necessary legislative directions.
[63 A B]
