On the ground that there were subsisting contracts between him and the State Government for execution of cer tain works, the nomination papers of the respondent for the general election to the State Assembly were rejected by the Returning Officer under section 9A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 at the instance of one of the contesting candidates.
In the election that ensued the appellant was declared elected.
The respondent in his election petition contended that the works on account of which he had been disqualified had been undertaken by him, not in his personal capacity, but as the Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat.
The High Court held that the respondent was not disqualified under section 9A of the Act and declared the election void.
On appeal, it was contended that the objections regard ing the validity of the nomination papers of the respondent were raised in collusion with the respondent and a duly elected candidate should not be made to suffer because of an order made on such collusive objections.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1 )(a) The appellant has clearly admitted in his written statement that objections which were filed about the validity of the respondent 's nomination papers were not collusive but genuine.
[53 G] (b) According to Sec.
100(1)(c) of the Act, if the High Court is of the opinion that any nomination had been improp erly rejected, it shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.
In view of the imperative nature of the provision, it is open to question as to whether courts can, in the event of an improper rejection of nomination, afford relief to the successful candidate on the score that the objections resulting in the improper rejection of nomi nation, were collusive.
Whether the legislature would do something in the matter is essentially for the legislature to decide, [53 G H] (2) A perusal of one of the disputed items shows that the tender in respect of the work was accepted on behalf of a Cooperative Society of which the respondent was the Presi dent.
It was not the respondent but the Society which entered into contract for the execution of the work and he signed the documents in his capacity as President of the.
Society.
The contract was not subsisting on the date of filing of the nomination paper.
In respect of another item the contract was not entered into with the. respondent in his personal capacity but the work had to be executed by the Gram Panchayat.
[54F G] Krishna Iyer J. (concurring) (1) In the instant case the Returning Officer was taken in by the specious plea that the respondent had` subsisting contracts with the State Government an& rejected his nomination papers.
Its aftermath was that the.
people 's verdict had been stultified.
Had there been any procedure for quick determination of objections to nominations with early appellate finality attached to it, the lurking danger of the whole process being ultimately baulked on account of antecedent official error would not have arisen.
[56 C] (2) The ambiguity in section 9A, especially as to how long and in what sense can a contract be said to be subsisting envelopes the disbarment provision with subtle legal ques tions such as: how long does a contract subsist ? Is every 50 liability arising on a breach of contract a claim under the contract the Provisions of s .
A9 ? If Government money is involved in the execution of the work does the contract necessarily become one with Government ? It is very de sirable that the disqualificatory net should not be cast too wide to disfranchise innumerable persons and must be easy of ascertainment if must be uncertainty is not to overhang elections [56 EH]
