Respondent was a welder in the Civilian Defence Forces.
On his services being terminated, without stating any rea son, he filed a suit for damages for illegal termination on the basis that he would have continued in service upto the age of 60 instead of being thrown out at the age of 41.
The trial Court gave a decree for damages which was affirmed by the High Court on the ground.
that the doctrine of post held during the pleasure of the President, contained in article 310, does not authorise the termination without complying with the procedure prescribed by the Central Civil Service 's (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965, framed under article 309.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) The Rules deal principally with the procedure for disciplinary proceedings and penalties and appeals and reviews against orders passed under the rules.
They are applicable if disciplinary proceedings had been taken against the respondent, but they do not make disciplinary proceedings incumbent or obligatory whenever the services of a person are terminated.
In the present case there were no disciplinary proceedings against the respondent.
[92 D E] (2) The mere termination of the service.
by an apparent ly innocent order, of a Government servant in permanent service, in the sense that he is entitled to remain in service until he reaches the age of retirement, could be deemed, in a given case, to be a punishment.
But, in that event, there had to be a finding on the rule or order under which the respondent was entitled to continue in service until he reached the age of 60.
There is no reference to any such rule and there was no finding that any punishment was imposed upon him or that his services were terminated as a measure of punishment for any wrong done by him or for incompetence.
[94 C; 93 G] P.L. Dhingra vs Union of India ; @ 47 referred to.
(3) Even assuming that the respondent was constructive ly punished, there is no legal obligation to apply the Rules.
The legal obligation to apply them to every case of punishment, flows from the provisions of article 311 and is confined to holders of posts covered by article 311.
But the provisions of article 311 do not apply to the respondent since they do not apply to the holder of a post connected with defence.
[94 E] L.R. Khurana vs Union of India ; followed.
(4) Terefore, when no disciplinary proceedings are instituted, the Rules will not at all apply, and there is no other rule dealing with the conditions under which the service, such as that of the respondent.
may be terminated.
Since there was no violation of any rule no question of a conflict between a rule framed under article 309 and the doc trine of pleasure contained in article 310, which applies to all Government servants including those in the services connected with defence, arises in the present case.
[94 G] 88 (5) The High Court in dealing with the question consid ered the view of a Divisional Bench of this Court in two cases, merely quoted the views expressed by larger Benches of this Court, and then observed that these were insuffi cient for deciding the point before it.
The High Court did not act correctly in thus skirting the views expressed by larger Benches of this Court.
The proper course for the High Court was to try to find out and follow the opinions expressed by the larger Benches in preference to those expressed by smaller Benches.
This practice is followed even by this Court and has crystallized into a rule of law.
If, however, the High Court was of opinion that the views expressed by larger Benches of this Court were not applica ble to the facts of the present case it should have said so, giving reasons in support.
[92 A C]
