The assessee was the owner of more than 100 acres of land within municipal limits and enclosed by a compound wall.
The land was adjacent to a tank, had two wells in it, was capable of being used for agriculture, was assessed to land revenue as agricultural land, but had not been actually put to any non agricultural use.
The High COurt held that the land was 'agricultural land ' under section 2(e)(i) of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and exempt from wealth tax on the basis that, (1 ) the expres sion 'agricultural land ', not having been defined in the Act, must be given the widest possible meaning; (2) so interpreted, all land which is capable of being utilised for agricultural purposes would be 'agricultural land unless it is actually put to some non agricultural use like construc tion of buildings etc; and (3) the land has been assessed to land revenue as agricultural land under the State Revenue Law.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: It is only land, which either is being actually used or ordinarily used, or has been set apart or prepared for use for agricultural purposes so as to indicate the intention of the owner or occupier of the land to put it to agricultural use, that would be 'agricultural land '.
[156 A] (1 ) It is not correct to give.
the expression a wide meaning merely because the statute does not define it.
The correct rule is for the Court to endeavour to find out logically the exact sense in which the words have been used in a particular context, reading the statute as a whole, giving an interpretation in consonance with the purposes of the statute, and avoiding absurd results.
[153 A B] (2) The object of the Wealth Tax Act is to tax surplus ' wealth.
It is not all land but only 'agricultural land ' that is excluded from the definition of assets.
Therefore, it is imperative to give reasonable limits to the scope of the expression 'agricultural land '.
[153 C] (3) The determination of the, character of land, accord ing to the purpose for which it is meant or set apart and can be used, is a matter which ought to be determined on the facts of each particular case.
What is really required to be shown is the connection with an agricultural purpose and user, and not the mere possibility of user by some possible future.
owner or possessor.
for an agricultural purpose.
It is not the potentiality, but its actual condition and in tended user which has to be seen for purposes of exemption from wealth tax.
The correct test to apply would be to.
find out whether human labour had been applied to the land it self, in order to extract from its natural powers, added to or aided by other natural or artificial sources of strength, a product which can yield income.
If there is nothing in its condition, or in the evidence to indicate the intention of its owner or possessor, so.
as to connect it with an agricultural purpose, the land could not be agricultural land.
The person claiming that any property is exempt must satisfy the conditions of the exemption.
[155 G H] The extent of the land, its situation, that it was capable of being used for agricultural purposes and has not been actually put to any use which would make it unfit for immediate cultivation, .are, therefore, inconclusive being based on absence of user for non agricultural purpose.
Entries in revenue records are.
however, good prima facie evidence since they are based on some quasi judicial enquiry but they raise only a rebuttable presumption.
If such 147 pritma facie evidence was enough for the assessee to dis charge his burden to establish an exemption, evidence to rebut it should have been led on behalf of the Department.
In the present case, however, the High Court relied not only on the entries, but also on the inconclusive circumstances based on potentialities.
While doing so, the High Court did not hold that categorical finding of the taxing authorities and Tribunal that the land was never used, nor was intended to be used for an agricultural purpose did not rest on any evidence at all; nor did it give any reasons for rejecting the finding.
it is therefore a fit case for being remanded to the Tribunal for deciding the question of fact, after giving opportunity to both sides to adduce evidence.
[155 B E] C.I.T.W.
Bengal vs Raja Benoy Kumar (1957) I.T.R. 466, followed.
Sarojini Devi vs Raja Sri Krishno A.I.R. 1944 Mad. 401, overruled.
