Pursuant to telegraphic information dated 5 August 1975 received from the Advocate General, Madhya Pradesh, communi cating the directions of the Jabalpur Bench of the, High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 1 August 1975, for the produc tion of a detenu held under section 3(1)(a) of the MISA 1971 in the court on 8 August 1975; the appellant, a district Magistrate, instructed the Superintendent, Central Jail, Raipur, to send the detenu to Jabalpur under strong guard for his production before the High Court on 8 August 1975.
The detenu was duly produced in court on 8 August 1975.
While seeking a clarification from the Home Secretary, on the order passed by the State Government under section 268, Criminal Procedure Code, which was gazetted on 1 August 1975, as to whether the detenu, under the MISA is to be produced before the High Court in connection with the habeas corpus petition, the appellant also spoke to the Government advocate and the Advocate General about the notification.
Since they desired the copy of the notification, the appel lant despatched a wireless message to Advocate General as follows "In the light of the above notification, he was requested to request the court not to insist on the production of VBT as there is strong.
possibility of disturbance of public order if VBT is taken out from jail.
Kindly inform the Government regarding the action taken.
" A copy of the wireless message was endorsed to the respond ent by 'way of abundant caution.
Viewing this as amounting to an expression by the appellant of his inability to obey the order of the. court on account of the notification issued by the State, Government published in the official gazette on 1 August 1975, the High Court, in exercise of the powers of the court under article 215 of the Constitution read with section 10 of the Contempt of Court Act (Act No. 70 of 1971) ordered the appellant to show cause why he should not be committed for contempt, for which the appellant submitted his reply in the form of an affidavit pleading for the discharge of rule nisi on the ground that no contempt of court was committed and that the wireless message to the Advocate General did not constitute a contempt of court.
The High Court found the appellant guilty for contempt by holding that the appellant had sent the wireless message dated 6 August 1975 without waiting for the reply from the State Government regarding the clarification of its notifi cation, and convicted the appellant and sentenced him to.
suffer imprisonment till the rising of the court under section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act 1971 and to pay a fine of Rs. 100/ .
The High Court, however, accepted the apology of the appellant for the purpose of remitting the punishment under the proviso to section 12(1) of the Act and remitted the sentence and ordered the appellant to.
pay the paper book costs and to bear his own costs.
Hence the appeal under section 19(1)(b) of the Act.
Accepting the appeal to this Court, HELD: The order of the High Court cannot be sustained in view of the tender of apology by the appellant as well as the production of the detenu.[102 D] All these features, namely, referring to the Home Secre tary for clarification of the notification dated 1 August 1975, sending a copy of the said notification 99 to the Advocate General, directing the Superintendent, Central Jail, to produce the detenu before the court and the detenu, in fact, having been produced before the High Court indicate that the appellant throughout acted in a careful and responsible manner and took all steps in good faith.
[101 B CF] HELD FURTHER: In the instant case, the appellant from the.
beginning gave directions for production of the detenu.
wireless message was not addressed to the court, but to the Advocate General, only to apprise him of the notifica tion sent by the State Government so that a request may be made to the court not to insist on the production of the detenu in the interest of public order.
The copy thereof to the Registrar is for information only.
The absence.
of reference to the.
telephonic talk in the affidavit does net mean that no such talk in fact took place.
The appellant tendered apology with grace and not as a coward.
The appel lant at no stage interfered with any order of the High Court.
The appellant never showed any disobedience.
On the contrary, the appellant acted in obedience to the order of the High Court.
[101 F, G H, 1012 A D]
