The appellant Society which is an association of compos ers, authors and publishers of copyright musical works was incorporated under the English Companies Act, 1908 and 1913 with its registered office in London.
It collects royalties for the issue of licences, granting permission for performing right in the works of its members and distributes the royalties to its .members.
The Society entered into an agreement in England with the President of India by which it granted to the All India Radio (the licensee) authority to broadcast from its sound broadcasting stations in India the.
musical works of the Society.
Under the agreement the licen see had to pay in England annual licence fee payable to the Society.
The appellant contended (i) that the agreement between the appellant and the licensee having been executed in England and the royalties being also payable in England, the income out of this agreement was not liable to be taxed in India and (ii) the Society being under an obligation to distribute the income to its members, royalties realised are hot really income of the Society.
Rejecting the contentions, HELD: (1)(a) Whether a certain income accrued or arose in India within the meaning of section 5(2) is a question of fact "which should be looked at and decided in the light of commonsense and plain thinking.
" The Society is a non resident company and though it received the income: out of the agreement executed, not in India but England, the income undoubtedly accrued or arose.
in India.
[175H and F] (b) The question whether the agreement is the source of the income is not relevant because section 5(2) provides that all income "from whatever source derived" is to be included in the total income of the non resident assessee if the income accrues or arises in India during the relevant year.
The income in this case had infact accrued in India and by virtue of section 9 no question arises whether it should be "deemed" to.
accrue or arise in India.
[175 G] In the matter of V.G. Every: (19 '37) approved.
(2) Article 48 of the Society 's Articles of Association shows that the royalties payable by the licensee under the, agreement are realised by the Society as its income.
Out of the receipts are deducted the expenses and also such other sums as in the discretion of the General Council should be set aside for the purposes mentioned in that article.
This is a case where the assessee having received the income, applies it in a particular Way; it is not a case of diver sion of income by an overriding charge.
[177 C] Raja Bejoy Singh Dudhuria vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal , P.C. Mullick and another (Executors) vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bengal and Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City vs Sitaldas Tirathdas (pp.
374 375) dis tinguished.
