Since the assessee had not maintained complete and regular accounts for the purpose of Excess Profits tax, the Excess Profits Tax Officer assessed tax on the basis of accounts of certain previous years chosen by the assessee as his "standard period", pointing out that because of this position it was not possible to make any adjustment for variations in average capital.
The Assistant Appellate CommisSioner upheld the assessment order.
In appeal to the Appellate Tribunal one of the specific grounds taken by the assessee was that the Excess Profits Tax Officer and the Assistant Appellate Commissioner had erred in not allowing proper standard profits in accordance with the standard period subject to the adjustment on account of increase and decrease of capital in the relevant chargeable accounting period and that they were prepared to file computation of average capital.
Without discussing the ground relating to the standard profits the Tribunal disposed of the appeals.
The assessee 's second application alleging that the ground relating to the standard profits was not disposed of by it was rejected by the Tribunal.
In an application under section 66(2) of the Income Tax Act before the High Court, the assessee did not ask for a reference on this ground.
But during proceedings for preparation of statement of case, the assessee 's application requesting the Tribunal to refer this ground to the High Court was rejected by it.
The assessee 's petition for a writ of Mandamus requiring the Tribunal to consider the ground relating to standard profits was allowed by the High Court.
Allowing the Department 's appeal to this Court, HELD: The High Court could not justifiably interfere, in the exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under article 226 of the Constitution, with the appellate orders of the Tribunal.
The question as to whether the omission to record a finding on Ground No. 1 by the Tribunal was due to the failure of the appellant to urge that ground or due to a lapse on the part of the Tribunal, which deserved rectifica tion, was a matter entirely for the authorities under the statute to decide.
[219 G] Shivram Poddar vs Income tax Officer (1964) 51, I.T.R. 823, 829 (,S.C.) applied.
In the instant case the High Court had assumed jurisdic tion on the assumPtion that a certain ground had been urged before the Tribunal which had arbitrarily refused to consid er the same and record a finding thereon.
This assumption, stood thoroughly discounted by the concomitant circumstances of the case including the dilatory and questionable conduct of the assessee.
This was not a fit case for the exercise by the High Court of its ' special jurisdiction under article 226.
[220 C]
