A Commission appointed by the State Government to en quire into the social and educational Conditions of the people in the State and to recommend as to what sections should be treated as socially and educationally backward classes found that the benefit then in vogue relating to the reservation in educational institutions of seats based solely on caste or community was being enjoyed by the rich among the backward communities and found that the lower income groups of certain communities constituted the social ly and educationally backward classes.
it, therefore, recommended adoption of a means cum caste/ community test for the classification so as to take in poor and deserv ing sections and exclude the wealthier sections.
The State Government accordingly stipulated that applicants who are members of certain communities and whose family income was below Rs. 10,000/ per annum would only be entitled to seats reserved for those students The petitioner who belonged to one of the socially and educationally backward classes, submitted a certificate of annual income of the family to be above Rs. 11,000/ , as a result of which her candidature could not be considered under the reservation scheme for a seat in the Medical College.
In a writ petition under article 32 of the Constitution it was contended that there was no reason to exclude an insignificant part of the community on the basis of income alone and that the income could not be the criterion of admission to determine the benefit of article 15(4).
Dismissing the writ petition HELD: The basis of the reservation is not income but social and educational backwardness.
Backward classes for whose umprovement special provisions are contemplated by article 15(4) are in the matter of their backwardness compara ble to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Backwardness under article 15(4) must be both social and educational.
In ascertaining social backwardness of a class of citizens,the aste of a citizen cannot be the sole or dominant test.
Just as caste is not the sole or dominant test, similarly poverty is not the decisive and determining factor of social back wardness.
[197 G H] The object of the reservation under article 15(4) is to recog nise the factual existence of socially and educationally backward classes in the country and to make a sincere at tempt to promote the welfare of the weaker sections of the community.
Article 15(4) gives effect to this principle.
The concept of backwardness in article 15(4) is not intended to be relative in the sense that classes who are backward in relation to the most advanced classes of society should be included in it.
[198 B C] In ascertaining social backwardness of a class of citi zens it may not be irrelevant to consider the caste of the group of citizens.
Caste cannot however be made the whole or dominant test.
Social backwardness is in the ultimate analysis the result of poverty to a large extent.
Social backwardness which results from poverty is likely to be aggravated by considerations of caste.
This shows the relevance of both caste and poverty in determining the backwardness of citizens.
In evolving proper criteria for determining the socially and educationally backward classes, sociological and economic considerations come into play.
This determination is the function of the State.
The Courts jurisdiction is to decide whether the tests applied are valid.
In dealing with the question as to whether any class of citizens is socially backward or not, it may not be irrelevant to consider the caste of the said group of citi zens.
Special provision is contemplated for classes of citizens and not for individual citizens as such, 195 and so.
though the caste of the group of citizens may be relevant, its importance should not be exaggerated.
If the classification is based solely on caste of the citizen, it may not be logical.
When the Commission had determined a class to be socially and educationally backward it was not on the basis of income alone, and the determination was based on the relevant criteria laid down by this Court.
Article 15(4) which speaks of backwardness of classes of citizens indicates that the accent is on the classes of citizens.
Article 15(4) also speaks of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Therefore, socially and educationally backward classes of citizens in article 15(4) cannot be equated with castes.
[199 G; 200 D H] R. Chitralekha & Anr.
vs State of Mysore & Ors. ; referred to.
