Thakordas, father of 3 appellants, was the owner of the suit premises.
He was a partner in a firm which.
had 3 other partners.
One of the partners was appellant No. 1, the son of Thakordas and two partners were outsiders.
A suit for eviction was filed against the respondent on the ground that Thakordas required the premises for the said firm reasonably and bona fide within the meaning of section 13(1)(g) of the Bombay Rent Act, 1947.
The trial court passed a decree for eviction in respect of a portion of the premises.
Thereafter, Thakordas died and the present appellants who are his sons filed an appeal.
Likewise the tenant also filed an appeal.
Appellants No. 1 and 2 togeth er with some outsiders continued the firm.
However, appel lant No. 3 a minor son of Thakordas was not admitted to the benefit of the partnership.
The First Appellate Court confirmed the decree of the trial court.
The revision application filed by the tenant was allowed and one filed by the appellants was dismissed by the High Court relying on the decision of this Court in Phul Rani & Ors.
vs Naubat Rai Ahluwalia [19731 3 SCR 679.
In an appeal by special leave, the appellants contended: 1.
Phul Rahi 's case was not correctly decided and the right of Thakordas survived in favour of the appellants.
The requirement of the firm in which the landlord is a partner will be the requirement of the landlord.
Since the decree had already been passed in favour of Thakordas before his death it could not be disturbed on his death either in appeall or in revision.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) Phul Rani 's case was wrongly decided.
If the law permitted the eviction of the tenant for the require ments of the landlord "for occupation as a residence for himself and members of his family" then the requirement was both of the landlord and the members of his family.
On his death, the right to '.sue did survive to the members of the family of the deceased landlord.
After the death of the original landlord the senior member of his family takes his place, and is well competent to continue the suit for evic tion for his occupation and the occupation of the other members of the family.
[343 H, 344 A B] (2) It is doubtful whether the requirement of the prem ises by the landlord for occupation by the firm in which he is a partner will tantamount to occupation by himself.
Even if it is assumed that it will amount to occupation by the landlord, since in the new firm the minor son of Thakordas was not admitted to the benefits of the partnership he had no interest in the said firm.
Therefore, as far as appellant No. 3 is concerned, he could in no sense be said to require the premises.
[344 C G] (3) The conclusion in Phul Rani 's case that if a decree had been already passed in favour of the plaintiff that could not be disturbed on his death is not correctly decid ed.
In fact, no final opinion was expressed in Phul, Rani 's case on that question.
[344 H, 345 A] 342 Phul Rani & Ors.
vs Naubat Rai Ahluwalia [1973] 3 S.C.R. 679, overruled.
