The principles that should be kept in mind by the Court when giving consent to the prosecution under section 494 Cr.
P.C. 1973, for withdrawing the prosecution against the accused, are that the prosecution is not able to produce sufficient evidence to sustain the charge, or that the prosecution does not appear to be well rounded, or that there are other circumstances which clearly show that the object of administration of justice would not be advanced or furthered by going on with the prosecution.
It is not sufficient for the prosecution merely to say that it is not expedient to proceed with the prosecution.
The ultimate guiding consid eration must always be the interest of administration of justice and that is the touchstone on which the question must be determined.
No hard and fast rule can he laid down nor can any categories of cases be defined in which consent should be granted or refused.
It must ultimately depend on the facts and circumstances of each case in the light of what is necessary in order to promote the ends of justice, because, the objective of every judicial.
process must be the attainment of justice.
[338 C F] Where, therefore, the Magistrate granted permission for withdrawal, because the prosecution averred that the evidence collected during investigation was not sufficient to sustain the charge against the accused and after satisfy ing himself, by perusing the case diary, that the averment of the prosecution was justified, the High Court was in error in setting aside the order of the Magistrate.
In the instant case,.
the High Court also erred in observing that the Magistrate had not perused the case diary, and that the Magistrate had accorded consent for withdrawal of the prosecution by accepting the prosecution case that it was inexpedient to proceed with the case.
[338 H; 339 A] Where, in the connected case, the Magistrate gave his consent for withdrawal on the ground that it was adminis tratively considered by the State inexpedient to proceed with the case, though it was not a valid ground, no useful purpose would be served in compelling the prosecution to proceed with the case, because, both cases arose out of the same incident and the evidence in regard to both was admit tedly the same.
[339 C D] Where the application made by the prosecution for with drawal showed that the clash in which certain persons were injured arose out of rivalry between two trade unions, but that since the date of the incident calm and peace prevailed in the industrial undertaking, the Trial Court would be justified in granting consent for the withdrawal of the prosecution and the High Court would be in error in setting aside that order.
In the present case, the State felt that it would not be conducive to the interests of justice to continue the prosecution, since the prosecution or convic tion of the accused would rouse feelings of bitterness and antagonism and disturb the calm and peaceful atmosphere prevailing in the undertaking.
Ultimately, every offence has a social or economic cause behind it and if the State feels that the elimination or eradication of the social or economic cause of the crime would be better served by not proceeding with the prosecution.
the State should be at liberty to withdraw from the prosecution.
[340 D G]
