At every centre of the Reserve Bank of India there were five departments, the General Department and four Specialised Departments.
There was a separate seniority list for the employees in each Department at each centre and confirmation and promotion of employees was only in the vacancies arising within their Department at each centre.
There were two grades of clerks in each Department, namely, Grade I and Grade 11.
The pay scales of Grade I and Grade II clerks in all the departments were the same and their conditions of service were also identical.
There was automatic promotion from Grade II to Grade I and when a clerk from Grade H was promoted to officiate in Grade I, he got an additional officiating allowance of Rs. 25/ per month.
There were also several categories of non,clerical posts in the General as well as Specialised Departments, and their pay scale was the same as that of Grade II clerks.
In view of expanding activities in the Specialised Departments, there were great er opportunities for confirmation and promotion for employ ees in the Specialised Departments than in the General Department.
This gave rise to dissatisfaction amongst employees in the General Department and they claimed equal opportunities by having a combined seniority list for all the clerks for confirmation and promotion.
The Reserve Bank, sought to justify the separate seniority lists on the ground that the work in each department was of a special nature and inter transferability was undesirable and hard to achieve.
As a result of the recommendation Of the National Tribunal, however, the Reserve Bank introduced the Optee Scheme of 1965 as h first step towards equalization of opportunities.
Under the Scheme, the option to go over to the Specialised Departments was confined to confirmed Grade 11 clerks and officiating Grade I clerks in the General Department.
If he exercised the option, he was eligible to be selected.
If he was selected, he would be entitled to be absorbed only as Grade II clerk in one of the Specialised Departments with the result that if he was an officiating Grade I clerk in the General Department at the time of the exercise of the option, he would lose the benefit of officiation in Grade I in the General Department as also the monetary benefit of Rs. 25/ .
His seniority in the cadre of Grade II clerks in the Specialised Department in Which he was absorbed would be determined on the basis of his length of service calculated from the date of his recruitment if he was a graduate when he joined service, or from the date of his graduation if he became a graduate whilst in service.
The petitioners in the present case and some others were, at the time of introduction of the Optee Scheme, confirmed Grade II clerks in the General Department and some of them were officiating in the General Department as Grade I clerks.
They exercised the option under the Optee Scheme land were absorbed substantively as confirmed Grade II clerks in one or the other of the Specialised Departments.
The clerks, other than the petitioners were in due course, in order of seniority, promoted as officiating Grade I clerks in their respective Specialised Departments.
But before the turn of the petitioners for promotion came, a new ' Scheme was introduced on May 13, 1972 as a result of continuous agitation by the employees for full equalisation of opportunities between the General Department and the Specialised Departments.
This Scheme was known as the Combined Seniority Scheme, and it superseded the Optee Scheme.
It consisted of two parts.
One part provided for the integration of the clerical staff of the General Depart ment with the clerical staff of the Specialised Departments, and the other, 378 for the integration of the non clerical staff with the clerical staff in all the Departments.
The Combined Seniori ty Scheme gave an option to the non clerical employees to be transferred to posts in the clerical cadre, but in the interest of efficiency, prescribed a qualification that only those employees in non clerical cadres would be transferred who arc either graduates or have passed both parts of Insti tute of Bankers Examination.
For determining their seniori ty vis a vis those in the clerical cadre, the Combined Seniority Scheme adopted the rule that one third of their total non clerical service until 7th May, 1972 (the date on which agreement was reached between the Bank and its employ ees in the terms of the Combined Seniority Scheme) or the date of acquiring the qualification should be taken into account.
The petitioners successfully challenged the Combined Seniority Scheme in the High Court.
The High Court held that the Scheme was violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, because: (1) The position which obtained when the Combined Seniority Scheme was brought into force was that the petitioners were still confirmed Grade 11 clerks in the Specialised Departments, while some of the Grade II clerks in the General Departments, who were junior to them and who had either not exercised the option, or having exercised the option, were not selected, were promoted as Grade 1 Clerks in the General Departments.
The result was that these Grade 11 clerks who had been promoted as Grade I Clerks in the General Department were equated to Grade I Clerks in the Specialised Departments.
Therefore, according to the petitioners, the Combined Seniority Scheme had the effect of prejudicing the promotional opportunities assured to the petitioners under the Optee Scheme and hence the Combined Seniority Scheme discriminated against the petitioners in relation to the clerical staff in the General Department who either did not exercise the option under the Optee Scheme or having exercised the option, were not selected; (2) it discriminated against the petitioners vis a vis others who had opted under the Optee Scheme of 1965 and who had obtained promotion as Grade I clerks in their respective Specialised Departments before the intro duction of the Combined Seniority Scheme; and (3) (a) the Scheme treated alike the non clerical staff as well as the clerical staff by integrating them together in one cadre with a combined seniority list though they formed two dis tinct and separate classes, and thus violated the equali ty clause; (b) by permitting, in the case of non clerical staff, one third of the total non clerical service until 7th May, 1972 or the date of acquiring the qualification, to be taken into account for the purpose of seniority, the Bank laid down a wholly irrational and unjust principle of sen iority in the integrated service and violated the equal opportunity clause and; (c) the seniority of the petitioners was adversely affected by the integration without giving any opportunity to them and thus the introduction of the Com bined Seniority Scheme violated the principles of natural justice.
Allowing the appeal to this Court and upholding the validity of the Combined Seniority Scheme.
HELD: (1) Assuming that the Reserve Bank is State under article 12, and therefore subject to articles 14 and 16, by the mere introduction of the Optee Scheme no promise or assur ance could be spelt out on the part of the Bank not to take any steps towards integration of other employees not covered by the Optee Scheme.
The Reserve Bank could not, on any principle of law or by any process of implication, be held bound to hold its hands in the matter of further inte gration, until the petitioners were promoted in the Specia lised Departments.
The only object of the Optee Scheme was to equalise the promotional opportunities of Grade II clerks in the General Departments with those of Grade II clerks in the Specialised Departments by giving an option to the former to be absorbed in the latter.
This object was carried out as soon as the petitioners and other Grade II clerks in the General Departments opted to be transferred to the Specialised Departments.
Then they became Grade I1 clerks in the Specialised Departments having the same promo tional opportunities as the original Grade 1I clerks in the Specialised Departments.
There was no assurance given by the Bank that the promotional opportunities available to Grade II clerks in the Specialised Departments will not be dimin ished.
The Combined Seniority Scheme affected the promo tional opportunities of all Grade II clerks in the Specia lised Departments, irrespective of whether they were origi nal or transferee Grade II clerks.
It did not discriminate between transferee Grade II clerks and original 379 Grade II clerks.
There was no breach of the principle that the promotional opportunities of transferee Grade 11 clerks should be equal to those of original Grade II clerks.
The fact that some of the Grade II clerks, junior to the peti tioners, had become Grade I clerks in the General Depart ments, and so could be equated only with Grade I clerks in the Specialised Departments is a wholly fortuitous result.
It might cause heart burning amongst the petitioners that they still continue to be Grade II clerks but whenever services are integrated, some hardship is bound to result as a necessary consequence of integration.
B G] (2) The Reserve Bank did not undertake that it will not take any steps for bringing about total integration of the clerical services until all the transferee Grade II clerks were promoted.
The Reserve Bank was entitled to introduce the Combined Seniority Scheme at any time it thought fit and its validity cannot be assailed on the ground that it was introduced at a time when some of the transferee Grade II clerks still remained to be promoted and so was discrimina tory against them.
The fact that some transferee Grade II clerks had already obtained promotion as Grade I clerks in the Specialised Departments by the time the Combined Senior ity Scheme was introduced, is all part of the exigencies of service and in law no grievance can be made against it.
[392 D E] (3) (a) The integration of different cadres into one cadre cannot be said to involve any violation of the equali ty clause.
It is entirely a matter for the State to decide whether to have several different cadres or one integrated cadre in its services.
That is a matter of policy which does not attract the applicability of the equality clause.
The integration of non clerical with clerical service sought to be effectuated by the Combined Seniority Scheme cannot, in the circumstances, be assailed as violative of the prin ciple of quality.
[393 F] Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi vs Union of India AIR 1962 S.C. 1139 referred to (b) It is open to the State to lay down any rule which it thinks appropriate for determining seniority in service and it is not competent to the Court to strike down such a rule on the ground that in its opinion another rule would have been better or more appropriate.
The only enquiry which the Court can make is whether the rule laid down by the State is arbitrary and irrational so that it results in inequality of opportunity amongst employees belonging to the same class.
[393 G H] In the present case the employees from non clerical cadres were being absorbed in the clerical cadre, and, therefore, a rule for determining their seniority vis a vis those already in the clerical cadre had to be devised.
To ignore their .entire non clerical service would have been unjust to them, and to take into account their entire non clerical services would be unjust to those in the clerical service.
The Bank therefore, decided that one third of the non clerical service rendered by the employees coming from non clerical cadres should be taken into account for the purpose of determining seniority.
It strikes a just balance between the conflicting claims of non clerical and clerical staff and cannot be condemned as arbitrary or discriminato ry.
[394 A B] Anand Parkash Saksena vs Union of India [1968] 2 S.C.R. 611, referred to.
(c) (i) The contention that there was violation of princi ples of natural justice was not raised before the High Court; (ii) Even if the contention is allowed be raised in this Court, there was no question of any existing seniority of the petitioners being disturbed by changing the rule of seniority.
The problem was fitting into the clerical cadre employees coming from non clerical cadres.
For that purpose, a new rule was required to be made.
The rule did not affect the petitioners ' seniority, and hence, there was no question of giving the petitioners an opportunity to make representa tion against it.
[394 E]
