Under the , it is the business of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission to plan, promote, organise and implement programmes for the development of petroleum resources and the production and sale of petroleum products produced by it and to perform such functions as the Central Government may, from time to time, assign to it.
Under section 29 of the Act, the Commission shall be deemed to be a Company, liable for any tax or fee levied by the Central or State Government.
Section 31 empowers the Central Government to make rules prescribing the conditions subject to which, and the mode in which, contracts may be entered into by or on behalf of the Commis sion.
The Commission is engaged in the business of produc ing crude oil in Assam and supplying it to the refineries of the Indian Oil Corporation at Gauhati in Assam and Barauni in Bihar.
It was decided by the Government of India and agreed to by the Commission; that the crude is deemed no tionally to be delivered only to Barauni Refinery and not to Gauhati Refinery, and that payment of Sales tax by the Commission is to be on the same principle.
The Commission however challenged, in a petition to this Court, its liability to pay any sates tax either under the Central Sales Tax Act to the State of Assam or the State Sales Tax to the .State of Bihar, on the ground, that, in supplying crude oil to the Corporation there was no contract of sale between the Commission and the Corporation, because, the supply was pursuant to.
directions and orders of the Central Government and the Commission had no volition or freedom in the matter.
The Commission also contended that assuming that they are sates they are inter state sales, under the , and the State of Bihar was not competent to levy any State sales tax.
HELD: (1) The supplies of crude oil by the Commission to the Brauni Refinery of the Corporation satisfy all the ingredients of a sale and amount to sales by the Commission to the Corporation.
[356 A] (a) Statutory orders regulating the supply and distribu tion of goods by and between the parties under Control Orders do not absolutely impinge on the freedom to enter into contract.
[357 C] (b) Directions, decisions and orders of agencies of the Government to control production and supply of commod ities, may fix the person who has to carry them out, the parties to whom the goods are to be supplied, and he price at which, and the time during which they are to be supplied.
In much cases it cannot be said that compulsive.
directions rob the transactions of the character of agreement.
There is privity of contract between the parties, he statute supplying the consensus and the modality of consensus.
[357 D E] (c) Such a transaction is a valid transfer of, property for consideration and he law presumes assent when there is transfer of goods from one to the other.
[357 F] (d) Also, a sale may not require the consensual element and there may compulsory sale of property under a statute for a price fixed against the owner 's will.
(e) Delimiting areas for transactions or denoting par ties or price for transactions are all within the area of individual freedom of contract with limited choice by reason of ensuring the greatest good for the greatest number by achieving proper supply as standard or fair price.
[357 G] .
(f) The transactions in substance represent the outgoing of the business and the price would come into computation of profits.
[357 G] Salar Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. Etc.
v, State of Mysore & Ors.
[1972] 2 S.C.R. 228 followed.
(2) The movement of crude oil from Assam to Barauni in Bihar is pursuant to and as an incident to the contract for, sale between the Commission and the Corporation.
The Sales are therefore inter state sales.
and under the Central Sales tax Act only the.
State of Assam is entitled to levy central sales tax on the Commission.
[358 G]
