The petitioners obtained oral licenses for catching and appropriating fish from specified sections of the Chilka Lake from its proprietor, the Raja of Parikud, on payment of heavy sums and obtained receipts in accordance with the prevailing practice.
This was before the passing of the Orissa Estates Abolition Act of 1951 by which ownership of the estate vested in the State of Orissa.
The licenses, however, were in respect of years subsequent to such vesting.
The State of Orissa refused to recognise them and was seeking to reaction the rights of fishery.
The petitioners contended that it had thereby infringed or was about to infringe their fundamental rights under articles 19(1)(f) and 31(1) of the Constitution and claimed that the transactions being sales of future goods, namely, the fish, the Act which was confined to immovable property had no application.
Held, that the right sought to be acquired by the petitioners by their several purchases was not in respect of any future goods as claimed by them but was a license to enter on the land coupled with a grant to catch and carry away the fish, in other words, a profit a prendre which is immovable property within the meaning of the Transfer of Property Act read with section 3(25) of the General Clauses Act.
Accordingly section 54 of the former Act applies.
That as the sale of the profit a prendre in the present cage was valued at more than one hundred rupees and was effected without writing and registration it contravened section 54 of the Transfer of Property Act, and so no title or interest therein passed to the petitioners and consequently, they bad no fundamental rights to enforce.
Firm Chhotabhai Jethabai Patel & Co. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ([1953] S.C.R. 476), distinguished and held inapplicable.
That it was not necessary in the present case to decide whether the contract was property within the meaning of articles 19(1)(f) and 31(1), but assuming it to be so, the State has not taken such property away from the petitioners or prevented them from acquiring, holding or disposing of it.
The State merely refuses to recognise the contract and refuses to consider itself bound by it.
That may give a cause of action for a suit on the contract but no fundamental right arises as the State has not confiscated or acquired or taken possession of the contract as such by claiming any benefits under it.
