The appellants granted a licence in respect of certain shop premises in Bombay to the respondent under a Leave and Licence Agreement which expired on 31st March 1966.
There after the appellants served a notice upon the respondent calling upon him to remove himself from the premises.
The respondent refused to do so.
In July 1967 the appellants filed on application for eviction under Section 41 of the Presidency Small Causes Court Act.
The contention of the respondent that he was a tenant was negatived by the Small Causes Court, Bombay.
The respondent approached the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court refused to interfere with the finding of the Small Causes Court that the respondent was a licensee and not a tenant.
The Bombay Rent Act was amended by Maharashtra Act 17 of 1973.
By the amending Act, section 5(4A) and Section 15A were introduced in the parent Act to confer on the licensee, who had a subsisting agreement on February 1, 1973, the status and protection of a tenant under the Bombay Rent Act.
The respondent by an amendment took the plea of protec tion under the Maharashtra Amendment Act 17 of 1973 on the ground that he was in occupation of the premises on 1st February 1973 under a subsisting agreement for licence.
The Small Causes Court, Bombay, negatived the plea on the ground that there was no subsisting agreement for licence on the 1st of February, 1973 as there was nothing on record to show that after 31st March 1966 the leave and licence agreement between the parties was renewed or any fresh agreement was entered into.
The respondent filed a revision petition under section 115 of C.P.C. in the High Court.
The High Court allowed the revision on the ground that the licence was not put an end to by the appellants and that in any event by filing the application for eviction the appellant licensor had granted an implied licence to the respondent licensee to continue in possession till a decree of eviction was passed in his favour.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (a) In order to get the advantage of section 15A of the Bombay Rent Act, the occupant must be in occupation of the premises as a licensee as defined in section 5(4A) on the 1st of February 1973.
If he be such a licensee, the non obstante clause of section 15A(1) gives him the status and protection of a tenant in spite of there being anything to the contrary in any other law or in any contract.
But if he is not a licensee under a subsisting agreement on the 1st of February 1973, then he does not get the advantange of the amended provision of the Bombay Rent Act.
[407 H, 408 A] (b) A person continuing in possession of the premises after termination, withdrawal or revocation of the licence continues to occupy it is a trespasser or as a person who has no semblance of any right to continue in occupation of the premises.
Such a person cannot be called a licensee at all.
[408 B] (c) A person continuing in occupation of such premises after revocation of the licence is still liable to pay compensation, or damages for their use and occupation.
[408 E] 404 (d) Filing an application under section 41 of the Presi dency Small Causes Court Act may in certain circumstances have the effect of putting an end to the licence if it was subsisting on the date of its filing.
But, that cannot possibly have the effect of reviving the licence as opined by the learned Judge.
Such a proposition of law is both novel and incomprehensible.
[408H, 409 G] (e) It is right that the Court should act in consonance with the spirit of the Maharashtra Amending Act 17 of 1973.
But the Court cannot and should not cast the law to the winds or twist or stretch it to a breaking point amounting to almost an absurdity.
[410 C] (f) The finding of the High Court that the respondent was in occupation of the premises under a subsisting licence was wholly wrong and suffered from serious infirmities of law and fact and deserved to be.set aside.
[410 G] [The Supreme Court is loathe to pass any harsh or unpal atable remarks concerning the judgment of the High Court and ought to act with restraint.
But sometimes constraint outweighs restraint and compels this Court in discharge of its duty to make strong observations when it finds the judgment of the High Court running galore with the gross and palpable mistakes of law almost amounting to judicial imbal ance in the approach to the case].
