The appellant was a member of the Subordinate Judicial Service of the State.
On receipt of certain allegations the High Court made a preliminary enquiry and the State Govern ment suspended him from service.
After the final enquiry the High Court recommended to the State Government to remove him from service.
The State Public Service Commission, on reference by the Government, stated that he should be exon erated.
On the basis of this recommendation, the Governor ordered the appellant 's reinstatement; but the High Court did not give him a posting on the view that the order of the Governor was illegal because of consultation with the Serv ice Commission and in accepting its advice, disregarding the High Court 's own recommendation.
The High Court, therefore, suggested to the Government to review its order of rein statement, but the Government did not take any action.
The appellant then filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging its refusal to give him a posting.
In the mean time the Governor compulsorily retired the appellant from service on his attaining 55 years of age.
Dismissing the writ petition the High Court held that the Governor 's order ;reinstating the appellant was void and non est because: (i) it was not passed in accordance with the provisions of article 235 of the Constitution and (ii) the Government could not have consulted the Public Service Commission which was an extraneous body.
In appeal to this Court it was contended for the appellant that (i) the Governor was not bound by the recom mendation of the High Court; (ii) the Governor was entitled under article 320(3)(c) to consult the Public Service Commis sion on the question arising out of a disciplinary proceed ing; and (iii) since the appellant was later compulsorily retired, the order of suspension merged with the order of reinstatement, and since no other order of suspension was passed thereafter, he was entitled to full salary upto the date of his compulsory retirement.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1)(a) Articles 233 to 237 relating to the subor dinate judiciary are specially carved out and placed in the safe niche of a separate chapter.
For the first time in the country 's history appeared in the Constitution of India the concept of control over subordinate courts to vest in the High Courts.
But the appointing authority of a Subordinate Judge under article 235 as well as under the Appointment Rules, is the Governor.
The High Court, in making its recommenda tion to the Governor for passing the order of removal, had rightly conceded the authority of the Governor.
Ordinarily and as a matter of graceful routine, recommendations of the High Court are and should always be accepted by the Gover nor.
This is ordinarily so and should be in practice the rule as a matter of healthy convention.
But it will not be correct always to insist that the Governor has no authority even under extraordinary circumstances to send the matter for reconsideration.
(b) The quality of exclusive control of the High Court is not whittled down by the constitutional device of all orders being issued in the name of the Governor as the head of the State administration.
When, therefore.
the High Court, exercising disciplinary control, over the subordinate judiciary found, after a proper enquiry, that a certain officer was guilty of gross misconduct and was unworthy to be retained in judicial service and, therefore, recommended to the Governor his removal or dismissal, it is difficult to conceive how and under what circumstances such a recommenda tion could be rejected by the Governor acting with the aid and advice of ministers or, of one of them.
[434 G H] The State of West Bengal vs Nripendra Nath Bagchi ; ; and State of Haryana vs Inder Prakash Anand H.C.S., and others [1976] Supp.
S.C.R. 603.
referred to.
(c) Whenever in an extraordinary ease, the Governor feels, for certain reasons, that he is unable to accept the High Court 's recommendations, these reasons will be communicated to the High Court to enable it to reconsider the matter.
There is no warrant for introducing another extraneous body between the Governor and the High Court in the matter of disposal of a disciplinary proceeding against a judicial officer.
The Governor could not have passed any order on the advice of the Public Service Commission in this case.
The advice should be of no other authority than the High Court in the matter of judicial officers.
This is the plain impli cation of Article 235.
There is no room for any outside body between the Governor and the High Court.
In relying upon the advice of the Commission the Governor took alien considerations into account and acted erroneously in passing the order of reinstatement.
[435 B, E F] Consultation with the Public Service Commission after receipt of the recommendation of the High Court for removal of the officer was not warranted by the provisions of article 235.
Under the Constitution the High Court is the sole custodian over the discipline of judicial officers.
[435 D] (2) (a) Just as the High Court staff are not serving under the Government of the State, the judicial officers are also not under the State Government.
They hold posts in connection with the affairs of the State but are entirely under the jurisdiction of the High Court for the purpose of control and discipline.
article 320(3)(c) is entirely out of place so far as the High Court is concerned dealing with judicial officers.
D] Pradvat Kumar Bose vs The Hon 'ble the Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court ; and The High Court, Calcutta vs Amal Kumar Roy [1963]1 SCR 437 distinguished and held inapplicable.
(b) The Governor cannot pass any order without reference to the High Court and except on its recommendation.
The matter should not be considered from the angle of supremacy between one organ over the other.
Solution must be found in harmony and not in cold war between the two organs.
[437 A B] (3) The character of the order of dismissal and that of the order of reinstatement in a departmental enquiry is absolutely different.
Suspension is a step to dismissal and may culminate in dismissal.
When an officer is suspended no work is taken from him but he does not cease to be in serv ice.
When he is dismissed the link with the service is snapped and naturally the order of suspension merges in dismissal.
When, however, a suspended officer is reinstated an order which is different in content and quality from that of suspension takes effect.
The suspended officer, on rein statement, goes back to service.
A further order may have to be passed by the authority as to in what manner the period of suspension will be treated.
That will be there fore a distinct and separate proceeding apart from the earlier departmental proceeding in which the order of rein statement was passed.
If the order of reinstatement is set aside the officer is bound to revert to his immediate ante rior status of suspension in the absence of any order in that behalf from the Court.
[438 A C] In the instant case since the order of reinstatement stood quashed, the appellant would have the status of a suspended officer on the date of his compulsory retirement.
It is not for this Court to say whether he would be entitled to his 427 full salary while on suspension.
Since the officer had already retired, it is not necessary for the Governor to consider the recommendation of the High Court for the pur pose of his removal.
[438 E F]
