Paragraph 3(b) of a memorandum dated December 21, 1967 issued by the State Government provides that for absorption in the post of Principal of a Higher Secondary School, the person concerned "should" possess a post graduate degree and should also possess the prescribed experience.
An amendment introduced by the memorandum dated December 6, 1972 says that wherever the qualification for a post is post graduate, the person concerned will have to obtain this degree within three years of absorption.
But this amendment was made applicable only to persons who had been working in schools run by Janpad Sabhas and Municipal Committees and for all teachers of non Government schools taken over by the Govern ment 1967 orders applied.
The appellant, who was a B.A.B.T., was the Head Mistress of a Private school.
When the administration of the school was taken over by the Government, she was fixed in a lower time scale of pay because, under the rules, no person could be appointed as Principal unless she held a post graduate degree and possessed the requisite experience.
The High Court dismissed her Writ Petition.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) her appointment in a lower post was illegal because she could have obtained the Post graduate degree within the three years ' time from the date of her absorption; (ii) the word 'should ' used in the 1967 memorandum showed that the rule is directory in charac ter; (iii) since.
she held B.A.B.T., she should be consid ered as having a post graduate qualification; (iv) she was discriminated against because in the schools run by Govern ment from their inception, teachers who did not hold a Master 's degree were appointed as Principals and (v) the qualifications of the teaching staff have to be the same as prescribed in the Regulations of the Board of Secondary Education.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) In view of the express statement in the 1972 Memorandum that it would be applicable only to previous teachers of Janpad Sabhas and Municipalities, the appellant could not claim the benefit of the particular facility.
[479 E F] (2) The word 'should occurring in paragraph 3(b) must be understood in a mandatory sense.
The use of word "should" cannot justify the construction that for absorption in the post of a Principal of a Higher Secondary School the incum bent may or may not possess the Post Graduate Degree.
In a memorandum containing a set of rules prescribing the quali fications for various posts, it is meaningless to provide that the incumbent of a certain post may or may not possess a certain qualification, if the possession of the particular qualification is considered to be a matter of no importance or consequence.
Paragraph 3(b) consists of a complex provi sion one part of which refers to the requirement of a Post Graduate Degree and the other to the need to possess a certain amount of experience.
Both the clauses of a single sentence are governed by the verb "should".
If the require ment as to the possession of a Post graduate Degree is to be directory in character, the same consideration must apply equally to the requirement of experience, with the result that for eligibility for the post of a Principal, it would neither be necessary to possess any particular educational qualification nor any particular experience of teaching.
[480 C E] 478 (3) By "Post graduate Degree" is meant a Master 's degree like the M.A. or M.Sc.
and not a Bachelor 's degree like B.T.
In expressions like "post nuptial", "post operative" etc., "post" means "after", the emphasis being on the happening of an event after a certain point of time.
In the educational world the expression "post graduate" has acquired a special significance.
It is the holder a Master 's Degree like the M.Ed.
or LL.M., who earns recognition as the holder of a post graduate degree.
That is the sense in which the ex pression is used in the Memorandum.
[480 G, 481 A] (4) The State Government had a valid reason for pre scribing comparatively stringent qualifications for Princi pals in schools taken over from privae institutions.
While a teacher in a Government school was appointed as Principal by reason of long and valuable experience gained as teacher, a Head Mistress or a. Principal of a private school was appointed directly and straightway without insistence on any worthwhile experience of teaching.
[481 G] (5) Regulations of the Board of Secondary Education framed under the Madhya Pradesh Madhyamik Siksha Adhiniyam 1965 have no relevance in the present ease.
They prescribe conditions with which an educational institution had to comply before seeking recognition.
The various conditions prescribed ' by the Regulations do not constitute conditions of service and can create no rights and obligations, con tractual or statutory, as between a school and its employ ees, whether the school is a Government institution or a non Government institution.
[482 A B]
