The respondent partnership firm, entered into contract with the appellant for the supply of East German sugar.
Provision for arbitration was made in clause (17) of the contract, and the arbitrator was to be nominated by the Secretary in the Ministry of Food & Agriculture.
In the present dispute, before an arbitrator was nominated, the Ministry of Food & Agriculture was bifurcated into two separate Ministries and the subject matter of the contract was allotted to the Ministry of Food.
The respondents took the stand that there was no longer any Secretary in the non existent Ministry of Food and Agriculture and clause (17) of the contract was a dead letter.
The appellant 's proposal to amend clause (17) to suit the changed circum stances, was rejected by the respondents.
Thereafter, the two Ministries were reintegrated into a Ministry of Food & Agriculture and two Secretaries were put incharge of the two departments.
The Secretary, Food Department, on a request from the appellant under clause (17), appointed an arbitra tor.
The respondents served on the appellant a notice under C.P.C. Sec. 80 but instead of proceeding to sue the appel lants, they submitted to the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator without protest until award was made, The appellant 's appli cation to the Sub Judge, Delhi, for passing a decree in terms of the award was resisted by the respondents who sought to set aside the award, challenging the validity of the Arbitrator 's appointment and contending that the arbi tration agreement under clause (17) was made by only one of the partners, and was not binding on the others.
The Sub Judge rejected their objections and made the award a rule of the court.
An appeal to the High Court was allowed on the ground that on bifurcation of the Ministries clause (17) of the contract became dead, and could not be revived on their re integration.
Allowing the appeal the Court, HELD: There were, after integration, two Secretaries in the Ministry of Food & Agriculture, but the argument that this event rendered the arbitration agreement vague and uncertain, is based on a highly technical and doctrinaire approach and is opposed to.
plain common sense.
A contract is a commercial document between the parties and must be interpreted in such a manner as to give it efficacy rather than to invalidate it.
It would not be right while inter preting a contract entered into between two lay parties, to apply strict rules of construction which are ordinarily applicable to formal documents.
The meaning of such a contract must be gathered by adopting a common sense ap proach and it must not be allowed to be thwarted by a narrow pedantic and legalistic interpretation.
The Secretary in the Ministry of Food and Agriculture in charge of the De partment of Food, would be the Secretary in the Ministry of Food and Agriculture concerned with the subject matter of the contract and under clause (17), he would be the person intended by the parties to exercise the power of nominating the arbitrator.
Furthermore, the respondents did not raise any objection to the appointment of the arbitrator and participated in the arbitration proceedings without protest, indicating the clear intendment of the parties that the Secretary in the Ministry of Food & Agriculture concerned with the subject matter of the contract should be the person entitled to nominate the arbitrator.
[488 B E, 489 A E] 484
