For the election to the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly out of 6 candidates 4 withdrew and Reddy and Rao were the only contestants.
Rao was elected by a margin of a few hundred votes.
Reddy challenged election of Rao by filing an election petition in the High Court on several grounds of corrupt practice, as well as on the ground that there were mistakes in counting of the votes.
Reddy in his election petition besides asking for the setting aside of the election of Rao also claimed that he should be declared elected in his place.
The High Court ordered a recount of votes.
However, even after the recount, Rao had still majority of votes in his favour although the margin was reduced.
The Election Petitioner contended that he was the sit ting member and was very popular and that he lost election on account of undue influence, force and violence on a large scale used by Rao.
It was alleged that about 200 supporters of Rao with the active assistance of respondent No. 2, one of the candidates who had withdrawn, threatened, beat and threw stones at the voters and supporters of Reddy; that as a result of the violence the polling had to be stopped and the polling took place later on; that about 300 supporters of Rao armed with sticks, iron rods and other weapons sur rounded the hotel where Reddy was staying and forced him to go out and severely assaulted him; that Reddy had to be removed to hospital.
In the election petition allegations were made against Rao almost under every sub section of Section 123 of the Act.
But the only corrupt practice found by the High Court against Rao was the commission of corrupt practice of undue influence within the meaning of Section 123(2).
The High Court.
therefore, set aside the election of Rao.
The High court, however, did not grant the decla ration in favour of Reddy since according to the High Court it was not found that but for the corrupt practice Reddy would have secured the majority votes.
Both Rao and Reddy, therefore, filed appeals in this Court.
Allowing the appeal of Rao and dismissing the appeal of Reddy.
HELD: (1 ) That the charge of commission of corrupt practice has to be proved and established beyond doubt like a criminal charge or a quasi criminal charge but not exactly in the manner of establishment of the guilt in a criminal prosecution giving the liberty to the accused to keep mum.
The charge has to proved on appraisal of the evidence ad duced by both sides especially by the election petitioner.
[500 F G] (2) That the election held and results declared on the choice of the voters should not be lightly interfered with or set aside by a court of law.
After all, in the holding of a fresh election are involved numerous botherations, tremendous expenses, loss of public time and money and the uncertainty of the public representation from a particular constituency.
[500 G H] (3) A charge of corrupt practice is easy to level but diffi cult to prove.
If it is sought to be proved only or mainly by oral evidence without there being contemporaneous documents to support it, court should be very careful in scru 491 tinizing the oral evidence and should not lightly accept it unless the evidence is credible, trustworthy, natural and showing beyond doubt the commission of corrupt practice, as alleged.
[501 A B] (4) That, this Court ordinarily and generally does not, as it ought not to, interfere with the findings of fact recorded by the High Court unless there are compelling reasons for the same, especially findings recorded on appre ciation of oral evidence.
[501 B] (5) This Court.
however, does not approve of the finding recorded by the High Court on a misreading or wrong appreci ation of the oral evidence especially when it is unsupported or runs counter to the contemporaneous documentary evidence.
[501 B C] (6) It must always be borne in mind that the conse quences of setting aside of an election on the ground of corrupt practice are very serious for the candidate con cerned as well as others involved in it.
A court, there fore, should reach its conclusion with care and caution taking into consideration the broad probabilities, the natural conduct of the persons involved and the special situation in which a corrupt practice is alleged to have been committed.
[501 C E] On appreciation of evidence the Court found that the High Court wrongly came to the conclusion that the corrupt practice was committed either by Rao or his agent; that the main story set up by Reddy does not find support from any of the contemporaneous documents including statement of Reddy himself.
The genesis of the disturbance was the alleged assault on the two boys by the Reddy group.
The disturb ances before the election did take place but it was not a one sided affair.
Both sides were responsible for entering into dashes.
The High Court committed a grave error in placing reliance on such intrinsically and inherently weak pieces of oral evidence as against the contemporaneous documents.
[501 H, 505F, 506A, G, 507 C] No corrupt practice was established to have been commit ted by any person with the consent of respondent Rao or his election agent.
The High Court, therefore, wrongly declared election of Rao to be void under Section 100(1) (b).
[508 F] The ballot papers on which the marks were put on the reverse side of the symbol and not on the obverse side were rightly rejected.
Rule 39(2)(b) of the Conduct of Election Rules 1961 requires the elector to make a mark on the ballot paper on or near the symbol of the candidate for whom he intends to vote.
On a plain reading of the said rule that the voter is to make the mark on the ballot paper and not behind the ballot paper.
[509 B E] Swarup Singh vs Election Tribunal AIR 1960 Allahabad 66 and Dhanpatilal vs Harisingh, AIR , over ruled.
A. V. Palaniswami vs The Election Court (District Mun sif), Tripura and others and Mr. Sykes vs Mr. Mc.
Arthur, 4 D 'Malley and Hardcastle 110.
approved.
