This appeal to the Supreme Court was from a reversing decree of the Bombay High Court in a suit for possession of certain immovable properties.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court on 20 12 1946, the value of properties being found to be over Rs. 10,000.
The decree of the High Court allowing the plaintiff 's claim was passed on the 8th November 1949.
The defendants applied to the High Court for leave to appeal to the Federal Court on 6 1 1950 which was granted on 1 10 1951.
One of the questions for determination was whether article 133 of the Constitution applied to the case and the appeal was competent to the Supreme Court.
Held, that article 133 did not apply as it relates expressly to appeals against any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court in the "territory of India".
Held further that on the date of the decree of the High Court, the defendants had a vested right of appeal to the Federal Court as the properties were of the requisite value and on 6 1 1950 a certificate of leave to appeal was bound to be granted.
Held also that the appeal was competent to the Supreme Court by virtue of the provisions of article 135 of the Constitution as the jurisdiction and powers in relation to the matter in dispute were exercisable by the Federal Court immediately before the commencement of the Constitution under an existing law inasmuch as the Federal Court had jurisdiction to entertain and hear appeals from a decree of a High Court which reversed the lower court 's decree as regards properties of the value of more than Rs. 10,000.
The construction contended for by the respondent that the jurisdiction was exercisable under article 135 by the Federal Court only if the matter was actually pending before the Federal Court and that it could not be said to be pending until the appeal is declared admitted under Order XLV of the Civil Procedure Code is 873 too narrow and does not give full and proper scope to the meaning of the word 'exercisable ' in the Article.
