The appellant is a major port.
An industrial Dispute was raised by the respondent workmen with regard to the termina tion of the services of one of the employees.
The dispute was referred to the Industrial Tribunal under section 10(1)(d) of the .
The appellant sought to be represented through Shri T. Mishra, Advocate, who was described as "Legal Consultant" of the appellant.
Mr. Misra admittedly is a practising advocate of the Orissa High Court.
An objection was taken by the respondent to the representation of the appellant by Mr. Misra.
The respond ents refused to give their consent as required by section 36(4) of the Act.
The Tribunal came to the conclusion that the relationship between the appellant and Mr. Misra is that of a client and his lawyer and not that of an employer and employee.
The Tribunal also held that merely by execution of a power of attorney the restrictions attached to a legal practitioner contained in subsection (4) by Section 36 cannot be circum vented.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Industrial Law in India did not commence with a show of cold shoulder to lawyers.
For the first time restriction was imposed in the year 1950 on the engagement of legal practitioners before the Appellate Tribunal without consent of the parties and leave of the Tribunal.
The restrictions on legal representations before the Industrial Courts existed in England also.
The act envisages investi gation and settlement of industrial disputes and with that end in view has created various authorities at different levels all independent of one another.
It is reason,able to suppose that the presence of legal practitioners in concili ation may divert attention to technical pleas and will detract from the informality of proceedings impeding smooth and expeditious settlement.
Legal practioners entrusted with their briefs cannot be blamed if they bring forth their legal training and experience to the aid and benefit of their clients.
But Labour Law operation operates in a field where there are two unequal contestants.
The Act, therefore, appears to be taking care of the challenge of the situation in which a weaker party is pitted against the stronger before adjudicating authorities.
Under section 36 (1) a workman who is a party to a dispute is entitled to be represented in any proceeding under the Act by 3 classes of officers mentioned in sub clauses (a), (b) and (c) of that sub section.
By sub section (3) a total ban is imposed (a), (b) and (c) of a party to a dispute by legal practi tioners in any conciliation proceedings under the Act or in any proceedings before a Court of enquiry.
Under section 36(4) a parry who desired to be represented by a legal practitioner has to take prior consent of the opposite party and leave of the Tribunal.
[539G, H, 540A, E F, 541H, & 542A] 2.
The rules of representation under section 36(1) and (2) are unconditional and are not subject to the conditions laid down in section 36(4).
[543A] 3.
Section 36 deals with the representation of the parties.
Neither the Act nor section 36 provides for ap pearance of the parties themselves when they are individuals or Companies or.
Corporations.
The Tribunals and Labour Courts being quasi judicial authorities dealing with the rights affecting the parties cannot adjudicate their dis putes in the absence of the parties.
It is therefore, incum bent on the Tribunals and Labour Courts to afford reasonable opportunity to the parties to appear before them and hear them while adjudicating the industrial disputes.
[543B C] 538 Section 36 is not exhaustive.
It is not intended under the Act that Companies and Corporations are confined 10 representation of their cases only through the officers specified in section 36(2) of the Act.
They can be repre sented by the Director, their own officers.
However, they cannot engage legal practitioners by means of special power of attorney.
[543C, F] 4.
If a legal practitioner is appointed as an officer of a Company or Corporation and is.
in their pay and under their control and is not a practising advocate.
the fact that he was earlier a legal practitioner or has a legal degree will not stand in the way of the Company or the Corporation being represented by him.
Similarly, if a legal practitioner is an officer of an association of employers or an office bearer of a Trade Union, there is nothing in section 36(4) to prevent him from appearing before the Tribunal.
[544 C D] There is no scope for the enquiry by the Tribunal into the motive for the appointment of such legal practitioner as office bearer of the Trade Union or the Employers ' Associa tion.
[544 F] 5.
The contention that 'and ' should be read as 'or ' in section 36(4) is negatived.
Consent of the opposite party is not an idle alternative but a ruling factor in Section 36(4).
[546 E F]
