In 1946, the appellant ordered cement manufacturing machinery from a in Denmark, for its factory in Dandot, but long before the machinery was due, the Country was parti tioned and Dandot went to Pakistan.
Instead of cancelling his order, the appellant imported the machinery.
It was found that the appellant did so with the intention of sell ing it at a profit, to the Orissa State.
At the time of the sale, the appellant charged only the invoice price initially paid by it, but later, obtained a profit.
The Income Tax Officer treated the profit as income earned pursuant to an adventure in the nature of trade, and taxed it as such.
The appellant 's appeals were rejected by the Appellate Taxation Authorities.
The matter was then referred to the High Court section 66 (1 ) of the income Tax Act, but was dismissed.
The appellant contended that making a profit was not its intention at the time of sale, and that being a single and isolated transaction of purchase and sale, it was not an adventure in the nature of trade within the meaning of section 2(4) of the Act, and that the onus of proving anything to the contrary, lay upon the Department.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court HELD: (i) It is well settled that even a single and isolated transaction can be held to be capable of failing within the definition of "business" if it bears clear indi cia of trade.
The fact that the transaction is not in the way of business of the assessee does not in any way alter the character of the transaction.
[556H, 557A] Narain Swadeshi Weaving Mills vs Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax (251` I.T.R 765), G. Venkataswami Naidu .
& Co. vs The Commissioner of Income Tax [1959] Supp.
(1) S.C.R. 646, Sarol Kumar Mazumdar vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, Calcutta [1959] Supp.
(2) S.C.R. 846 followed.
(2) It is a correct proposition of law that as it was a single and isolated transaction of purchase and sale, the onus of proving that it was a transaction in the nature of trade lay on the department [560 D E] (3) The appellant had the dominant intention of selling the Dandot machinery to its own advantage, and acted with the set purpose of taking an advantage of its position as the owner of the imported machinery Even if the appellant had not earned any profit whatsoever at the time of the sale or very soon thereafter, the transaction, in the facts and circumstances of this case, would nonetheless have been an adventure in the "nature of trade", and a business transac tion within the meaning of Section 2(4) of the Act.
[560H, 561B, 562A B] Narain Swadeshi Weaving Mills vs Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax (Supra).
and G. Venkataswami Naidu & Co. vs The Commissioner of Income Tax (Supra) followed.
Kishan prasad & Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab Saroj Kumar Mazumdar vs The Commis sioner of Income Tax.
West Bengal, Calcutta (Supra).
janki Ram Bahadur Ram vs Commissioner of Income Tax., Calcutta ; and Ajax products Ltd. vs Commissioner of IncomeTax, Madras distinguished.
