Under the proviso to section 58(2) of the an application for renewal of an existing permit shall be made not less than 120 days before the date of expiry of the permit.
The procedure to be followed in this respect is the same as provided in section 57 for the grant of a fresh permit.
Under section 58(3) a delay of not more than 15 days in making the renewal application can be condoned by the Re gional Transport Authority.
The proviso to section 68F(1D) provides for the renewal of an existing permit for a limited period when a Scheme is pub lished under section 68C. Since a Scheme was published under this section the appellant made an application under section 68F(1D) for renewal of his permit.
R was rejected by the RTA on the ground that there was delay of 18 days which was not capable of being condoned.
The Transport Appellate Tribunal dismissed his appeal and the High Court summarily rejected his writ petition.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) Chapter IVA of the Act, which section 68 occurs, being a self contained code the proviso to section 58(2) was not applicable in the case of an application for renewal filed under the proviso to section 68F(1D) or (ii) in the alternative the delay could be con doned by the RTA for sufficient cause under section 5 read with section 29(2) of the .
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) (a) Section 68F(1D) imposes a prohibition on grant or renewal of permit during the intervening period between the publication of a scheme under section 68C and the publication of the approved scheme and if the proviso were not enacted.
renewal of an existing permit expiring after the publication of the scheme under section 68C would have been barred.
This, the legislature did not want and hence the proviso was introduced permitting renewal of an existing permit though for a limited period, despite the general prohibition enacted in sub section
This renewal was not intended to be some special kind of renewal.
There is no reason why the provisions of section 57 and the proviso to section 58(2) should not apply in case of a renewal application under the proviso to section 68F(1D).[569 A B] (b) chapter IVA is not a self contained code and the other sections apply to an application under the proviso to section 68F(1D)of the Act.
[569D] (i) The procedure in section 57 applies because.
there is no other procedure prescribed by the Act.
[569C] (ii) The time limit specified in the proviso to section 58(2) also applied as otherwise there would be no time limit for making an application for renewal.[569D] (iii) Section 68F(3) also proceeds on the assumption that, but for its enactment, an order made by the RTA under sub~3 (1) or (2) of section 68F would have been appealable under section 64 and it was to exclude the applicability of section 64 that 68F(3) was enacted.
[569 E F] 564 (2) The word used in sub section
3 is 'may ' and not 'shall ' and the RTA is given a discretion to entertain an applica tion for renewal of a permit even where it is beyond time, though not more than 15 days.
It could never have been the intention of the legislature that even where there is no sufficient cause for delay in making an application for renewal, the Regional Transport Authority should still be bound to entertain the application for renewal merely on the ground that the delay is of not more than 15 days.
[570F. 571A B] 3 (a) Section 29(2) of the makes section 5 applicable in the ease of an application for renewal unless its applicability can be said to be expressly exclud ed by any provision of the Act.
Sub section (3) of section 58 in so many terms says that the RTA .may condone the delay in making of an application for renewal and entertain it on merits provided the delay is of not more than 15 days.
This clearly means that if the application for renewal is beyond time by more than 15 days, the RTA shall not be entitled to entetain it.
[571E G] (b) There is an express provision in sub section
(3) that delay in making an application for renewal shall be condona ble only if it is of not more than 15 days and that express ly excludes the applicability of section 5 in cases where an application for renewal is delayed by more than 15 days.
[571G]
