The second appellant was the owner of a grocery shop and the first appellant was his salesman in the shop.
Food Inspector Bhanot purchased a sample from appellant No. 1 of mustard oil after complying with the formalities prescribed by the Act.
The Public Analyst reported that the sample was misbranded as it was of in seed oil and it was adulterated due to the presence of artificial dye.
The appellants were charge sheeted under section 16(1)(a)(i).
The learned Magis trate convicted the appellants and sentenced them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 9 months.
On appeal, the learned Sessions Judge confirmed the conviction but reduced the sentence from 9 months to 6 months.
The High Court, in revision upheld the decision of the Sessions Judge.
On appeal of Special Leave the appellants contended: 1.
The conviction was bad since it rested solely on the evidence of Food: Inspector Bhanot.
The offence committed by the appellants on the opinion of the Public Analyst fell under sec tion 16(1)(a)(i) read with clause (1) of section 2 (i) and, therefore, the Court had discretion under the proviso to section 16(1) to impose a lesser sentence than the minimum of 6 months.
In any event, the benefit of the ,, should be given to the appel lants.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
There is no rule of law that conviction cannot be based on the sole testimony of a Food Inspector.
It is only out of a sense of caution that the courts insist that the testimony of a Food Inspector should be corroborated by some independent witness.
This is a necessary caution which has to be borne in mind because the Food Inspector may in a sense be regarded as an interested witness.
But this cau tion is a rule of prudence and not a rule of law.
If it were otherwise it would be possible for many guilty persons to escape punishment by resorting to the device of bribing Panch witnesses.
In the present case, the sample was taken in the presence of witness Krishan Datt Sharma who has turned hostile.
His explanation is palpably dishonest and cannot be accepted.
There is also the evidence of another Food Inspector Bhatnagar.
The Courts below accepted their evidence and there is no reason to interfere with the con current view taken by the courts below.
[595A G] 2.
Section 2(1) defines "Adulterated" and says that an article of food shall be deemed to be adulterated if the article fails within the description given in my of the succeeding clauses (a) to (1).
Clause (j) provides that an article of food shall be deemed to be adulterated if any colouring matter other than 593 that prescribed in respect thereof and in amounts not within the prescribed limits of variability is present in the article.
Clause (1) deems an article of food to be adulter ated if the quality or purity of the article fails below the prescribed standard or its constituents are present in quantities which are in excess of the prescribed limits of variability.
[596C D] 3.
It is wrong to contend that if an article fails within clause (1) it cannot fail under clause (j) or any other clause.
Different clauses of section 2(i) are not mutually exclusive; they, overlap one another and it is quite possible that an article of food may be found adulter ated trader two or more clauses of section 2(i).
[597A C] 4.
The report of the public analyst showed that the linseed oil contained artificial dye and this was clearly prohibited under rule 23.
The only artificial dyes which were permitted to be used in food were those set out in rule 28 and Rule 29.
prohibited the use of permitted coal tar dyes in or upon any articles of food other than those enu merated in that Rule.
Lin seed oil was not one of the arti cles of food enumerated in rule 29 and hence artificial dye, even if permitted coal tar dye could not be added to linseed oil.
[597G H, 598A] 5.
The contention of the appellants that clause (j) would be attracted only if colouring matter is prescribed and the article of food is found to con:sin a colouring matter different from that prescribed was negatived.
When no colouring matter is permitted to be used in respect of an article of food what is prescribed in respect of the article is 'nil ' colouring matter and if the article contains any colouring matter it would be "other than that prescribed in respect" of the article.
[597A C, 598B D] Vidyacharan Shukla vs KhubchandBaghel, ; , relied on.
The operation of the is not excluded in case of persons found guilty of offence under the .
Howev er, imperatives of social defence must discourage the ap plicability of the probation principle.
No chances can be taken by Society with a man whose anti social activities in the guise of a respectable trade jeopardise the health and well being of numerous innocent consumers.
The adulterator is a social risk; it might be dangerous to leave him free to carry on his nefarious activities by applying the probation principle to him.
Adulteration is an economic offence prompted by profit motive and it is not likely to lend itself easily to therapeutic treatment by probationary measure.
[599D, G H, 600A B] Isher Das vs State and 1.
K. Tejani vs
M.R. Dhange, [1974] 2 S.C.R. 154 followed.
