The appellant company having its registered office at Calcutta, with branches at Bombay, Delhi, Lucknow, has a principal factory Cum branch at Madras.
The registered office and the various branches are registered as dealers both under the Central Sales Tax Act and the local Sales Tax Acts.
The appellant company in respect of the assessment year 1965 66, did not include a sum of Rs. 21.88,540.41 in its turnover in the return filed under the Central Sales Tax Act on the ground that the turnover represented sales out side the State of Madras.
The said sale related to a Bombay buyer who placed the order with the Bombay branch of the appellant company after it was informed by the said branch in consultation with the Madras branch factory that the price was f.o.r.
Madras at the buyer 's risk and that the delivery would be ex works, Madras.
The Bombay buyer was also informed by the Bombay branch of all the particulars, condition of sale, the fact that the goods would be manufac tured at the Madras branch factory and would be supplied by the Madras Branch etc.
as advised by the Madras branch to the Bombay branch.
The respondent treated it as inter State sale under section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act and issued a notice of demand whereupon the appellant filed an applica tion under article 226 of the Constitution in the Madras High Court praying for a writ of Prohibition restraining the respondents from taxing and/or including in the turnover for the purposes of assessment for the year 1965 66.
The said petition was dismissed.
Dismissing the appeals by certificate, the Court.
HELD: (1) When the movement of the goods from one State to another is an incident of the contract it is a sale in the course of inter State sale.
It does not matter in which State the property in the goods passes.
What is decisive is whether the sale is one which occasioned the movement of goods from one State to another. 'the inter State movement must be the result of a covenant, express or implied in the contract of sate or an incident of the contract.
It is not necessary that the sale must precede the inter State move ment in order that the sale may be deemed to have occasioned such movement.
It is also not necessary for a sale to be deemed to have taken place in the course of inter State trade or .commerce, that.the covenant regarding inter State movement must be specified in the contract itself.
It will be enough if the movement is in pursuance of 2nd incidental to the contract of sale.
[634D E] (2) Branches have no independent and separate entity.
Branches are different agencies.
In the instant case, the contract of sale is between the appellant company and the Bombay buyer.
[634C]
