Respondent No. 1 was declared elected to Manipur Legis lative Assembly.
The appellant who was one of the rival candidates filed an Election Petition on two grounds (1) Respondent No. 1 was holding office of profit inasmuch he was the speaker of the Assembly; and (2) the Respondent No, 1 incurred election expenses in excess of what is permissi ble.
The High Court negatived both the contentions and dismissed the Election Petition.
In an appeal filed by the Election Petitioner to this Court in view of the change in law with retrospective effect the first ground was not available to the appellant in this Court.
The appellant contended (1 ) The sum of Rs. 500 paid to his party by respondent No. 1 has been wrongly excluded by the High Court from the total expenditure.
(2) The sum of Rs., 101.50 spent for the purchase of petrol and mobil oil was not shown by respondent No. 1 in his return.
(3) Respondent No. 1 spent Rs. 1180/ on the microphone.
He has, however, shown Rs. 720 only in the return.
(4) Respondent No. 1 used Jeep No. 7343 in addi tion to Jeep No. 194 and the expenses incurred on that jeep are not known.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: It is well settled that this Court does not nor mally interfere in an election appeal with the High Court 's appraisement of oral evidence of witnesses unless such appraisement is vitiated by some glaring infirmity.
In the present case no such infirmity is shown.
The evidence led by the Election Petitioner is not cogent and sufficient to come to the conclusion that various amounts mentioned.
by him were actually spent by Respondent No. 1.
As far as the payment of Rs. 500/ is concerned, the same is admitted by respondent No. 1, but that was paid before the filing of the nomination and what the Statute requires is the expenses incurred from the date of nomination till the date of the declaration of the result.
[575 B C, 576G] Stray and solitary use of a jeep for visiting a place a few hundred yards away from the residence of the respondent where some untowards incident had taken place cannot be held tantamount to the use of the jeep for election purposes.
[577B C]
