The State Government issued a notification u/s 43(1) , directing the State Transport Authority to impose the charge of certain uniform rates of freight upon the operators of stage carriages other than State Transport undertakings, carrying mails or postal goods.
The S.T.A. then directed the Regional Transport Authority, u/s 44(1) of the Act, to impose the duty of carrying the postal goods upon rates fixed by the Government as a condition annexed u/s 48(3)(XV) to permits.
The appellant contended that the power of the Government u/s 43(1) to issue directions relating to "freights", does not include imposition of charges for carrying postal goods as conditions of permits granted by the Regional Transport Authority.
in exercise of its quasi judicial powers.
Dis missing the appeal the Court, HELD: The State Government has the data and the legal power under Section 43(1) of the Act to fix freights for carriage of postal goods in various types of carriages mentioned there, including stage carriages.
Such charges are merely a species of freight on postal goods about which the State Government can issue appropriate directions.
[668 E] (2) Section 48(3) deals with what lies past the quasi judicial stage of decision to grant the permit.
At that stage, the decision to grant the permit is already there and only conditions have to be attached to the permit.
The Regional Transport Authority has, at this stage to act mainly mechanically after considering matters on which it has, acting quasi judicially, formed an opinion and taken a decision.
There is no interference with the quasi judicial functions as the annexation of a condition like.
this is a part of the purely executive duties of the Regional.
Trans port Authority.
[668 D E, 669 A] section Srikantiah & Ors.
vs The Regional Transport Author ity, Anantapur & Ors followed.
(3) There is no question of any special provision over riding the general.
The provisions are complementary.
Section 48(3)(XV) is really meant to carry out the direc tions which can legally be given under section 43( 1 )(d)(i) of the Act.
[669 B C]
