The appellant, a displaced person from Lahore, was the owner of a house there and on the 10th of October, 1947, she arranged to have it exchanged with certain lands in a village in the State of Delhi, belonging to M, an evacuee.
On the 23rd of February, 1948, she made an application to the Additional Custodian of Evacuee Property (Rural), Delhi, for confirmation of the transaction of ex 1118 change under section 5 A of the East Punjab Evacuees ' (Administration of Property) Act, 1947, as amended in 1948 and applied to the State of Delhi.
Under section 5 B of the Act an order if passed by the Custodian or Additional Custodian would not be subject to appeal or revision, and would become final and conclusive.
But the application was not disposed of until the 20th of March, 1952, and on that date the Additional Custodian passed an order confirming the exchange.
In the meanwhile, there were changes in the law relating to evacuee property by which the East Punjab Act as applied to the State of Delhi witness repealed and re enacted, and ultimately Central Act XXXI of 1950 was passed which, among other things, conferred by section 27 revisional powers on the Custodian General.
The Custodian General issued a notice under section 27 to the appellant and, after hearing her, set aside the order of confirmation and directed the matter to be reconsidered by the Custodian.
It was contended for the appellant that the order of confirmation by the Additional Custodian was not open to revision, on the ground that on the filing of the application in 1948 the appellant got a vested right to have it determined under section 5 A, with the attribute of finality and conclusiveness under section 5 B attaching to such determination, and that the subsequent repeal and re enactment of these provisions cannot affect such a right, in view of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, and section 58(3) of Act XXXI of 1950.
Held (i) that section 6 of the General Clauses Act (X of 1897) was not applicable to the case, as section 58(3) of Act XXXI of 1950 was a self contained provision indicative of the intention to exclude the operation of section 6; (ii)that the right to a determination with the attribute of finality, assuming that such a right exist,.
;, is not a vested right and it does not accrue until the determination is in fact made, when alone it becomes an existing right.
Colonial Sugar Refining Co. Ltd. vs Irving ([1905] A.C. 369) and Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Income Tax Com missioner ([1927] I.L.R. ; 54 I.A. 421), distinguished; (iii)that the words "the repeal shall not affect the previous operation of the repealed law" in section 58(3) of Act XXXI of 1950 cannot be construed as meaning "the repeal shall not affect the future operation of the previous law"; and (iv)that the scheme underlying section 58(3) is that every matter to which the new Act applies has to be treated as arising, and to be dealt with, under the now law except in so far as certain consequences have already ensued or acts have been completed prior to the new Act, to which it is the old law that will apply.
In view of section 58, the application of the appellant for con firmation pending on the date when Act XXXI of 1950 came into force, had to be dealt with and disposed of under this Act and the order of confirmation passed in 1952 was subject to the revisions power of the Custodian General under s, 27 of the said Act, 1119 Quaere.
Whether a right of appeal in respect of a pending action can be treated as a substantive right vesting in the litigant on the commencement of the action.
