The appellant is an inter State dealer.
In respect of all the eight quarters of the years 1969 70 and 1970 71, the appellant filed returns in time.
In respect of the four quarters of 1969 70 the Assessing Authority did not accept the returns and issued notices under section 11(2) of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948, requiring the appellant to produce evidence in support of the returns.
Since the question of the appellant 's liability to pay central sales tax for an earlier assessment year (1962 63) was pending before the High Court, the matter was not pursued by the Assessing Authority and was kept pending.
After the High Court gave its decision against the appellant, and while the matter was pending appeal in this Court, the Assessing Authority took up the matter of assessment ' for the year 1969 70 by the issue of notice in September 1975.
The appellant thereupon filed writ petitions in the High Court to quash the proceedings.
In respect of the four quarters of the year 1970 71 notices under section 11(2) were issued by the Assessing Authority on January 30, 1976, and the appel lant filed writ petitions in the High Court for quashing those proceedings also.
All the ' writ petitions were dis missed by the High Court, In appeal to this Court, in view of the decision of this Court in appeal.
the appellant did not agitate the question of its tax liability under the Central Sales ' Tax Act.
but contended that, (i) the Assessing Authority could not assess the tax payable by the appellant on the expiry of the period of 5 years from the end of each quarter in relation to the year 1970 71 the same contention was raised even though notice under section 11(2) was within time apropos the last ' quarter; and (2) the notice under section 11(2) and assessment under section 11(3) had to be completed within a reasonable time.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: (1) Under section 10 of the Act read along with Rules framed thereunder, the return has to be filed by a dealer for each quarter by the last day of the following month of the quarter and admitted sales tax as per the return has also got to be deposited.
Where a registered dealer has filed the return the Assessing Authority can accept the return as correct and pass the assessment order under section 11(1) If the Assessing Authority does not accept the return he may issue notice under section 11(2) asking the asses see to produce evidence in support of the return.
In such a. case the, Assessing Authority shall hear the evidence produced by the dealer on the day specified in the notice issued under sub section
(2), or adjourn the hearing to some other day and hear the evidence produced by the dealer on the adjourned day. or days.
or may require the dealer to produce further evidence on specified points on the ad journed day, or days.
The Assessing Authority should under section 11 (3), on the day on which the hearing of the evidence is completed or 'as soon afterwards as may be ', assess the amount of tax due from the dealer, that is, pass the order of assessment.
[720 E H] Section 11(4) is attracted in a case.
where a dealer having furnished a return fails to comply with the terms of a notice issued .under section 11 (2).
In such a case, the Assessing Authority has to take some effective steps, such as issuance of a notice to the assessee, within 5 years of the expiry of the period concerned, intimating to him that he is proceeding to assess the tax due from the dealer to the best of his judgment.
Under section 11(5), on failure of a dealer to furnish a return in respect of any period by the prescribed date the Assessing Authority, after giving the dealer a reasonable opportunity of being heard can, within 5 717 years after the expiry of the concerned period proceed to assess to the best of his judgment the amount of tax, if any, due from the dealer.
Sub section (6) is attracted in the case of a dealer who, being liable to pay tax under the Act, had failed to apply for registration.
Similar steps as the ones under sub section
(5) are to be taken under sub section
(6) within a period of 5 years after the expiry of the concerned period.
It is thus seen that for taking action under sub sections (4), (5) and (6) of section 11 a time limit of 5 years has been fixed by the legislature.
The reason is that best judgment assessments in the circumstances mentioned in any of the sub sections
(4), (5) oF (6) are fresh proceedings and could not be allowed to be taken after the expiry of a certain reasonable time which the legislature has fixed at 5 years.
But the legislature advisedly did not fix any period of time for taking steps or the passing of the assessment order under any of the sub sections
(1), (2) or (3).
Where a dealer files a return the proceeding under the Act commences and the issue of a notice under section 11(2) does not initiate any fresh proceedings.
A notice under section 11(2) requiring the dealer to produce evidence can therefore be issued at any time after the filing of the return.
because, when once a return is duly made, the assessment could be made at any time unless the statute prescribes a time limit.
The ex pectancy of taking steps without any undue delay and within a reasonable time is an expectancy of prudence, because, where a notice under sub section
(2) is issued when 5 years are about to expire and the dealer fails to comply with the terms of the notice the Assessing Authority may have to proceed to make the best judgment assessment under sub section
(4) and he may not be able to do so if the period of 5 years had expired by then.
[722 A G] Bisesar House vs State of Bombay & Others.
9 S.T.C. 654, and Rameshwar Lal Sarup Chand vs U.S. Nanrath Excise & Taxation Officer, Assessing Authority, Amritsar and Another 15 S.T.C. 932 overruled.
Ghanshyamdas vs Regional Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Nagpur & Others 14 S.T.C. 976, The State of Panjab & Others vs Tara Chand Lajpat Rai 19 S.T.C. 493, The State of Punjab and another vs Murlidhar Mahabir Prasad 21 S.T.C. 29, Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd. vs State of Maharashtra and Others 22 S.T.C. 400 and Madan Lal Arora vs The Excise and Taxation Officer, Amritsar 12 S.T.C. 387 followed.
(2) The case of Gurbux Singh vs Union of India is not an authority for the contention of the appel lant that the issue of the notice under section 11(2) and comple tion of assessment under section 11(3) should be within a reason able time.
In that case it was pointed out that since the legislature had not provided any period of limitation within which an order was to be made by an Appellate or Revisional Authority, the period of limitation prescribed in other sections could not be imported for the exercise of such power.
It was not stated in that case that the exercise of the revisional power suo moto could not be made even after an undue long delay.
It was merely found as a fact in that case that there was no undue delay in the exercise of the power.
[727 A D] [Obiter.
The phrase as soon afterwards as may be ' in section 11(3) may suggest that where assessment order under section 11(3) of the Act was passed after under delay after the completion of the hearing of the evidence produced 'by the dealer, the order of assessment may not be valid.
But that question does not arise in the present case.
because, the appellant has not yet produced any evidence].
