According to section 98(1)(a) of the Bombay Industrial Rela tions Act, 1946 a lock out shall be illegal if it is com menced.
or continued in cases where it relates to any indus trial matter specified in Schedule III, Item 6(ii).
Item 6(ii) states "employment including unemployment of persons previously employed in the industry concerned".
On account of financial and other difficulties the appellant laid off workers in some departments of the mill.
After.
a few days the management declared a lock out alleg ing that the workers gheraoed some officers in the mill, started 'dharna ' and behaved in an unruly manner.
The Labour Court, to which the dispute was referred, held that there was no evidence of violence or of gheraoes, that the situation in the mills was not of such a grave nature as called for a lock out and that the management resorted to the lock out on the slightest opportunity in order to avoid payment of compensation, since it was in continuous financial difficulties heading towards a closure and closure would have put the company under obligation to pay compensation.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) A lock out can be declared for reasons similar to those described in the present notice of lock out.
In that case although it will be lock out in another sense it may not be a lock out within the meaning of section 3(24) of the Act.
That kind of lock out with the avowed object of pre venting violence and threat to life and property may be justified on facts in a given case.
In such a situation it may be difficult to prove that it is an illegal lock out since in an illegal lock out the sole object is to compel the workmen to accept the terms of the employer which the workers consider as unreasonable and oppressive.
[713 F G] But in the instant case though the views of the Labour Court that threats and gheraoes "are the normal behaviour when an occasion like this takes place" should be disap proved, the ultimate conclusion after appreciation of the evidence was not such as would call for interference in an application under article 136 of the Constitution.
[713 H] (2) Though the Act has not defined 'lay out ', even according to the dictionary meaning, lay off means to dis continue work or activity; to dismiss or discharge tempo rarily.
When workers are in employment and they are laid off, that immediately results in their unemployment, howso ever temporary.
and such an unemployment will clearly come under item 6(ii) in Schedule III of the Act.
Since unemploy ment is an industrial matter under item 6(ii) of Schedule Iii of the Act, the lock out which had been found by the Labour Court to have direct connection with lay off is clearly illegal under section 98(1)(a) of the Act.
[715 BC]
