The Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) Sales Tax, Bareil ly, disposed of the respondents ' appeal made against an order of the Sales Tax Officer.
A copy of the order was served on the respondent, but he lost it.
Later, he ob tained another copy and filed a revision petition under sectiOn 10 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act.
The same was opposed as being time barred, but the Judge (Revision) accepted the respondent 's contention that under section 12(2) of the , he was entitled to exclude the time spent in obtaining the second copy of the order, while computing the limitation period.
The question whether such exclusion was permissible, was referred to the High Court which an swered in the affirmative.
The appellant contended that the U.P. Sales Tax Act itself provided for a specific period of limitation; and therefore the was not applicable, and also that, a copy of the order was not required to be filed with the revision petition, and so the time spent in obtaining a second copy could not be excluded in computation of limita tion.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: (1 ) Where the copy served upon a party is lost and there is no alternative for that party except to apply for a fresh copy in order to be in a position to file revi sion petition, the time spent in obtaining that copy would necessarily have to be excluded under Section 12(2) of the .
State of Uttar Pradesh vs Maharaj Narain & Ors. ; followed.
[688 B C] (2) The provisions of Section 12(2) of the would apply even though the copy mentioned in that Sub section is not required to be filed alongwith the Memorandum of appeal.
The same position should hold good in case of revision petitions ever since of 1963 came into force.
1686 B, D 687 FI J.N. Surty vs
T.S. Chettyar (55 IA 161), The Punjab Co.operative Bank Ltd., Lahore vs The Official Liquidators, the Punjab Cotton Press Co. Ltd. Lahore Series 191, MT.
Lalitkuari vs Mahaprasad N. Singh Panta Series 157, Additional Collector of Customs, Calcutta & Anr.
vs M/s. Best & Co. (AIR S.A. Gaffoor vs Ayesha Beghum & Ors.
(C.A. 2406/1969 decided on 18 8 1970 Unreported Judgment of Supreme Court, 1970 Vol. 2, page 784) followed.
(3) For the purpose of determining any period of limitation prescribed for any application by any special or local law, the provisions contained in Section 12(2), inter alia.
shall apply in so far as, and to the extent to which they are not expressly excluded by such special or local law, and there is nothing in the U.P. Sales Tax Act expressly excluding the application of Section 12(2) of the .
[685 H, 686 A]
