Chapter 11 of the Indian Railway Establishment Manual deals with "Rules governing the provision of subordinate staff and Section A thereof deals with "promotion to class II posts.
" The Railway Board by virtue of its power vested by para 157 of the Indian Railway Establishment Code, introduced w.e.f.
March 11, 1973, an "Advance Correction Slip No. 70" substituting a new rule 301 and introducing new rules 324 to 328.
Chapter III deals with the rules regulat ing seniority of non gazetted Railway servants and the new rule 328(2) provided that selections and promotions made in the Diesel Locomotive Works from August 1, 1961 to March 11, 1973 shall not be valid.
The appellant, a member of the class III service serving with the Western Railway as a chargeman was transferred to the Diesel Locomotive Works in 1963 and was given .the benefits of deemed dates of transfer as provided for in Rule 326(2).
The appellant filed a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court praying for a writ of mandamus ,on the strength of the "Advance Correction Slip No. 70" praying for a direction to the respondent to hold selections to class 1I service.
The application was rejected holding that the rules contained in Slip No. 70 did not govern the promo tion of class III employees to class Dismissing the appeal by ' special leave the court, HELD: 'Though the Railway Board has the power to make rules governing both gazetted and non gazetted Railway servants, the rules expressed to be made under paragraph 157 cannot, in the.
very nature of .things, be intended to apply to gazetted Railway servants or to govern the promotion of non gazetted Railway servants to gazetted posts.
If the Railway Board has the power to make rules in regard to both gazetted and non gazetted Railway servants, the significa tion of a limited source of power cannot whitle down the effective exercise of that power if the rules can reasonably be construed to cover both the gazetted and non gazetted categories.
[787 H, 788 A B] (2) None of the rules introduced by Slip No. 70 govern the promotion of a class III employee to a class II post.
The amendments were made to.
Chapter III dealing with rules regulating seniority of non gazetted Railway servants.
It is in regard to that class of Railway servants that the Railway 786 Board made new provisions.
The provisions contained in Chapter III including provisions newly introduced by Slip No. 70, are very clearly designed to govern the seniority and promotions of non gazetted servants within the non gazetted categories of posts.
Chapter 11 Section A of the Manual in terms prescribes rules governing the promotion of subordinate staff to class II post.
In view of the fact that the Railway Board has framed seven specific rules in Chapter II for the promotion of class III staff to class ii post, the contention that the rules introduced by Slip No. 70 would also govern the same subject mater cannot be ac cepted.
In the instant case, since the appellant is working as a non gazetted employee in class III, his promotion 10 a gazetted post in class 1I would be governed by Chapter II, Section A and not by Chapter III of the Railway Establish ment Manual.
[788 F H, 789 A] (3) The words "promotions made in the Diesel Locomo tive Works" which occur in Rule 328(2) must be construed as meaning 'promotions made in the Diesel Locomotive Works from one category of non gazetted post to another category of non gazetted post.
" The words "promotion to the higher grades" occurring in para 328(4) mean promotion to a class II post.
The words promotion to the higher grades must, in the context mean promotion to any of the higher grades in the non gazetted category.
The contention that Rule 328(1) casts an obligation on the Railway Board to recall all promotions made from amongst class III servants to class II posts from August 1, 1961 to March 11.
1973 is misplaced.
[789 B C]
