Certain lands were sought to be acquired by the State Government under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the public purpose stated being the development and utilisation of the lands as a residential and industrial area.
Identical notifications under section 4 were issued in all the cases.
In one group of lands, declarations that the provisions of section 5A shall not apply in respect of the lands were issued under section 17(4).
With respect to a second group, declarations under section 17(4) were issued but were not fol lowed up with the section 6 notification.
With respect to a third group no notification under section 17(4) was issued but after the petitioners filed objections, the section 6 notifica tion was issued accompanied by the declaration of urgency under 8.
17(4).
The owners of the land sought to have the proceedings quashed on the grounds that, (1) there was no public pur pose, and that (2) there was no urgency justifying the notification under section 17(4) and dispensing with the enquiry under section 5A.
The High Court held that, (1) the notifications under section 4(1) were valid, and that (2) the State had not discharged its burden of showing facts constituting the urgency which impelled it to issue the declarations under section 17(4) dis pensing with the enquiry under section 5A, and, therefore, those declarations were invalid, and that the parties were rele gated to the position they could take up in the absence of declarations under section 17(4).
Both sides appealed to this Court.
In the appeals by the State, it was contended by the appellant State that the burden of proving that there was No. urgency was on the owners of the. lands.
Dismissing all the appeals, HELD: (1) The notifications under 8.
4(1) of the Act were valid in all the cases.
[769 G] (2) (a) The rules regarding burden of proof are set out in the .
Section 101 of the Evi dence Act lays down that whoever desires any Court to, give judgment as to any legal right or liability dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist, and section 102 provides that the burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies on that person who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Section 103 provides that the burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the 'Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Section 106 lays down that when any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person the burden of proving that fact is upon him.
Section 114 of the Evidence Act covers a wide range of presumptions of fact which can be used by the Courts in the course of administration of justice to remove lacunae in the chain of direct evidence before it.
[774 C E; 775 C E] (b) The result of a trial or proceeding is determined by a weighing of the totality of facts, circumstances and presumptions operating in favour of one party as against those which may tilt the balance in favour of another.
Such weighment always takes place at the end of a trial or pro ceeding which cannot, for purposes of this final weighment be split up into disjointed and disconnected parts.
What is weighed at the end is one totality against another and not 17 1234SCI/76 764 selected bits or scraps of evidence against each other.
Such total effect of evidence is determined at the end of a proceeding not merely by considering the general duties imposed by sections 101 and 102 but also by the special or par ticular ones imposed by other provisions such as sections 103 and 106.
In judging whether a general or particular or special onus has been discharged the Court will not only consider the 'direct effect of the oral and documentary evidence led but also what may be indirectly inferred because certain facts have been proved or not proved though easily capable of proof if they existed at all and such proof of other facts may raise either, a presumption of law or fact.
The party against which a presumption may operate can and must lead the evidence to show why the presumption should not be given effect to.
If the party which initiates the proceed ing or comes with a case to Court offers no evidence in support of it.
the presumption is that such evidence does not exist and if some evidence is shown to exist on a ques tion in issue but the party which has it within its power to.
produce it does not, despite notice to do so, produce it, the natural presumption is that it would, if produced, have gone against it.
Similarly, a presumption arises from failure to discharge a special or 'particular onus.
The doctrine of onus of proof becomes unimportant when there is sufficient evidence before the Court to enable it to reach a particular conclusion in favour of or against a party.
The principle of onus of proof becomes important in cases of either paucity of evidence or where evidence given by two sides is so equivalenced that the Court is unable to hold where the truth lay.
The question whether an onus probandi has been discharged is one of fact.
Sufficiency of evidence to discharge the onus probandi is not examined by this Court as a rule in appeals by special leave granted under article 136 of the Constitution,.
but placing an onus where it did not lie may be.
so examined in appropriate cases.
[775 H; D G; 778 C D; 774 G] Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. vs The State of U.P. & Ors. ; 434 and Raja Anand Brahma Shah vs State of U.P. & Ors.
; at 381 referred to.
I. G. Joshi etc.
vs State of Gujarat & anr.
; held inapplicable.
(c) Section 17(4) of the Land Acquisition Act has to be read with sections 4(1) and 5A of the Act.
The immediate purpose of a notification under section 4(1) of the Act is to enable those who may have any objections to lodge them for purposes of an enquiry under section 5A.
Considering the nature of the objections which are capable of being successfully taken under section 5A, the enquiry should be concluded quite expedi tiously.
The purpose of section 17(4) is obviously not merely to confine action under it to waste and arable land but also to situations in which an enquiry under section 5A will serve no useful purpose, or, for some overriding reason, it should be dispensed with.
The mind of the officer or authority con cerned has to be applied to the question whether there is an urgency of such a nature that even the summary proceedings under section 5A of the Act should be eliminated.
It is not just the existence of an urgency but the need to dispense with an inquiry under section 5A which has to be considered.
[781 G H; 782] (d) Even a technically correct recital in an order or notification stating that the conditions precedent to the exercise of a power have been fulfilled may not debar the Court in a given case from considering the question whether, in fact, those conditions have been fulfilled.
And, a fortiori the Court may consider and decide whether the authority concerned has applied its mind to really relevant facts of a case with a view to determining that a condition precedent to the exercise of a power has been fulfilled.
If it appears upon an examination of the totality of facts in the case, that the power conferred has been exercised for an extraneous or irrelevant purpose or that the mind has not been applied at all to the real object on purpose of a power, so that the result is that the exercise of power could only serve some other or collateral object, the Court will interfere.
[779 E F] (e) The High Court was wrong in the present case in laying down a general proposition that the presumption of regularity attaching to an order containing a technically correct recital did not Operate in cases in which section 106, Evidence Act, was applicable.
An order or notification containing a recital technically correct on the face of it raises a presumption of fact under section 114, illustration 765 (e) That presumption is based on the maxim omain praesumun tur rite esse acta, that, is, all acts are presumed to have been rightly and regularly done. 'This presumption, however, is one of fact.
It is an optional presumption which can be displaced by circumstances indicating that the power lodged in an authority or official has not been exercised in ac cordance with tile law.
The totality of circumstances has to be examined including the recitals to determine whether and to what extent each side had discharged its general or particular onus.
[777 E F] (f) The High Court had, however, correctly stated the limited grounds on which even a subjective opinion as to the existence of the need to take action under section 17(4) of the Act can be challenged, namely, main fides, no application of mind and total want of material on which the opinion is formed.
Therefore, it is for the petitioner to substantiate the grounds of his challenge under sections 101 and 102.
That is, the.
petitioner has to either lead evidence or show that some evidence has come from the other side to indicate that his challenge to a notification or order is made good.
If he does not succeed in discharging that duty his petition will fail.
[776 B C] In the present case, in addition to the bare assertions of the owners of the land that the particular urgency contem plated 'by section 17(4) did not exist there were other facts and circumstances including non disclosure of any facts and circumstances which could easily justify the use of section 17(4) and which could have been disclosed if they existed; and, therefore, the petitioners should be held to have discharged their general onus under section 101 of the Evidence Act.
Thus the High Court was right in quashing the notifications under section 17(4).[778 E] (g) In the present case, the public purpose.
was suffi ciently specified to he prima facie a legally valid purpose.
The High Court thought it vague; but, that did not really affect the judgment of the High Court so much as the total absence of facts and circumstances which could possibly indicate that this purpose.
necessarily to be carried out in such a way as to .exclude the application of section 5A of the Act.
Therefore, a .triable issue did arise in these cases and was decided by the High Court.
This issue was whether the conditions precedent to exercise of power under section 17(4) had been fulfilled or not.
Such a question can only be decided rightly after determining what was the nature of compliance with the conditions of section 17(4) re quired by the Act.
[776 D E] (i) The public.
purpose indicated is.
the development of an area for industrial and residential purposes.
This, in itself, did not make the taking of immediate possession imperative without holding even a summary enquiry under section 5A.
On the other hand, the execution of such .schemes generally take sufficient period of time to enable at least summary inquiries under section 5A of the Act to be completed without any impediment to the execution of the scheme.
(ii) All schemes relating to development of industrial and resi dential areas must be urgent in the context of the.
coun try 's need for increased production and more residential accommodation.
Yet, the very nature of such schemes of development does not appear to demand such emergent action as to eliminate summary enquiries under section 5A. (iii) There is no indication whatsoever in the affidavit filed on behalf of the State that the mind of the Commissioner was applied at all to the question whether it was a case necessitating the elimination of the enquiry under section 5A.
The recitals in the notification on the contrary indicate that elimination of the enquiry under section 5A was treated as an automatic consequence of the opinion formed on other matters.
The recital does not say at all that any opinion was formed on the need to dispense with the enquiry under section 5A. [782 G; 783 C D] The burden, therefore, rested upon the State to remove the defect, if possible, in recitals by evidence to show that some exceptional circumstances existed which necessi tated the elimination of an enquiry under section 5A and that the mind of the Commissioner was applied to this essential question.
[783 E] (h) The High Court has thus correctly applied the provi sions of section 106 of the Evidence Act to place the burden upon the State to prove those special circumstances, although the High Court was not quite correct in stating that 766 some part of the initial burden of the petitioners under sections 101 and 102 of the Evidence Act had been displaced by the failure of the State to discharge its duty under section 106 of the Act.
The correct way of putting it would have been to say that the failure of the State to produce the evidence of facts especially within the knowledge of its officials, which rested upon it under section 106 of the Evidence Act, taken together with other evidence and the attendant facts and circumstances, including the contents of recitals, had enabled the petitioners to discharge their burdens under sections 101 and 102 Of the Evidence Act in these particular cases.
[783 F G] ARGUMENTS For the Appellant: It was urged on behalf of the appellant State that the High Court was in error in placing the burden of proof on the State.
Reliance was placed on the decision of the Su preme Court in ; (pages 432, 433 and 434).
In particular it was urged that where a statute prescribes something as a condition precedent for the exercise of statutory power, and there is a recital of existence of that condition in the notification then it is presumed that the statutory condition exists and it is for the ' other side to bring material before the Court to show that recital is not supported on any evidence or is made malafide.
Similarly, in ; Raja Anands case the very scope of section 17(4) was discussed and the State relied on the observations at page 381 indicating the scope of judicial review original petitioners have not brought their case within the grounds mentioned in this case.
The Barium Chemicals case and other cases cited can be easily distinguished on the ground that the statutory re quirements for the exercise of particular power, for example under section 237 of the Companies Act are differently worded where certain circumstances are required to be present.
The Land Acquisition Act does not require the existence of any such circumstances.
Besides, a decision of the Supreme Court has clearly indicated the scope of judi cial review in [967] 1 S.C.R. 373 and the respondents have not shown why any different view should not be taken.
Cases like ILR 67 Gujarat 620, AIR 1964 Punjab 477 and ILR 1970 Cuttack 21 can be easily distinguished.
There specific allegations were made by the petitioners giving reasons as to why they challenged the notifications.
In reply thereto the State was bound to bring the material to negative those charges.
In the present case if such allega tions were made by the writ petitioners the State would have certainly placed all the necessary materials to negative those allegations.
In the absence of any such allegation the correct rule to apply was the one stated in ; & 433.
Apart from this it may be noticed that by amending paragraph XVI (ARP) was introduced which made some effort to make concrete allegations regarding the invalidity of the notification under section 17(4).
The ' substance of these allegations is that out of the whole area which is to be acquired urgency clause has been applied only to some areas and, therefore, petitioners prayed that an inference of ' exercise of powers in a casual and lighthearted manner should be drawn.
To this averment, and since such concrete allegation was made a concrete reply has been given by the State in para 6 at Record Page 55 explaining why some lands were selected for urgency clause and why some notifications were issued earlier and why others came to be issued later.
It is not open to.
the respondents to enlarge their attack on grounds other than those which are stated in para.
16A. Lastly it was urged that the satisfaction under section 17(4) is not subjective satisfaction but must be an objec tive test because section 17(4) should be deemed to be controlled by section 17 sub sections 1 and 2.
In the first place such a, contention was never raised in the High Court.
Secondly, there are number of decisions of the Supreme Court where the opinion which is to be formed on section 17(4) is held to be subjective satisfaction.
Thirdly, 767 the contention does not interpret complete provisions of section 17(1), 17(2) and 17(4).
It is submitted under section 17(1) and 17(2) on one ' hand ,and the power under 17(4) are two separate and independent powers which can be exercised at different stages of the Land Acquisition pro ceedings.
Vide AIR 1970 Allahabad 151 Hakim singh versus State of Uttar Pradesh, under 17(1) possession can be taken without there being an award under section 11 but there has to be a publication of a notice under section 9(1) and also a notification under section 6 preceded by an inquiry under section 5(a).
In such cases and the cases covered by 17(2) the urgency may be determined on an objec tive basis but the whole purpose of section 17(4) is to dispense with an enquiry under section 5(a) which is to be followed again by a notification under section 6 and for such a purpose all that is required is that in the case of any land in the opinion of the appropriate Government the provision of sub section 1 or sub section 2 are applica ble.
In other words the lands must be either waste of arable lands (which is, of course to be determined objec tively) but so far as the question of urgency is concerned it is the opinion that the Government has to form and that is not to be established by any objective test but its subjective satisfaction.
For the Respondents: The Appellant (the State of Maharashtra) tried to argue that lack of bonafides were not argued in the Court below.
In the pleadings of the Respondents (the writ petitioners) it was urged at pages 10 and 11 of the record that in fact it is significant that in some cases the lands which are sought to be acquired for the same purpose vis a vis for development and utilisation of the land as industrial and residential area the urgency clause has not been applied.
It was further stated at page 11 that the power under Section 17(4) has 'been exercised in casual and light heart ed manner .
without there being any proper application of mind to the condition requisite for the exercise of that _power.
The said point was argued before the High Court and the High Court dealt with the same at pages 61 to 70 of the record.
It was argued before this Honble Court that the circumstances under Section 17(4) is not subjective satis faction but an objective test since Section 17(4) is con trolled by Section 17(1) and (2).
It was further argued that the Government never applied its mind nor did it place before the High Court any material to show that there was any urgency with respect to some of the lands and no urgency in respect to the others.
It is admitted that the lands in all these cases were acquired for the same purpose inter alia for the development and utilisa tion of the said lands as an industrial and residential area.
It was further argued that the burden of proof on the facts of these cases would be on the State since the reasons for urgency are only in the knowledge of the authority issuing the Notification.
The cases cited by the Counsel for the State have no application since in those cases the petitioners could establish that the impugned notification was not bona fide.
In this case the respondent, land owners, had in their Writ Petitions specifically raised the question that the authority had not applied its mind and treated it light heartedly 'and the Notification was not bona fide.
The State however did not place any material before the Court to show that the authority had applied its mind or there was any clue to the urgency.
The respondents have 'been deprived of their right to prefer objections under Section 5A of the Act and those objections are to be filed within 30 days.
The notifications in this case have been made at the interval of months and even more than a year.
The notification under Section 17(4) was made with respect to some lands and it was not made with respect to other.
The State has not satisfactorily ex plained the reasons for this.
From all these facts and circumstances the respondents argue that the notification under 768 Section 17(4) was not bonafide and the authority had not applied its mind, and the High Court was right in setting aside the said notification.
