section Gobinder Singh Sibia was possessed of a large estate valued at about Rs.15 lacs at the time of his death in the year 1954.
He had two wives Gulab Kaur and Dalip Kaur.
Dalip Kaur predeceased him leaving a son and a grandson named Surjit.
After the death of section Gobinder Singh, Gulab Kaur filed a suit for maintenance, claiming alternatively a one half share in the estate left by her husband.
Surjit contested the said suit.
After the institu tion of the suit, the , came into force on June 17, 1956 upon the plaintiff giving up her claim for maintenance and restricting her suit to a half share in her husband 's estate, the defendant made an appli cation for amending his written statement and pleaded that section Gobinder Singh had executed a will in the year 1945 bequeathing practically the entire estate in his favour and leaving a small life interest in favour of the plaintiff.
The amendment application was flied in March, 1958, after the plaintiff 's evidence was over.
The Trial Court decreed the plaintiffs suit and .held that the plaintiff was enti tled to a half share in the estate left by Gobinder Singh and that the defendant had failed to prove the will.
In an appeal flied by the defendant the High Court set aside the Judgment of the Trial Court and dismissed the plaintiff 's suit.
The High Court held that will was duly established.
Allowing the appeal, Held: (a) In cases where the execution.of a will is shrouded i.n.
suspicion its proof ceases to be a simple lis between the plain tiff and the defendant.
What generally is an adversary proceeding becomes in such cases a matter of the court 's conscience.
The presence of suspicious circumstances makes the initial onus heavier and, therefore, in cases where the circumstances attendant upon the execution of the will excite the suspicion of the court the propounder must remove all legitimate suspicions before the document can he accepted as the last will of the testator.
[929 C F, 930 C D] (b) A will has to be proved like any other document by applying the usual test of the satisfaction of the prudent mind.
[929 F] (c) Since section 63 of the Succession Act requires a will to be attested it cannot be used as an evidence until at least one of the attesting witnesses is examined, if available.
[929 G] (d) Unlike other documents the will speaks from the death of the testator and, therefore, the maker of the will is never available for deposing as to the circumstances in which the will was executed.
That circumstance intro duces a certain amount of solemnity in proof of testamentany instruments.
[929 H, 930 A] R. Venkatachala lyengar vs
B.N. Thimrnajamma & Others [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 426, followed.
The testator was a man of property and occupied a high position in society.
A genuine will of such a person is not likely to suffer from the loop holes and infirmities which may beset an humbler testamentany instrument.
[931 D, H,932 A] 3.
The following circumstances throw a cloud of suspi cion on the making of the will by Gobinder Singh: 926 (i) The will is alleged to have been made in 1945 but it did not see the light of the day till 1957.
It is unacceptable that a document by which property worth lacs of rupees was disposed of could have remained a closely guarded secret from intimate friends and relatives and from the sole legatee him self for over 21/2 years after the testator 's death.
[932 A B] (ii) The testator had left behind him a large property and along with it large amount of litigation which makes it impossible to believe that upon his death no one bothered to go through his papers.
The explanation of the defendant that he stumbled upon the will by chance while going through some papers of his grandfather is patently lame and unacceptable.
[932 B D] (iii) The defendant came out with the theory of will after the of 1956 came into force as a result of which the plaintiff would become an absolute owner of the property that would fall to her share as the heir of her husband.[932 G H, 933 A B] (iv) The will was typed Out on both sides of a single foolscap.paper and was obviously drafted by a lawyer.
No evidence was led as to who drafted the will and who typed it out.
[933 B C] (v) The will was attested by two persons, both of whom were strangers to the testator 's family and neither of whom could give a proper account of the execution of the will.
In fact they contradicted each other.
[933 C H] (vi) The two persons who are alleged to have been appointed executors were not exam ined, though available.
Normally, the execu tors are not appointed without their consent or consultation.
[934 A C] (vii) The will is unnatural and unfair.
[934 C] (viii) The will does not make mention of many of the near relations and descendants of the testator.
[934 D F] (ix) The plaintiff was excluded as an heir of the testator for the supposed reasons that she had brought disgrace to the Sibia family and that her behaviour was such as would not even bear a mention in the will.
No evidence was led on the misconduct of the plaintiff.
[934 F G] (x) The defendant in his evidence did not offer any explanation any of the suspicious circumstances.
[934 G] 4.
The High Court merely recited a few facts mechanical ly and without going into the suspicious circumstance accepted the will as genuine.
The High Court did not apply the rule as to the burden of proof which governs the testa mentary proceedings, as set out in the decision of this Court in lyengar 's case to which reference was made in the Trial Court 's Judgment.
[838 F H]
