Section 2(1)(s) of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, defines 'turnover" to mean the total amount set out in the bill of Sale as the consideration for the sale or purchase of goods including any sums charged by the dealer for anything done in respect of goods sold at the time of or before the delivery of the goods.
The appellants in the first two sets of appeals are manufacturers of Indian liquors.
A buyer of Indian liquor from the distilleries pays, in the first instance, the excise duty in the Treasury and obtains a distillery pass for the release of liquor.
On presentation of the distill ery pass an invoice is prepared by the manufacturers showing the price of liquor.
Neither invoice.
nor the account books of the manufacturers show the excise duty paid by the purchasers.
Under the system in vogue in the second set of appeals, the appellant who is the owner of a bonded warehouse pre pares a bill for the liquor required by the purchaser who pays the countervailing duty in the Treasury in his own name and obtains a pass from the excise authorities for the removal of the liquor from the warehouse.
In both the, cases the Sales Tax Authorities included the excise duty in the taxable turnover of the appellants.
The High, Court dismissed the writ petition of the appel lants impugning the orders of the Sales Tax Officers.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) Excise duty and countervailing duty paid directly by the buyers for the Indian liquors did not con stitute a part of the turnovers or, the appellants.
[924 C] (2) The phrase 'any sums charged by the dealer ' occur ring in the definition of 'turnover ' has to be understood in its ordinary popular sense.
So construed, it means what is demanded and collected or received by the dealer.
[923 B] In the instant case the excise duty or the countervail ing duty has not been charged or received by the dealer but has been charged by the excise authorities and deposited directly by the buyers of the liquor in the State exchequer.
It cannot be said that the excise duty or the countervailing duty was charged by the appellants.
In M/s. George Oakes (Private) Ltd. vs The State of Madras & Ors., this Court held in relation to the definition of turn over that the aggregate amount includes the tax as part of the price paid by the buyer; the amount goes into the common till of the dealer till 'he pays the tax; it is the money which he keeps using for his business till he pays the tax; it is the money which he keeps using for his busi ness till he pays it over to Government; it becomes a part of the circulating capital of the tradesman and is turned over in his business.
Secondly the price paid by the pur chaser was not so much money for the cause turnover means the amount of money which is turned over in the busi ness.
[923 E G] 915 In the instant case the excise and the countervailing duties did not go into the common tills of the appellants and did not become a part of their circulating capital.
The Sales tax authorities were not competent to include in the turn overs of the appellants the excise duty and the countervail ing duty which was not charged by them but was charged by and. paid directly to the excise authorities by the buyers of the liquors.
[924 A] A. V. Fernandez vs The State of Kerala ; followed.
R.C. Jail vs Union of India [1962] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 436, Sea Customs ACT ; , A B. Abdul Kadir & Ors.
vs State of Kerala , Kalyani Stores vs The State of Orissa & Ors. ; & M/s Mohan Megkin Brewaries Ltd. vs Excise & TaxatiOn Commisisoner, Chandigarh & Ors. ; referred to.
Messrs George Oakes (Private) Ltd. vs The State of Madras & Ors.
(122 S.T.C. 476) and (13 S.T.C. 98) referred to and distinguished.
The Government of Andhra (now Andhra Pradesh) vs East India Commercial Co. Ltd. (8 S.T.C. 114) distinguished.
