Section 66(1)(b) of the Bombay Prohibition Act 1949 makes any person liable for punishment on conviction for the offence of "consuming, using, possessing or transporting any intoxicant or hemp." Section 66(2)(b) prescribes a statutory limit of 0.05 percentage of alcohol in the veinous blood taken from the accused.
In summary case Nos. 798 and 799 of 1972 before the Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Kodi nar, Gujarat State, the appellant/accused No. 2 along with six others was charged with consumption of liquor while accused No. 1, the owner of an agricultural farm, where a drinking party took place was charged with the offence of possessing liquor.
h spite of the fact that the percentage of alcohol present in the veinous blood taken from the body of accused No. 2 was more than the statutory limit, in view.
breaches of certain statutory rules, in Bombay Prohibi tion (Medical Examination and Blood Test) Rules, 1959, the appellant/accused No. 2 was acquitted along with accused 3 to 8 in whose cases the percentage was less than the statu tory limit.
Accused No. 1 was also acquitted for lack of evidence on the charge of possession of liquor.
In the State appeal, taking the view that in a drinking party there should always be a further charge of possession of liquor, the High Court without examining the correctness of the findings of fact leading to the acquittals, set aside the orders of acquittal in respect of all and 'ordered retrial.
On appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (i) In a State appeal against acquittal, the acquittal should not be set aside unless the High Court on a consideration of the evidence.
comes to the. conclusion that the acquittal was wrong.
In the instant case, the High Court did not even consider whether the acquittal of the appellant was correct or not and without finding that the acquittal was erroneous proceeded to set aside the.
acquit tal and direct retrial.
It 'was not competent to the High Court to set aside the acquittal without finding that it was erroneous.
Setting aside the acquittal order and ordering retrial merely because.
it took the view that a further charge should have been framed against the appellant and accused No. 3 to 8 was plainly and indubitably wrong.
[876 B D] (ii) If while hearing an appeal, the High Court, finds that, on the material before it, a further charge should be framed, the High Court can legitimately, the exercise of its jurisdiction set right the error committed by the trial court in not framing a proper charge.
[876 G H] 873 (iii) In the exercise of extra ordinary jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution, the Supreme Court would not ordinarily entertain a complaint on facts.
[877 B] (iv) Possession is distinguishable from custody and it must be conscious possession.
Whether the accused is in possession of liquor or not must depend on the facts and circumstance of each case.
[877 D]
