One Lakshmi Dayal died in 1952 leaving behind two wid ows, appellant and Shantibai.
In 1954, Chandanbai widow of brother of Laxmi Dayal filed a suit against the appellant and Shantibai in respect of the. properties left by Lakshmi Dayal.
During the. pendency of the said suit, the appel lant, Shantibai and Chandanbai executed a partition deed alloting different properties to each one of the widows.
The partition deed was registered and necessary mutation entries were made.
The suit filed by Chandanbai was dis posed of in terms of the Partition Deed.
In September.
1955, Shantibai made a will in favour of the respondent and she died on 29 5 1956.
After her death, the appellant took forcible possession of the suit land from the respondent.
The respondent, therefore, filed a suit against the appel lant for possession of the land in dispute.
The Trial Court, the first Appellate, Court and the High Court in Second Appeal came to the conclusion that the appellant had relinquished her right of survivorship in lands which fell to the share of Shantibai and, therefore, decreed the respondefts suit.
In an appeal by Special Leave the appellant contended: 1.
The appellant did not relinquish her right of survivorship.
It is not permissible for a Hindu co widow.
to give up her right of survivorship even by an agreement.
Even if right of survivorship can be given up during the lifetime of the widows con cerned, the property could have been trans ferred inter vivos but could not have been disposed of by a will.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
It is clear from the Partition Deed and the evidence of the appellant herself that she had relinquished her right of survivor ship.
The findings of all the courts below to the effect that the appellant relinquished her right of survivorship are correct.
[990 B C] 2.
It is permissible under Hindu Law for a co widow to relinquish by agreement her right of survivorship ' in the property which falls to the share of the other widow.
[990 G] Karpagathachi & Ors.
vs Nagarathipathachi ; followed.
Bhuowan Deen Doobey vs Myna Baee ; Gauri Nath Kakaji vs Gaya Kaur (1928) LR 55 IA 299 re ferred.
Commissioner of Income Tax vs Smt.
Indira Balakrishna ; , 517 distinguished.
Ramakkal vs Ramasami Naichan Mad.
522, Sudalai Ammal vs Comathi Ammal ; Kailash Chandra Chuckerbutty vs Kashi Chandra Chuckerbutty Cal.
339; Subbammal vs Lakshmana Iyer ; Ammani Ammal vs Perissemi Udayan re ferred to. 3.
The power of a co widoW to execute a will in respect of the property falling to her share in the partition with the other co widows is co extensive with her power to trans fer it inter vivos. 989
