By virtue of section 4 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition & Land Reforms Act, 1950, the right, title and interest of all the intermediaries in every estate including hats, bazars and melas stood terminated and vested absolutely in the State.
Section 9 provides ' that all wells, trees in abadi and all buildings situate within the limits of an Estate, belonging to an intermediary, shall continue to belong to or be held by such intermediary and the site of the buildings which is appurtenant thereto, shall be deemed to be settled with him by the State Government.
Section 117(1) empowers the State Government to vest lands in Gaon Sabhas or other local authorities.
Under section 117(6) the State Government has power to resume from a Gaon Sabha the lands vested in it.
By a notification under section 117(1 ) the State Government vested the land in the village in the Gaon Sabha.
On the estate in dispute, the defendant who was the quondam zamindar, had been conducting a cattle fair.
The estate had on it, among others, a few structures.
The plaintiffs ' (the State and the Gaon Sabha) suit for eject ment of the defendant from the estate was dismissed by the trial court.
The Gaon Sabha, however, did not appeal; but the State went in appeal to the High Court as 'a person aggrieved '.
The High Court negatived the defendants conten tions that as a result of the notification under section 117(1) the land having vested in the Gaon Sabha, the State Government had no locus standi and that it was not a person aggrieved, but allowed the defendant to keep all the struc tures and a space of 5 yards running round each building.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) The State has title to sustain the action in ejectment.
The Government, despite vesting the estates in Gaon Sabhas has, and continues to have, a constant hold on these estates, when it chooses, to take away what it had given possession of to a Gaon Sabha.
This is plainly 'present legal interest ' in the Government and a sort of precarium tenans in the Sabha.
[1082 D; 1079 F G] (a) The Act contemplates taking over of all zamindari rights as part of land reform.
Instead of centralising management of all estates at State level, the Act gives an enabling power to make over these states to Gaon Sabhas.
Apart from management, no power is expressly vested in the Sabhas to dispose of the estates absolutely.
If the State thinks fit to amend or cancel the earlier vesting declara tion or notification it can totally deprive the Sabha of, and resume from it, any estate.
The vesting in the State was absolute but the vesting in the Sabha was limited to possession and management subject to divestiture by Government.
Such a construction of vesting in two different senses in the same section is sound because the word 'vest ' has many meanings.
The sense of the situation suggests that in section 117(1) 'vested in the State ' carries a plenary conno tation, while 'shall vest in the Gaon Sabha ' imports a qualified disposition confined to the right to full posses sion and enjoyment so long as it lasts.
To postulate vesting of absolute title in the Gaon Sabha by virtue of the declaration under section 117(1) is to stultify section 117(6).
[1081 A C; F G] 1073 (b) The State is 'a person aggrieved '.
He, who has a proprietary right, which has been or is threatened by violation, is an 'aggrieved person '.
The right to a remedy apart, a larger circle of persons can move the court for the protection of defence or enforcement of a civil right or to ward off or claim compensation for a civil wrong, even if they are not proprietarily or personally linked with the cause of action.
The nexus between the lis and the plain tiff need not necessarily be personal.
A person aggrieved is an expression which has expanded with the larger urgen cies and felt necessities of our time.
[1082 E F] (c) The amplitude of 'legal grievance ' has broadened with social compulsions.
The State undertakes today activi ties whose beneficiaries may be the general community even though the legal right to the, undertaking may not vest in the community.
The State starts welfare projects whose effective implementation may call for collective action from the protected group or any member of them.
Test suits, class actions and representative litigation are the begin ning and the horizon is expanding with persons and organi sations not personally injured but vicariously concerned being entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of the court for redressal of actual or imminent wrongs.
[1083 A C] Dhabolkar ; followed. 'Locus standi ' has a larger ambit in current legal semantics than the accepted, individualistic jurisprudence of old.
Therefore, the State, in the present case, is entitled to appeal under section 96 of the= Code.
of Civil Procedure.
[1084 D] (2) Where a wrong against community interest is done, 'no locus standi ' will not always be a plea to non suit an interested public body chasing the wrongdoer in court.
In the instant case the Government is the 'aggrieved person '.
Its right of resumption from the Gaon Sabha, meant to be exercised in public interest will be seriously jeopardised if the estate slips into the hands of a trespasser.
The estate belonged to the State, is vested in the Gaon Sabha for community benefit, is controlled by the State through directions to the Land Management Committee and is liable to be divested.
The wholesome object of the legislature of cautiously decentralised vesting of estates in local self governing units will be frustrated, if the State is to be a helpless spectator of its purposeful bounty being wasted or lost.
[1083 H; 1084 A B] (3)(a) The touchstone of 'appurtenance ' is dependence of the building on what appertains to it for its use as a building.
Obviously the hat, bazar, or mela is not an appurtenance to the building.
Even if the buildings were used and enjoyed in the past with the whole.
st.retch of.vacant space for a hat or mela, the land is not appurte nant to the principal subject granted by section 9, namely, buildings.
[1085 G] (b) The larger objective of section 9 is to settle with the former intermediary only such land as is strictly appurte nant to buildings, all the rest going to the State.
for implementation of the agrarian reform policy.
[1084 G] (c) The large open spaces cannot ,be regarded as appurtenant to the terraces, stands and structures.
What a integral is not necessarily appurtenant.
A position of subordination, something incidental or ancillary or depend ent is implied in appurtenance.
That much of space required for the use of the structures as such has been excluded by the High Court itself.
Beyond that may or may not be necessary for the hat or mela but not for the enjoyment of the chabutras as such.
[1085 B C] (d) 'Appurtenance ' in relation to a dwelling, includes all land occupied therewith and used for the purposes there of.
The word 'appurtenances ' has a distinct and definite meaning.
Prima facie it imports nothing more than what is strictly appertaining to the subject matter of the devise or grant.
What is necessary for the enjoyment and has been used for the purpose of the building, such as easement, alone will be appurtenant.
The. word 'appurtenance ' in cludes all the incorporeal hereditaments attached to the land granted or demised such as rights of way, but does not include lands in addition to that granted.
[1086 D E] (e) What the High Court has granted viz., 5 yards of surrounding space is sound in law.
[1086 H] 1074
