The appellants are the promotee Deputy Collectors in the State of Gujarat.
The contesting respondents are the direct recruits to the parent cadre of Deputy Collectors.
7 Deputy Collectors who are the contesting respondents in this appeal and who were directly recruited as Deputy Collectors in and after 1963 claimed that they were senior to the appellants who were the promotees promoted as Deputy Col lectors between the years 1960 and 1963 by filing a Writ Petition in the High Court.
The routine source of recruit ment to the posts of Deputy Collectors used to be Mamlatdars who were promoted as Deputy Collectors.
In 1939, direct recruitment policy was also evolved for this post.
By an order of 1941 the mode of determining seniority between direct recruits and promotees was settled.
As far as the direct recruits were concerned, their seniority was to run from the date of their appointment on probation and in the case of promotees such service was to begin with promotion in substantive vacancy if continued without break.
During the year 1950 to 1959 the direct recruitment was discontin ued.
By the Bombay Government Resolution dated 30 7 1959, the mode of direct recruitment was again started and the proportion in which the recruitment from the two sources, namely, the direct recruits and the promotees, was fixed as 50: 50 as far as practicable.
On 1 5 1960, the Bombay State was bifurcated into Gujarat and Maharashtra.
On 1 5 1960, a circular was issued by the Gujarat Government adopting the rules, resolu tions, notifications etc.
of the Bombay State.
By a further clarificatory resolution dated 27 5 1960 Gujarat Government provided that nothing contained in the circular dated 1 5 1960 shall apply to appointments of officers, authorities or persons which may be made by the Government on or after 1 5 1960.
During the year 1959 62,.no direct recruitment was made but many promotions were effected.
The Writ Peti tion filed by the direct recruits was dismissed by a learned Single judge of the High Court.
The Division Bench of the High Court, however, accepted the appeal of the con testing respondents.
In an appeal by Special Leave the appellants contended: 1.
The expression 'as far as practicable ' in the resolution of 1959 provides a sensible safety valve.
Therefore, the rule is neither exception proof nor abstractly absolute but realistic and flexibly true to life.
The mandate of equality in Articles 14 and 16 does not require pushing down the promotees in the seniority list in the fact of their actual service and legal appointment.
Rotation is not implicit in quota.
Quota without rotation is also reasonable and constitutional as much as quota with rotation.
The choice, both being permissible and fair, is left to the Administration.
The contesting respondents contended (i) The rule of law is the enemy of arbitrary absolutism and the discretion to disobey is a doctrine of despotism and cannot be sub scribed to by a Court.
1038 (ii) 'As far as practicable does not permit the State to deviate from it.
It merely authorises provisional variations or ad hoc solutions or emergency arrangements to meet the difficulty of the Administration without making formal or regular appointments to the posts in question.
(iii) Rotational system is implicit in quota.
(iv) Any deviation from rotational system is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Con stitution.
Allowing the appeal held: 1.
The State in tune with the mandate of the quota rule must make serious efforts to secure hands to fill half the number of vacancies from the open market.
If it does not succeed despite honest and serious effort, it qualifies for departure from the rule.
If it has become non feasible, imprac ticable to get the requisite quota of direct recruits having done all that it could, it was free to fill the Post by promotion of suit able hands, if the filling up of the vacan cies was administratively necessary and could not wait.
The sense of the rule is that as far as possible the quota system must be kept up and if not practicable promotees in place of direct recruits or direct recruits in place of promotees may be inducted applying the regular procedures without suffering the seats to lie indefinitely vacant.
[1050 F H, 1051 A] 2.
The Government sent a requisition for 12 posts of Deputy Collectors to the Gujarat Public Service Commission as early as in October, 1960.
On account of commission having raised various queries including require ments of adequate knowledge of Marathi and Gujarati, the examination could not be held during the years 1960 1962.
The expla nation given by the Government is prima facie good and not rebutted as got up.
Since the Government took active steps in the direction of direct recruitment, the excep tion to the Government Resolution comes into operation.
The Government in the present case did all that it could.
[1051 A F] 3.
Quota is not inter locked with Rota.
[1052 A] (a) The quota system does not necessitate the adoption of the rotational rule in practical application.
Many ways of working out 'quota ' prescription can be devised of which rota is certainly one.
(b) While laying down a quota when filling up vacancies in a cadre from more than one source, it is open to Government.
subject to tests under article 16, to choose 'a year ' or other period of the vacancy by vacancy basis to work out the quota among the sources.
But once the Court is satisfied, examining for constitutionality the method proposed, that there is no invalidity, administrative technology may have free play in choosing one or other of the familiar processes of imple menting the quota rule.
We, as Judges, cannot strike down the particular scheme because it is unpalatable to forensic taste.
(c) Seniority, normally, is measured by length of continuous.
officiating service the actual is easily accepted as the legal.
This does not preclude a different prescription, consti tutionality tests being satisfied.
(d) Promotees regularly appointed during period 1960 62 in excess of their quota, for want of direct recruits can claim their whole length of service for seniority.
(e) Promotees appointed in 1963 and onwards in excess of their quota should be pushed down and absorbed in vacancies in their quota during subsequent years.
[1057 E H, 1058 A C] 1039 Mervyn Coutindo & Ors.
vs Collector of Customs, Bombay [1967] 3 S.C.R. distinguished, Badami vs Stale of Mysore & Ors.
[1976] 1 S.C.R. 815 distinguished, Govind Dattaray Kelkar and Ors.
vs Chief Controller of Imports and Exports & Ors.
[1967] 2 S.C.R. 29 distinguished and doubted.
S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India [1967] 2 S.C.R. 703 distinguished.
Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India [1975] Supp.
S.C.R. 491, Union of India vs Bishan Sarup Gupta [1975] 1 S.C.R. 104 and A.K. Subbraman & Ors.
vs Union of India [1975] 2 S.C.R. followed.
The Court directed the Government to draw up expedi tiously a fresh seniority list in the light of the observa tions made in the Judgment.
[1058 H] Obiter: (Lengthy legal process, where administrative immediacy is the desideratum is a remedy worse than the malady.
The fact that the present case has taken around 5 working days for oral arguments is a sad commentarY on the legal system.
To streamline and to modernise Court manage ment is a cinderella subject in India, as elsewhere.
We too have miles to go for law and justice to meet).
