Certain estate in a village was acquired under the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953.
Section 3 of the said Act provides that the provisions of that Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract expressed or implied or any in strument or any usage or custom.
Section 4 authorities the State Government by a notification to declare that all estates and the rights of every intermediary in each such estate shall vest in the State free from all encumbrances.
Section 5 provides that on publication of such a notifica tion the estates to which the declaration applies shall vest in the State free from all encumbrances.
Section 2(h) defines an encumbrance as under: " 'incumbrance ' in relation to estates and rights of intermediaries therein does not include the rights of a raiyat or of an under raiyat or of a nonagricultural tenant, but shall, except in the case of land allowed to be retained by an intermediary under the provisions of section 5, include all rights or interests of whatever nature, belonging to intermediaries or other persons, which relate to lands comprised in estates or to the produce thereof.
" The respondents, some of the villagers, filed a suit against the appellant in a representative action claiming that the agrarian community in the village has always been enjoying the right of pasturage over the suit estate and that the said right survived in spite of the notification under the Act.
The appellants contended that no such right survived after the publication of the notice and in any event, even if such a right amounted to an incumbrance it came to an end by virtue of section 5 of the Act.
According to the respondents the said right was not an incumbrance within the meaning of the said Act and according to the appellant it was an incumbrance.
The suit and the appeal filed by the respondents were dismissed.
The High, Court, however, allowed the Second Appeal filed by the respondents.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, HELD: (1) The great socio economic objective of the Act if it is to be successful as a land reform measure requires that all the rights must vest fully in the State.
[74A C] (2) From the perspective of land reform objective, a specious meaning is derived by the definition of incum brance.
Ordinarily the court cannot cut down the defini tional amplitude given in the statute and there is no reason for departing from the said golden rule.
The Legislature used the expression incumbrance in its widest amplitude to cast the net wide so as to catch all rights and interest whatever be their nature.
[74C G] (3) There is no substance in the contention of the respondent that the collective, though uncertain body of villagers cannot be brought within the expression "or other persons".
The expression "intermediaries or persons other than intermediaries" embraces all persons, and the villagers who seek to exercise the right of grazing over the interme diaries ' lands are plainly "other persons".
[73 G H] (4) The conclusion of the High Court that the grazing right is a customary right does not carry the case of the respondents any further because the provisions of section 3 operate notwithstanding any usage or custom to the contrary.
[76 D F] 72 The Court observed that the present appeal raises a human problem and as 'grazing ' right is an important aspect of agrestic life the State should try to provide alternative grazing grounds to villagers when such rights are taken away [76A C]
