Rule 2(d) of the Maharashtra Prevention of Food Adul teration Rules.
1962 defines a manufacturer as a person engaged in manufacturing any article of food for the pur poses of trade.
Clause (e) defines a. "retail dealer" as a dealer in any article of food other than wholesale dealer and cl.
(g) defines a "wholesale dealer" as a person engaged in the business of sale or storage for sale or distribution of any article of food, for the purposes of resale.
Fees payable by a wholesale dealer or manufacturer for the grant or renewal of a licence are prescribed in item 1 and those payable by a retail dealer in items 7 and 8 of Appendix 1.
Members of the appellant association, who are hoteliers and restaurant keepers prepare articles of food in a part of their respective premises and sell them to the customers visiting them.
The respondent municipality charged from members of the association licence fee both under item 1 and items 7 and 8 of Appendix 1 on the ground that each of them is both a manufacturer and a retail dealer.
The appellant 's suit for declaration that the municipality had no right to charge two sets of fees from the members who are essentially retail dealers and for refund of excess amount realised by the municipality was dismissed by the trial court.
The first appellate court allowed the appellant 's appeal: but the High Court on further appeal by the municipality re stored the order of the trial court.
Allowing the appeal to this Court.
HELD: The High Court was in error in holding that the members of the association were covered both by item 1 as also by items 3 to 8 of Appendix 1.
Members of the appellant association are liable to pay licence fee under items 3 to 8 of Appendix (1) and not under item 1.[148 B C] 1 (a) Item 1 took within its fold a wholesale dealer or manufacturer or both.
It does not mention of a retail dealer.
Before a trader falls within the purview of item 1 it must be shown that he is either a wholesale dealer or a manufacturer or both.
Where the dominant nature of the trading activity is neither that of a manufacturer nor a wholesale dealer but is a retail sale, item 1 would have no application.
The fact that the trader prepares the articles for selling them to his customers would not make him either a wholesale dealer or manufacturer.
[147H; 148 A B] (b) The words 'wholesale dealer ' or 'manufacturer ' in item 1 will not apply to hoteliers and restaurant keepers whose main business is to conduct retail sale of their articles prepared by them in a part of their premises.
[143G] (c) The word 'manufacturer ' as defined in r. 2(d) had been used in the widest possible sense to include not only manufacture through a laboratory process but also prepara tion of an article of food.
However liberally the word 'manufacturer ' is construed, it will not include the trading activity of persons the dominant nature of which is to supply articles of food prepared or produced by them to their customers.
[143E] 140 2(a) There is no force in the contention that unless the members of the Association are licensed as manufacturers the Food Inspector cannot enter for inspection any premises where the articles are prepared.
The question of a trader obtaining a licence has nothing to do with the statutory duties of a Food Inspector.
The Food Inspector does not derive his powers from the rules regulating licence of a trader, but his duties spring from the statutory provisions.
There is no provision in the rules which in any way prevents or interferes with the discharge of his duties.
[147C E; 146C] (b) Apart from the wide powers given to the Food Inspec tor by the Statute, Rules framed by the Central Government confer additional powers on the Food Inspector.
The Maha rashtra Rules do not contain any provision which in any way runs counter to either the Central Rules or the Act.
The rules merely contain certain additional provisions regarding the conditions of licence and additional duties to be per formed by the Food Inspector.
[147B] (c) Even assuming that a particular State Government did not frame any rules under the Act it cannot be said that the Food Inspector would be absolutely powerless and cannot exercise effective control.
His duties and functions spring from the parent statute and are not in any way corre lated to the additional duties provided for in the rules framed by the State Government.
[147G]
