Section 94(1), Cr. P.C., 1898, which deals with summons to produce any document, authorises the court to issue a sum mons to the person in whose, possession or power such docu ment is believed to be, requiring him to attend and produce it.
or to produce it at the time and place stated in the summons.
According to sub s.(2) a person required merely to produce a document shall be deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document to be produced in stead of attending personally to produce it.
In the present case, during a criminal trial, the complain ant flied art application under section 94, for a direction to the accused to produce a document.
The accused stated that the document was not in their possession.
The complainant then made another application under the section praying that the appellant may be directed to produce the document.
The appellant was not a party to the case and no reason .whatso ever was given by the complainant in the application why the document was likely to be in appellant 's possession or power.
The Magistrate then passed an order summoning the appellant with the document.
The appellant, in her reply, professed ignorance of the document and stated that as she was a "pardanashin" lady she may not be sumoned to court.
The Magistrate thereupon passed another order directing her to attend the Court so that if she made a 'statement on oath ' that she was not in possession of the document, the Court may get a chance to put her a few questions for satis fying itself regarding the whereabouts of the document.
The appellant 's revision petitions against the order to the District Court and High Court were dismissed.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, HELD: (1) There is nothing in the Criminal.
Procedure Code providing that the person who appears in Court, in pursuance of a summons under section 94(1), becomes a witness and can be examined and cross examined even though he has not been cited as a witness.
Section 139, Evidence Act, also pro vides that if a person produces the document for which a summons has been issued to him, he does not thereby become a witness and that he cannot be cross examined until he is called as a witness.
All that the Magistrate could do was to issue search warrants under section 96(1) or section 98 if the, requirements of those sections were satisfied.
The Court could not therefore record the appellant 's statement on oath on her inability to produce the document, or put her a few questions for satisfying itself regarding its whereabouts.
[163C E] (2) The order, which was thus not according to law adversely affected the appellant who was not a party to the enquiry or trial.
Obviously she could have no opportunity to challenge it at the end of the trial, and such belated challenge would also be purposeless.
Therefore, the order could not be said to be an interlocutory order and the revisional courts erred in raising the bar of section 397(3), Cr.
P.C. 1974.
[164C D] Mohan Lal Magan Lal Thacker vs State of Gujarat ; , followed.
