Section 108 of the provides that a company shall not register transfer of shares unless a proper instrument of transfer duly stamped and executed by or on behalf of the transferor and by or on behalf of the transferee has been delivered to the company along with the share certificate.
The appellants and the respondents were members of a family.
The family held shares in a company, and in addi tion, the members were doing partnership business.
To realise large sums of income tax dues from the firms and individual partners, the Income tax Department issued no tices to the company to pay to that department any amount due to the firm or its partners.
A receiver appointed by the Collector took possession of the appellants ' shares along with duly signed blank transfer deeds.
Later shares belonging to the family.
in the company were attached under O. 21, r. 46, C.P.C.
In the meantime the appel lants in settlement of their accounts with the respondents agreed for transfer of certain shares to the respondents as soon as the transfer became permissible.
At the instance of respondents 1 and 2, however, the company, by a resolution, transferred the appellants ' shares to the respondents.
The appellants gave notice to the respondents that the shares under attachment of the Incometax Department had been sold by the Collector and that the transfers were illegal and void.
The respondents contended that it was not a case of transfer but one of transmission.
In a petition under section 155 of the the appellants contended that tie transfer was in contravention of the mandatory provisions of section 108 and that the shares had been attached by the Collector under O. 21, r. 46 C.P.C. A single Judge of the High Court held the transfer to be illegal and void.
On appeal a Division Bench held that the provisions of section 108 were directory and not mandatory and that the provisions of section 64, C.P.C. and O. 21, r. 46 pre vailed over the prohibitory order contained in Form 18 in Appendix E of Schedule I of the C.P.C. but that the attach ment and appointment of Receiver did not divest a party of his right to his property.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: The provisions of section 108 of the are mandatory and the High Court erred in holding that they were directory.
[197B] (1)(a) The words "shall not register" are mandatory in character.
The mandatory character is strengthened by the negative form of the language which is used to emphasise the insistence of compliance with the provisions of the Act.
Negative words are clearly prohibitory and are ordinarily used as a legislative device to make a statutory provision imperative.
(See State of Bihar vs Maharjdhiraja Sir Ka meshwar Singh of Darbhanga & Ors.
at pp.
988 89; M. Pentiah & ors.
vs Muddalal Veeramallappa & Ors. ; at p. 308 and Additional District Magis trate, Jabalpur vs Shivaknant Shukla [1976] Supp S.C.R. 172 followed.
[195D E] 191 (b) The tests for finding out when a provision is manda tory or directory are: the purpose for which the provision has been made, its nature, the intention of the legislature in making the provision, the general inconvenience or injus tice which may result to the person from reading the provi sion one way or the other, the relation of the particular provision to other provisions dealing 'with the same subject and the language of the provision.
Prohibition and negative words can rarely be directory.
Negative, prohibitory and exclusive words are indicative of the legislative intent when the statute is mandatory.
[195F G] Raja Buland Sugar ' Co. Ltd. vs Municipal Board, Rampur ; and Seth Bikhral Jaipuria vs Union of India ; at pp.
89394, followed.
(2) (a) In holding that section 108 is directory and not mandatory for the reason that non compliance with the sec tion was not declared an offence, the High Court failed to consider the provisions of section 629 A of the Act which pre scribes a penalty where no specific penalty is provided in the Act.
It is a question of .construction in each case whether the legislature intended to prohibit the doing of the act altogether or merely to make the person who did it liable to pay the penalty.
[196B] (b) A contract is void if prohibited by a statute under a penalty, even without express declaration that the contract is void, because such a penalty implies a prohibi tion.
If a contract is made to do a prohibited act, that contract will be unenforceable.
If a contract is expressly or implied by prohibited by statute one has to see not what acts the statute prohibits but what contracts it prohibits.
One is not concerned with the intent of the parties.
[196C E] St. John Shipping Corporation vs Joseph Rank [1957] 1 Q.B. 267, referred to.
(c) The maxim a pactis privatorum publico juri non derogatur means that private agreement cannot alter the general law.
What is done in contravention of the provi sions of an Act of Legislature cannot be made the subject of action.
[196F] Mellis vs Shitlay L.B. referred to.
(d) In every case where a statute inflicts a penalty for doing an act, though the act be not prohibited, yet the thing is unlawful because it is not intended that a statute would inflict a penalty for a lawful act.
[196G] (e) If a penalty is imposed by statute for preventing something being done on some ground of public policy, the thing prohibited, if done, will be treated as void, even though the penalty imposed is not enforceable.
[197A] In the present case in addition to the prohibition issued under O. 21, r. 46, a separate prohibitory order was issued to the company in Form 18 in Appendix E of the First Schedule of the C.P.C. Therefore, the company by registering the transfer of shares was obviously permitting the transfer and such action being in violation of the prohibition is contrary to law.
[]97D] (3) When the receiver held the scrips and the transfer forms, it was not open to the owners to exercise rights of ownership or to transfer their ownership to anyone else.
[197F]
