The complainant Ram Khelawan had illegally encroached upon a portion of a public road and grown a paddy crop on it.
A complaint against him was pending before the Panchay at.
He was in peaceful possession of the land to the knowl edge of the appellants who nevertheless went armed and tried to exercise their right over the public road, by passing through the field with their cattle and thereby damaging the crop.
The complainants protested and a fight ensued, as a result of which, one of the complainants ' party died and injuries were received by both sides.
The appellants plead ed the right of private defence of property and person, which they had exceeded, but were concurrently found guilty by both, the Trial Court and the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: (1) A true owner has every right to dispossess or throw out a trespasser while he is in the act or process of trespassing but this right is not available to the true owner if the trespasser has been successful in accomplishing his possession to the knowledge of the true owner.
In such circumstances the law requires that the true owner should dispossess the trespasser by taking recourse to the remedies under, the law.
[235 F G, 236 A] Puran Singh & Ors.
vs State of Punjab [1975] Supp.
S.C.R. 299, applied.
The Court further observed: It is a peculiar feature of our criminal law that where a trespasser has succeeded in taking recent wrongful possession of the property vested in the public for common enjoyment, the members of the village or the real owner are not entitled in law to throw out the trespasser but have to take recourse to the legal remedies available, and if any member of the public tries to secure public property from the possession of the trespasser he is normally visited with the onerous penalty of law.
[233 A B] (2) The complainant Ram Khelawan was in peaceful posses sion of the land to the knowledge of the appellants and he was in law entitled to defend his possession.
The appel lants who were the aggressors and had opened the assault, could not claim any right of private defence either of person or property.
[237 A B]
