The applicant purchased certain agricultural lands from a Muslim evacuee.
The sale deed was executed, registered and possession was delivered to the applicant in September, 1947, before the East Punjab Evacuees ' (Administration of Property) Act of 1947 came into operation on the 12th of December, 1947.
By subsequent amendments a new section, section 5 A, was inserted into the Act with retrospective effect from the 15th of August, 1947, rendering transactions in respect of evacuee property ineffective unless confirmed by the Custodian.
The applicant applied for confirmation.
The Assistant Custodian recommended such confirmation but the Additional Custodian, acting in terms of a circular issued by the Custodian General enunciating a policy of non confirmation with regard to agricultural lands, refused to confirm the applicant 's purchase and this order was affirmed by the Assistant Custodian General in revision, It was contended on behalf of the applicant, inter alia, that the retrospective operation of section 5 A of the Act was in effect a deprivation of property without compensation and was hit by article 31 of the Constitution.
Held that 9.
5 A of the East Punjab Evacuees ' (Administration of Property) Act though retrospective in operation does not amount to deprivation of property in respect of past transactions and is valid.
, In respect of future transactions the requirement of con 1114 firmation is clearly a restriction and not a deprivation.
Such restriction was also reasonable having regard to the purpose and policy of the Evacuee Property Law.
The requirement of confirmation being thus in essence only a restriction and not a deprivation, retrospectivity in the operation of that restriction does not make it deprivation.
That the applicant 's loss was occasioned not by any unconstitutional law but by a quasi judicial order of the Custodian refusing confirmation and, consequently, his contention that any fundamental right had been violated must be rejected.
That even if the contention that the order was itself illegal being based on irrelevant material be correct, that did not by itself raise any question of violation of any fundamental right and would be no ground for an application under article 32 of the Constitution.
