A permanent lecturer 's post fell vacant in the appellant University, and the Executive Committee which ordinarily made the appointment under section 23(1) (g) of the Varanasaya Sanskrit Vishwa Vidyalaya Adhiniyam, 1956, not being in session, the Vice Chancellor exercised his emergency powers under section 13(7) of the Act to appoint the respondent on the recommendation of a Selection Committee of the University.
Later, the Executive Committee, when apprised of the ap pointment, refused to treat it as permanent and decided to re advertise the post.
The respondent 's suit for permanent injunction against the termination of his services was dismissed by the Trial Court but decreed on appeal.
On second appeal, the High Court upheld the decree.
The respondent contended that his appointment by the Vice Chancellor, made under section 13(7), was permanent and could not be nullified by the Executive Committee as its resolution was collusive and inoperative.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: (1) The extraordinary power under section 13(7) of the Act are intended for certain emergent situations necessitat ing "immediate action.
" The Vice Chancellor has to report the action taken to the authority or other body "which in the ordinary course would have dealt with the matter" The object of such a report is to leave the final decision to that body when it does meet.
The Executive Committee had the final power to appoint and to specify conditions of service under section 23(1)(g) of the Act.
The powers of the Vice Chancellor were confined to making a tentative decision which was subject to confirmation by the Executive Commit tee.
[216 G H, 217 B C] (2) It is not enough to state, in general terms, that there was "collusion" without particulars.
By general allegations of alleged collusion, the plaintiff respondent seemed to imply some kind of fraud, but no such particulars of that fraud or collusion were given as would satisfy the requirements of Order VI Rule 4, Civil Procedure Code.
[217 E F] Bishundeo Narain & .Anr.
vs Seogeni Rai & Ors.
; at 556, applied.
