A petition under article 226 of the Constitution was filed in the High Court on behalf of the.
appellant, who was sen tenced to death, praying that, since the appellant was insane the State should be restrained from carrying out the sentence.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that if the appellant were really insane, the appropriate authorities would take necessary action.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended that convicted person who became insane after conviction and sentence could not be executed until he regained sanity.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) (a) Courts have no power to prohibit the carrying out of a sentence of death legally passed upon an accused person on the ground either that there is some rule in the common law of England against the execution of an insane person sentenced to death or for some theological religions or moral objection to it.
Our statute law on the subject is based entirely on secular considerations which place the protection and welfare of society in the fore front.
[249 B] (b) What the statute law does not prohibit or enjoin cannot be enforced, by means of a writ of mandamus under article 226 of the Constitution, so as to set at naught a duly passed sentence of a court of justice.
[249 C] (2) (a) Section 30 of the Prisoners Act, 1900 has nothing to do with the powers of courts.
It only regulates the place and manner of confinement of a person, who appears to be a lunatic, when his detention or imprisonment is either during the trial or during the period when, after the sentence, he is undergoing imprisonment.
In the case of a person condemned to death, no question of keeping him in prison would arise except for the period elapsing between the passing of the sentence of death and its execution.
[243 F] (b) Insanity, to be recognised as an exception to crimi nal liability must be such as to disable an accused person from knowing the character of the act he was committing when he commits a criminal act.
If, at the time of the commis sion of the offence, the appellant knew the nature of the act he was committing, he could not be absolved of responsi bility for the grave offence of murder.
[245 B D] Jagmohan Singh vs The State of U.P. ; referred to.
In the instant case, the whole object.
of the proceed ings in the High Court and before this Court seems to be to delay execution of the sentence.
In view of the number of times the appellant had unsuccessfully applied the powers of the High Court and of this Court ought not to have been invoked again.
[244 A]
