The appellant, a school teacher under the Delhi Munici pal Corporation.
was dismissed from service by the Deputy Commissioner (Education) after following the procedure prescribed under the Regulations.
His appeal to the Commis sioner of the Corporation was dismissed and his writ peti tion was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
On further appeal to this Court it was contended that (I ) the order of dismissal was invalid for the reason that the Commissioner being the appointing authority, the Deputy Commissioner was incompetent to dismiss him and the regulation conferring power on the Deputy Commissioner to dismiss a municipal employee drawing less than Rs. 350 being inconsistent with section 95 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act 1957 is void; (2) since the disciplinary authority had neither recorded its findings nor given its reasons in the order of dismissal it is vitiated and (3) the petition should not have been dismissed in limine by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1 ) The appellant 's appointment having been made by the Deputy Commissioner, who possessed plenary powers in that behalf by virtue of the delegation of power to him, there was neither any legal bar to 'his dismissal by that authority nor a breach of the first proviso to section 95(1).
In his writ petition before the High Court the appellant failed to make any averment regarding the incompetence of the Deputy Commissioner to pass the impugned order and the invalidity of the regulation.
None of his pleas was tenable in view of the order of the Commissioner delegating his powers to the Deputy Commissioner his actual appointment as an Assistant Teacher by the Deputy Commissioner and regula tion 7 being consistent with section 95(1) of the Act.
[204 E&C] The Managment of D.T.U. vs Shri B.B.L. Hajeley & Ant. ; and Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Ram Partap Singh (Civil Appeal No. 2449(N) of 1969 delivered on January 8, 1976), held inapplicable.
(2)(a) Although it may be necessary for the disciplinary authority to record its provisional conclusions in the notice calling upon the delinquent officer to show cause why the proposed punishment be not imposed upon him if it dif fers from the findings arrived at by the enquiry officer with regard to the charge, it is not obligatory to do so in case the disciplinary authority concurs with the findings of the enquiring officer.
[205 F] In the instant case it is apparent from the order of the Deputy Commissioner that he agreed with the findings of the Enquiring Officer.
[208 A] State of Orissa vs Govinddas Pande (Civil Appeal No. 412 of 1958 decided on December 10, 1962) and State of Assam & Anr.
vs Vimal Kumar Pandit A.I.R followed.
(b) While it may be necessary for a disciplinary or administrative authority exercising quasi judicial functions to state the reasons, in support of its order if it differs from the conclusions arrived at and the recommendations made by 199 the enquiring officer in view of the scheme of a particular enactment or the rules made thereunder, it would be laying down the proposition a little too broadly to say that even an order of concurrence must be supported by reasons.
it cannot be laid down as a general rule that an order is a non speaking order simply because it is brief and not elabo rate.
Every case has to be judged in the light of its own facts.
[208 B] Sardar Govindrao & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh ; , Bhagat Raja vs The Union of India & Ors. ; , Travancore Rayon Ltd. vs Union of India ; ; Mahabir Prasad Santosh Kumar vs State of U.P. & Ors.
; , Rangnath vs Daula trao & Ors. ; and The Siemens Engineering & Manufacturing Co. of India Ltd. vs TIre Union of India & Anr. ; , inapplicable.
(c) M.P. Industries Ltd. vs Union of India ; contains a correct statement of law.
In Bhagat Raja vs The Union of India, ; this Court did not make any observations which can be interpreted as overruling the majority judgment in the former case.
In view of the amendment of r. 55 of the ' Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 the decision in Bhagat Raja 's case was differ ent from M.P. Industries case which had been rendered on the unamended r. 55 of the Rules.
[212 A; 211 B] (3) The High Court was not wrong in dismissing the writ petition.
in limine because a prima jacie case requiring investigation had not been made out by the appellant.
The High Court would be justified in refusing to carry on inves tigation into the allegations of mala fides if necessary particulars of the charge making out a prima facie case are not given in the petition.
Since the burden of establishing mala fides lies very heavily on the person who alleges them and the allegations made.
in regard thereto, in the writ petition were not sufficient to establish malus animus.
The High Court was justified in dismissing the petition without issuing notice to the other side.
[212 C D]
