The appellants filed three suits (the earliest of the three suits was filed on December 18, 1945) for possession of lands claiming that K, the last owner of the lands died on August 15, 1945.
Those suits were dismissed on August 3, 1951, as premature on the ground that the fact of the death of K had not been established.
The appellants again instituted three suits in October 1952, December 1952 and May 1953 for the same relief as in the previous suits alleging that the right to sue had ac crued after August 16, 1952, that is, after a period of seven years, under section 108 of Evidence Act; that K died three years before the date.
of the filing of the suits; and that they were within time under article 2(b) of the.
Schedule annexed to the Punjab Limitation (Customs) Act, 1920 which provides that the period of limitation for a suit for pos session of ancestral immovable property which has been alienated, is three years, if a declatory decree has been obtained, and that period commences from the date on which the right to sue accrues.
On appeal, a single Judge of the High Court decreed the suits holding that K having been treated as alive by the High Court when it passed the previous decree in 1951, the conclusion of the lower courts that he had been dead for seven.
years before the institution of the suits could not be sustained and also excluded the time spent on the previ ous litigation from 1945 to 1951 under section 14(1) of the Limitation Act.
On Letters Patent appeal, the Division Bench held: (1) that the single Judge was in error in ex cluding the time spent on the previous litigation by apply ing section 14(1) of the Limitation Act; (ii) that the words "or other cause of a like nature" occurring in section 14(1) had to be read ejusdem generis with the preceding words "relating to the defects of jurisdiction" and that it was not possible to give the benefit of that provision to the plaintiffs.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court (per A.N. Ray, C.J. and Jaswant Singh, J) HELD: (1) Under article 2(b) of the Schedule to the Punjab Limitation (Customs) Act, 1920 in order to be able to succeed the plaintiffs must bring their suits within three years of the accrual of the right to sue (which ac cording to well settled judicial opinion means the accrual of the right to seek relief), namely within three years of the death of K.
They had to prove affirmatively that the death of K took place within three years of the institution of the suits.
Granting that K has to be presumed to be dead, it cannot be overlooked that under section 108 of the Evidence Act, the precise time of the death is not a matter of presumption but of evidence and the onus of proving that the death took place at any particular time within seven years lies upon the person who claims the right for the establishment of which the proof of that fact is essential.
The plaintiffs had not only, therefore, to prove that K had not been heard of for a period of seven years and was to be taken to be dead, but it also lay heavily on them to prove the particular point of time within seven years when K 's death occurred.
This they have failed to prove.
In the absence of such proof, it cannot be held that the present suits had not been brought within three years of the accrual of the right to sue.
[263 D G] 251 Nepean vs Doe D. Knight ; ; , Jayawant Jivarao Deshpande vs Ramachandra Narayan Joshi (A.1.R. 1916 Born.
300), Lalchand Marwari vs Ramrup.
Gir (LIII I.A.24; A.I.R. 1926 P.C. 9), Jiwan Singh vs Kuar Reoti Singh & Anr.
(A.I.R. 1930 All. 427), Kottappalli Venkates warla vs Kottapalli Bapayya & Ors.
(A.I.R. 1957 A.P. 380), Punjab and Ors.
vs Natha & Ors.
(A.I.R. and Ram Kali & Ors.
vs Narain Singh (A.I.R. 1934 Oudh 298 F.B.) referred to.
(2) If K had died beyond three years, from the date of the suits, the suits would be barred by limitation because the appellants cannot claim the benefit of section 14 of the Limitation Act 1908.
The three important requirements of the section are: (1) that the plaintiff must have prosecuted the earlier civil proceeding with due diligence; (2) the former proceeding must have been prosecuted in good faith in a court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature was unable to entertain it and (3) the earlier proceeding and the later proceeding must be based on the same cause of action.
[265 D] (3) The contention that the appeals had been rendered untenable as a result of the amendment made to section 7 of the Punjab Customs Power to Contest) Act 1920 by the Amending Act 12 of 1973 has no force and must be rejected.
Section 4 of the Act provides that the Act shall not affect any right to contest any alienation or appointment of an heir made before the Act came into force.
This section has been left untouched by the Amending Act of 1973.
In the instant case, the alienation was made before the 1920 Act came into force and was not affected by that Act.
[261 F H] (4) The words "or other cause of a like nature" in section 14(1) take their colour from the preceding words "defect of jurisdiction" according to the rule of ejusdem generis.
Therefore, the defect must be of a character analogous to jurisdiction barring the Court from entertaining the previ ous suit.
In the instant case, the Court which tried and dismissed the previous suits as premature did not suffer from inability or incapacity to entertain the suits on the ground of lack of jurisdiction or any other ground analogous to the defect of jurisdiction.
The exclusion of the period during which the previous suits were pending, could not, therefore, be allowed to the plaintiffs while computing the period of limitation.
[265 E; I 1; 266 A] Bhai lai Kishan Singh vs People Bank of Northern India, I.L.R. , Dwarkanath Chakravarti vs Atul Chan dra Chakravarti (I.L.R. and Palla Pattabhira mayya & Ors.
vs Velga Narayana Rao (A.I.R. referred to.
[Obiter: The causes of action in the previous suits and in the present suits are also different.
And hence the appellants cannot press section 14 into service.] Beg, .J. (Dissenting) The Division Bench of the High Court was wrong in ignor ing the effect of the finding of the single Judge that a new cause of action had arisen within three years before the filing of the plaintiffs ' suits.
[281 C] The question of time bar or its removal by resorting to section 14(1) of Limitation Act postulates that a point of time from which limitation could run had been ascertained.
As that point could not be the date of the death of K, which was unknown the suits could not be dismisses on that ground.
[281 D] (1) The single Judge had sufficiently indicated that the cause of action in the previous litigation was different from the one in the later inasmuch as the facts proved in the later case showing that K must be presumed to be dead could not be and were not set up in the earlier suits.
The cause of action had not accrued in 1945.
The effect of the judgment in the former suits was that these suits were premature, which is not the case in the suits in appeal.
The plaints in the later cases set out the case founded on new facts not in existence at the time of the earlier liti gation and expressly stated why the plaintiffs rely on the presumption of death of K.
If the previous suits were dismissed on the ground that they were premature, the cause of action could only, be said to have accrued after their institution.
[268 G; 269 C] 252 The findings of the single Judge showed that the.
plain tiffs were entitled to the benefit of the presumption laid down by section 108 of the Evidence Act.
He found that till August 3, 1951 when the judgment of the High Court in the previous suits was delivered, the position was that the death of K had not been established.
This meant that on new facts asserted and proved, K could be presumed dead when the subsequent suits were instituted in 1952 and 1953.
This presumption of death having become available to the plain tiffs within.
three years of the suits and not before, no occasion for applying section 14 of the Limitation Act could arise.
The evidence sought to be given in the previous suits was that K had died on a particular date but the evidence in the subsequent suit was not that he had died on a particular date but that he had not been heard of from August 5, 1945 upto the time of filing of the subsequent suits.
[269 H; 270 H] Modi Khalil Khan vs Mahboob Ali Mian, A.I.R. 1949 PC 78 at 86 referred to.
(2) (a) If causes of action differ from suit to suit, the accrual of the cause of action can also not be tied down to a particular kind of fact such as the date of actual death of the holder of the property.
Once it is held that the causes of action differ for purposes of their accrual, their accrual could not be made to depend on facts of one type only.
Facts denoting their accrual must differ from case to case.
Proof of date of actual death is conclusive.
But, where the basis of the right to sue is presumption of death, the. date; of accrual of the right is the date on which that presumption matures.
[271 C] Indian Electric Works Ltd. vs James Montosh & ,Anr. ; followed.
Rante Surno Moyee vs Shooshee Mokhee Burmonia & Ors.
12 Moore 's I.A. 244, State of Madras
V.P. Agencies & Anr.
AIR 1960 SC 1309 at 1310 and Mst.
Chand Kour vs Partap Singh, , referred to.
(b) The expression "cause of action" has sometimes been employed to convey the restricted idea of facts or circum stances which constitute either the infringement or the basis of a right and no more.
In a wider and more compre hensive sense it has been used to denote the whole bundle of material facts which a plaintiff must prove in order to succeed.
These are all those essential facts without the proof of which the plaintiff must fail in his suit.
[272 G] (c) Applying these tests, in the instant case, the causes of action in the earlier and later litigations would be materially different.
No cause of action had arisen at all if it is assumed that K had not died at all.
K 's death was an essential part of the cause of action.
It had to be proved to enable the plaintiffs to put forward their claims to succeed.
But proof of the date of death was not essen tial or indispensable for that purpose.
It could only become material in deciding whether the right accrued had been extinguished by the law of limitation.
Both the narrow and wider sense of the term "cause of action ' would include all those facts and circumstances on the strength of which the plaintiffs urged that they were entitled to the benefit of the obligatory presumption of law contained in section 108 of the Evidence Act.
As these were not available to the plain tiffs before the expiry of seven years from August 5, 1945, it was not possible to urge that this cause of action had arisen more than three years before the filing of the suits.
Therefore, the date of its accrual could not lie a day earlier than seven years after August 5, 1945 when K was last heard of.
[272 G H; 273 A B] (d) It was for the defendants to establish that K was either alive or had died more than three years before the suits were filed.
The presumption under section 107 of the Evidence Act could not come to the aid of the defendants when the plaintiffs had established facts necessary to raise the presumption under section 108 of the Evidence Act.
[273 E] (e) The suits are not barred by limitation.
The plaintiffs discharged their burden as to when the accrual of their cause of action was within the prescribed period of limita tion.
If the "media" upon which the plaintiffs rest their cases 253 are different in the previous and subsequent litigations, the causes of action are different.
If the alleged date of death of K was the date of accrual of the previous cause of action, the date of accrual of the second could only be something other than the date of death of K, it could not possibly be the same.
The other date of accrual could only be subsequent to August 5, 1945 because it was held in the previous suit that the suit was premature on the ground that seven years since K was last heard of had not elapsed then.
Since the evidence was that he was last heard of on August 5, 1945, the only possible date of accrual of the subsequent cause of action could be seven years after the date.
The suits were filed within three years of that date.
[273 H; 274 A C] (3)(a) The term 'right to sue ' occurring in article 2 of Schedule to the Punjab Limitation (Customs) Act 1 of 1920 must be equated with cause of action.
" The "date of death" cannot be substituted for the date of accrual of the "right to use".
In the Limitation Act the accrual when intended to be tied to the date of some event is specified as the date of that event.
In this case, it is not so.
It cannot be held that the date of accrual in both sets of suits is one and the same, that is to say, the actual date.
of death.
[274 D] (b) Wherever the accrual of a right or commencement of a period of limitation, within which a suit must be shown by the plaintiffs to have been brought, could only be estab lished by proving the date of a person 's death, that duty must be discharged by the plaintiffs or the suit will fail.
But to carry the doctrine beyond that and to lay down that the date of death must invariably be proved, whenever the question of limitation is raised in such cases must result in stultifying or defeating legal right and wiping out the effects of a statutory presumption.
The accrual of a cause of action based on untraceability of the owner could not be said to depend at all on proof of either actual death or the date of actual death of the owner.
It accrues as soon as death can be presumed and not a day earlier.
[278 D F] (c) It is not in every suit for possession that the com mencement of the date of dispossession must be established by the plaintiffs.
It is only in a suit for possession based on the allegation by the plaintiff of his own dispos session that the burden is governed by Art, 142 of the Limi tation Act.
[274 G] (d) In the instant ease, the plaintiffs were never in pos session and, therefore,there was no question of their dis possession.
It was a pure and simple suit for possession on the basis of title against which the defendants had not even alleged adverse possession.
Therefore, there is no need to bring in the actual date of death constructively, as the date of the presumed dispossession or adverse possession has not been asserted anywhere.
[275 B] (e) The plaintiffs have asserted and proved that the period of seven years when K was last heard of by those who would in the natural course of events have heard of or about him if he was alive, had elapsed and that their cause of action matured within three years of their suits.
Assuming that the concept of adverse possession of the defendants was to be introduced, the legal position is that possession of defendants could not be adverse to K 's reversioners even before K could be presumed to be dead.
The defendants them selves had set up.
the plea that he must be still deemed to be alive.
The plaintiffs could only be required to prove K 's death but not the date of his death or the date of the plaintiffs ' dispossession.
Neither cases dealing with recov ery of possession on the plaintiffs ' allegation of their own dispossession nor those where proof of date of death was a necessary statutory duty for showing that the suit was within time; are applicable in these cases.
[275 E F] Nepean vs Doe D. Knight (English Reports 150 Exchequer p. 1021), Jayawant Jivanrao Deshpande vs Ramachandra Narayan Joshi, AIR 1916 Bom.
300 & 301.
, Lal Chand Marwari vs Mahant Ramrup Git & Anr.
AIR 1926 PC 9, Jiwan Singh vs Kuar Reoti Singh & Anr.
AIR 1930 All.
427, Kottapalli Venkateswarlu vs Kottapalli Bapayya & Ors.
AIR 1957 AP 380 Punjab v Natha AIR 1931 Lab.
582 (FB) & Ram Kali & Ors vs Naraian Singh AIR 1934 Oudh 298 & 299 300, refrered to.
254 (f) It is neither a part of the case of any plaintiff in these cases nor necessary for the success of his case to prove that K died on a particular date or that K died before or after somebody else.
The plaintiffs cannot be saddled with the responsibility to prove this date.
[279 ,B] (4) The suits were not barred by limitation because the causes of action in the previous litigation and the litiga tion now are different and the subsequent cause of action has arisen within three years before the filing of the suits.
Assuming that the suits were filed beyond the period of limitation on the actual basis of their claims the plaintiffs are entitled to succeed because this is a fit case in which section 14(1) Limitation Act could come to the aid of the appellants.
They had been asserting repeatedly that the basis of their claim was that although the actual date of death of K could not be proved, yet, he has not been heard of for seven years.
That basis having emerged within three years before the filing of the suits, their suits could not be barred by time.
If the causes of action did not arise no question of its exceeding by the law of limitation, could emerge.
[280 G] The previous suits did not fail for want of jurisdic tion.
The delay in bringing the present suits was due to the fact that no court could decree the claim before the cause of action matured.
Therefore, the cause of action of a "like nature" to a defect of jurisdiction is present in these cases, since the provision has to be liberally con strued.
The defect revealed by the evidence in the latter litigation was that the suits did not lie at all as they were premature.
This was a defect reasonably comparable to a want of jurisdiction.
[280 A C] India Electric Works Ltd. vs James Mantosh & Anr. ; , followed.
(5)(a) If no cause of action could accrue at all unless and until the date of actual death of K was established, there could be no commencement of a period of limitation.
The only possible point from which limitation could start framing in these, cases is the date on which seven years expired from the date on which K was last heard of.
This was within three years before filing of the suits.
[280 D] (b) The issue in the earlier litigation was whether K was actually shown to have died on a particular date.
This was quite different from the issue decided now, which was whether K 's whereabouts had remained unknown for seven years so that he could be presumed to be dead.
[280 F] ARGUMENTS For the appeliants: The legal presumption under Section 108 was not sought to be raised in the prior suits.
It was for the first time raised in the subsequent group of suits instituted in Octo ber, 1952 based on the allegation that Kishan Singh was not heard of since 15th August, 1945.
This submission opens the questions (i) when is the presumption of death to be raised and (ii) whether for the purpose of proceedings in which it is raised or any prior proceedings.
The presumption is to be raised in the pro ceedings where the question has been raised i.e. the second group of suit.
However, there is no presumption as to the time of death of the person whose death is accepted as a result of presumption.
The two are distinct matters (i) the legal presumption of death and (ii) the time of death preceding the period when presumption is drawn.
The death may be at any time during the preceding period of 7 years the period that has enabled the court to draw presumption of death.
The law requires that if one has to establish the pre cise period during these 7 years at which such person died he must do so by evidence.
255 The conclusion of the court of presumption of death based upon disappear ance from 15th August, 1945 cannot be ignored.
Death at any time on or after 15th August, 1945 does not in any manner adversely affect the case of the appellants, inasmuch as the parties had instituted suits (of course premature) on 18th December 1945 (other suits some time later decided by a common judgment).
If the parties are held entitled to the benefit of deduction of time from 18th December 1945 to 3rd August, 1951, the death of Kishan Singh even if it took place between 15th August, 1945 to any date before 3rd August, 1951 the suit are not barred by limita tion.
On the pleading of the parties it cannot be assumed that the presumption of death would justify acceptance of date of death, any time prior to 15th August, 1945.
The period of limitation for the suit for possession was 3 years The defendants had not pleaded in the prior suit that the suit was.
barred by limitation as instituted.
In other words it was not alleged that he had died at any time 3 years prior to the institution of the suit (18th December, 1945).
Actually death has not been admitted even on 15th August, 1945.
The trial Court and the District Judge held the suit to be time barred not on the ground that his death had taken place at a period exceeding 3 years from the date of the institution of the first suit.
They have apparently not ignored the possibility of death having taken place during the period between 18th December, 1945 to 3rd August., 1951.
They have held the. suit to be time barred because it was considered that the appellants are not entitled to deduct the stated period spent in the prior suits.
Even if it is considered that death had taken place during this period or any time after 15th August, 1945 or during the 3rd August to 31st October, 1952 the suits are not time barred.
Preliminary objection was raised by the respondents as to the effect of the Punjab Customs (Power to Contest) Amendment Act, 1973 (Punjab Act 12 of 1973).
It was urged that the Act had come into force on 23rd January, 1973, it has retrospective operation and bars all suits to contest alienation also including the suits for possession of the property following a declaratory decree.
It was urged that the appeals are barred as a consequence of repeal of the provisions of Punjab Act II of 1920.
The contention as to the effect of Act 12 of 1973 is not correct.
The previous law on the subject of right to contest alienation of immovable property and the limitation of suits relating to alienation of ancestral immovable property is regulated by two Acts.
(1) Punjab Act II of 1920 Described an Act to restrict the powers of the descendents or collaterals to contest an alienation of immovable property; and (2) Punjab Act I of 1920 Described as an Act to amend and consolidicate the law govern ing the limitation of suits relating to alien ations of ancestral immovable property etc.
The present Act 12 of 1973 repeals section 6 of Act II of 1920.
It also amends section 7 of the aforesaid Act.
Effect of the repeal of section 6 and amendment of section 7 merely is that the right to.
contest vesting in the collaterals upto 5th degree has been done away with and the suit to contest alienation of ancestral property has been taken away.
Under the previous existing law an alienation of non ances tral property could not be contested.
Act I of 1920 has also not been repealed.
The limitation provided for a suit for possession i.e. 3 years is still an existing provision of the Act.
It is obvious that the legislature has retained 256 Act I of 1920 unrepealed so that the benefit of the decrees may be available to all persons under section 8 of the Act and the period of limitation may be retained as before.
The effect of the declaratory decree in that the alienation is not binding against the inheritance.
The succession never remains in abeyance.
A person entitled to succeed to the last male holder is entitled to sue for possession on the basis of right to succession to the property.
For the respondent: The principle of res judicata would be immediately attracted if the plaintiffs allege the "same cause of ac tion" and seek the exclusion of the time because the earlier suit was tried on merits by a competent court having jurisdiction and was dismissed holding that 'plaintiff failed to prove that Kishan Singh died on 15th August, 1945.
This finding would be binding between the parties in the subsequent suits as they have been given after recording the evidence and a full trial by, the competent court having jurisdiction.
Therefore, the plaintiff is barred by principles of res judicata from alleging the accrual of right to sue before the filing of the earlier suits as the same would be res judicata.
The plaintiff is estopped from alleging the accrual of same cause of action, therefore, no question of exclusion of time inasmuch as the principle of section 14 of exclusion of time arises only if the cause of action is the same.
Section 14 uses the words "the proceeding is founded upon the same cause of action".
The language of section 14 of the Limitation Act by using the words "same cause of action" makes it very clear that time can be excluded for the same cause of action only if the earlier suit is dismissed be cause of defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature.
On the interpretation of section 14 also the time cannot be excluded for the reason that the earlier suit was dis missed as premature and the new suit was filed on a new cause of action, namely, Alla Singh and his line became extinct on the death of Kishan Singh on 15th of August, 1952 i.e. after the expiry of ' seven years from 15th August, 1945.
Since a new cause of action was alleged after the dismissal of previous suit, section 14 cannot be attracted.
The words "is unable to entertain it" mean that it is not able to admit the matter for consideration on merits i.e. the.
inability is of a formal nature but it does not mean inability to grant relief.
From the decisions one principle is deducible that section 14 of the Limitation Act has to be construed harmoniously with section 11 C.P.C. Section 11 C.P.C. bars the filing of a fresh suit on the same cause of action whereas section 14 of Limitation Act allows time to be.
excluded in the previous litiga tions was "founded on the same cause of action ' '.
Section 12 says that if plaintiff is barred under section 11 C.P.C. to file suit for any cause of action then plaintiff cannot file suit for a such cause of action in any court to which C.P.C. applies.
If both.
section 14 of Limitation Act and principles of res judicata are to operate then, it should be held that to apply section 14 the earlier suit had been dismissed on a technical ground of jurisdiction, or other cause of a similar nature, court is unable to entertain it without going into the merits of the case.
In the present case earlier suits were dismissed because the plaintiff failed to prove the death of Kishan Singh and the extinction of line of Alia.
The words used by the High Court at page 302 line 37 are: "The suit had been rightly dismissed as premature" do not mean that Kishan Singh was alive but it means that plaintiffs have not proved the accrual oj cause of action namely the extinction of line of Alia.
In these circumstances it is submitted that the suits were not dis missed on the ground of defect of jurisdiction or other cause of similar nature.
for which the court was unable to entertain it.
Section 14 of the Limitation Act does not apply.
Plaintiffs have failed to prove the date of death of Kishan Singh and the extinction of line of Alla within 3 years of the filing of the suit.
Suits are therefore time barred.
257 Sections 107 and 108 of the Evidence Act do not help the appellants.
Rule of evidence in section 107 is that it is for the plaintiff to prove the death of a person if he was alive within 30 years and section 108 says that burden of proving that a man was ,dive is on the person who alleges he is alive if it is proved that he has not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had even alive.
In this case the plaintiffs appellants have alleged that Kishan Singh was last heard of on 15th August, 1915 and singe then he is not heard of.
The onus is, there fore, on the plaintiff appellant under section 107 of Evidence Act 10 prove as to when Kishan Singh died.
It is; Submit ted that Kishan Singh may have died on any date either before 15th August, 1945 or immediately theereafter.
There is no presumption that he died on the expiry of 7 years from the date he was last heard.
The date of death is thus required to prove by the plaintiff like any other fact.
The suits are, therefore, barred by time and should be dismissed plaintiffs ' failure to prove death of Kishan Singh within three years of the filing of suits.
