100(1) (d)(iii) of the Jammu & Kashmir Representation of the People Act, 1957 provides that if the High Court is of opinion that the result of the election in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected by the improper reception, refusal or rejection of any vote or the reception of any vote which is void, the High Court shall declare the election of the returned candidates to be void.
The appellant was declared elected to the State Assembly in the General Elections.
In his election petition the respondent, a defeated candidate, contended that improper rejection at the time of counting of votes cast in his favour and improper reception of votes at the time of poll ing in favour of the appellant had materially affected the result and that therefore the appellant 's election should be declared void.
The High Court held that certain votes had been improp erly received in favour of the appellant, certain votes validly polled in favour of the respondent were improperly rejected at the time of counting; and in respect of 550 votes which were found to have been improperly received, the High Court held that the appellant was the greatest benefi ciary of those votes although the precise number by which he was benefited could not be easily ascertained.
In appeal, this Court directed the Registrar to scruti nise the 550 ballot papers to find out as to how many of those votes were cast in favour of the appellant and the other candidates.
The result of the investigation showed that the appellant had a lead of 38 votes over the respond ent.
Allowing the appeal HELD: There is no escape from the conclusion that the election of the appellant should be upheld.
[303H] (1) In an election petition founded upon the ground that the result of the election was materially affected by the improper reception or rejection of votes, the Court has first to decide whether certain ballot papers were improperly received or were improperly rejected.
Once that controversy is resolved, the rest is purely a matter of arithmetical calculation.
If the result of arithmetical calculation is that the returned candidate has still a lead over his nearest rival, his election would not be declared to be void on the ground of improper reception or improper rejection of votes.
Improper reception or improper rejec tion of votes can result in invalidating the election only if such improper reception or improper rejection materially affects the result of the election.
[303H] In the instant case, even after excluding all the votes found to have been improperly received by the appellant and also giving credit to the respondent for the votes found by the High Court to have been improperly rejected at the time of counting, the net result still was that the appellant had a lead over the respondent.
(2) As it is not permissible to widen the scope of an election petition, the respondent could not seek relief on grounds which were not taken by him in the election peti tion.
The respondent could not derive any benefit on the irregularities committed in the conduct of election.
The election was not challenged on the ground of any irregulari ty or non compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of the Representation of the People Act nor was the election assailed on the ground of corrupt practice.
[304D & C] 298 (3) The contention of the respondent that if the ballot papers which bore the initials and not the full signatures of the presiding officer are rejected, the appellant 's election should be declared void, is without force.
The ballot papers bore the distinguishing marks as required by r. 38(1).
The fact that the returning officer did not reject the ballot papers on the ground that they bore only the initials and not the full signatures of the presiding officer showed that the returning officer was satisfied that the alleged defect was caused by the mistake or failure on the part of the presiding officer.
There can be no doubt that the mistake occurred because of the mistake or failure of the presiding officer.
The first proviso to r. 56(2) of the Rules provides that where the returning officer is satisfied that any defect mentioned in cl.
(g) or cl.
(h) of this Rule has been caused by any mistake or failure on the part of a presiding officer or polling officer, the ballot paper shall not be rejected merely on the ground of such defect.
[305B C]
