Held per section R. DAS, ACTING C. J., VENKATARAMA AYYAR, JAFER IMAM and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.
(BHAGWATI J. dissenting) the contention that the word "matter" in section 5 of the Indian Stamp Act was intended to convey the same meaning as the word "description" in section 6 is without force.
In its popular sense, the expression "distinct matters" would connote something different from distinct "categories".
Two transactions might be of the same description, but all the same, they might be distinct.
When two words of different import are used in a statute in two consecutive provisions, it cannot be maintained that they are used in the same sense and therefore the expression "distinct matters" in section 5 and "description" in section 6 have different connotations.
It is settled law that when two persons join in executing a power of attorney, whether it comprises distinct matters or not will depend on whether the interests of the executants in the subject matter of the power are separate or not.
Conversely, if one person holding properties in two different capacities, each unconnected with the other, executes a power in respect of both of them, the instrument should logically be held to comprise distinct matters.
Held, that the instrument in question, Exhibit A, the power of attorney comprised distinct matters within the meaning of section 5 of the Indian Stamp Act in respect of several capacities of the respondent mentioned therein.
Per BHAGWATI J. (dissenting).
The fact that the donor of the power of attorney executes it in different capacities is not sufficient to constitute the instrument, one comprising distinct matters and thus requiring to be stamped with the aggregate amount of the duties with which separate instruments each comprising or relating to one of such matters would be chargeable under the Act, within the mean ing of section 5 of the Indian Stamp Act.
The instrument in question, Exhibit A, does not comprise distinct matters but comprises one matter only and that matter is the execution of a general power of attorney by the donor in favour of 843 the donees constituting the donees his attorneys to act for him in all the capacities he enjoys.
It is within the very nature of the general power of attorney that all the distinct acts which the donor is capable of performing are comprised in one instrument which is executed by him and therefore whatever acts the donor is capable of performing whether in his individual capacity or in his representative capacity as trustee or as executor or administrator are also comprised within the instrument and are not distinct matters to be dealt with as such so as to attract the operation of section 5 of the Indian Stamp Act.
Secretary, Board of Revenue, Madras vs Alagappa Chettiar I.L.R. , Ansell vs Inland Revenue Commissioners , Reversionary Interest Society vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue [1906] 22 T.L.R. 740, Davis vs Williams ; , Bowen vs Ashley ; , Good son vs Forbes ; , Freeman vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue [1870 71] L.R. 6 Exch.
101, Allen vs Morrison ; , Reference under Stamp Act, section 46, Mad. 358, Reference under Stamp Act, section 46, Mad.
386, Reference under Stamp Act, section 46, , and Vidya Varuthi vs Balusami, 48 I.A. 302, referred to.
