Section 13A was introduced in Rajasthan Premises (Con trol of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950 by an Ordinance on September 29, 1975, The Ordinance was later replaced by an Act.
Clause (a)of the section provides that no Court shall, in any proceeding pending on the date of the commencement of the Amending Ordinance, pass any decree in favour of a landlord for eviction of a tenant on the ground of non payment of rent under certain circumstances.
Clause (b) provides that in every such proceeding the Court shall, on the application of the tenant, made within 30 days from the date of the presentation of the memorandum of appeal or application for revision, determine the amount of rent in arrears.
Clause (c) provides that the provisions of els.
(a) & (b) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to all appeals, or applications for revision, preferred or made after the commencement of the Amending Ordinance.
Explanation (b) to the section defines a proceeding to mean a suit, appeal or application for revision.
Section 22(1) provides that from every decree or order passed by the Court under the Act, an appeal shall lie to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie :from original decrees and orders passed by such former Court.
On the ground of non payment of rent, a decree of evic tion was passed against the appellant, who was the respond ent 's tenant.
The High Court having affirmed the decree on appeal, the appellant filed an application for special leave to this Court on September 23, 1975.
The Ordinance intro ducing section 19A was passed on September 29, 1975.
This Court granted special leave on November.
In appeal to this Court it was contended by the appel lant (1) that since the application for special leave was pending before this Court on the date of the commencement of the Ordinance, the case was governed by section 13A (a) and (b) of the Act; (2) in the alternative since, as a result of the grant of special leave, an appeal had been pending before this Court, the appellant was entitled to the protection of section 13A(c) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (Per Chandrachud and Goswami, JJ) (1)(a) In order to attract section 13A(a) a suit, appeal or application for revision must be pending on the date of the commencement of the Ordinance.
An application for special leave under article 136 of the Constitution cannot be equated with the ordinary remedy of appeal as of right under any provision of law.
It is an extraordinary right conferred under the Constitution, within the discretion of the Supreme Court and an application for special leave does not come within the contemplation of appeal pending before the Court under section 13A(a).
The collocation of the words "suit, a. appeal or application for revision" used in the explanation to denote "proceeding", shows that the suits and regular appeals therefrom as provided under the ordinary law and applications for revision alone are intended.
[329C & B] 325 (b) The expression "presentation of memorandum of appeal" under section 13A (c) chimes with the construction that the legislature clearly intended to include only the hierarchy of appeals under the Code of Civil Procedure.
[330D] (c) Under section 13A(c) read with section 13A(b) in a pending appeal, the tenant has to make an application within 30 days "from the date of presentation of the memorandum of appeal".
There is no provision in an appeal by special leave for presentation of memorandum of appeal, under r. 11 of O.XVI.
of the Supreme Court Rules, on the grant of special leave, the petition for special leave is treated as the petition of appeal.
In contrast under O.41 r. 1(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, every appeal shall be preferred in the form of a memorandum signed by the appellant and pre sented to the Court.
[329H] (d) The terminus a quo for the purpose of section 13A(c) is from the date of presentation of the memorandum of appeal.
Since no petition of appeal has to be presented in the Supreme Court after the special leave is granted, such a contingency of appeal to this Court by way of special leave is not intended to be covered by section 13A(c).
[330C] (2) Section 22 cannot assist the appellant in this case.
While section 22(1 ) qualifies the decree or order as being "under this Act" section 13A does not describe "proceeding" to be under the Act.
[330E; 332C] The Act provides for the institution of serious in two different forums namely, the lowest Court of competent jurisdiction, which is the Civil Court, and the other before a Magistrate on the executive side.
[332F] Appeals or applications for revision under section 13A(c) relate only to decrees in suits for eviction based on the ground of non payment of rent.
Such appeals or applications for revision under section 13A(c) are not contemplated under section 22.
Decrees or orders passed by the Court under the Act, against which appeals and revisions are provided in section 22, do not take in decrees and orders passed in a suit for eviction.
Usual rights of appeal and revision will be available in the latter class of suits.
To hold otherwise will be to deny a right of second appeal to a litigant, whether it is landlord or tenant, against a decree in an eviction suit which is clearly not the intention of the legislature.
Second appeal is only barred in case of de crees or orders passed under the Act.
[332H] (Per section Murtaza Fazal Ali, J.) Proceedings in this Court would not fall within the ambit of cls.
(a) and (b) of section 13A. [338F] (a) The Explanation to the section clearly shows that the word "proceeding" refers only to such proceedings as may be pending in any suit, appeal or application for revision under the Act.
The use of the words "such proceedings" in section 13A(b) shows that the proceedings contemplated by section 13A are really proceedings referred to in the explanation, which means proceedings in the nature of suits, appeals or appli cations for revision as referred to in section 22.
[338E F] (b) Section 13A(c) would not apply to the present case.
The benefit conferred by el.
(c) would apply only to appeals and applications for revision filed under the Act as provid ed by section 22.
The true interpretation of cl.
(c) would be that this clause contemplated the same proceedings as con templated by els.
(a) and (b), namely, proceedings indicated in the explanation.
[338G H] (c) An appeal by special leave is a special remedy provided by article 136 of the Constitution and the legislature must be presumed to be aware of this special remedy.
If the intention was to extend the benefit to appeals for special leave, it should have been clearly stated in el.
[339B] (d) The Supreme Court Rules make a clear cut distinction between an application filed for the grant of special leave and a petition of appeal, if the leave is granted.
The constituents and ingredients of an application for special leave to appeal are quite different from those of a memoran dum of appeal under O.X.LI r. 1(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[339D] 326 (e) The provisions of O.XLI, r. 1(2) C.P.C. require that the memorandum of appeal has to set forth under distinct heads, the grounds of objections to the decree appealed from.
No such requirement is to be found in the Supreme Court Rules either for an application for special leave to appeal or in the petition of appeal which is required to be filed if certificate by the High Court is granted.
The legislature must be.
presumed to be aware of the difference between an application for special leave to appeal and a memorandum of appeal.
Though r. 11 of O.XVI of the Supreme Court Rules provides that the petition for special leave would be treat ed as a petition of appeal after the special leave is grant ed,it cannot be equated with a memorandum of appeal contem plated by section 13A(c) of the Act.
[339G H] (f) The fact that section 13A(c) mentions the words "from the date of the presentation of the memorandum of appeal or application for revision" clearly indicates that the reme dies contemplated by the Act are remedies of appeal and revision as provided for by section 22 of the Act.
[339H]
