Presidential Orders dated 27th April 1960 and the var ious orders and circulars issued pursuant thereto by the Home Ministry, P & T Department and Railway Board, compel ling attendance in "Hindi in service training" as part of duty and providing for penal consequences for non attendance were quashed by the Madras High Court as being inconsistent with section 3 of the as amended by Act 1 of 1968 which was law made by Parliament under article 343(3) of the Constitution.
In appeals to this Court on certificates, the appellant Union contended: (i) The instructions were aimed at promoting the policy of the constitutional revisions that Hindi should be the official language of the Union; (ii) No employee was placed at a disadvantage even if one could not qualify oneself in Hindi because no penalty was prescribed for an employee who did not attain any particular standard; and (iii) The Government was within its rights to issue orders obliging its employees to take training in Hindi language, so that ultimately when Hindi became the language of the Union they could perform their duty in an efficient and smooth manner.
The respondents reiterated their stand, namely, (i) Article 343 of the Constitution is transitional and directions of the President are limited to the period of 15 years from the commencement of the Constitution in view of the provision in Articles 343, 344(1), 344(2)(a) and (b), 344 (3), 344 (6) indicating that directions should relate to purposes of subclauses (a) to (e) of Article 344(2); (ii) When the embodied the field covered by Parliamentary legislation, the Presidential Order would not have any effect; (iii) The Presidential Order is inconsistent with section 9 (4) of the as amended in 1968 and to that extent void; and (iv) Under section 3(4) of the , persons were not to be placed at a disadvantage on the ground that they do not have proficiency in both the languages, namely, English and Hindi.
Dismissing the writ petitions and allowing the appeals, HELD: (1) The Presidential Orders dated 27th April 1960 and the various orders and circulars issued by Home Minis try, P & T Department and Railway Board pursuant thereto are valid.
[323H] (2) The Presidential Order was validly made and there has been and can be no challenge to it.
The President Order keeps in view the ultimate object to make the Hindi language as official language, but takes into note the circumstances prevailing in our country and considers it desirable that the change should be a gradual one and due regard should be given to the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the non Hindi speaking areas.
The purpose of the Presidential Order is to promote the spirit of the Hindi language and to provide the Central Government employees the facilities to take training in Hindi language when they are in service.
[322F G] (3) The provisions in article 344 indicate that if there is a Second Commission at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of the Constitution, the President, may after consideration of the report, issue directions at the end of fifteen years.
The provisions contained in article 344(6) are not exhausted by using it once.
The President can use it on more than one occasion.
Further the effect of the power used cannot be said to be exhausted on the expiry of fifteen 315 years.
The Presidential Order which was issued in 1960 continues to be in force and cannot be said to have exhaust ed itself at the end of fifteen years from the commencement of the Constitution.
It would be strange that the steps necessary for the change should be given up at the.
expiry of fifteen years because what is said to be a switch over from English to Hindi has not been possible and Parliament provided by law for the continued use of the English lan guage for particular purposes specified in that law.
[322D F] (4) Article 344 is enacted for the purpose of achieving the object of replacing English by Hindi within a period of 15 years.
The ultimate object is provided in article 351 which fulfils the object of the spirit and development of the Hindi language and enlargement of the composite culture of India, Articles 343 and 344 deal with the process of transi tion.
Article 343(3) provides merely for extension of time for the use of English language after the period of 15 years.
The progressive use of the Hindi language is thereby not to be impaired.
Extending the time for the use of the English language does not amount to abandonment of progress in the use of Hindi as the official language of the Union.
[321G H, 322A B] (5) Article 344(6) provides that notwithstanding any thing in article 343, the President may after consideration of the report of the committee issue directions.
The non obstante clause in article 344(6) does not operate only against article 344(1) and (2) but against the entire article 344 for the reason that so far as transition is concerned, the direc tions under article 344(6) may continue.
Article 344(6) takes this objective and is intended to determine the pace of progress and to achieve the same.
[322B C] (6) The High Court failed to see the sequences of the Presidential Order and the .
It is erroneous to suggest that the Presidential Order of 1960 became invalid after the passing of the Act.
The Act merely continues the use of English language in addition to Hindi.
The Act does not provide anything which can be interpreted as a limitation on the vower of the President to issue directions under article 344(6) of the Constitution.
The Presidential Order has no inconsistency with the Act.
The non obstante provision in article 344(6) empowers the Presi dent.
[322G H, 323A B] (7) Parliament is legislating in a different field.
The field is the permissible use of English language in addition to Hindi during the period following 15 years because the change to Hindi could not be complete.
The trasitional period has exceeded 15 years.
The Presidential Order keeps in view the steps to replace the use of English in Hindi and the application of the Act and the Presidential Order is in different fields and has different purposes.
The Offi cial Languages Act is to continue the use of English lan guage after the expiry of 15 years, but Presidential Order, on the other hand is, to provide for the progressive use of Hindi language.
It confers an additional qualification on those who learn Hindi and does not take away anything from the Government employees.
Prizes are offered and there may be increase in pay.
These are incentives.
The measures taken for enforcement of provisions for learning Hindi by providing for absence from classes as breach of discipline and insisting on appearance at the examinations are steps in aid of fulfilling the object of what is described as in service, training in Hindi language.
Such enforcement of attendance in examinations for proficiency if necessary for completion of training.
The contention that the Presiden tial.
Order conflicts with section 3(4) of the Act is unsound.
The "In service training" of the employees is during hours of duty and free of cost.
Even if they fail, there is no penalty.
There is no treatment of unequals alike.[323 B H] [323B F] Murasoli Maran etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
1972 Madras 40 reversed.
