Proceedings under section 145(1) of the Criminal Proce dure Code 1898 were going on between the parties.
The appellants filed affidavits before the Magistrate.
The said affidavits were not sworn before the Magistrate who was in seisin of the case but were sworn before some other Magis trate.
It was contended before the Magistrate by the re spondents that the said affidavits were not admissible in evidence.
The High Court held those affidavits to be inad missible.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, HELD: (1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary in the Criminal Procedure Code the affidavits have to be sworn or affirmed in accordance with the provi sions of the Oaths Act, 1873.
Section 145(1) of the Code provides that the Magistrate making an order under it shall require the parties concerned in the dispute to attend his court in person or by pleader and to put in such documents or to adduce by putting in affidavits the evidence of such persons as they rely upon in support of their claim.
The affidavits contemplated by the sub section are, therefore, evidence for purposes of proceedings before the Magistrate concerned even though the Evidence Act does not apply to them.
[175G H] (2) There is no provision in the Code specifying the courts before whom the affidavits referred to in section 145 have to be sworn and affirmed.
The definition of affidavit in section 3(3) of.the only states that it shall include affirmation and declaration in the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing.
Section 4 of the Oaths Act reads as under: "4.
The following Courts and persons are authorised to administer by themselves or by an officer empowered by them in this behalf, oaths and affirmations in discharge of the duties or in exercise of the powers imposed or conferred upon them respectively by law : (a) all Courts and persons having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence;" It is clear that all Courts and persons having by law or consent of parties authority to receive evidence are autho rised to.
administer oaths and affirmations, but they can do so only where they are otherwise acting in the discharge of the duties or in exercise of the powers imposed or conferred upon them respectively by law.
In the present case the Magistrate concerned with the proceedings under section 145 of the Code was discharging the duties imposed and exercising the powers conferred by the Code and he alone could adminis ter the oaths and affirmations to the persons who made affidavits and not Magistrates who were not discharging any such duty or exercising any such power.
[176A H] Nandial Ghose vs Emperor AIR 1944 Cal. 283, Hemdan vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., AIR 1966 Raj. 5; Govind vs State and others AIR 1969 All. 405; Krishna Chandra Naik vs Sk.
Makbul and others AIR 1970 Orissa 309; Mahesh Thakur and others vs Lakshman Prasad Thakur and another (1971) 19 Bihar Law Journal 727 and State of Madhya Pradesh vs Trivedi Prasad (1971) XVI H.R. Law journal 1059 approved.
175 Ahmad Din vs Abdul Salem AIR and Shambhu Nath Chopra vs State AIR 1970 Delhi 210, over ruled.
