Section 494 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1893 provides that any Public Prosecutor may, with the consent of the Court, in cases tried by jury before the return of the verdict and in other cases before the judgment is pro nounced.
withdraw from the prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried and upon such withdrawal (a) if it is made before a charge has been framed the accused shall be discharged; and (b) if it is made after the charge has been framed or when under the Code no charge is required, he shall be acquitted.
In the instant case, the committing Magistrate framed a charge against the respondents for having committed an offence under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. and committed them for trial by a Sessions Court.
The Sessions Judge granted permission sought by the Public Prosecutor to with draw from the prosecution under section 494 of the Code and "discharged" the respondents.
After fresh investigation a new charge sheet was filed.
By then the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 had come into force.
Following the provisions of the new Code, the commit ting Magistrate committed the respondents to stand trial before the Sessions Court for the same offence.
When the case came up for trial, the respondents contended that by virtue of the earlier orders of the Sessions Court, they had been acquitted and that they were not liable to be prosecut ed again for the offence in view of section 300 of the new Code.
This was rejected on the ground that they had earlier been "discharged" and not acquitted and that section 300 had no appli cation to their case.
The High Court allowed their revision application holding that since the withdrawal from the prosecution in the earlier case was made after the charge had been flamed, the respondents had been acquitted and the bar of section 300 was attracted.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The High Court was right in holding that by reason of the order of the Sessions judge granting consent to the withdrawal from the prosecution in the earlier case, the respondents were acquitted and in view of section 300 they were not liable to be tried again for the same offence.
[356B] (1) Section 484 of the new Code provides that where a trial is pending immediately before the commencement of the new Code, it shall be proceeded with in accordance with the provisions of the old Code as if the new Code were not in force.
[352H] In the instant case, when the new Code came into force the case was pending before the Court of Session for trial and so was liable to be tried according to the old Code.
It was for this reason that the withdrawal application was made under section 494 of the old Code.
[353A B] (2) (a) When the prosecution against an accused commit ted for trial is allowed to be withdrawn by the Court of Session under section 494 of the old Code, 351 the withdrawal of the prosecution would be after the framing of the charge against the accused and it must result in the acquittal of the accused under el.
(b) of that section.
[355G] (b) The charge against an, accused under the procedure prescribed in the new Code is to be framed for the first time by the Court of Session while according to the proce dure prescribed under the old Code, the charge is framed by the committing Magistrate and the Court of Session is merely given the vower to alter or amend the charge, if it thinks necessary to do so.
Therefore, when under the old Code, the Court of Session commences the trial of an accused, there is already before it a charge framed by the committing Magis trate and it is that charge that is required to be read out and explained to the accused.
and on which the plea of the accused is required to be taken.
[355D F] (c) In the instant case, the Judicial Magistrate fol lowed this procedure and after framing the charge committed the respondents for trial.
[354G] Queen Empress vs Sivarama, and In re.
Ve layudha Mudali, A.I.R. 1949 Mad 508, approved.
