The respondent was Stage Carriage Operator whose two permits were to expire in January and March 1976.
In the usual course and in compliance with section 58 of the , he applied for renewal more than 120 days ahead but at the time of the actual date of expiry of the permits a draft scheme under A had been pub lished.
The State withdrew the draft scheme under A for some technical reasons and republished in July 1975, after the appellants ' permits had expired.
Section 68F(1D) provides that no permit shall be granted or renewal during the period intervening between the date of publication under section 68C of any scheme and the date of publication of the approved or modified scheme.
The proviso to the said sec tion provides that if a permit expires after the publication of the scheme such permit may be renewed for a limited period but the renewed permit shall cease to be effective on the publication of the scheme under section 68D(3).
Applying the prohibition contained in section 68F(1D) the Regional Transport Authority rejected the prayer for renewal.
The High Court set aside that order directed the grant of the renewal.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
At the time the respondents ' permit expired a draft scheme had already been published but the approved scheme had not been, published.
Any permit holder whose permit expires during this spell is eligible for a renewal as specified in the proviso.
The fact that the draft scheme was later withdrawn ca.not affect the rights to a renewal.
Renewal of the permit however would be to the extent contem plated by section 68F(1D).
[390G H] 2.
(a) No permit or renewal except to the extent ex pressly saved by section 68F(1D) can be granted by the Regional Transport Authority during the period between the date of publication of any scheme and the date of publi cation of the approved scheme.
[391C] (b) If a permit expires after the publication of any draft scheme such permit is eligible for renewal for a limited period as set out in the proviso.
The special provi sion contained in that proviso cannot be stretched on the ground of possible anomalies or unjust consequences to cover permits expiring even before the publication of the draft scheme.
Where language is plain the interpretation cannot take the shape of addition or interstitial legislation.
[391C D] 3.
If a permit holder whose permit is about to expire diligently does in the normal course, all that he needs and all that he can, that is to say, if he sets in motion the legal machinery for the grant of renewal as laid down in section 58, the fact that a scheme is published before the actual grant of renewal will not intercept or extinguish the process of law set in motion by the application for renewal.
If for reasons beyond the control of the applicant the renewal process gets delayed or prolonged he.
cannot be penalised.
Renewal is a legal process and not the final act.
Save in this category of cases all other permits which have expired before the draft scheme is published, suffer the ban of section 68F(1D).
However, no permit can ensure beyond the time of the publication of the approved scheme.
[391D F] 390
