Section 19 of the Slum Areas (improvement and Clear ance) Act 1956 provides that notwithstanding anything con tained in any other law for the time being in force, no person shall, except with the previous permission in writing of the competent authority, institute any suit or proceeding for obtaining any decree or order for the eviction of a tenant from any building in a slum area.
Section 39 enacts that the provisions of the Act shall have effect notwith standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
Section 14A and Chapter IIIA called "Summary Trial of certain applications" containing sections 25A, 25B and 25C were introduced into the Delhi Rent Control Act with effect from December 1, 1975.
Section 14A provides that where the landlord who, being in occupation of residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government, was required to vacate such residential accommodation on the ground that he Owns residential accommodation within the Union Territory, there shall accrue to such landlord, not withstanding anything contained in the Act or any other law for the time being in force, a right to recover immediately possession of any premises let out by him.
Section 25A provides (i) that the provisions of Chapter IlIA shall have an over riding effect over every other provision of the Delhi Rent Act which is inconsistent with anything con tained in Chapter IIIA and (ii) that the provisions of Chapter IIIA shall have over riding effect over anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
Section 25 B prescribes special procedure for the disposal of appli cations for eviction.
Section 54 provides that nothing in the Act shall affect the provisions of the .
The respondent who was allotted government quarters in New Delhi was called upon by the Government to vacate the quarters on the ground that he owned a residential house in Delhi.
Since he did not vacate the quarters before the time given he was asked to pay a high penal rent.
His application under section 14A of the Delhi Rent Control Act for eviction of the appellants, who were the tenants of the premises, was contested by them on the ground that since the house had been situated in a slum area, the respondent was not entitled to possession because he had not obtained permission of the competent authority under section 19 of the Slum Clearance Act.
This plea was rejected.
Their revision application was rejected by the High Court.
In appeal it was contended that the Slum Clearance Act being a special Act, its provisions must have precedence over the provisions of the Delhi Rent Act and to deny prece dence to the former Act In matters arising out of section 14A and Chapter IIIA was to repeal that Act by implication.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The provisions of section 14A and Chapter IlIA of the Rent Control Act must prevail over those contained in sections 19 and 39 of the Slum Clearance Act.
[434 G] 1 (a) By virtue of the first part of section 25A, the provi sions of Chapter IIIA must prevail over the provisions of section 54 of the Delhi Rent Act.
To the extent 422 to which section 54 saves the operation of the Slum Clearance Act, it is inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter IlIA which prescribes a special procedure for dealing with appli cations for eviction filed under cl.
(e) of the proviso to section 14(1) or under section 14A of the Delhi Rent Act [430 F] (b) By virtue of the second part of section 25A also the provisions of Chapter IlIA would prevail over those of the Slum Clearance Act.
Sections 19 and 391 of the Slum Clear ance Act are to that extent inconsistent with the procedure prescribed by Chapter IlIA of the Delhi Rent Act and have to be subordinated to it.
[430 G] 2(a) The object of section 14A is to confer a right on certain landlords to recover "immediate possession of premises" belonging to them and which are in the possession of their tenents.
such a right is "to accrue" to a class of persons.
The same concept is clarified by providing that in the contingencies mentioned in the section, a right will accure to the landlord "to recover immediately possession of any premises let out by him." [430 H] (b) The provisions of section 14A must prevail over anything contained elsewhere in the Delhi Rent Act or in the Slum Clearance Act.
Section 25B(1) prescribes that the right conferred by section 14A has to be enforced in accordance with the procedure prescribed by Chapter ILIA.
Section 25A gives an overriding effect to the provisions of Chapter ILIA.
[431 E] 3(a) The Legislature has expressed its intention clearly and unequivocally that the provisions of section 14A and Chapter IIIA would have precedence over anything else contained in that Act or in any other law.
The object of the Legisla ture in incorporating the non obstante clause both in section 14A and section 25A of the Delhi Rent Act was to free the proceedings arising out of the right newly conferred by section 14A and falling within Chapter IlIA from the restraint imposed by section 19 of the Slum Clearance Act and from the operation of section 39 thereof.
To subject that facility to the provision of the Slum Clearance Act would be to make illusory the right conferred by section 14A on the allottee to obtain "immediate possession" of the premises let out by him to his tenant.
[432D & 431F] (b) While section 25A gives an overriding effect to the provisions of Chapter IlIA over anything "inconsistent therewith" contained elsewhere in the Delhi Rent Act or in any other law, section 14A does not qualify the over riding effect of what is contained therein i.e. in section 14A in refer ence to anything inconsistent therewith contained either in the Delhi Rent Act or in any other law.
The word 'anything ' occuring in "now withstanding anything contained" elsewhere in the Delhi Rent Act would ordinarily mean "anything to the contrary".
[432B C] (c) In order that the object of section 14A may not be frustrat ed, section 25C provides that nothing contained in section 14(6) shall apply to a landlord who is in possession of the premises allotted to him by the Central Government and who is re quired to vacate that residential accommodation.
Section 25C(2) reduces the period of six months prescribed under section 14(7) for recovery of possession of the premises to two months which emphasises that the object of the Legislature is to confer real, effective and immediate right on a class of landlords to obtain possession of premises let out by them to their tenents.[432F H] (4) To afford a quick and expeditious remedy against the tenant the Act provided that nothing, not even the Slum Clearance Act, shall stand in the way of an allottee of Government accommodation from evicting his tenant by resort ing to the summary procedure prescribed by Chapter IIIA.
The tenant is deprived of the right to defend a proceeding against him and to appeal or second appeal lies against the order of the Rent Controller.
The jurisdiction of the High Court m revision is limited to finding out whether the order complained of is according to law.
[433A B] (5(a) When two or more laws oVerate in the same field and each contains a non obstante clause, cases of conflict have to be decided in.
reference to the object and purpose of the law under consideration In the instant case, the 423 special and specific purpose which motivated the enactment of section 14A and Chapter IIIA would be frustrated if the provisions of the Slum Clearance Act were to prevail over them.
Therefore, the newly introduced provisions of the Delhi Rent Act must hold the field and be given full effect despite anything to the country contained in the Slum Clear ance Act.
[433 D & G] Sri Ram Narain vs The Simla Banking & Industrial Co. Ltd. [1956] S.C.R. followed.
(b) Yet another test is that the later enactment must prevail over the earlier one.
Section 14A and Chapter IlIA having been enacted with effect from December 1, 1975 are later enactments in reference to section 19 of the Slum Clear ance Act which was placed on the statute book with effect from February 28, 1965 and i.n reference to section 39 of the same Act which came into force in 1956 when the Act was passed.
The Legislature gave overriding effect to section 14 A and Chapter IlIA with the knowledge that sections 19 and 39 of the Slum Clearance Act contained non obstante clauses of equal efficacy.
[434A B]
