Section 2(b) of the defines additional dearness allowance to mean such dearness allowance as may be sanctioned from time to time after the appointed day, i.e., July 6, 1974 over and above the amount of dearness allowance payable in accordance with the rate in force immediately before the date from which such sanction of additional dearness allowance is to take effect.
Section 6(2) (b) enjoins on the employer the duty to make deductions and to remit to the nominated au thority additional dearness allowance from the emoluments disbursed after the appointed day.
Section 115A of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 provides that if any agreement is arrived at between the employer and employees who are parties to an industrial dispute pending before the industrial court, the award in such proceeding shall be made in terms of such agreement, except in certain circumstances stated therein.
As a result of negotiations between the employers and employees a settlement was entered into between the parties on June 28, 1974 enhancing the dearness allowance with retrospective effect from January 1, 1974.
The Indus trial Court before which certain disputes were pending gave the award conformity with the settlement sometime in August September, 1974.
Arrears of dearness allowance were paid after the appointed day.
In a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution by the employees ' Union, the High Court issued a writ re straining the employers from effecting any deduction from the arrears of D.A. payable to the employees on the basis of the settlement and granted certain other reliefs.
In appeal it was contended that since the settlement of June 28, 1974 could not be effective prior to the award made in August September 1974 additional dearness allow ance could be said to be sanctioned only after the award and so the provisions of section 2(b) would be attracted.
Dismissing the appeal HELD: One of the components of cl. 2(b) namely, that the additional dearness allowance is that part of the D.A. which is sanctioned after the appointed day, is absent since there was no sanction for any rise in dearness allowance after the appointed day.
[477 G] (1) According to section 115A of the Bombay Industrial Rela tions Act if the conditions enumerated therein did not exist the award "shall be made" in terms of the settle ment.
Since the settlement in this case had merged in the award, the terms of the award are those specified in the settlement.
The sanction of the award in such a case was the sanction under the settlement and since the settlement was prior to the appointed day, additional dearness allow ance could not be said to be sanctioned after the appoint ed day.
[476 F & H] In the instant case the Industrial Court having passed the award in conformity with the terms of the settlement, the award came into operation on the date specified in it.
(2) Sanction must have relevance to the reality of the transaction between the parties.
Increased dearness allowance payable between January 1, 1974 and July 5, 1974 was sanctioned prior t.o the appointed day.
Once it is found that the sanction was prior to the appointed day, section 2(b) would not be attracted.
[4 (3) From the definition of "additional wages" in section 2(c) it is clear that the Act recognises agreements and settle ments in the same way as awards of Tribunals.
Any wage revision "whether by or under an agreement or settlement between the parties or any award" comes within the sweep of the definition clause.
Agreements and settlements are distinctly mentioned along with awards.
Settlement is a type of sanction recognised under the Act.
There is there fore sufficient warrant under the Act to give effect to the sanction by voluntary settlement in respect of D.A.
When there is no ambiguity in the word "sanctioned" in section 2(b) recourse to the aim and object of the Act is not called for.
[478 A B]
