Under section 115(7) of the , nothing contained in that section could, after the appointed day, i.e. November 1, 1956, affect the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of of the Constitution in relation to the determination of conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State.
The proviso provides that the condition of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to any person who is allotted to another State could not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
The respondents, who were bus conductors in the State Road Transport Department of the former State of Hyderabad, were allotted to the State of Mysore consequent upon the reorganisation of the States in 1956 and they continued to hold the same posts under the Mysore Government Road Trans port Department.
They were dismissed from service by the Divisional Controller of Mysore Government Road Transport Department and the order of dismissal was affirmed by the General Manager of the Department.
The orders of dismiss al were challenged on the ground that since they were ap pointed by the Superintendent of the Traffic Department of the former State of Hyderabad, who was the Head of that Department they could be dismissed only by the General Manager of the Mysore State Road Transport Department and that their dismissal by the Divisional Controller, who was not the.
Head of the Department, was in violation of the right guaranteed under article 311 of the Constitution.
The High Court struck down the order of dismissal.
On appeal by the State it was contended that (1 ) since the post of Superintendent of Traffic Department did not exist in the State of Mysore and the Divisional Controller was the competent authority to appoint ' and dismiss servants of the category to which the respondents belonged, their dismissal was not incompetent in view of section 116(2) of the ; (2) There was substantial compliance with article 311 because the order of dismissal was confirmed by the General Manager; (3) Since the posts were not civil posts under the State, there was no violation of article 311; (4) The discretionary relief of declaration of continuance in service could not have been granted in this case; and (5) the respondents were dismissed before.
the establishment of the Corporation and since they did not exercise their option to join the Corporation, no decree could be passed against the Corporation.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: The respondents could not have been dismissed from service by an authority lower or subordinate in rank to the General Manager of the Transport Department as it would tantamount to deprivation of the guarantee in,Art.
311 of the Constitution read with s 115(7) of the State Reorgani sation Act.
That there was no post of Superintendent of Traffic under the Mysore.
Government Road Transport Depart ment is of no consequence.
1 (a) The protection enjoyed by persons holding civil posts under the State like the respondents prior to the coming into force of the Act could not after the appointed day, be taken away, whittled down or impaired by any legislative enactment or rule.
The broad purpose underlying the section was to ensure that the conditions of service of persons mentioned therein shall not be changed except with the prior approval of the Central Govt.
[288 E;B] (b) The expression 'condition of service ' is an expres sion of wide import and the dismissal from service is a matter which falls within the conditions of service of public servants.
It is not possible by means of any legis lative provision.
or rule to take away the guarantee provid ed by article 311(1) and if any legislative provision or rule lays down otherwise, it will be ultra vires.
[288 D] M.D. Shukla & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat & Ors.
; ; N. Raghavendra Rao vs Deputy Commissioner, South Kanara, Mangalore ; ; North West Frontier Province vs Suraj Narain Anand 75 I.A. 343; AIR 1949 P.C. 112; Pradyat Kumar Bose vs The Hon 'ble the Chief Justice of Calcutta High Court ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
v Shardul Singh ; and Ranga chari vs Secretary of State 64 I.A. 40: AIR 1937 P.C. 27, followed.
(c) The expression 'competent authority ' in section 116(2) of the Act must be read in conjunction with, construed and understood as having the same meaning as the expression 'appropriate authority ' contemplated by section 116(1) and article 311(1) which means the appointing authority or an authority equivalent to or co ordinate in rank with the appointing authority, [289B] (d) The power to dismiss a Government servant from service can be conferred on an officer other than the 'a ppointing authority provided he is not subordinate in rank to the appointing officer or authority.
[291 B] The State of U.P. & Ors.
vs Ram Naresh Lal [1970] 3 S.C.R. 173, applied.
N. Somasundaram vs State of Madras A.I.R. 1956 Mad. 419; Sobhagmal vs State A.I.R , Gurmukh Singh vs Union of India A.I.R. 1963 Punjab 370; Mahadeo Prasad Rao vs
S.N. Chatterjee & Ors.
A.I.R. 1954 Patna 285 and State of Jammu & Kashmir and Anr.
vs Raj Mohammad & Ors.
approved.
In the instant case by virtue of section 116(1) the respondents were deemed to have been appointed from November 1, 1956 in the State of Mysore by the appropriate authori ty which could not be the authority other than the one equivalent to or coordinate in rank with the authority which appointed them in the erstwhile State of Hyderabad.
The General Manager of the Mysore Department could alone be considered to be the competent authority in terms of section 116(2).
[291 D] (2) The original order of dismissal being without jurisdic tion and as such void and inoperative, the order passed on appeal by the General Manager could not cure the initial defect.
[292 A] (3) Both at the time of coming into force of the and at the time of the passing of the impugned orders, the respondents were holding civil posts in connection with the affairs of the State and they could not but be treated as holding civil, posts under the State.
[292 D] 4 (a) The declaration to enforce a contract of personal service 'can be granted (i) where a government servant is dismissed from service in contravention of the article 311; (ii) to dismissed workers under the industrial and labour law, and (iii) where a statutory body has acted in breach of a mandatory obligation imposed by a statute.
[292 G] Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation Limited vs Chandra Kiran Tyagi ; and Executive Committee of Vaish Degree College, ShamIi & Ors.
vs Lakshmi Narain & Ors. ; followed.
284 (b) It is only where the discretion is not exercised by the lower court in the spirit of the statute or fairly or hon estly or according to the rules of reason and justice that the order passed by the lower court can be reversed by the superior court.
[293 A] Charles Osenton & Company vs Johnston , referred to.
In the instant case, it cannot be said that the discre tion has been wrongly exercised in favour of the respond ents.
[294 C] (5) In view of the appellants ' application before the High Court, which was duly endorsed by the Government, that since the State had constituted the Road Transport Corpo ration and transferred the rights and liabilities to it, the decree, if any, could be passed exclusively against it, the Corporation cannot contend that no decree should have been passed against it.
[294 D]
