Raja Rajendra Mullick Bahadur of Calcutta executed his last will on 21 2 1887.
The author of the Will was a religious minded Indian, the draftsman of the document was John Hart, an English Solicitor.
The Will open with the words 'I hereby dedicate and make debutter my Thakurbaree '.The
Income Tax Officer issued notices requiring filing of the returns against the Deity Thakurbaree.
On b:half of Deity, a nil income return was filed under section 22(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 for the assessment years 1956 57 and 1957 58.
In connection with the writ petition filed in the High Court for the proceedings in respect of assessment years 1955 56 it was conceded by the Revenue that a part of the income of the assessee which would be proved before the Income Tax authorities to have been applied in connection with feeding of the poor, sub scription to other charities enuring for the benefit of the public would be exempted under section 4(3)(i) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
The Revenue contended that on a true construction of the said will there was a complete dedication of the property to the Deity and, therefore, the income arising from the said property was taxable in the hands of Deity.
It was, however, contended by the assessee that the remuneration of the trustees and the allowances to the widows of the de ceased trustees as provided in the Will created a charge on the income of the trust estate and should therefore be treated as diversion of the income of the trust before it accrued in the hand of the trustees.
The Income Tax Officer taxed the income of the Deity deducting therefrom such amounts as were conceded before the High Court in respect of the prior year.
The appeal preferred by the assessee was dismissed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
Before the Tribunal, the Revenue substantially succeeded.
Thereafter, the Tribunal referred 4 questions of .law to the High Court, two at the instance of the assessee and.
two at the instance.
of the Revenue.
, The High Court on a metic ulous consideration of the entire Will decided against the Revenue and took the view that reading the Will as a whole the entire beneficial interest in the properties did not vest in the assessee Deity.
Assessee Deity was not the owner of the properties and, therefore.
the only income which could be subjected to income tax in the hands of the asses see would be the beneficial interest of the said Deity under the Will which would be the expenses incurred for Seva Puja of the Deity and for the various religious ceremonies con nected with the said Deity and the value of the residence of the Deity in the temple.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Will represents pious Bengali Wishes and disposition but drafted in the hands of an English Solici tor.
The court 's function in such an 484 ambiguous situations to steer clear of the confusion impart ed by the diction and to read the real intention of the testator.
The courts discerning loyalty is not to the formalitistic language used in drawing up the deeds but to the intentions which the disponer desired should take effect in the manner he designed.
The real question is whether the testator created an absolute or partial debutter or was there no dedication to the idol but a vesting of the legal estate in the trustees.
The use of the words like trust, trustees and Shebaits can lend support to the conten tion that the legal estate vested in the trustees.
However, the court has to push aside the English hand to reach at the Indian heart.
We are construing the Will of a pious Hindu aristocrat whose faith in ritual performances was more than matched by his ecumenical perspective.
Secondly, the sacred sentiment writ large in the Will is his total devotion and surrender to the family Deity Shri Jagannathjee.
It looks like doing Violence to the heart of the Will if one side steps the Deity to the status of but one of the benefici aries.
The Will in the forefront declares the dedication to the Deity.
The expression trust, trustees and shebaits were indiscriminately used.
The expressions are uncertain of the precise import of these English legal terms in the Indian context.
The idol was, therefore, the legal owner of the whole and liable to be assessed as such.
, 491B, C D, 497D, 499E] 2.
The court negatived the contention that even if the property vested in the Deity, all the amounts to be spent on the Shebaits and the members of their family on the upkeep of horses and carriages and repair of buildings etc.
were charge on the income and, therefore, the same did not and could not come into the hands of the Deity as his income and could not be taxed as such.
If the Shebaits received rent and interest to the extent of these other disbursements they received the amounts merely as collectors of rents etc.
and not as receivers of income.
The terms in which the direc tions are couched do not divest the income at the source but merely direct a Shebait to apply the income received from the debutter properties for specified purposes.
[499E H, 501F G]
