The respondent filed its sales tax returns for the assessment years 1948 49 and 1949 50 on the basis of its turnover of two previous years.
In respect of certain commodities, the rate of sales tax was enhanced with effect from certain dates falling within the assessment years.
The High Court on reference took the view that the dealer who had chosen to be assessed on the basis of its turnover of the previous year of assessment, was liable to be assessed at the rule prevailing on the first day of the relevant assessment year and that any change in the rate during the assessment year could not be applied to that assessment.
The assessee, who had paid tax at the enhanced rate, applied for refund of the excess tax together with interest thereon under section 11(6) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948.
The Additional Judge (Revisions), however, rejected the applica tion holding that refund was not permissible in view of section 31 introduced by the Amending Act (U.P. Act 3 of 1963).
That section provided that where a dealer opted to be as sessed to tax on the basis of his turnover of the previous year, he shall be assessed to tax at such.rates as are prevalent during the year for which the assessment is being made, and if the rates of tax are altered during such as sessment year, the dealer, in respect of the turnover of such goods, shall be liable to pay tax at the altered rates, as if the altered rates were in force during the previous year also proportionately for the number of days involved as they were in force during the assessment year.
According to sub section (2) of that section the assessments made at the enhanced rates in accordance with the notification dated April 9, 1948 were to be deemed to be good and valid as if they had been duly made and as if the amendment made by the insertion of section 31 had been in force on all material dates.
It was expressly provided by the sub section that that was to be so notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court.
The High Court quashed the order of assessment on the ground that the Revising Authority was not free to take a different view from the one expressed by it (High Court) on any ground whatsoever, including the ground of any subse quent amendment of the law.
Allowing the Appeal to this Court, HELD: There is nothing wrong with the view taken by the Revising Authority.
When section 31 of the Act is valid, and is retroactive .and the Legislature has shown the intention of restoring the assessments and orders made before the amendment as good and valid in law as if they had been duly made.
that was enough to set the controversy at rest.
The amendment made by section 31 was retroactive and applied to assessments pending or closed as if the Amending Act had been in force at all material times.
[554C D; 552C] Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P.v.
Bijli Cotton Mills, Hathras; , referred to.
(a) Section 31 was sought to be applied to the facts of the case when the Additional Judge (Revisions) was in seisin of the case for the purpose of passing the necessary orders to dispose it of finally in conformity with the judgment of 549 the High Court.
If he had passed an order under section 11(6) of the Act as directed by the High Court, that would have been of no consequence and would have been inoperative because of section 31(2).
[553B C & F]
