The appellant was tried by the Sessions Judge with the aid of assessors for an offence under section 409, I.P.C. for misappropriating certain sums of money received as promoter of a Company from three ,different persons for the purpose of allotment of shares and omitted to be brought into the Company after it was formed, and also for an offence under section 477 A, I.P.C. by the same Sessions Judge with the aid of a jury for the offence of falsifying a minute book, the same persons acting both as assessors and jurors.
They returned a verdict of not guilty in respect of both the charges.
The Sessions Judge, disagreeing with the verdict of the jury under section 477 A, referred the matter to the High Court under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Disagreeing also with the opinion of the assessors in respect of the charge under section 409, I.P.C. he held the appellant guilty and sentenced him to 4 years ' rigorous imprisonment.
Against this conviction the appellant appealed to the High Court.
Both the reference under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the appeal were heard together by the High Court which confirmed the appellant 's conviction under section 409 and the sentence passed by the Sessions Judge and disagreeing with the verdict of the jury it held him guilty under section 477 A and sentenced him to two years ' rigorous imprisonment.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court: Held (i) that the contention that when the Sessions Judge disagreed with the verdict of the jury and the opinion of the assessors, 1036 he should have referred the whole case under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to the High Court and not merely that part of it which related to the charge under section 477 A, I.P.C. was without force because the Sessions Judge had contravened no provision of law and committed no illegality in deciding the case which related to the charge under section 409, I.P.C.
That section 307, Code of Criminal Procedure applies in terms only to trials by a jury and the Sessions Judge had no power under that section to refer cases tried with the aid of assessors for the decision of the High Court.
In the present case there was the further fact that both the appeal against the conviction under section 409, I.P.C. and the reference under section 307 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in respect of the charge under section 477 A were disposed of by the same judgment; (ii)that the contention that the appellant 's true status was that of a servant and not that of an agent and that he should have been tried not under section 409, I.P.C. but under section 408, I.P.C. was also without force inasmuch as his status was that of an agent and not that of a servant in view of his duties as Secretary of the Society.
The distinction between the two is this a servant acts under the direct control and supervision of the master, and is bound to con form to all reasonable orders given to him in the course of his work.
An agent though bound to exercise his authority in accordance with all lawful instructions which may be given to him from time to time by his principal, is not subject in its exercise to the direct control or supervision of the principal; (iii)that the contention that there had been violation of section 234 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in that the appellant had been charged with three offences under section 409, I.P.C. and one under section 477 A was also without force as the case was governed by section 235 of the Code of Criminal Procedure as the several offences under section 409, I.P.C. and section 477 A, I.P.C. arose out of the same acts and formed part of the same transaction.
Emperor vs Haria Dhobi, (A.I.R. 1937 Patna 662), Pachaimuthu In re, ([1932] I.L.R. , Emperor vs Lachman Gangota, (A.I.R. 1934 Patna 424), Emperor vs Kalidas, ([1898] , Emperor vs Vyankat Sing ([1907] and Emperor vs Chanbasappa (A.I.R. , referred to.
