Consequent to reorganisation of States, the Maharash tra Government published seniority lists from time to time, erroneously according to the respondent a lower place of seniority with the result that juniors got promoted and his promotion was unduly delayed.
The respondent filed a writ petition asking for due recognition of his seniority, and later amended his petition, claiming arrears of pay and allowances retrospectively from the date on which he ought to have been promoted according to the final gradation list wherein he was placed correctly and which was approved by the Central Government.
The writ petition was allowed by the High Court.
Before this Court the respondent contended that under rule 21 of the Allocated Government Servants (Absorption, Seniority, Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1957, he was entitled to draw his pay and allowances from the date of his promo tion including the deemed date of promotion.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The Maharashtra Government circular No. SRV 1064 dt.
25.2.1965 does not have the effect of altering the respondent 's conditions of service to his prejudice since the said circular issued by the State Government does not fall within the mischief of proviso to section 115(7) of the States Reorganisation Act.
[592 A] (2) The circular deals with cases where Government servants who were superseded for promotion to the higher post are later promoted on orders of higher authorities who considered the supersession unjustified and who having power to set aside orders of supersession have set aside such orders.
[590 D] (3) The circular dt.
25.2.1965 is not intended to govern questions of seniority and supersession arising as a result of Reorganisation of States.
That circular by its language is designed to meet cases in which a Government servant apart from the provisions of States Reorganisation Act and apart from the problems arising out of reorganisa tion of States was denied his rightful seniority but is later accorded a due and appropriate place in the seniority list.
[590 F G] (4) The circular issued by the Government of Maharashtra on February 25, 1965 does not take away from the respondent the right, if any, which was available to him under rule 21.
Rule 21 is not in the nature of an entitlement.
On the other hand, it restricts the right of the allocated Government servant to receive pay and allowances "only with effect from the date" from which he became available for service or would have been so available except for the causes mentioned in rule 2(d).
[592 B D] 588 (5) The respondent 's case must fall within the Bombay Government Circular No. SR INT 1059 VI dt. 10.3.1960 in which case he would not be entitled to the arrears for salary for the period prior to the date of his actual ' promotion.
[591 G]
