The constitutional validity of the Madhya Pradesh Dharma Swatantraya Adhiniyam, 1968, was challenged in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and the constitutional validity of the Orissa Freedom of Religion Act, 1967 was challenged in the High Court of Orissa.
The two Acts prohibit forcible conversion and make the offence punishable.
The Madhya Pradesh High Court upheld the validity of the Act.
The Orissa High Court held that article 25(2) of the Constitution guarantees propogation of religion and conversion is a part Christian religion; that the State Legislature has no power to enact the impugned legislation which in pith and sub stance is a law relating to religion; and that entry 97 of List I would apply.
Upholding the validity of both the Acts, HELD: (1) Article 25 guarantees to all persons right to freedom and conscience and the right freely to profess, practice and propogate religion subject to public order, morality and health.
The word 'propogate ' has been used in the Article as meaning to transmit or spread from person to person or from place to place.
The Article does not grant right to convert other person to one 's own religion but to transmit or spread one 's religion by an exposition of its tenets.
The freedom of religion enshrined in article 25 is not guaranteed in respect of one religion only but covers all religions alike which can be properly enjoyed by a person if he exercises his right in a manner commensurate with the like freedom of persons following other religion.
What is freedom for one is freedom for the other in equal measure and there can, therefore, be no such thing as a fundamental right to convert any person to one 's own religion.
[616 B F, 617 A B] (2) The Madhya Pradesh Act prohibits conversion from one religion to another by use of force, allurement or fraudu lent means and matters incidental thereto.
Similarly, the Orissa Act prohibits conversion by the use of force or by inducement or by any fraudulent means.
Both the statutes, therefore, clearly provide for the maintenance of public order because if forcible conversion had not been prohibited that would have created public disorder in the States.
The expression "public order" has a wide connotation.
[617 C E] Ratilal Panachand Gandhi vs The State of Bombay & Ors. ; Ramesh Thappar vs The State of Madras ; ; Ramjilal Modi vs State of U.P. ; and Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal ; , followed.
(3) If an attempt is made to raise communal passions, e.g. on the ground that someone has been forcibly converted to another religion it would in all probability give rise to an apprehension of a breach of the public order affecting the community at large The impugned Acts therefore fall within the purview of Entry 1 of List II of the Seventh Schedule as they are meant to avoid 5 112SCI/77 612 disturbance to the public order by prohibiting conversion from one religion to another in a manner reprehensible to the conscience of the community.
The two Acts do not provide for the regulation of religion and do not fall under Entry 97 of List I. [618 A C]
