The appellants held the post of Shambhogues on hereditary basis under the Mysore Village Offices Act 1908.
This Court in the case of Gowla Dasrath Ramarao held that a law which recognises the custom by which a preferential right to an office vested in the members of a particular family was not consistant with the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 16 of the Constitution and that the Madras Hereditary Village Offices Act of 1895 in so far as it made discrimina tion on the ground of descent only was violative of Article 16(2) of the Constitution and, therefore, void.
With a view to give effect to the said judgment of this Court Mysore Village Offices Abolition Act of 1961 was enacted abol ishing all the hereditary Village Offices including the office of Shambhogues or Village Accountants created under the Mysore Villages Offices Act 1908.
The President gave his assent to the said Act.
Thereafter, the Governor of Mysore framed Mysore General Services (Revenue Subordinate Branch) Village Accountants (Cadre and Recruitment) Rules, 1961, to regulate the recruitment, pay and other conditions of service of Village Accountants.
Rule 10 provided for the initial recruitment to the post of Village Accountants to be made from amongst persons holding posts of Village Offi cers on the date of commencement of those rules provided they fulfilled certain educational qualifications and were below a certain age Challenge to the constitutional validi ty of the said Act was negatived by this Court in the case of B.R. Shankaranarayana & Ors.
vs State of Mysore AIR.
The State Legislature enacted the Karnataka Land Revenue Act 1964 Section 16 of the said Act provides for the appointment of Village Accountants and the continu ance of Village Accountants hold the said post immediately before the commencement of the Act.
Section 16(e) provides that persons holding the office of the Village Accountant before the commencement of the Act shall be deemed to be village Accountants for such villages till other persons were appointed.
The 1961 rules were repealed and replaced by Karnataka General Services (Revenue Subordinate Branch) Village Accountants (Recruitment) Rules.
Rules 4 and 5 lay down the eligibility of the persons for the ap pointment as Village Accountant .and the constitution of a Committee for selection and the method of selection.
The Recruitment Committee invited applications, interviewed the applicants who were eligible and prepared a list of selected Candidates and, thereafter, issued the order of appointment.
As the appellants had to give up their posts in consequence of the fresh appointments they filed the present writ peti tions impugning the validity of rules 4 and 5 of the 1970 Rules on the ground that they were violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and challenging the selection and appointment of respondents Nos. 3 to 191 as Village Ac countants and for a direction that they should be continued as Village Accountants.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.
Though Article 226 of the Constitution in terms does not describe the classes of persons entitled to apply thereunder, the existence of the right is implicit for invoking the exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction by the High Court under the said Article.
It is well estab lished that a person who 627 is not aggrieved by the discrimination complained of cannot maintain a writ petition.
The constitutional validity of the Abolition Act abolishing all hereditary Village Offices having been upheld by this Court, the appellants who did not apply for appointment as Village Accountants in response to the notification inviting applications, since they did not possess the.
prescribed qualifications, could not complain of the unconstitutionality of the 1972 Rules or of the infringement of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The High Court, therefore, was right in holding that the appellants have no right to maintain the writ petitions.
[631 E H 632 A]
