Rule 23 of the Assam Agricultural Income tax Rules, 1939 provides that where an order apportioning the liability to the tax on the basis of partition has not been passed in respect of a Hindu undivided family hitherto.
assessed as undivided or joint, such family shall be deemed, to continue to be a Hindu undivided or joint family.
The assessee was the Karta of a Hindu undivided family, which was assessed to agricultural income tax in respect of income derived from the manufacture and sale of tea.
The assessee contended before the Agricultural Income tax Officer that, since there was disruption of the Hindu undi vided family, no agricultural income tax was payable exen though agricultural income had arisen from tea estates.
This plea was rejected.
His petition under article 226 of the Constitution impugning the validity of r. 23 had been dis missed by the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that (i) after the dissolution of the family no assessment order could be made under r. 23 in respect of such disrupted Hindu Undi vided family (ii) the State Government had no power to make a rule for the assessment of a Hindu undivided family after a partition took place in the family.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: (1) The language of r. 23 clearly warrants the conclusion that in the absence of an order apportioning the liability to tax on the basis of partition in respect of a Hindu undivided family hitherto assessed as undivided or joint, such family shall ,be deemed, for the purpose of the Act to continue to be a Hindu Undivided family.
No order apportioning the liability to, tax on ' the basis of the alleged partition having been passed, the family shall continue be treated as a Hindu undivided family.
[651 C F] 2(a) The liability for tax having been created by the charging section, the rule deals with the question as to who should be the person that should be assessed to tax.
This is a matter of detail to carry out the purposes of the and the State Government was well within its competence to make the rule in exercise of its rule making power.
[652 C D] (b) The fact that.
unlike the Income tax Act, there is no statutory provision in the Act and the matter is dealt with by the rules, would not make any material difference.
The rules would be as much binding as would be statutory provision in t,his respect.
[652 E F] (c) It is well settled that it is not unconstitutional for the legislature to leave it to the executive to deter mine the details relating to the working of taxation laws.
such as selection of persons on whom the tax is to be levied.
the rate at which it is to be charged in respect of different classes of goods and the like.
[652 G H] Pt.
Banarsi Das vs State of Madhya Pradesh [1959] S.C.R. 427, followed.
Powell vs Appollo Candle Company Limited [1885] 10 A.C. 282 and Syed Mobgreed & Co. vs The State of Madras 3 S.T.C. 367, referred to. 646
