Pursuant to the departmental enquiry conducted by the High Court and on its recommendation, the Gujarat Governor dismissed the respondent from the service of Registrar, Small Causes Court, Ahmedabad.
The respondent challenged by way of a writ the said order contending: (1) The High Court was not his appointing authority and he being the member of general State service, the High Court has no authority to initiate proceedings, the appointment of the enquiry offi cer, framing of charges of misconduct and taking discipli nary proceedings etc.
(2) The High Court has no authority to direct further enquiry to be made in respect of recording the statement of one Mr. Bhatt, an advocate or to consider the reports made by the enquiry officer and come to the conclusion about his guilt or to issue show cause notice of punishment.
(3) The direction of the High Court that the statement 0f Mr. Bhatt is recorded was passed without hear ing the petitioner and this violated the rules of natural justice.
(4) The failure to give copies of certain documents demanded by the petitioner deprived him of a reasonable opportunity to defend himself and, therefore, the enquiry was contrary to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitu tion; and (5) .The impugned order was passed by the Govern ment without consulting the Public Service Commission and the same was illegal and bad in law.
The High Court held: (1 ) The post of the Registrar of Small Causes Court does not fall within the expression "judicial service" within the meaning of article 235 and (2) The High Court has no disciplinary jurisdiction over the Registrar in view of the fact that the High Court is not the "appointing authority".
Accepting the State 's appeal by certificate and remitting the case, the Court, HELD: (1 ) The Registrar of the Court of .Small Causes is a person holding a civil judicial post inferior to the post of District Judge and he is in judicial service.
Sections 9(1), 13 14, 33 to 36 of the indicate in no uncertain manner that the Registrar of Small Causes Court exercises judicial powers, Inasmuch as the Registrar Small Causes Court exer cises his judicial function, he is a judicial officer in judicial service and comes within the scope and intent of article 235 and 236.
[711 H, 712 G H] (2) The High Court was in error in considering the question of "appointing authority" as relevant in regard to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the High Court and also in holding that it had no power to order disciplinary proceed ings.
The High Court abdicated its own disciplinary juris diction.
The High Court is the competent authority to hold departmental enquiries.
[711 D E, 713 A C].
High Court of Punjab & Haryana etc.
vs State of Haryana and Ors.
; and Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab ; , referred to.
711 (3) In the instant case the enquiry was contrary to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution due to the fail ure to give copies of certain documents demanded by the Registrar, thus deprived him of a reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
[713 G]
