The appellant was owner of the suit land.
The appel lant 's wife sold this land to respondent No 1.
Thereafter, the appellant made an application under section 70(b) of the Bombay Tenancy & Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, for a decla ration that he was a tenant of two of the 4 plots of the land.
The dispute went up to the Maharashtra Revenue Tribu nal who rejected the claim of the appellant to tenancy.
Thereafter, the respondent filed an application under sec tion 70(b) of the said Act praying for a declaration that the appellant was not a tenant in respect of the remaining two survey numbers also.
The respondent alleged that he never leased the land to the appellant and that he came to know of the entry of the record of rights for the year 1955 56 on the strength of mutation alleged to have been made on 30.1.1966.
The respondent was cross examined and it was suggested to him that he had made an admission in previ ous deposition although the said deposition was not shown to the respondent.
After the cross examination of the respond ent was over, a certified copy of the said deposition was placed on record.
Thereafter the appellant was examined and he relied on the extract of the record of rights.
The Mamlatdar rejected the claim of the appellant to be a tenant which was confirmed by the Deputy Collector.
The Maharash tra Revenue Tribunal held in exercise of its revisional powers that the appellant was proved to be a tenant of the land and set aside the concurrent findings of the two au thorities below.
In a writ petition filed by the respondent under article 227 of the Constitution the High Courts set aside the order of the Revenue Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal by Special Leave, HELD : 1.
Admission on which reliance has been placed by the appellant suffers from 3 infirmities: (i) Earlier deposition related to two different survey numbers.
Whatever was stated about another survey number is irrelevant and inadmissible.
Since under section 17 of the Indian Evidence Act an admission is a statement, oral or documentary, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact.
(ii) In fact there was no admission in the earlier proceed ings; and (iii) The deposition was not brought to the notice of re spondent when he was being cross examined.
Privy Council has laid down in the case of Bal Gangadhar Tilak that before any person is to be faced with any statement he should be given an opportunity to see that statement and to answer the statement.
[673 E, 674 A C, 675 A E] Bal Gangadhar Tilak vs Shrinivas Pandit 42 Indian Ap peals 135 at page 147, applied.
There is a presumption about the correctness of the record of rights.
However, there is no abstract principle that whatever will appear in the Record of Rights will be presumed to be correct.
In the present case it is shown by evidence that the entries are not correct.
[676 B D] 672 3.
Under section 76 of the Act power of Tribunal to interfere is limited.
There was no error of law on the face of the record.
If the authority entrusted with adjudication goes into the question and assesses the same, the decision may 'be right or wrong but that will not go to show that there is any error of law on the face of record.
[676 E, 677 A B]
