After the reorganisation of the States a separate sen iority list was prepared by the State of Bombay for History and Political Science teachers.
On 20.8.1963, the Director of Education issued a letter conveying the decision of Government to amalgamate the list of lecturers in History and Lecturers in Political Science and to prepare a single seniority list for both the subjects.
It was expressly stated in the letter that it was issued in pursuance of the decision of the State Government.
Thereafter a revised seniority list was prepared.
One Nanekar filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the said order on the ground that when two separate seniority lists had been prepared for the departments of History & Political Science in accordance with the earlier Government Order of 1960.
the new list was invalid.
The High Court took the view that the existence of the Government resolution dated 27.2.1963, which was said to be the authority for the issue of Direc tor 's letter dated 20.8.1963, had not been proved.
It therefore held that there Was no such resolution or.
order requiring the preparation of a combined seniority list.
It decided that the earlier order of 1960 requiring the prepa ration of separate list of History and Political Science continued to be operative.
It however dismissed the writ petition filed by Nanekar on the ground that he could not claim to be the seniormost person in his department In the present writ petition filed by B.K. Joshi and P.S. Kane the High Court followed its decision in Nanekar 's case and held that there was no order or decision dated 27.2.1963 so that the action of amalgamating the list of ' History and PoLit ical Science departments was invalid.
A resolution was taken on 15.1.1970 in which it was mentioned that the earli er decision to amal gainate the two categories was given up on account of the difficulties which were experienced and an option was given by the 1970 resolution in order to obviate those difficulties.
That resolution was challenged in the present proceedings.
The High Court examined the effect of the Government Resolution dated 15.1.1970 and held that in the absence of the earlier resolution dated 27.2.1963 the Director of Education was not competent to combine or amal gamate the seniority lists of History and Political Science Departments.
It assumed that legally there was no amalga mation at all and any action taken on the basis of the amalgamation would also consequently have to fall on that ground.
The High Court held that the option given by the 1970 resolution had the effect of perpetuating the effect of the working of the invalid list and amounted to violation of article 16 of the Constitution.
The High Court held that in Nanekar 's case no attempt was made to produce the resolution of 27.2.1963: Allowing the appeals, Held: 1: The High Court erred in observing that the resolution of 27.2.1963 did not exist.
The High Court lost sight of the intrinsic evidence which was available on the record to prove beyond doubt that Government had passed the resolution on 27.2.1963 to amalgamate the two lists.
In the 1970 resolution, the Government itself reiterated the act that a decision was taken by Government in the year 1963 to amalgamate the lists of Lecturers in History and the Lecturers in Political Science into one common list.
The reason for taking that decision to amalgamate the two lists was also stated in that resolution. ' In fact the 1970 reso lution made a mention of the difficulties experienced in working the 1963 resolution and that was why it was decided to revert to the decision to split up the combined seniority 'list which formed the basis of promotion of some of the teachers.
As the genuineness of the resolution of 1970 was 783 not challenged, the High Court ought to have taken notice of its intrinsic evidentiary value for the purpose of proving the earlier resolution of 1963.
In fact the Director in his order specifically stated that the decision of the Government to amalgamate the two lists had to be brought to the notice of all concerned.
The combined seniority list, was therefore fully authorised and there was nothing wrong if it formed the basis of the subsequent promotions.
[787 G H, 788 A E] 2.
No exception could be taken to the decision of the Government to give option to the Lecturers to elect either of the two departments.
The decision to amalgamate the seniority lists of the two departments was not taken in consultation with them and if they were required to teach History or Political Science and were promoted as Professor of History or Political Science on the basis of combined seniority list for which they themselves were not responsi ble, it would have been unfair if they had been required to serve in another depart.meat by a unilateral executive fiat.
