While the respondent was travelling in his car, the appel lant 's truck, driven by a driver, hit the car and caused injuries to the respondent and damaged the car.
The Claims Tribunal awarded compensation to the respondent, and the High Court upheld the Tribunal 's award.
In the course of the judgment the High Court, however, observed that every person has a right to security and safety of his person irrespective of the fault or negligence or carelessness and that every person has a right to claim compensation, irre spective of proof of negligence on the part of the driver.
It further observed that the perimeters of liability in cls.
(i) and (ii) of section 95(1)(b) must be held to be the same because in both, the liability of the owner of the driver exists and is made compulsorily insurable and that it could not be said that the legislature intended absolute liability in cases covered by cl.
(ii) and not in cases covered by cl.
HELD: Proof of negligence is necessary before the owner or the insurer could be held liable for payment of compensa tion in motor vehicle accident claims.
The High Court 's views are opposed to basic principles of the owner 's liabil ity for negligence of his servant and are based on a com plete misreading of the provisions of Chapter VIII of the .Motor Vehicles Act.
[900 F] 1.
Before a person can be made liable to pay compensa tion for any injuries and damage caused by his action.
it is necessary that the person injured should be able to establish that he has some cause of action against the party responsible.
In order to succeed in an action for negligence the plaintiff must prove (1) that the defendant had, in the circumstances, a duty to, take care and that duty was owed by him to the plaintiff and (2) that there .was a breach of that duty and that as a result of the breach damage was suffered by the plaintiff.
The master also becomes liable for the conduct of the servant when the servant is proved to have acted negligently in the course of his employment.
[895 C D] 2(a) The purpose of making insurance compulsory is to protect the interests of the successful claimant from being defeated by the owner of the vehicle who has not enough means to meet his liability.
The safeguard is provided by imposing certain statutory duties, namely, the duty not to.
drive or permit a car to be driven unless the car is covered by third party insurance.
1895 F] (b) Under section 95(1)(b)(i) of the Act, the policy of insurance must be a policy which insures against any liabil ity which may be incurred in respect of death or bodily injury to any person or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place.
The accident to which the owner or the person insuring is liable is to the extent of his liability in respect of death or bodily injury and that liability is covered by the insurance.
It is, therefore, obvious that if the owner has not incurred any liability in respect of death or bodily injury to any person there is no liability and it is not intended to be covered by the insurance.
The liabil ity contemplated arises under the law of negligence and under the principle of vicarious liability.
The provisions of the section do not make the owner or the insurance compa ny liable for any bodily injury caused to a third party arising out of the use of the vehicle unless the liability can be fastened on him.
[896 D F] 887 (c) Under sub cl.
(ii) of section 95(1)(b) of the Act the policy of insurance must insure a person against death or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place.
So far as the bodily injury caused to a passenger is concerned it need not be due to any act or liability incurred by the person.
The expression "liability which may be incurred by him" in sub. cl.
(i) is meant to cover any liability arising out of the use of the vehicle.
Therefore, the person must be under a liability and that liability alone is covered by the insurance policy.
[896 F H] (d) The owner 's liability arises out of his failure to discharge a duty cast on him by law.
The right to receive compensation can only be against a person who is bound to compensate due to the failure to perform a legal obliga tion.
If a person is not liable legally he is under no duty to compensate any one else.
The Claims Tribunal is a tribu nal constituted by the State Government for expeditious disposal of the motor vehicles claims.
The general law applicable is only common law and the law of torts.
If under the law a person becomes legally liable then the person suffering the injuries is entitled to be compensated and the tribunal is authorised to determine the amount of compensation which appears to be just.
The plea that the Claims .Tribunal is entitled to award compensation which appears to be just when it is satisfied on proof of injury to a third party arising out of the use of a vehicle on a public place without proof of negligence, if accepted, would lead to strange results.
[897 E F] 3.
The power to constitute one or more Motor Vehicle Claims Tribunals under section 110(1) is optional and the State Government may not constitute a Claims Tribunal for certain areas.
When a claim includes a claim for compensation, the claimant has an option to make his claim before the Civil Court.
In claims for compensation, therefore, in certain cases, Civil Courts also have jurisdiction.
If the contention put forward is accepted so far as the Civil Court is concerned, it would have to determine the liability of the owner on the basis of common law or torts while the Claims Tribunal can award compensation without reference to common law or torts and without coming to the conclusion that the owner is liable The concept of owner 's liability without any negligence is opposed to the principles of law.
The mere fact that a party received an injury arising out of the use of a vehicle in a public place, cannot justify fastening liability on the owner.
It may be that a person bent upon committing suicide may jump before a car in motion and thus get himself killed.
In such cases, the owner cannot be made liable.
Proof of negligence remains the lynch pin to recover compensation.
[897 H; 898 A B] Haji zakariaand others vs Naoshir Cama and others A.I.R. 1976 A.P.171 and New India Assurance Co Ltd. vs Sumitra Devi and others , not approved.
Kesavan Nair vs State Insurance Officer, and M/s. Ruby Insurance Co. Ltd. vs V. Govindaraj and others, A.A.O. 607 of 1973 and 296 of 1974 decided by the Madras High Court on December 13, 1976 referred to.
