The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities (Maharashtra Conditions of Detention) Order, 1974 provides that security prisoners shall not be allowed to supplement their diet even at their own expense, restricts the security prisoner from receiving funds from relatives and friends; restricts the number of meetings with relatives and friends and medical attention is allowed only through the Medical Officer of the prison in the same way as a convicted criminal and so on.
Writ Petitions field by the detenus under articles 226, and 227 of the Constitution, two High Courts .have struck down the Order as ultra vires.
On appeal it was contended by the State that the right of a person to move.
any Court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by articles 14, 19, 21 and 22 of the Constitu tion having been suspended by the Presidential Orders of June 27, 1975 and January 8, 1976 issued under article 359(1) for the period during which the Proclamation of Emergency was inforce, no person had locus Mandi to move an appli cation under article 226 for the 'issue of a writ to enforce any right to personal liberty.
Allowing the appeals, (per Ray, C.J. and Jaswant Singh, J.) HELD: The Writ Petitions were not maintainable and the High Courts were clearly in error in passing the impugned directions which were not warranted by any relevant law including the law relating to preventive detention.
[732 D] 1.
It is well settled by the decisions of this Court that if a person was deprived of his personal liberty not under the 'Defence of India Act, 1962 or any rule or order made thereunder but in contravention thereof, his locus standi to move any court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by articles 21 and 22 was not barred.
On the other hand since the Presidential Orders dated June 27, 1975 and January 8, 1976 were not circumscribed by any limitation, their applicability was not made dependent upon the fulfil ment of any conditions precedent.
They imposed a total or blanket ban on the enforcement of the fundamental rights conferred by articles 19, 21 and 22.
There is,therefore, no room for doubt that these Presidential Orders unconditional ly suspended the enforceability of the right conferred upon any person, including a foreigner, to move any Court for the enforcement of the rights conferred by articles 14, 19, 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
[742 E, G H] Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur vs Shiva Kant Shukla , Makhan Singh vs State of Punjab , State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sanz giri [1966] 1 S.C.R. 702 A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 424, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar 1966 S.C. 740, A.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras and Kharak Singh vs State of U.P. [1964] 1 S.C.R. 332 A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1295, followed, 720 2.
When a person has no locus standi to move any Court to challenge his order of detention, the High Court could not issue directions disregarding the provisions of the Act, which is a self contained code, and particularly sections 5 and 12(6) which are mandatory.
[745 F H] Maqbool Hussain vs The State of Bombay ; , followed.
As Articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Constitution have been suspended during the operation of the Proclamation of Emergency, the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Preven tion of Smuggling Activities Act and the orders made or passed thereunder were not open to challenge on the ground of their being inconsistent with or repugnant to articles 14, 19, 21 and 22 of the Constitution in view of the Presiden tial Orders, dated June 27, 1975 and January 8, 1976.
[742 G H] In the instant case the detenus covertly sought to enforce the vary rights which were suspended.
It was not open to the High Courts to strike down the impugned clauses of the Maharashtra Conditions of Detention Order 1974.
The avowed object of the Act, as mainrest from its preamble, being the conservation and augmentation of foreign exchange and the prevention of smuggling activities secretly organised and carried on, it is essential that contact 0f the detenus with the outside world should be reduced to the minimum.
It is for the State Governments who are in full possession of all material facts and not for the Courts who have neither the necessary knowledge of the facts nor the.
legal competence, to regulate conditions of detention Of persons, including their maintenance, interviews or communi cations with others.
[746 A C] 5.
When a person is detailed, he can exercise only such privileges as are conferred on him by the order of detention or by the rules governing his detention.
State of Maharashtra vs Prabhakar Pandurang Sanzgiri [1966] I SCR 702AIR 1966 S.C. 424 referred to.
The mere fact that a detenu is confined in a prison for the sake of administrative convenience does not entitle him to be treated as a civil prisoner or to be governed by the provisions of the Prisons Act.
The view of the High Courts to the contrary cannot be sustained.
[746 D E] Maqbool Hussatn vs The State of Bombay ; , followed.
The contention that the Presidential Orders did not bar the Court from examining the vires of the detention orders because what was sought to be enforced was not a right of personal liberty but a redress against unreasona bleness of the order was misconceived.
The Presidential Orders imposed a blanket ban on every judicial enquiry into the validity of an order depriving a person of his personal liberty irrespective of whether it stems from the initial order directing his detention or from an order laying down the conditions in his detention.
[743 A E] Additional District Magistrate, .Jabalpur vs Shiva Kant Shukla followed.
(Per Beg.
J.) Concurring.
721 The High Courts, acting under article 226 have not been given the power to interfere in any matter involving the assertion or enforcement of a right to personal freedom by the detenus during an Emergency, when exercise of such power by the High Courts is suspended.
In times of Emergency the remedy for all the grievances of the detenus lies with the executive and administrative authorities of the State.
[754 B C] 1.
Shukla 's case held that 'it was not the fundamental rights which were suspended by the Presidential Order under article 359 but the right to move any Court for the enforcement of such right conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in the Order which is suspended for the duration of_the Emer gency.
This mean that it is the 'jurisdiction of Courts, to the extent to which a petitioner seeks to enforce the funda mental rights mentioned in the Presidential Order, which is suspended.
[749 G H] Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur vs Shivakant Shukla AIR 1976 SC 1283, applied.
A.K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; , Kharak Singh vs State of U.P., [1964] 1 SCR 332, 1.
C. Golakanath vs State of Punjab ; His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp.
SCR 1 and Haradhan Saha vs The State of West Bengal & Ors., [1975] (1) SCR 778 AIR 1974 SCR 154 referred to.
The term "any other purpose" in article 226 means pur poses similar to those for which one of the specified writs would issue subject to certain exceptions The writ of habeas corpus is wider in scope than the enfrocement of fundamen tal rights which are available against the State only and its officers and agents.
But so far as mere directions or orders for any other purpose are concerned, the jurisdiction of High Courts does not extend to making orders against private individuals.
On the other hand, if an officer is duly empowered and has passed a detention order, that order is not capable of being questioned under article 226.
All enquiry into the conditions of exercise of such.
power is barred under the constitutional provisions during the emer gency.
[750 D E, H, 751 A, C D] 3.
In the instant case the remedy sought was clearly covered by the Presidential inhibition which operates against the High Courts.
The claims made by the detenus were not matters which the High Court could consider in petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
[751 E F] 4.
If the object of a proceeding is to enforce the fundamental right, to personal freedom, a High Court 's jurisdiction under article 226 is barred during an Emergency even if it involved adjudication on the question of vires of a rule made under enactments authorising preventive deten tion.
It is impossible to invalidate a rule either intended for or used for regulating the conditions of detention of a person detained under one of the Acts authorising preven tive detention on the ground that the rule could only be used for persons in punitive detention.
The attack on the validity of such a rule cannot succeed on the ground that the object of the rule should be shown to be preventive and not punitive.
[754 E F] 5.
Shukla 's case indicates that articles 19 and 21 embrace every aspect of an alleged infringement of the right of personal freedom by a State authority or officer purporting to act under a law.
Even if the action violates, a protec tion conferred by article 21 upon citizens as well as non citizens in ordinary times, the result of the suspension, of the protection given by article 21 must necessarily be that the protection cannot be enforced during an Emergency.
If that be the effect of the Presidential declaration under article 359, the Court cannot go behind this declaration of law and the express letter of the law as embodied in the Constitu tion and enforce what may be covered by the right to person al freedom in ordinary times whether it parades under the guise of natural law or statutory law or constitutional law.
[755 F H] 722
