Punjab Land Reforms Act, 1972 included in the protec tive umbrella of the Ninth Schedule, subsequent to the decision of the High Court declaring certain provisions thereof as unconstitutional article 3lB being retrospective is entitled to the immunity conferred by it.
U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act (Act No. 1) 1971 as amended by Act No. 18 of 1973 and Act No. 2 of 1975, all included in the, Ninth Schedule The question, whether section 5(6) is violative of second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A of the Constitution cannot be assailed by reason immunity enacted in article 31B. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling of Holdings) Act, 1961 which was enacted in implementation of the Direc tive Principles of State Policy contained in clauses (b) and (c) of article 39 of the Constitution imposed a maximum ceiling on the holding of agricultural land in the State of Maha rashtra and provided for the acquisition of land held in excess of the ceiling and for the distribution of such excess land to landless and other persons with a view to securing the distribution of agricultural land in a manner which would best observe the common good of the people.
Maharashtra Amendment Act 21 of 1975 effected radical amend ments in the principal Act by lowering the ceiling on agri cultural holding and created a concept of artificial family unit for fixing ceiling on holdings of agricultural land.
The person as defined in s.2(22) r/w. s.2(11) and his spouse and their minor daughters were clubbed together for the purpose of constituting a family unit as defined in the Explanation to s.4 sub section (1) and all lands held by each member of the family unit whether jointly or separately were aggregated together, and by a fiction of law deemed to be held by the family unit.
The appellant landlords in the State of Maharashtra preferred writ petitions in the High Court of Bombay chal lenging the constitutional validity of the Principal .Act, as amended on various grounds since the effect of the provi sions of the principal Act as amended by the three Maharash tra Acts, viz. 21 of 1975, 47 of 1975 and 2 of 1976 was to expropriate a part of the lands belonging to concept of family unit and fixed a ceiling 'on holding of land by such family unit, it was violative of the second proviso to clause (1) article 31A and was not saved by the immunising provision enacted in article 3lB.
The High Court dismissed them.
The main contention was that in so far as the Act created an artificial 791 the petition holding that article 3lB afforded complete immunity to the provisions of the principal Act.
In appeal by special leave to this Court, the appellant contended: (1) On a true construction of article 31B a post constitution enactment such as the Act is protected from invalidation only when it merely transgresses a restriction on legislative competence imposed by any provision of that Part and is therefore inconsistent with such provision.
The larger ground of validation curing generally any incon sistency with any provision of Part III is available only in case of pre constitution legislation.
(ii) The second proviso to clause (1) of article 37A does not confer any Funda mental Right but merely imposes a limitation,on the legisla tive competence of the legislature and, therefore, article 3lB does not exonerate the Act from its obligation to conform with the requirements of the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31.
(iii) To interpret the second proviso as conferring a Fundamental Right would convert the second proviso into a substantive provision and that would be contrary to the well recognised canon of construction that a proviso must be read so as to carve out from the main provision something which would otherwise fall with it and (iv) The Explanation to s.3 of the Constitution (Seven teenth Amendment) Act, 1964 shows that an acquisition made in contravention of the second proviso to clause (i) of Act.
31A is void and does not have the protection of article 3lB. even if the law under which such acquisition is made is included in the Ninth Schedule.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, Held: Per Bhagwati J. (for himself and on behalf of Ray, C.J., Beg and Shinghal, JJ.) (1) The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling of Holdings) Act, 1961 as amended by Maharashtra Acts 21 of 1975, Maha rashtra Act 47 of 1975 and Maharashtra Act 2 of 1976 in so far as it creates an artificial concept of family unit and fixes a ceiling on holding of land by such family unit, does not conflict with the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A. [810 E] (2) It would not be possible to say in the ease of an individual member of the family unit that when any land held by him under his personal cultivation is taken over by the State under the Act by reason of the land deemed to be held by the family unit being in excess of the ceiling limit applicable to the family unit, the acquisition is of any land "within the ceiling limit applicable to him" and hence in such a ease there would be no question of any violation of the provision enacted in the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A in so far as the land held by him is concerned.
It may be that by reason of the creation of an artificial concept of a family unit, one or more members of the family unit may lose the land held by them, but that cannot be helped, because having regard to the social and economic realities of our rural life and with a view to nullifying transfers effected in favour of close relations for the purpose of avoiding the impact of ceiling legislation, a family unit has been taken by the State Legislature as a unit for the applicability of the limitation of ceiling area.
[809 H, 810 A B] (3) Even if the Act, in so far as it introduces an arti ficial concept of a family unit and fixes ceiling on holding of agricultural land by such family unit, is violative of the second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A it is protected by article 31B, by reason of its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule.
[808 F G] Hasmukhlal Dayabhai vs State of Gujarat ; followed.
(4) It is an elementary rule of construction that a statutory provision must always be interpreted in a manner which would suppress the mischief and advance the remedy and carry out the object and purpose of the legislation.
Our Constitution has a social purpose and an economic mission and every Article of the Constitution must, therefore.
be construed so as to advance the social purpose and fulfil the economic mission it seeks to accomplish.
[803 F G] (5) The aim and objective of article 3lB is to make the most comprehensive provision for saving agrarian reform legislation from invalidation on the ground of infraction of any provision in Part III and it must therefore be so inter preted as to have the necessary sweep and coverage.
An expansive interpretation must be placed on the language of article 31B so to carry out the object and purpose of enacting that Article.
[803 F H] 792 (6) Article 3lB is sufficiently wide to protect legisla tion not only where it takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by any provisions of Part but also where it is inconsistent with any such provisions.
[803 H, 804 A] (7) The words "such Act, Regulation or provision is incon sistent with or takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by any provision of this Part" in article 31B are clearly an echo of the language of clauses (1) and (2) of article 13 and they have obviously been employed because the enactments Specified in the Ninth Schedule may be pre con stitution as well as post constitution laws.
But, it would not be right to introduce an artificial dichotomy in article 3lB by correlating the first part of the expression namely, "is inconsistent with . any provisions of this Part" and confining its applicability to pre constitution legislation and correlating and confining the applicability of the other Part of the expression namely "takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by; any provisions of this Part" to post constitution legislation.
Both the parts of the expression, on a plain natural construction of the language of article 3lB apply equally to post constitution legislation as well as pre constitution legislation.
[803 D F] (8) The Second Proviso to clause (1) of article 31A does confer a Fundamental Right.
The second proviso to article 31A confers a right higher than the one under clause (2) of article 31 on a person in respect of such portion of land under his personal cultivation as is within the ceiling limit applica ble to him and if the Act by creating an artificial concept of a family unit and fixing ceiling on holding of agricul tural lands by such family unit enables land within the ceiling limit to be acquired without payment of full market value, it would be taking away or abridging the right conferred by the second proviso, but it would be protected by article 31 B. [804.
B, 806 E] (9) The second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A is also couched in the negative language like clauses (1) and (2) of article 31 and it imposes a fetter on the exercise of the legislative power of the State by providing that the State shall not be entitled to make a law authorising acquisition of land held by a person under his personal cultivation within the ceiling limit applicable to him, unless the law provides for payment, of compensation at a rate not less than the market value.
This limitation on the legislative power of the State is the measure of the fundamental right conferred on the owner of the land.
It is by imposing limi tation on the exercise of legislative power that protection is given to the owner in respect of the land held by him under his personal cultivation within the ceiling limit.
[805 D E] State of Bihar vs Kameshwar Singh .@ 986; R.C. Cooper vs Union of India ; @ 569, reiter ated.
(10) Restriction on legislative competence and conferment of right on the holder of land within the ceiling limit are complementary to each other.
They are merely two different facets of the same provision.
What is limitation of legislative power from the point of view of the State is conferment of right from the point of view of holder of land within the ceiling limit.
The former secures the latter.
The second proviso in effect guarantees protection to the holder against acquisition of that portion of the land which is within the ceiling limit except on payment of the market value of such land.
The second proviso clearly con fers a right to property on a person holding land under his personal cultivation.
[805F G] (11) The Explanation to section 3 of the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act 1964 does no 'more than provide that so far as the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 is concerned, if any acquisition is made under it in contravention of the second proviso to clause (1) of . article 31A, it shall, to the extent of contravention be void.
Obviously this Explanation was rendered necessary, because otherwise, acquisition under the Rajasthan Act, 1955, even if in contravention of thee second proviso to clause (.1) of article 31A would have been valid under article 31B and that result the parliament did not wish to produce.
It was manifestly not the intention of Parliament that acquisition made under any enactment included in the Ninth Schedule should be void where if conflicts with the second proviso to clause (I) of article 31A and that article 3lB should not protect it from invalida tion.
[806 G, 807 F H] 793 (12) It is true that the orthodox function of 'an expla nation is to explain the meaning and effect of the main provision to which it is an explanation and to clear up any doubt or ambiguity in it, but ultimately it is the intention of the legislature which is paramount and mere use of a label cannot control or deflect such intention.
[807 D E] (13) It is true that the proper function of a proviso is to except or qualify something enacted in the substantive clause, which, but for the proviso would be within that clause.
The question is one of interpretation of the proviso and there is no rule that the proviso must always be restricted to the ambit of the main enactment.
[805 H, 806A] Ishwarlal Thakarlal Almania vs Motabhai Nagjibhai [1966] 1 SCR 367 @373, followed.
C.A. 1040/76.
(14) The inclusion of the Punjab Land Reforms Act, 1972, in the Ninth Schedule as entry 78 by the Constitution.(Thirty Fourth Amendment) Act, 1974 subsequent to the decision of the High Court entitles it to the immuni ty conferred by article 3lB.
It does not suffer from any of the constitutional infirmities alleged in the writ petition.
[814 C E] Hasmukhlal vs State of Gujarat ; , applied.
C.A. 1307/76.
(15) Section 5, sub section (6)of the U.P. Imposition.of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act is valid and its constitutional validity cannot be assailed by reason of the immunity enact ed in article 3lB. Section 5(6), even if it contravenes second proviso to clause (1) of article 31A is validated under article 3lB by virtue of inclusion under the protective umbrel la of the Ninth Schedule.[812 C E] Per Krishna Iyer, J. (concurring) (1) The Maharashtra, the Punjab and the U.P. Acts are not unconstitutional taking the constructive view that article 31 B vis a vis agrarian reforms, is a larger testament of vision and values in action and a bridge between individual right and collective good.
[824 B C] (2) The purpose of article 31 B is conferment of total immunity from challenge on the score of violation of Part HI.
The words used are as comprehensive as English lan guage permits.
No land reform law shall be narrowed down by use of Part III, once included in the Ninth Schedule.
No matter what the grounds are, if they are traceable to Part III in whatever form, they fail in the presence of article 3lB.
No master of English legal diction could have used, so tersely, such protean words which in their potent totality bang, bar and bolt the door against every possible invalida tory sally based on Part III.
It is not correct to argue that the phraseology of article 3lB must be correlated to article 13 and read with a truncated connotation.
[817 H, 822 E F, G] (3) Every Fundamental Right, from the point of view of the individual, gives a right and from the stand point of the State is a restraint.
Whether the manner of expression used is in positive terms or negatively, whether the statu tory technique of a proviso, saving clause, exception or explanation, is used of ' 1 direct interdict is imposed, the substantive content is what matters.
Many of the Articles in Part III worded in a variety of ways, arm the affected individual with a right and pro tanto prohibit the legisla ture and the executive from enacting or acting contra.
[823 A B] (4) A great right is created in favour of owners to get compensation at not less than the market value if lands within the ceiling limit and in personal cultivation are acquired by the State.
This is a fundamental right and is a creature of the 2nd proviso to article 31 A(1).
An independ ent provision may occasionally incarnate as a humble provi so.
[823 F G] (5) It is absolutely plain that in the context setting and purpose of a provision even a proviso may function as an independent clause.
[823 G]
