An application was filed by the first respondent under section 162 clauses (v) and (vi) of the Indian Companies Act for the winding up of the Company on the grounds, inter alia, that the affairs of the Company were being mismanaged and that the directors had misappropriated the funds of the Company.
In the alternative it was prayed that action might be taken under section 153 C and appropriate orders be passed to protect the interests of the shareholders.
The High Court held (i) that the charges set out in the application bad been substantially proved and that it was a fit case for an order for winding up being made under section 162(vi) and (ii) that under the circumstances action could be taken under section 153 C and accordingly it appointed two administrators with all the powers of directors to look after the affairs of the Company.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court by the Company it was contended that the 1067 application under section 153 C was not maintainable inasmuch as there was no proof that the applicant had obtained the consent of requisite number of shareholders as provided in sub clause (3)(a)(i) to section 153 C, that clause providing that a member applying for relief must obtain the consent in writing of not less than one hundred members of the Company or not less than one tenth of the members of the Company whichever is less.
It was alleged that thirteen members who had given their consent to the filing of the application had subsequently withdrawn their consent.
Held that the validity of a petition must be judged on the facts as they were at the time of its presentation, and a petition which was valid when presented cannot, in the absence of a provision to that effect in the statute, cease to be maintainable by reason of events subsequent to its presentation.
The withdrawal of consent by thirteen of the members, even if true, could not affect either the right of the applicant to proceed with the application or the juris diction of the court to dispose of it on its own merits.
Held further that before taking action under section 153 C the court must be satisfied that circumstances exist on which an order for winding up could be made under section 162 and where therefore the facts proved do not make out a case for winding up under section 162, no order can be passed under section 153 C.
The words "just and equitable" in section 162(vi) are not to be construed ejusdem generis with the matters mentioned in clauses (i) to (v) of the section.
If there is merely a misconduct of the directors in misappropriating the funds of the Company an order for winding up would not be just and equitable but if in addition to such misconduct, circumstances exist which render it desirable in the interests of the shareholders that the Company should be wound up, section 162(vi) would be no bar to the jurisdiction of the court to make such an order.
The order for winding up was just and equitable in the cir cumstances of the present case.
In re Anglo Greek Steam Company ([1866] L.R. 2 Eq. 1), In re Diamond Fuel Company ([1879] , Spackman 's Case ([1849] 1 M. & G. 170), Be Suburban Hotel Company ([1867] , Be European Life Assurance Society ([1869] I,.
R. , In re Amalgamated Syndicate ([1897] 2 Ch.
600) and Loch vs John Blackwood Ltd. ([1924] A. C. 783, 790), referred to.
