Appellants Nirpal Singh, Gurdev Singh and Jagmohan Singh were convicted under section 302 J.P.C. and sentenced to death while the appellants Devinder Singh, and Maha Singh were convicted under section 302 but sentenced to imprisonment for life by the Sessions Judge.
The High Court upheld the convictions as also the sentences while accepting the refer ence under section 366 made by the Sessions Judge and dismissing the appeals by the accused.
On appeal by special leave, the appellants contended inter alia, that the sentence passed against them was bad as the Sessions Judge, after delivering the judgment of conviction has not given any opportunity to them of being heard on the question of sentence separately.
Dismissing the appeals of Devinder Singh and Maha Singh and partly allowing the appeals of the other three appel lants, the Court maintained their convictions set aside the sentence of death passed on them and remitted their cases to the trial Court for passing sentences on them afresh under section 235(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code.
The Court HELD: (1) Though the commitment inquiry was held under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, since the procedure under section 235(2) has not been adopted by the Sessions Judge, the sentence of death passed on the appellants, Narpal Singh, Gurdev Singh and Jagmohan Singh in the instant case cannot be sustained.
Since Devinder Singh and Maha Singh have already been given sentences of life imprisonment which is the minimum sentence that could be passed under section 302, remetting their cases to the Sessions Judge was not neces sary.
[902 F G, 903 E] Santa Singh vs State of Punjab [1977] 1 S.C.R. 229, reiter ated.
(2) When a case is remitted by this Court to the Ses sions Court for giving a hearing on the question of sentence under section 235(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
there would be fresh evidence and the principle that the Sessions Judge may not act on evidence already recorded before his predecessor and must conduct de novo trial would not be violated.
The ratio of Pyare Lal 's case cannot be applied or projected into the facts and circumstances of the present case or to cases where the trial has ended in a conviction but the matter has been remitted to the trial Court for hearing the case only on the question of sentence.
[903 A D] Pyare Lal vs State of Punjab , distin guished.
