In the 1959 Second Pay Commission Report, the pay scales and the revised pay scales of the Computers were shown as identical with that of the Research Assistants Grade II, even though the 'two posts were shown as separate classes.
The Third Pay Commission Report, however, showed that the Computers not only belonged to a separate class of their own but received less pay than Research Assistants ' Grade II.
The petitioners assailed this view under article 32 of the Constitution as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution on the ground that they had a Fundamental Right to be equated both in status as well as in Day to that of Research Assistants, Grade II.
Dismissing the petition the Court.
HELD: (1) Equation of posts and equation of pay are matters entirely within the sphere of the function of the Pay Commission.
These are questions entirely unfit for determination upon a petition for a writ for the enforcement of Fundamental Rights.
It requires, firstly, formula tion of correct criteria for each classification.
and, secondly.
the application of these criteria to facts relat ing to the functions and the qualifications for each class.
The Pay Commission had done this in the instant case elabo rately,.
B C] (2) The Court, under article 32.
neither has wider powers nor can do it with greater facility than a High Court can not, when exercising its writ issuing jurisdiction.
This Court had already laid down that equation of posts is not a duty which the High Court was competent to carry out in proceedings under article 226.
[913 D] Union of India vs G.R. Prabhavalkar & Co. ; , referred (3) The question, whether there is or there is not enough material on record in a particular case to establish the basis of a particular discrimination is one of fact for the determination of which no hard and fast rules can be laid down.
A discrimination which involves the invocation of article 14 is not necessarily covered by article 16.
In the instant case, even the material relied upon by the petition ers shows the Computers and Research Assistants Grade II are classified separately, and, therefore, the validity of that classification cannot be displaced by the kind of evidence relied on.
Until that classification is shown to be unjus tified, no question of violating Article 16 can arise.
[913 G H, 914 A] Purshottam Lal and Ors.
vs Union of India & Anr.
held inapplicable.
