Under regulation 26(1) if, in the opinion of the Regional Inspector, a person to whom an Overman 's, Sirdar 's, Engine driver 's, Shot firer 's, or Gastesting Certificate has been granted is incompetent or is guilty of negligence or misconduct in the performance of his duties, he may, after giving the person an opportunity to give a written explana tion, suspend his certificate by an order in writing.
U/r 26(2) he shall within a week of such suspension report the fact to the Board together with all connected papers includ ing the explanation, if any received from the person con cerned.
U/r 26(3) the Board may, after such inquiry as it thinks fit, either confirm or modify or reduce the period of suspension of the certificate, or cancel the certificate.
The respondent, a shot firer in a colliery, violated the provisions of the Coal Mines Regulations by entrusting his risky, technical work to an unauthorised person which re sulted in an accident injuring one Bhadu.
The Regional Inspector u/r 26(1) gave him an opportunity for an explana tion in writing and after considering the materials before him forwarded the papers to the Chairman of the Board together with a recommendation for cancellation of the cer tificate under Regulation 26(3).
The Board bestowed its judgment on the materials gathered which included the delin quent 's admission, and cancelled the shot firing certifi cate.
The High Court allowed the writ petition assailing the orders of cancellation of the licence and held: (1) The Board had no jurisdiction since the Regional Inspector did not suspend the certificate first before reporting (2) The Regional Inspector had no power to recommend but only to report and so the Board 's order influenced by the recommen dation was bad in law and (iii) the Board should have given a fresh opportunity to be heard before cancellation of the certificate and its absence violated natural justice, void ing the order.
Accepting the Court, HELD: (1 ) Law is meant to serve the living and does not beat its abstract wings in the jural void.
Its functional fulfilment as 'social engineering ' depends on its scruti nized response to situation, subject matter and the complex of realities which require ordered control.
A holistic understanding is simple justice to the meaning of all legis lations.
Fragmentary grasp of rules can, n misfire or even backfire, as in this case.
[906 H, 907 A] (2) The judicial key to construction is the composite perception of the daha and the dahi of the provision.
To be literal in meaning is to see the skin and miss the soul of the Regulation.
[909 A B] (3) Over judicialisation can be subversive of the justice of the law.
To invalidate the Board 's order because the Regional.
Inspector did not suspend the certificate is a fallacy.
The Board 's power is independent and is ignited by 905 the report, which exists in this case, of the Regional Inspector.
There is an overall duty of oversight vested in the board to enforce observance of rules of safety.
[909 D] (4) To set aside the order on the ground that the Re gional Inspector had no power to recommend but only to suspend and report that his recommendation influenced the Board 's order is to enthrone a processual nicety do dethrone plain justice.
Suspension, on a.n enquiry, predicates a prior prima facie finding of guilt and to make that known to the Board implicitly conveys a recommendation.
The differ ence between suspension plus report and recommendatory report is little more than between Tweedledum and Tweedledee Recommendations are not binding but are merely raw materials for consideration.
Where there is no surrender.
of judge ment by the Board to the recommending Regional Inspector, there is no contravention of the cannons of natural justice.
[909 E F, 910D E] (5) Natural justice is no unruly horse, no lurking land mine, nor a judicial cure all.
If fairness is shown by the decision maker to the man proceeded against, the form features and the fundamentals of such essential processual propriety being conditioned by the facts and circumstances of each situation.
no breach of natural justice can be complained of.
Unnatural expansion of natural justice.
without reference to the administrative realities and other factors of a given case, can be exasperating.
Courts cannot look at law in the abstract or natural justice as a mere artifact.
Nor can the), fit into a rigid mould the concept of reasonable opportunity.
If the totality of cir cumstances satisfies the Court that the party visited with gelverse order has not suffered from denial of reasonable opportunity the Court will decline to be punctilious or fanatical as if the rules of natural justice were sacred scriptures.
In the instant case, the Board cannot be anath ematised as condemning the man without being heard.
The respondent has, in the form of an appeal against the report of the Regional Inspector, sent his explanation to the Chairman of the Board.
He has thus been heard dad compli ance with Regulation 26 in the circumstances is complete.
[909G H, 910 A G] Tereaesai 's case ; ; Management of DTU ; Tandon 's case referred to.
Observations: Sensitive occupations demand stern juristic principles to reach at scapegraces, high and low, and not mere long drawn out commissions whose verdicts often prove dilatory 'shelter ' for the men in whom Parliament his en trusted plenary management.
Any sensitive jurisprudence of colliery management must make it cardinal to pt nish the Board vicariously for any major violations and dreadful disasters, on macro:considerations of responsibility to the community.
The Board must quit, as a legal pendry, if any dreadful deviation.
deficiency, default or negligence anywhere in the mine occurs.
This is a good case for new principles of liability, based on wider rules of sociologi cal jurisprudence to tighten up the law of omission and commission at the highest levels.
Responsibility and penal ty must be the concomitants of highly paid power vested in the top brass.
Any deviance on the part of these high powered authorities must be visited with tortious or criminal liabilities.
[908 F H, 907 D FI (The Court emphasised the need for evolving a code of strict liability calling to utmost care not only the crowd of workers and others but the few shall care or quit so that subterranean occupations necessary for the nation are made as risk proof as technology and human vigilance permit).
