The respondent plaintiffs filed a suit for partition and allotment of one half share of the suit house and the move able properties.
One Faqir Chand had 3 sons, Nathubhai, Lallubhai and Nanabhai.
Nanabhai was the defendant in the suit whose legal representatives are appellants.
Lallub hai 's heirs are the plaintiffs.
According to the plain tiffs the three brothers were members of a Joint Undivided Hindu Family.
According to the respondents the properties were never partitioned though the three brothers were stay ing and messing separately and each branch carried on its business separately.
The respondents also challenged the validity of the sale deed executed by Bai Kashi the widow of Nathubhai in favour of the appellants on the ground that the sale was not for legal necessity.
The appellants contended that the three brothers were separate and each branch used to do its business separately.
That as far as the suit house was concerned it was divided though not by metes and bounds and that the brothers lived in separate portions of the house.
The appellants claimed that they were entitled to 2/3 share on the house.
The Trial Court found that the 3 brothers had separated before the deaths of Nathubhai and Lallubhai.
It also found that the defendant and his broth ers had separated and the suit house was also divided as alleged by the defendant.
It came to the conclusion that the defendant had failed to prove that there was any legal necessity for Bai Kashi to sell the share in the suit house and that after Bai Kashi 's death the respondent was entitled to one half share in the suit house.
The Trial Court found that Bai Kashi became entitled to one ' half share of her husband in the suit house under the Hindu Women 's Rights to Property Act, 1937.
As her interest was only a limited interest known as Hindu Women 's Estate when Bai Kashi died in January 1956, she had not become the full owner of the share under the .
The court was of the view that on the death of Bai Kashi her share would go to the reversioners.
The court held that the parties were governed by Mayukh school which over rules the Mitakshara school and, therefore, after the death of Bai Kashi the defendant and plaintiff No. 1 would inherit together to the share of Nathubhai.
The court held that the claim of the plaintiff for one half share should be decreed though there was no specific claim on the plea of separation and heir ship.
The High Court dismissed the appeal and confirmed the findings of the Trial Court.
In an appeal by Special Leave the appellants contended that the respondents ' plea that the 3 brothers were joint and the share of Bai Kashi was inherited by the remaining two branches by survivorship having been negatived by the courts below the suit ought to have been dismissed and that the court erred in making out a new case of succession to the property of Bai Kashi without necessary pleadings.
Allowing the appeal partly, HELD: 1.
On the question whether the respondents are entitled to one half share on her death has not been dealt with by the High Court.
This Court agreed with the concur rent findings of the Trial Court and the High Court that the family was separate and that the sale deed by Bai Kashi in favour of the appellants was not for legal necessity.
However, the claim of the respondent for partition and allotment of 1/3 share by metes and bounds 921 cannot be resisted.
Though the brothers became separate admittedly there was no division by metes and bounds.
There is also no dispute that the respondents are entitled to 1/3 share in the house.
[924 A C] 2.
The High Court did not deal satisfactorily with the contention of the defendant that the Trial Judge erred in saying that Bai Kashi had only a widow 's estate when she died in the absence of any issue as to who were heirs of the deceased Bai Kashi.
On the question whether respondents are entitled to succeed to Bai Kashis 1/2 share, the Court remitted the matter to the High Court for consideration.
[924 C D]
