Respondent 1, a conductor of the Mysore Government Road Transport Department was dismissed.
for misconduct on 25 1 1961.
The legality of the said dismissal order was questioned in the High Court under article 226 with a further prayer to declare that he had continued in service since the date of his suspension and commencement of disciplinary proceedings.
The High Court allowed the writ petition on 11 9 1964 and quashed the dismissal order with an observa tion viz. "It is further ordered that this is without preju dice to the holding of fresh enquiry if they consider the same necessary".
On 1 8 1961.
the Road Transport Corpora tion was constituted and the Government Road Transport Department was abolished.
Such of the employees who had exercised their option as per the notice dated 23 6 1961, were taken over by the appellant corporation.
The re spondent No. 1 was not given the option as he was dismissed by that date.
On a complaint under the.
Contempt of Courts Act against respondent 2 and the appellant, that there was disobedience to the order of the High Court dated 12 9 1964, the respondent 1 was paid ,,he salary by the State Govern ment for the period 25 1 1961 to 31 7 1971.
Since he was not paid back salary and allowances and also the salary due from 1 8 1961, the respondent filed a writ petition No. 1579/66 which was again allowed.
On a concession made by the counsel for the State Government that the State Govern ment was willing to make available to the petitioner an option to become an employee of the appellant corporation, the High Court held: "Notice shall be in the same form in which it was served on other employees and with a month 's time to exercise his option.
If he exercises his option to become an employee of the corporation the petitioner will have all.
the benefits.
such as continuity in service, seniority, the benefit of the old conditions of service applicable in Mysore Government Road Transport Department.
The petitioner will also be entitled to the salary for the period ' between August 1, 1961 and the date of his appoint ment as an employee of the corporation".
On appeal by special leave by the corporation, the Court, HELD: (1) The order of the High Court dated 11 9 1964 could not possibly amount to a declaration that the first respondent had continued in the service of either the Mysore Government or had become the servant of the appellant corpo ration, a separate legal entity which came into existence by means of a Notification under section 3 of the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950.
As a separate legal entity the corpo ration could not be said to have stepped automatically into the shoes of the Mysore Road Transport Department, there being no provision of the Act or Rules made thereunder to that effect.
[927 A D] (2) The declaratory relief asked for not having been granted, that relief would be deemed to have been refused.
Failure to go in appeal against that decision operates as a bar for claiming such a relief in the subsequent writ petition.
[931 B] (3) The effect of the High Courts ' order setting aside the dismissal was that the stigma of dismissal was removed from the record of the first respondent.
The winding of the department on the facts of the case, operates as the discharge of the respondent.
The respondent cannot be deemed to be the corporation 's employee inasmuch as he has not exercised any option nor did be ask for a notice of option in the original writ petition filed by him.
[931 D E] 926 Mysore State Road Transport Corporation vs A. Krishna Rao & Anr., C.A. No. 1720 of 1967 S.C. decided on 6 8 1969, followed.
(4) Neither the Act nor the two notifications under section 34(1) of the Act contain any provision.
which could entitle an employee of the Mysore Government Road Transport Depart ment to get a notice automatically.
The notifications could apply only to those persons who, on 1 8 1961 had already exercised an option to serve under the corporation in pursu ance of notice issued to them.
It makes no provision for persons to whom for any considerable reason, no notice has been issued.
[928 D F] (5) When the first respondent applied in the High Court for another writ or direction under article 226 in 1966, the High Court over stepped the limits of mere interpretation or application of the law and indulged in what is nothing short of legislation by directing the State Government to serve a notice calling upon the first respondent to exercise his option on the question whether he wanted to become an employee of the Mysore State Road Transport Corporation in the same way in which other employees of the Transport Department had been asked to exercise their option.
[929 C E] (6) The State Government owed no duty to the first respondent to pay him after transport department was wound up in the absence of any contract 10 show what duty the Government could have to employ the first respondent after its transport department was wound up or to direct the corporation to do so.
[929 G H] (7) In order to compel the corporation to do anything only a general direction u/s 34 of the Act could be given by the Government.
There neither could be a special direction with regard to a particular case nor was any special direction given by the Government for any such case.
The High Court could not take upon itself the power to fill any gap in the provision of the.
Act, even if there be one, and compel the Government to perform a function which the Gov ernment was not under any kind of obligation to discharge.
The High Court could not give a specific direction to make a provision to meet what it thought was required in a particular or individual case if such a case fell outside the provisions made by the Act and the rules.
There is no justification at for such assumption of powers by the High Court.
[929 H, 930 A B]
