The appellants were put up for trial along with others before the Court of Sessions.
The charge against them set out the fact that they formed an unlawful assembly, stated the common object specifying in detail the part each accused had played and then gave a list of ten sections of the.
Travancore Penal Code including sections which correspond to section 302 of the Indian Penal Code read with section 149.
The Sessions Judge acquitted them under section 302 read with section 149 but convicted them on the lesser charges.
They appealed to the High Court against their convictions and the State appealed against their acquittals under section 302 read with section 149.
The High Court dismissed their appeals and allowed the appeals against their acquittals and sentenced each of them to transportation for life.
It was contended on their behalf that the charge was not in accordance with law and their examinations under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were defective and prejudiced them.
Held, that the charge framed was a legal one and was expressly covered by section 225 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Each of the accused was apprised of the facts alleged against him and he could easily pick out the relevant sections under which he was charged.
There could, therefore, be no prejudice to any one of them.
Held further, that as no objection was taken to the defective examination under section 342 of the Code of Criminal Procedure at an earlier stage although the accused were represented by counsel, and as the petition of appeal did not set out the questions the court should have put to them and the answers they would have given and as they thereby withheld from the court facts which were within their special knowledge, the court was entitled to draw an adverse conclusion against them and hold that no prejudice had been caused to them.
That when an accused person is not properly questioned under section 342 so as to enable him to explain the circumstances appearing in the evidence against him he is entitled to ask the appellate Court, which is the ultimate court of fact, to place him in the same position 1058 he would have been in if he had been properly questioned and to take the explanation he would have given, if he had been asked, into consideration when weighing the evidence in just the same way as the court would have done if the explanation had been there all along.
But he cannot ask to be placed in a better position than he would have been in if the court had done its duty from the start.
Therefore, when complaining of prejudice he must set out the questions he should have been asked and indicate the answers he would have given.
