Satindra Nath Raha and Uma Shankar Shastri were trav elling by a bus owned by Gupta of M.P. Speedways Company.
They were travelling from Bhind to Gwalior.
On the high way, a bus owned by Bhuta came from the opposite direc tion.
On account of negligence of drivers of both the buses there was a head on collision of the two buses, as a conse quence of which Raha and Shastri sustained fatal injuries to which they succumbed on the same day in the hospital.
Widow of Raha claimed a compensation of Rs. 3,00,000/ under section 110A of the Motor Vehicles Act and Mrs. Shastri claimed a sum of Rs. 1.20,000/ as compensation.
The Claims Tribunal decreed the claim of Mrs. Raha to the extent of Rs. 60,000/ and of Mrs. Shastri to the extent of Rs. 40,000/ .
The compensation awarded to Mrs. Raha is on the basis of the salary which Mr. Raha would have earned upto the age of 55 years after deducting half the salary.
The quantum awarded by the Tribunal was upheld by the High Court.
Gupta and Mrs. Raha field the present appeals in this Court.
Gupta contended that the compensation awarded was very excessive and Mrs. Raha contended that the compensation granted was grossly inadequate and should be enhanced.
Allowing the appeal filed by Mrs. Raha and dismissing the appeal filed by Gupta, HELD: 1.
The contention of Gupta that he should not be made liable to pay the compensation since no negligence was alleged against the driver Ram Swarup negatived.
Although the plaint is loosely drafted but it clearly contains the relief of compensation against Gupta and Ram Swarup, the driver.
Pleadings have to be interpreted not with formalis tic rigour but with latitude or awareness of low legal literacy of poor people.
The Claims Tribunal and the High Court overlooked two important and vital considerations.
Firstly the increments which Mr. Raha would have earned while reaching the maximum of his grade long before his retirement and secondly the pensionary benefits which he would have obtained had he retired.
It would be reasonable to expect that if the deceased had not died due to the accident he would have lived at least upto the age of 65 years.
The Court, therefore, enhanced the compensation of Rs. 60,000/ to Rs. 1,00,000/ .
[948 F, G, 949A B, 950A B] 2.
It is unfortunate that section 95(2)(d) of the Motor Vehicles Act restricts the liability of the Insurance Compa nies to Rs. 2,000/ only in case of a third party.
The court suggested that the Legislature should increase the liability of the Insurance company.
The court observed that it was anamolous that if a passenger dies in a plane acci dent he gets the compensation of Rs. 1 lac and a person who dies in the road accident should get only Rs. 2,000/ .
[946 D E] 3.
Expressing its concern for the need for creating no fault liability by a suitable legislation, the Court ob served: The time is ripe for serious consideration of creating no fault liability.
Having regard to the directive princi ples of State policy, the poverty of the ordinary run of victims of automobile accidents, the compulsory nature of insurance of motor vehicles, the nationalisation of general insurance companies and the expanding trend towards nation alisation of bus transport, the law of 945 torts based on no fault needs reforms.
Where the social need of the hour requires that precious human lives lost in motor accidents leaving a trial of .economic disaster in the shape of their unprovided for families call for special attention of the law makers to meet this social need by providing for heavy and adequate compensation particularly through Insurance Companies.
Our .country can iII afford the loss of a precious life when we are building a progres sive society and if any person engaged in industry, office, business or any other occupation dies, a void is created which is bound to result in a serious set back to the indus try or occupation concerned.
Apart from that the death of a worker creates a serious economic problem for the family which he leaves behind.
In these circumstances it is only just and fair that the Legislature should make a suitable provision so as to pay adequate compensation by property evaluating the precious life of a citizen in its true per spective rather than devaluating human lives on the basis of an artificial mathematical formula.
[916 C 950 D F]
