The cross appeals arose from two writ petitions filed by A.V. Rao and N. V. Krishnaiah in the High Court.
A.V. Rao 's case was that while he was already in preventive detention.
on December 18.
a First Information Report was lodged against him in connection with some Sessions cases.
Some of the co accused in ' these cases were produced before the Magistrate on December 19, 1969 for remand, but Rao was produced before him only in mid April, 1970 after his release from preventive detention.
The accused in the Sessions cases were thereafter convicted and sentenced, and Rao.
filed a writ petition asking for an order on the State Government to set off u/s , the time between December 19, 1969 and April 13, 1970, against his term of imprisonment, treating the said period as the period of detention undergone by him as an undertrial prisoner, and also to take the same into account, for the purpose of remission of his sentence under the Prisons Act.
Rao con tended that he could have been produced before the Magistrate for remand on December 19, 1969.
The State Government contended that Rao could not be produced before the Magistrate for remand until the period of preventive detention was over.
In the case of Krishnaiah, he was in detention under the MISA, when his appeal against conviction in a criminal case was dismissed by the High Court, and a warrant was issued against him on December 1, 1975, but was served on him only on December 30, 1975, when the order against him under the MISA was revoked.
The High Court rejected the petitioners ' contention regarding set off under section 428 Cr.
P.C. but accepted their contention regarding the benefit of remission.
Allowing the appeals by the State, and partly allowing the appeals by the original writ petitioners, the Court, HELD: (1) Section 428 of the Cr. P.C., 1973 only pro vides that the period of detention of an accused as under trial prisoner shall be set off against the term of impris onment imposed on him on conviction.
It does not equate an "undertrial detention or remand detention with imprisonment on conviction" or do away with the difference in the two kinds of detention and put them on the .same footing for all purposes.
[11B C] G.V. Godse vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; 446, referred to.
(2) section 428 expressly says that the "period of detention" mentioned, refers to the detention during the investigation, enquiry or trial in connection with the "same case" in which the accused person has been convicted.
The period during which the writ petitioners were in preventive detention cannot be set off under section 428 against the term of imprisonment imposed on them.
[11G, 12 A B] (3) Section 418 does not exclude a case where the war rant concerns an accused who is already in detention.
We have not been referred to any provision either in the Cr.
P.C. or in the MISA which requires the service of the war rant to be delayed until after the period of preventive detention is over.
There is no bar to the preventive and punitive detention continuing simultaneously.
[13A B, C] 2 240SCI/77 8 Haradhan Saha & Anr.
vs State of West Bengal & Ors.
; , referred to.
