The first appellant was prosecuted under section 5 of the Bombay Prevention of Gambling Act (Bombay Act IV of 1887) for being present in a gaming house for the purposes of gaming and was, in addition, charged under section 4(a) of the Act for keeping a gaming house.
The Presidency Magistrate, who tried the case, found him guilty under section 4(a) and sentenced him to three months ' rigorous imprisonment.
He also found him guilty under section 5 but awarded no separate sentence under that section.
In revision, the High Court set aside the conviction under section 4(a), but confirmed that under section 5 and awarded a sentence of three months ' rigorous imprisonment under that section.
It was contended for the first appellant that the High Court had no power under section 423(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure to impose any sentence under section 5 of the Act when no such sentence had been awarded by the Magistrate and that, in any event, the award of such a sentence amounted to an enhancement and was, in consequence, illegal, as no notice had been issued there for, as required by law.
Held, that though section 423(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure was not applicable to the case, the High Court had power to pass the sentence under section 423(1)(d).
The law does not envisage a person being convicted for an 1050 offence without a sentence being imposed therefor, and the award of a sentence by the High Court was only consequential on and incidental to the affirmance of the conviction, and it was a just and proper order to be passed under the law, within the meaning of section 423(1)(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Such a sentence cannot amount to an enhancement as it was awarded only for the first time in appeal.
Even if it were to be regarded as an enhancement, the order of the High Court could not be held to be bad for want of notice under section 439(2), as the first appellant had an opportunity of showing cause against the conviction and enhancement, and, in any event, no prejudice had resulted to him by reason of the absence of a formal notice under the section.
Ibrahim vs Emperor (A.I.R. , Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs vs Hossein Ali (A.I.R. and Pradip Chaudhry vs Emperor (A.I.R. 1946 Pat. 235), disapproved.
