The appellant (Plaintiff) had two shops, one in his village and the other in a city.
The respondent (defendant) had dealings of various kinds with the appellant at both the places.
The plaintiff filed a suit claiming a certain sum representing the net balance due to him from the respondent (defendant) on the village account.
The defendant on the other hand claimed that, had the city account been taken into account, it was he who would be entitled to a larger sum from the plaintiff.
The plaintiff claimed that the accounts of the village and city should not be mixed up.
The trial Court held that, though the shops were located at different places, they were owned by the same person and in equity and law, set off was Permissible and it accordingly granted a decree.
On the plaintiff 's appeal, the High Court held that rendition of city accounts was illegal and remanded the case to the trial Court.
On remand, the trial Court held that while the plaintiff was right in his demand vis a vis the village shop the defendant was entitled to a certain sum from the city account and awarded a decree to the plaintiff m respect of the net balance.
In appeal, the High Court held that after remand the trial Court had no jurisdiction to look into the city accounts as a whole and on account of a misapprehension of the observations of the remand order, an illegal decree had been passed in favour of the plaintiff.
Restoring the trial Court 's order, HELD: The true nature of the action in this case was a suit on account to: the sum due on striking a balance.
That itself was the cause of action.
[981E] 1.
The trial Court 's view that the entirety of account in the two shops could be viewed as a composite one, was sound.
The parties are the same.
There was only one person who owned the two shops and it is wrong to construe the situation as if there were two juristic entities.
The defendant who dealt with the plaintiff in the two shops was the same person.
The dealings were either in one or the other shop.
The artificial dissection of the transactions could not square up with the reality of the situation.
[981C D] In the instant case there was no misapprehension on the part of the trial Court of the observations made by the High Court in its remand order.
While directing remand, the High Court ordered that issue No. 6, namely, whether on making an account of the two shops of the plaintiff the defendants were entitled a set off and thereafter to certain sums, should be decided by the trial Court.
The trial Court natu rally took the view that the High Court having ordered an adjudication of the issue, vested it with jurisdiction to enquire into the city accounts in toto and pass a decree.
If the village and city accounts had to be gone into, the decree passed was correct.
[980G H] 2.
Order 8, rule 6 CPC deals with a specific situation and does not prevent the Court.
where the facts call for wider relief, from looking into the accounts in both places to do ultimate justice between the parties.
[981 H] 974 3.
(a) After remand by the High Court, the subordinate Court is bound by the direction of the High Court, the same High Court hearing the matter on a second occasion or any other Court of co ordinate authority hearing the matter, cannot discard the earlier holding.
Both a finding in a remand order cannot bind a higher Court when it comes in appeal before it. [982A B] (b) The remand order by the High Court is a finding at an interreed are stage of the same litigation.
When it came to the trial Court and escalated to the High Court, it remained the same litigation.
The appeal before the Supreme Court is from the suit as a whole and, therefore, the entire subject matter is available for adjudication before the Supreme Court.
[982C D] (c) The circumstance that the remanding judgment of the High Court was not appealed against, assuming that an appeal lay therefrom, cannot preclude the appellant from challeng ing the correctness of the view taken by the High Court in that judgment.
[982E] Lonankutty vs Thomman ; , followed.
