The assessee carries on business of running Oil Mill and dealing in groundnuts, groundnut seeds and oil, speculative business in groundnuts, groundnut oil and groundnut seeds, and speculation business in cotton errands etc.
The I.T.O. disallowed loss in forward contracts and groundnut oil, groundnuts and groundnut seeds on the ground that it arose out of illegal contracts on account of the same being banned under section 15(4) of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner on appeal confirmed the decision of the l.
T.O. but bifurcated the loss into two headings, namely, loss incurred in hedging transac tions m the banned items and loss incurred in speculative transactions.
On second appeal, the Tribunal held that notwithstanding the illegality of the transactions the loss could be set off and carried forward in accordance with the provisions of section 24(1) and 24(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
The Tribunal accordingly directed that the loss in hedging transactions of forward business in the banned contracts be set off against the other profits of the asses see for the relevant accounting year under section 24(1) and that balance of loss relating to the speculative transac tions in the banned contracts be carried forward to the following year under section 24(2) of the Act to be set off against profit of the following year from speculative busi ness.
On reference to the High Court, the High Court an swered both the questions in favour of the assessee and upheld the judgment of the Tribunal.
The High Court relied on its earlier judgment in the case of C.I.T. vs S.C. Ko thari.
Allowing the appeal by certificate HELD: (1) The loss incurred ,in the hedging transactions cannot be set off against other profits in the previous year in view of the decision of this Court partly reversing the judgment of the High Court in the case of S.C. Kothari.
[31C D] Commissioner of Income tax vs S.C. Kothari, , ap plied.
(2) It is admitted that the contract for speculation in the commodity in question is banned under the Forward Con tracts (Regulation) Act 1952.
To allow such a loss to be carried forward is to permit a benefit of adjustment of loss from an illegal business to spill over and continue in the following year even in a lawful speculative business.
The speculative business which is carried on in the following year must be a business of lawful speculation pertaining to the lawful and enforceable contracts.
An assessee carrying on a lawful speculative business in the following year cannot derive benefit by carrying forward and setting off a loss from illegal speculative business of the earlier year.
Law will assume an illegal business to die out of existence with all its losses to the assessee in the year of loss itself.
The assessee can derive no benefit on account of the unlawful business in the following year.
The matter will be different if a lawful speculative business after incurring loss is 27 discontinued and loss thereupon is carried forward for set off against any other lawful speculative business in the following year.
It is inconceivable that law can permit an illegal activity to be carried on from which a benefit could be obtained.
The concept of carry forward is not the same thing as the setting off of loss in a particular illegal business against profit of that illegal business in a par ticular year.
The two concepts have to be kept distinctly separate even in a taxing statute.
It is true that by earning income from illegal trading activity the business does not get tainted so far as exigibility to tax is con cerned.
While computing income from illegal activity in a particular year all losses incurred in earning that particu lar income are also taken into account for computation of real profits even in the illegal business.
There is a marked distinction between the computation of a particular year 's profit from illegal trading activity and carry for ward of a loss to set it off against income in the subse quent years even assuming that such illegal activity is continued against the provisions of law.
No illegal activi ty can be perpetuated under any provisions of law nor bene fit out of it.
Law will miss its paramount object if it is not consistent with morality and any interpretation by courts cannot lead to a result where continuation of illegal activity or benefit attached to it is given recognition.
[31D H, 32A D]
