The parties entered into an agreement for the execution of some construction work.
An arbitration clause in the agreement stipulated that if disputes arose, the matter would be referred to a Settlement Committee to be appointed by the State Government.
A dispute arose, and a Settlement Committee was duly constituted, but was unilaterally abol ished by the respondent before it concluded its work, Subsequently the respondent appointed another Settlement Committee whose award was set aside by the Civil Court on the ground that it was made even before the expiry of the time given by the Committee to the appellant.
The Commit tee thereafter ceased to exist, and the respondent applied to the trial court for appointing an arbitrator section 8(2) of the Arbitration Act.
The appellant opposed the same on two grounds.
Firstly that by unilaterally abolishing the first Settlement Committee, the State Government had put an end to the arbitration clause, and no other committee could be appointed and secondly, that section 8 was not applicable.
The appellants ' objections were rejected by the trial court, and later by the High Court in revision.
In appeal before this Court, the respondent also argued that s.8 would not apply when one party could appoint a Settlement Committee without reference to the other party.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: (1) The wording of section 8, that any party may serve the other parties with a written notice to concur in the appointment or appointments, or in supplying the vacancy, will include not serving other parties in cases in which the service on the other party is not contemplated.
The section cannot be read as not being applicable where the agreement provides or the nomination of the Committee by one of the parties, for the section itself says that the party may serve the other parties.
[41F G] (2) The Government could have appointed a Committee by itself without coming to court.
There is no indication in the clause that when once the Committee was unilaterally dissolved no new Committee could be formed.
When the second Committee ceased to function, it became "incapable of act ing" and, therefore, ' it was within the competency of the Court to proceed to appoint a new Committee.
[41E, F]
