The appellant purchased in a public auction a building which was evacuee property.
Before the sale certificate was made out in favour of the appellant, the possession of the building was handed over to him.
He in turn let out a shop in the said building to the respondent.
The appellant filed a suit for eviction in the Civil Court against the respond ent.
The Civil Court passed a decree for eviction and negatived the contention of the respondent that the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 was applicable and, therefore, the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was barred.
The Court relied on section 3 of the Delhi Rent Control Act which provides that nothing in the Act shall apply to any premises belonging to the Government.
The decree for eviction was confirmed by the Appellate Court and then by the High Court in Second Appeal.
Before the decree could be executed section 3 was amended by adding a proviso with retrospective effect, which provided that where any premises belonging to Government have been lawfully let out by any person, then notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court the provisions of the Act would apply to the tenancy.
The Executing Court held that it was not competent to it .to go into the question whether the decree was rendered d nullity on the ground that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court was ousted by the introduction of :the proviso in section 3 with retrospective effect since the decree had become final between the parties.
The Appellate Court upheld the said decision.
The High Court in Second Appeal reversed the decision of the two courts below and held that the decree was a nullity and could not be executed.
Dismissing the appeal this Court, HELD :(1) An executing court cannot go behind the.
decree nor can it question its legality or correctness but where a decree sought to be executed is a nullity for lack of inherent jurisdiction in the court passing it, its inva lidity can be set up in an execution proceeding.
[64C D] Vide Kiran Singh vs Chaman Paswan and Seth Hiralal Patni vs Sri Kali Nath, ; , followed.
(2) Since the proviso was introduced with retrospective effect it must be deemed to be part of section 3Since.
the time the Delhi Rent Control Act was enacted.
[65 D] East End Dwellings Co. Ltd. vs Finsbury Borough Council [1952] A.C. 132, approved.
As a result of the fiction the proviso must be deemed to be part of section 3 from the date of enactment of the Act.
The logical and inevitable Consequence of the introduction of the proviso.
in section 3 with retrospective effect would be to read the proviso as if it were part of the section at the date when the Act was 'enacted, and the legal fiction created by the retrospective operation must be carried to its logical extent and all the consequences and incidents must be worked out as if the proviso forms part of the section right from the beginning.
The phrase "notwithstand ing any judgment; decree or order of any court" in the proviso makes it clear that the legislature intended" that the finality of the judgment,decree etc., should not stand in the way of giving full effect to the= retrospective operation of the proviso in section 3.
[66C G] 61
