Section 7 of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1955, which deals with termination of tenancy, provides that no tenancy shall be 'terminated except on any of the grounds mentioned in the section.
Section 7 gives additional grounds for termination of tenancy in certain cases.
Respondent No. 2 sold his land to the appellants.
Claiming that he was a non occupancy tenant under respondent No. 2, respondent No. 1 filed a suit for possession of the land by pre emption.
The trial Court decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff pre emptor holding that he had been a tenant at will on the date of the sale and that he was forcibly dispossessed after the sale.
The District Judge as well as the High Court upheld the trial Court 's decision.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the pre emptor had to prove his subsisting right of pre emption on the date of sale, date of institution Of the suit and date of passing of the decree and since the plaintiff had failed to file a suit for recovery of possession under section 50 of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 his right and title had been extinguished.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The plaintiff cannot but be deemed to be the tenant of the suit land on the date of sale as well as on all other material dates and is thus fully qualified and entitled to pre empt the land.
[5H] The point now sought to be raised was not raised by the appellant in the Courts below.
In view of the provisions of sections 7 and 7A of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1955, which have an over riding effect and the decision of this Court in Rikki Ram & Anr vs Ram Kumar & Ors it cannot be disputed that an order or decree di recting eviction of a tenant is necessary to be obtained to bring about a determination of the tenancy.
A fortiori, the person who has been in possession of the land with the right to possess it continues to hold the land and be a tenant in spite of having been wrongfully put out of posses sion specially if he has initiated proceedings for recovery of possession.
[3E & 5F] Since in the instant case, it has been concurrently found by the Courts below that the plaintiff pre emptor was a tenant of the suit land on the date of sale and it has not been alleged that his tenancy was thereafter determined or terminated on any of the grounds set out in sections 7 and 7A of the Act and the plaintiff had applied to the Tehsildar for restoration of possession, he could not but be deemed to be a tenant of the suit land on the date of the sale as well as on all other material dates and thus fully qualified and entitled to pre empt the land.
[5G] Rikki Ram & Anr.
vs Ram Kumar & Ors. followed.
Bhagwan Das vs Chet Ram ; and Dindyal & Anr.
vs Rajaram referred to. 2
