The appellant was convicted by the Sessions Judge.
Salem for an offence under section 302 I.P.C. and was sentenced to death.
The High Court modified the sentence of death to one of life imprisonment.
However, exercising its powers under section 367(4) of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, the High Court imposed a fine of Rs. 20,000/ under section 357(1)(c) of the Code.
Special Leave was granted, by the court, limiting it into the question of propriety of the fine im posed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal in part and reducing the fine the Court, HELD: (i) A saving provision which saves the inherent powers of the court cannot over ride an express provision contained in the statute which saves that power.
That did not however affect the power of the High Court to deal with the application merely because the application was wrongly described as having been made under a wrong section.
In the instant case, the High Court correctly passed an order of compensation not under 5.
482 but under section 357(1)(c) of the Code and the application filed in the High Court was main tainable at the instance of the son and daughter of the deceased.
[133 H, 135 F G] (ii) Under section 302 LP.C. not only a sentence of imprisonment for life but even a sentence of death can legitimately be combined with a sentence of fine.
For the offence of murder, the court do have the power to impose the sentence of fine.
[136 B C] (iii) Legitimacy is not to he confused with propriety and the fact that the court possesses a certain power does not mean that it must exercise it.
Though there is power to combine a sentence of death with a sentence of fine that power is to be sparingly exercised because the sentence of death is an extreme penalty to impose and adding to that grave penalty a sentence of fine is hardly calculated to serve any social purpose.
[136 C E] (iv) The first concern of the court, after recording an order of conviction, ought to he to determine the proper sentence to pass.
The sentence must be proportionate to the nature of the offence and the sentence, including the sentence of fine, must not be unduly excessive.
In fact, the primary object of imposing a fine is not to ensure that the offender will undergo the sentence in default of payment of fine but to see that the fine is realised which can happen only when the fine is not unduly excessive, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including the means of the offender.
[137 D F] (v) Since by section 357(1)(c) of the code of 1973 and its pre cursor section 545(1)(bb) of the code of 1898 compensation can only come out of fine, it is always necessary to consider in the first instance whether the sentence of fine is at all called for, particularly when the offender is sentenced to death or life imprisonment.
If so, the fine must not be execessive, having regard to all the circumstances of the case like motivation of the offence, the pecuniary gain likely to have been made by the offender by committing the offence and his means to pay the fine.
The High Court in the instant case instead of applying its mind to these fac tors, considered only what compensation the heirs ought to receive.
There is no warrant for the assumption made by the High Court as regards the retention of "abilities in fact" or as regards the "extent of loss to the dependants.
" [137 A C, 138 A C] 133 State vs Pandurang Shinde, A.I.R. [1956] Born 711, 714 referred to.
Adamji Umar Dalai vs The State of Bombay, , applied.
(vi) In view of the fact that the appellant was under the sentence of death since its imposition by the Sessions Court and its reduction to life imprisonment by the High Court since a sentence of life imprisonment has been imposed on the appellant that being the only other sentence permis sible under the law, the fine of Rs. 20,000 is unduly exces sive and a sum of Rs. would meet the ends of justice.
[138 C D]
