The apellants are accused Nos. 10, 13, 14, 15 and 17 to 20 before the Sessions Court for trial under various offences, viz., . 324, 326, and 307 read with section 34 of the Penal Code.
While discharging accused Nos. 11, 12 and 16 u/s 227 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1973, on 8.8.1975, the learned Sessions Judge observed that there was "some materi al to hold that the remaining accused have had something to do with the incident which occurred on 6.12.1973 in I.T.I. Colony, Banglore" and adjourned the case to September 1, 1975, "for framing specific charges as made out from the material on record against the rest of the accused person .
Two revision petitions were filed against this order, one by accussed Nos. 10, 13, 14 and 15 and the other by accused Nos.
17 to 20.
These petitions were allowed by the High Court on the view that there was no sufficient ground for proceeding against the petitioners before it.
The High Court accordingly quashed the the proceedings in regard to them.
In appeal by Special Leave, the appellant State contended: (1) The High Court ought not to have exercised its power to quash the proceedings against the respondent without giving to the Sessions Court, which was seized of the case, an opportunity to consider whether there was sufficient material on the record on which to frame charges against the respondents.
(ii) In any event the High Court could not take upon itself the task of assessing or appreci ating the weight of material on the record in order to find whether any charges could be legitimately framed against the respondents.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court HELD: (1) The High Court was justified in holding that for meeting the ends of justice the proceedings against the respondents ought to be quashed.
It would be a sheer waste of public time and money to permit the proceedings to continue against the respondent, when there is no material on the record on which any tribunal could reasonably convict them for any offence connected with the assault on the com plainant.
This is one of these cases in which a charge of conspiracy is hit upon for the mere reason that evidence of direct involvement of the accused is lacking.
[118 A, D E] (2) The saving of the High Court 's inherent powers, both in civil and criminal matters, is designed to achieve a Salutary public purpose which is that a Court proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution.
In a criminal case, the veiled object behind a lame prosecution, the very nature of the material on which the structure of the prosecution rests and the like would justify the High Court in quashing the pro ceeding in the interest of justice.
[117 F G] (3) Considerations justifying the exercise of inherent powers for securing the ends of justice vary from case to case and a jurisdiction as wholesome as the one conferred by section 482 ought not to be encased within the strait jacket of a rigid formula.
The three instances ' cited in the Judgment to when the High Court would be justified in exercising its inherent jurisdiction are only illustrative and can in the very nature of things not be regarded as exhaustive.
[118 F H, 119 A] 114 R.P. Kapur vs State of Punjab explained. (4) It is wrong to say that at the stage of framing charges the Court cannot apply its judicial mind to the consideration whether or not there is any ground for presum ing the commission of the offence.
[119 B] (5) While considering whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding against an accused.
the court pos sesses a comparatively wider discretion in the exercise of which it can determine the question whether the material on the record.
if unrebutted, is such on the basis of which a conviction can be said reasonably to be possible.
[119 B E] Vadilal Panchal vs D. D. Ghadigaonkar ; ; Century Spinning & Manufacturing, Co. vs State of Maharashtra applied.
(6) In the instant case the High Court is right in its view that the materials on which the prosecution proposed to rely against the respondents is wholly inadequate to sustain the charge that they are in any manner connected with the assault on the complainant.
[119 E F] (7) The grievance that the High Court interfered with the Sessions ' Court 's order prematurely is not justified.
The case was adjourned by the Sessions Judge not for deciding whether any charge at all could be framed against the remaining accused, but for the purpose of deciding as to which charge or charges could appropriately be framed on the basis of the material before him.
[116 G H] (8) The object of section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Act 2 of 1974, is to enable the superior Court to examine the correctness of the reasons for which the Sessions Judge has held that there is not sufficient ground for proceed ing against the accused.
[117 C D] (9) The High Court is entitled to go into the reasons given by the Sessions Judge in support of his order and to determine for itself whether the order is justified by the facts and circumstances of the case.
[117 D E] .
(10) In the exercise of the wholesome power u/s 482 of the Act 2 of 1974 (section 561 of 1898 Code), the High Court is entitled to quash a proceeding if it comes to the conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the Court or that the ends of justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed.
[117 E F] Observations: The ends of justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice has got to be administered according to laws made by the legislature.
Without a proper realisation of the object and purpose of the provision which seeks to save the inherent powers of the High Court to do justice between the State and its subjects, it would be impossible to appreciate the width and contours of that salient jurisdiction.
[117 G H]
