The appellant society was incorporated in terms of section 2(r) of the (Act 14 of 1957), in the State of Maharashtra on August 23, 1969 as a company limited by guarantee for the purpose of carrying on business in India of issuing or granting licences for performance in public of all existing and future Indian musical works in which copyright within the meaning of section 13 subsists in India.
The appellant company has amongst its members the composers of musical works, authors of literary and dramatic works and artistes.
In accordance with the provisions of section 33 of the Copyright Act, the appellant published on September 27, 1969 and November 29, 1969 in the "Statesman" and the Gazette of India respectively a tariff laying down the fees, charges and royalties that it proposed to collect for the grant of licences for performance in public of works in respect of which it claimed to be an assignee of copy rights and to have authority to grant the aforesaid li cences.
A number of persons including various associations of producers of cinematograph films including the sound track thereof and the Cinematograph Exhibitors Association of India filed objections in respect of the tariff before the Copyright Board in accordance with the provisions of section 34 of the Act, repudiating the rights of the appel lant.
The Copyright Board held : (1) In the absence of proof to the contrary, the composers of lyrics and music retained the copyright in their musical works incorporated in the sound track of cinematograph films provided such lyrical and musical works were printed on written and that they could assign the performing right in public to the appellant.
(2) The tariff as published by the appellant was reasonable.
(3) The appellant had the right to grant li cences for the public performance of music in the sound track of copyrighted Indian cinematograph films and (4) It could collect fees, royalties and charges in respect of those films w.e.f.
the date on which the tariff was pub lished in the Gazette of India.
The High Court allowed the appeal preferred by the respondents under section 72 of the Act and held: (i) Unless there is a contract to the contrary a composer who composes a lyric or music for the first time for valuable consideration for a cinematograph film does not acquire any copyright either in respect of film or its sound track which he is capable of assigning.
(ii) Under proviso (b) to section 17 of the Act, the owner of the film at whose instance the composition is made becomes the first owner of the copyright in the composition.
(iii) The compos er can claim a copyright in his work only if there is an express agreement between him and the owner of the cinemato graph film reserving his copyright.
(iv) Though section 18 of the Act confers power to make a contract of assignment.
the power can be exercised only when there is an existing or future right to be assigned and that in the circumstances of the present case, assignment, if any, of the copyright in any future work is of no effect.
In appeal by certificate to this Court, the appellant contended (1) The author (composer) of a literary or musical work has copyright which includes.
inter alia.
the exclusive right (a) to perform the work in public and 207 (b) to make any cinematograph film or a record in respect of the work.
(2) That copyright in a literary or musical work is infringed by any person if without a licence granted to him by the owner of the copyright, he makes a cinematograph film in respect of the work or perform the work in public by exhibiting the cinematograph film.
(3) If a person desires to exhibit in public a cinematograph film containing a musical work, he has to take the per mission not only of the owner of the copyright in the cine matograph film but also the permission of the owner of the copyright in the literary or musical work which is incor porated in the cinematograph film, as according to section 13(4) of the Act, the copyright in a cinematograph film or a record does not effect the separate copyright in any work in respect of which or a substantial part of which the film or as the case may be, the record is made (4).
The provi sions of section 17(b) of the Act have no application to a literary or musical work or the separate copyright therein and do not take away the copyright in a literary or musical work embodied in a cinematograph film.
(5) The only modes in which the author of a literary work or musical work ceases to be the owner of copyright in the work are (a) by assigning under section 18(b) by relinquishment under section 21 and (c) by the composer composing the work in the course of his employment under a contract of service with an employer in which case the employer becomes the owner of the copyright in the musical work.
(6) In the case of an assignment of copyright in future work and the employment of the author to produce a work under a contract of service, the question of priorities will be decided according to the principles "where equities are equal, the first in time shall prevail".
The respondent 's contentions were (i) Unless a music is notationally written, printed or graphically reproduced it is not a musical work within the meaning of Copyright Act and there is no copyright in songs or orchestral pieces sung or played directly without its notation being written.
(ii) Since a "cinematograph film" is defined in section 2(f) of the Act as including the sound track and the "cinema tograph" is required to be construed to include any work produced by any process analogous to cinematography the owner of the cinematograph film is the first owner of the copyright therein including the right of the composer of the literary or musical work incorporated in the sound track of the film.
(iii) In the case of the film in which a lyric (which literally means a short poem directly expressing the poet 's own thoughts and sentiments in instances failing within the purview of the expression "literary work" as defined in section 2(0) of the Act has been plagiarised, there will be copyright in the film vesting in the pro ducer.
(iv) The Act confers a separate copyright of a cinematograph film as a film, its author under section 2(d)(v) of the Act being the owner of the film at the time of its completion.
(v) In the case of a lyric or music incorporat ed under the sound track of a cinematograph film, since in section 2(f) of the Act cinematograph film includes its sound track and section 13(1)(b) of the Act confers copyright on the cinematograph film and section 14(c) (ii) of the Act confers on the. owner of copyright the right to cause the film in so far as it consists of visual images to be seen in public and in so far as it consists of songs to be heard in public, it is not necessary for the owner of the cinematograph film to secure the permission of the composer of the lyric or of the music incorporated in the sound track of a cinematograph film for exhibiting or causing the exhibition of the sound portion of the film in public or for causing the records of the sound track of the film to be heard in public.
(vii) It is not correct to say that under section 17 proviso (b) in order that the producer of the cinematograph film should have copyright in the literary or musical work incorporated in it, the making of the entire film should be commissioned.
Section 17(b) will equally apply if someone is commissioned to make any compo nent part of a cinematograph film such as a lyric or musical work i.e. when such component of the film is made at the instance of a film producer for valuable consideration, the copyright for such component shall as well vest in the producer.
(viii) As the Act confers a separate copyright on a cinematograph film as a film the producer can exercise both the rights conferred on him under section 141(c)(ii) of the Act and all that section 13(4) of the Act (when applicable) provides is that the rights created by section 14(1)(a) and (b) shall coexist with those created by section 14(1)(e) and (d) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: (Per Krishna Iyer, J. concurring) 208 (1) Copyright in a cinema film exists in law but section 13(4) of the Act preserves the separate survival in its individuality of a copyright enjoyed by any work notwith standing its confluence in the film.
This persistence of the aesthetic personality of the intellectual property cannot cut down the copyright of the film qua film.
The exclusive right, otherwise, called copyright, in the ' case of a musical work extends to all the sub rights spelt out in section 14(1) (a).
A harmonious construction, of section 14, which is the integral yoga of copyright shows that the artiste enjoys his copyright in the musical _work the film producer is the master of his combination of artistic .pieces and the two can.
happily co exist and need not conflict.
[223 A C] (2) The boundaries of composite creations of art which are at once individual and collective may be viewed from different angles.
In a cosmic perspective, a thing of beauty has no boundary and is humanity 's property but in the materialist plane on which artistes thrive private and exclusive estate inert subsists.
The enigmatic smale of Mona Lisa is the timeless heritage of mankind, but, till liberated by the prescribed passage of time, the private copy right of the human maker says, "hands off.
[223 F G] (3) The film producer has the sole right to exercise what is his entitlement under section 14(1)(c) qua film.
But, he cannot trench on the composer 's copyright which he does only if the 'music ' is performed or produced or repro duced separately, in violation of section 14(1)(a).
A film may be caused to be exhibited as a film but the pieces of music cannot be picked out of the sound track and played in the cinema or the theatre.
To do that is the privilege of the composer and that right of his is not drowned in the film ' copyright except where there is special provision such as section 17, proviso (c).
Beyond exhibiting the film as a cinema show if the producer plays the songs separately to attract an audience or for other reasons he infringes the composer 's copyright, the copyright of the composer or the Performing Acts Society comes into play, if a music is played, whether in a restaurant or aeroplane or radio sta tion or cinema theatre.
[223 C E] (4) Section 14 has in its careful arrangement of the right belonging each copyright has a certain melody and harmony to music which is to loose the sense of the same.
Our copyright statute protects the composite cinematograph work produced by lay out of heavy money and many talents but does not extinguish the copyrightable component parts in toto.
The music which has merged through the sound track, into the motion picture is copyright by the producer but, on account of this monopoly, the music composer 's copyright does not perish.
The twin rights can co exist each fulfil ing itself in its delectable distinctiveness.
[224 A B] Observation: Apart from the music composed, the singer must be conferred a right.
Copyrighted music is not the soulful tune, the superb singing, the glorious voice or the wonder ful rendering.
It is the melody or harmony reduced to print writing or graphic form of musical works.
Author as defined in s.2(d) in relation to a musical work is only the composer and section 16 confines copyright to those works which are recognised by the Act, which means the composer alone has copyright in a musical work and the singer has none.
This disentitlement of the musician or group of musical artistes to copyright is un Indian because the major attraction which lends monetary value to a musical performance is not the music maker so much as the musician.
Perhaps both deserve to be recognised by the copyright law, because art in one sense depends on the ethos and the aesthetic best of a people and while universal protection of intellectual and aesthetic property of creators of "works" is an international obliga tion each country in its law must protect such rights wher ever originally is contributed.
[224 E H] Per Jaswant Singh J. (1) The existing and future right of music . . composer and lyrics in their respective works as defined in the Act is capable of assignment subject to the conditions mentioned in section 18 of the Act as also in section 209 19 of the Act which requires an assignment to be in writing, signed by the assigner or by his duly authorised agent.
[215 D E] (2) The interpretation of clause (f) of section 2 which is not exhaustive leaves no room for doubt when read in conjunction with section 14(1)(c)(iii), that the term cine matograph film includes a sound track associated with the film.
[220 D] (3) A harmonious and rational instead of mechanical construction of section 34, section 14(1)(a)(iii) and section 14(1)(c)(ii) will be: (A) Once the author of a lyric or a musical work parts with a portion of his copyright by authorising a film pro ducer to make a cinematograph film in respect of his work and thereby to have his work incorporated or recorded in sound track of a cinematograph film, the latter.acquires by virtue of section 14(1)(c) of the Act on completion of the cinematograph film a copyright which gives him the exclu sive right, inter alma, of performing the work in public that is, to cause the film in so far as it consists of visual images to be seen in public and in so far as it consists of the acoustic portion including a lyric or a musical work to be heard in public without securing any further permission of the author (composer) of the lyric or a musical work for the performance of the work in public.
A distinct copyright in the aforesaid circumstances comes to vest in the cinematograph film as a whole which relates both to copying the film and to its performance in public.
(B) If an author (composer) of a lyric or a musical work authorises a cinematograph film producer to make a cinematograph film of his composition by recording it on the sound track or a cinematograph film, he cannot complain of the infringement of his copyright if the author (owner) of the cinematograph film causes the lyric or the musical work recorded on the sound track of the film to be heard in public and nothing contained in section 13(4) of the Act can operate to affect the rights acquired by the author (owner) of the film by virtue of section 14(1)(c) of the Act.
(C) The composer of a lyric or musical work retains the right of performing it in public for profit otherwise than as a part of cinematograph film and he cannot be restrained from doing so.
In other words, the author (composer) of a lyric or musical work who has authorised a cinematograph film producer to make a cinematograph film of his work and thereby permitted him to appropriate his work by incorporating or recording it on the sound track of a cinematograph film cannot restrain the author (owner) of the film from causing the acoustic portion of the film to be performed or projected or screened in public for profit or from making any record embodying the recording in any part of the sound track associated with the film by utilising such sound track or from communicating or authorising the communication of the film by radio diffusion, as section 14(1)(c) of the Act expressly permits the owner of the copyright of a cinematograph film to do all these things.
In such cases the author (owner) of the cinematograph film cannot be said to wrongfully appropriate anything which belongs to the composer of the lyric or musical work.
Any other construction would not only render the ex press provisions of clause (f), (m), (y) of section 2, section 13(1)(b) ,red section 14(1)(c) of the Act otiose but would also defeat the intention of the legislature which in view of the growing importance of the cinematograph film as a powerful media of expression and the highly complex, technical and scientific process and heavy capital outlay involved in its production has sought to recognise as a separate entity and to treat a record embodying the record ing in any part of the sound track associated with the film by utilising such sound track as something distinct from a record as ordinarily understood.
[220 G H; 221 A G] (4)Clauses (d), (v), (f), (m), (v) and (y) of section 2, section 13(1) and 14(1)(c), provisos (b) and (c) to section 17 and section 22 and 26 of the Act abundantly make it clear that protectable copyright (comprising a bundle of exclusive rights mentioned in section 14(1)(c) of the Act comes to 210 vest in a cinematograph film on its completion which is said to take place when the visual portion and audible portion are synchronized.
[221 H; 222 A] (5) The rights of music . . composer or lyricist can be defeated by the producer of a cinematograph film in the manner laid down in proviso (b) and (c) of section 17 of the Act.
In both the.
cases falling under clauses (b) and (c) of section 17, a cinematograph film producer becomes the.
first owner of the copyright and no copyright subsists in the composer of the lyric or music so composed unless there is a contract to the contrary between the composer of the lyric or music on one hand and the producer of the cinemato graph film on the other.
[222 D F] Wallerstein vs Herbert (1867) Vol.
16, Law Times Reports 453, quoted with approval.
