The respondent No. 1 landlord let out his building to the appellant, a company to carry on business and use part of it for its manager 's residence.
The landlord was occupying residential premises allotted by the Central Government.
After the amendment of the.
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, by Ordinance 24 of 1975 which was later replaced by Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976, section 14A and 25B were added to the Statute.
Section 14 permits a landlord to evict the tenant if the premises let for residential pur pose are required bonafide by the landlord for occupation as a residence for himself or for any member of his family dependent upon him.
Section 14A provides that where a landlord is in occupation of any residential accommodation ,allotted to him by the Central Government or any local authority and if he is required by order made by that Gov ernment or authority to vacate such residential accommoda tion on the ground that he owns in the Union Territory of Delhi a residential accommodation either in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child, there shall accrue to the landlord a right to recover immediately pos session of any premises let out by him.
The said provision has been given effect notwithstanding anything to the con trary in the Delhi Rent Act or any other law or the custom or usage.
Section 25B provides for a summary remedy.
It provides that the Controller shall give to the tenant leave to contest the application if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord for obtaining an order for the recovery of possession on the ground specified in section 4(1)(c) or 14A. The re spondent was directed by the Government to vacate the Gov ernment accommodation on the ground that he had let out residential accommodation of which he was owner.
The respondent No. 1 accordingly filed eviction proceedings against the appellant claiming possession under Section 14A. The appellant contended before the Rent Controller that the ground did not fail within the sweep of section 14A since the premises were let out for residential rum com mercial purposes to, a joint Stock Company which was carry ing on business besides using for the residence of its Managing Director.
This plea did not cut ice with the Con troller who refused leave to contest.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court under Art 226 of the Consti tution which was dismissed.
In appeal by special leave, the appellant contended that 1.
Nothing in s.14A compels the landlord to occupy the premises after evicting the tenant.
He could still let it for a higher rent, take on lease from the private sector a small house and make a gain, from the difference flowing in rent.
The Controller could not shut him out from being heard if a triable issue emerged from the affidavit in opposition.
In the present case such issues were present and, therefore, the Rent Controller was not justi fied in refusing leave to contest.
Section 14A does not apply in the present case since the premises were not residential premises as they were let out both for commercial and residential purposes.
313 (Krishna lyer, J.) Dismissing the appeal, HELD: (1) It is fallacious to approximate section 25B(5) with Order 37 rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The social setting demanding summary proceeding, the nature.
of the subject matter and above all, the legislative diction which has been deliberately designed, differ in the two provisions.
Disclosure of facts which disentitle recovery of possession is a sine qua non for grant of leave.
[320 F A, 321A] (2) The definition of premises in section 2(i) covers any building or part of the building leased for use, resi dential, commercial or other.
To attract section 14A the landlord must be in occupation of residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government.
He must be required by order of that Government to vacate his residen tial accommodation.
The Delhi Development Authority granted the land to respondent No. 1 for construction of a residen tial building although it was let out for commercial pur pose.
Residential premises are not only plots which are let out for residential purposes nor do all kinds of structures where humans may manage to.
dwell are residential.
Use or purpose of the letting is no conclusive test.
Whatever is suitable or adaptable for residential use, even by making some changes, cart be designated residential premises.
Once it is residential in the liberal sense, section 14A strands attracted.
In the present case the house was built on land given for constructing a residence, is being used even now for residence is suitable otherwise for residence and is being credibly demanded for the respondent 's residence.
Residential suitability being the basic consideration, the building is residential.
The `purpose test ' will enable officers who own houses to defeat the statute that they do not own residential premises though it was suitably built for residence.
The scheme of section 14A definitely contem plates a specific representation from landlord to the Controller that because he has been ordered to vacate the premises where he is residing he requires immediate posses sion for his occupation.
It 's non obstante clause, the vesting of a right to immediate recovery, the creation of a summary process and the package of connected provisions all emphasize that the amendments have to be viewed as a whole, that the court cannot be fooled and the statute mocked at.
The cause of action is not only the Government orders to vacate but consequential urgency to recover his own build ing.
Parliament cannot be.
assumed not to intend the obvi ous, or to.
intend the ludicrous.
Literality is not right where obscurity is the result.
[321 C D, G H 322 C D, 323 A B, G H] Gillespie Brothers & Co. Ltd. vs Roy Bowles Transport Ltd. quoted in 39 MUd.
L.R. 379 (1976) and Anderson vs Abbott ; at 366 67 quoted in Univ.
of Pennsylvenia Law Review Vol. 117 (1968) p. 1, 63, quoted with approval.
(3) Judicial machinery while enforcing the law shall forbid its being misused.
[325 E] (4) The possibility of the power of Government to issue orders to vacate being used discriminately should be care fully avoided.
If exceptions are made in the case of big officers, naturally the.
middling and the lesser minions of Government may have a grievance.
It may ' perhaps be proper for Government when allotting good premises for high offi cers who made from their own houses large returns to pay into the Government coffers some: equitable part of the gain so made, giving consideration to circumstances like loans investment and the like.
[325 G H]
