A contract called a "lease" to collect and exploit sal seeds from forest area was entered into in 1970, between the respondent State and the appellants in 1970.
Clause (3) in the written contract executed in accordance with the provi sions of article 299 of the Constitution provided for the revision of the. rate of royalty at the expiry of every three years in consultation with the lessee and was to be binding on the lessee.
Under clause (4) of the. lease, the lessee.
had to establish a factory within the, State of Bihar for processing of sal seeds and extraction of oil therefrom within a period of five.
years from the date.
of the, agreement, failing which the agreement itself was to terminate.
In 1974, the respondent State revised the rate of royalty payable, by the appellants and after that, can celled the lease by a letter dated 15th, March 1975.
The writ petitions challenging the said orders were dismissed by the Patna High Court.
On appeals by certificates, the appellants contended: (i) the State acting in its executive capacity through its Government or its officers even in the contractual field cannot escape the obligation imposed upon it by Part III of the Constitution; (ii).
Article 14 of the Constitution has been infringed and (iii) Principles.
of natural justice have.
been violated as no opportunity to show cause against the cancellation of lease was given.
Dismissing the appeals the Court, HELD: (1) Article.
14 of the Constitution imports a limitation or imposes an obligation upon the States execu tive power under article 298 of the Constitution.
The rule of law which regulates.
the operation are organs of Government functioning under the Constitution is that all constitution al powers carry ' corresponding obligations with them.
[254 E F] Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. vs State of West Bengal and Anr.
1975(2) SCR 674 at 677, referred to.
(2) The State acts purely in its executive capacity and is bound by the obligations which dealings of the State with the individual citizens import into every transaction en tered into in exercise of its constitutional powers, only at the time of entry into the field of consideration of per sons with whom the Government could contract at all.
But, after the State or its agents have entered into the field of ordinary contract the relations are no longer governed by the constitutional provisions but by the legally valid contract which determines rights and obligations of the parties inter se.
[255 C D] 250 (3 ) Article 14 or of any other constitutional provision is not violated when the State or its agents purporting to act within the contractual field perform.
any act.
In this sphere they can only claim rights conferred upon them by contract and are bound by the terms of the contract only unless some statute steps in and confers some special statu tory power or obligation on the State in the contractual field which is apart from contract.
In the instant case, the contracts do not contain any statutory terms or obliga tions and no statutory ' power or obligation which could attract the application of article 14 of the Constitution is involved.
[255 D E, 260 E F] (4) The doctrine of discrimination cannot be availed of against the State 's action purporting to be taken solely within the contractual field when no aspect of any statutory or constitutional obligation appears either from incontro vertible facts or of facts.
The appellants ', cases do not raise any question of discrimination alleged at the stage of entry into the contractual area which could attract the application of Article 14.
[258 F G, 259 A] C.K. Achuthan vs State of Kerala and Ors.
1959 Supp.
(1) SCR 787, applied.
Erusian Equipment & Chemicals vs State of West Bengal & Ant. , distinguished.
(5) Before any adjudication on the question whether Article 14 of the Constitution could possibly be held to have been violated as between persons governed by similar contracts, they must be properly put in issue and estab lished.
The question whether Article 14 could at all be held to operate within the.
contractual field whenever the State enters into such contracts is such that it cannot be decided without a detailed adduction of evidence which is only possible in ordinary civil suits, to establish that the State, acting in its executive capacity through its offi cers, has discriminated between parties identically situat ed.
In the instant case allegations on which a violation of article 14 could be based are neither properly made nor estab lished.
It is the contract and not the executive power regulated by the Constitution which governed the relations of the parties.
[259 A D] (6) Proceedings under article 226 are, summary proceedings reserved for extraordinary cases where the exceptional and what are described perhaps not quite accurately as "preroga tive" powers of the court are invoked.
If the facts are disputed and require assessment of evidence, the correctness of which can only be tested satisfactorily by taking de tailed evidence involving examination and cross examination of witnesses, the case could not be conveniently or satis factorily decided in proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.
Even in cases where the question is of choice or consideration of competing claims before an entry into the field of contract facts have to be investigated and found before the question of violation of article 14 could arise.
The appellants ' cases are not such in which powers under Article 226 of the Constitution could be invoked.
[255 E G] Lekhraj Satnam Das Lalvani vs
M.M. Shah, Deputy Custodi an cum Managing Officer ; ; Banchhanidhi Rath vs The State of Orissa & Ors.
AIR 1972 SC 843 @ 845 and Har Shankar & Ors.
vs The Dy.
Excise. & Taxation Corotar.
& Ors. 3 ; @ 265, reiterated.
D.F. South Kheri vs Ram Sangi Singh AIR 1973 SC 205; K.N. Guruswamy vs State of Mysore, ; ; Calcutta Gas Co. (Proprietary) Ltd. vs State of West Bengal & Ors. ; Basheshat Nath vs Commissioner of Income Tax, 1959 Supp.
(1) SCR 528; State of M.P. vs Thakur Bharat Singh 1967(2) SCR 454 and S.S. Sawhney
D. Ramarathnam, Assistant Pass port Officer, Govt.
of India, New Delhi & Ors. , held not applicable.
(7) The Patna High Court had very rightly divided the types of cases in which breaches of alleged obligation by the State or its agents can be set up into three types: (i) Where a petitioner makes a grievance of breach of an obliga tion of the State in cases where on an assurance or repre sentation of, the State, he has acted to his prejudice and detriment but the agreement is 251 short of a contract within the meaning of article 299 of the Constitution; (ii) Where the contract entered into between the person aggrieved and the State is in exercise of a statutory power under certain Act or Rules framed thereunder and the petitioner alleges a breach on the part of the State; (iii) Where the contract entered into between the State and the person aggrieved is nonstatutory and purely contractual and the rights and liabilities of the parties are governed by the terms of the contract and the petitioner complains about breach of such contract by the State.
The High Court rightly held that the appellants cases should be placed in the third category where questions of pure alleged breaches of contract are involved and that no writ or order can issue under Article 226 of the Constitution in such cases to compel the authorities to remedy a breach of con tract pure and simple [255 H, 256 A B, F G] Umakant Saran vs The State of Bihar AIR.
and Lekhraj Satram Das vs N.M. Shah ; , followed.
B.K. Sinha vs State of Bihar AIR 1974 Patna 230, approved.
Union of India vs M/s. Anglo Afgan Agencies ; ; Century Spinning and Manufacturing Company Ltd. vs Ulhasnagar Municipal Council AIR 1971 SC 1021; Robertson vs Minister of Pensions (1949)(1) K.B. 227; K.N. Guruswamy vs State of Mysore AIR ; ; D.F. South Kheri vs Ram Sanghi Singh AIR 1973 SC 205; M/s. Shrikrishna Gyanaday Sugar Ltd. vs The State of Bihar , distin guished and held inapplicable.
(8) The object of the appellants is to hold up any adjudication on the cases, by taking shelter behind Article 14 so that the stay orders obtained by them may continue.
To accede to the prayer to adjourn the hearing of the cases until after the emergency is lifted and yet to continue the stay orders is to permit circumvention of the constitutional mandate contained in article 359 and to countenance gross abuse of the process of the court.
[259 D E] (9) The interim stay or order or injunction could not be justified at all because so long as the Presidential Order under article 359 of the.
Constitution is operative, the en forcement of Fundamental Rights falling under Art.14 of the Constitution is suspended.
In such cases even if a petition or a suit is entertained and can be pending no stay order could be passed because that would amount to indirectly enforcing the Fundamental Rights conterred by article 14 of the Constitution.
It is only where a prima facie case for an injunction of stay can be made out, uqite apart from a right governed by article 14 of the Constitution or of any other Fundamental Rights whose enforcement may have been suspend ed, that an injunction could be granted at all in suitable cases on suitable terms.
[260 C E] Additional District Magistrate, Jabalpur vs Shivkant Shukla ; @ 1288 1976 Supp.
SCR, 172 re ferred to.
(10) The appellants are not entitled to an opportunity to show cause against the cancellation of the leases.
The question of distinguishing between an administrative and quasi judicial decision can only arise in the exercise of powers exercised under statutory provisions.
Rules of natural justice are attached to the performance of certain functions regulated by statutes or rules made thereunder involving decisions affecting rights of parties.
When a contract is sought to be terminated by the officers of the State purporting to act under the terms of an agreement between parties, such action is not taken in purported exercise of an agreement between parties, such action is not taken in purported exercise cannot operate upon powers which are governed by the terms of an agreement exclusively.
The only question which normally arises in such cases is whether the action complained of is or is not in consonance with the terms of the agreement.
[259 F H, 260 C]
