Section 14(1 ) of the pro vides that "any property possessed by a female Hindu, wheth er acquired before or after the commencement of the Act, shall be held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited owner." According to the explanation to this sub section the term "property" includes both movable and immovable property acquired by a female Hindu in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance or in any other manner whatsoever.
Sub section (2) provides that nothing in sub section
(1) shall apply to any property acquired by way of gift or under a will or any other instrument which prescribes a restricted estate in such property.
At the time of his death, the appellant 's husband, who was the brother of the respondent, lived in a state.
of jointness with the respondent.
On her husband 's death the appellant filed a petition for maintenance.
The re spondent entered into a compromise with her, one of the terms of which was that the appellant should enjoy during her life time certain properties given to her and on her death those properties should revert to the respondent. 'The appellant .sold some of the properties.
The respondent sought a declaration that under 1he terms of the compromise the appellant 's interest, which was a limited one, could not be enlarged into an absolute interest enabling her to sell the. properties.
The District Munsiff decreed the suit.
On appeal, the District Judge held that by virtue of the provisions of the 1956 Act, the appellant had acquired an absolute interest in the properties and that section 14(2) had no application to the case because the compromise was an instrument in recognition of a pre existing right.
The High Court, on the other hand, held that the compromise was an instrument contemplated by s.14(2) and the appellant could not get an absolute inter est, under s.14(1); and that since her husband died even before the Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act, 1937 came into force, she could not be said to have any pre existing right because she had got the right for the first time under the compromise.
Allowing the appeal, (Per Bhagwati and Gupta, JJ) HELD: Since the properties were acquired by the appel lant under the compromise in lieu or satisfaction of her right to maintainance it is section 14(1) and not s.14(2) which would be applicable.
The appellant must be deemed to have become full owner of the properties notwithstanding that the compromise prescribed a limited interest in the properties.
[274 C D] 1.
Under the Sastric Hindu Law a widow has a right to be maintained out of joint family property and this right would ripen into a charge if the widow took the necessary steps for having her maintenance ascertained and specifically charged on the joint family property and even if no specific charge were created, this right would be.
enforceable against joint family property in the hands of a volunteer or a purchaser taking it with notice of her claim.
The right of the widow to be maintained is not a ]us in rem, since it does not give any interest in the joint family property but it is ]us ad rem.
When specific property is allotted to the widow in lieu of her claim for maintenance, the allotment would be in satisfaction of her jus ad rem, namely, the right to be maintained out of the joint family property.
It would not be a grant for the. 262 first time without any pro existing right in the widow, The widow would be getting the property in virtue of her pre existing right, the instrument giving the property being merely a document effectuating such pre existing right.
[273 A C] 2(a) Section 14(1) is large in its amplitude and covers every kind of acquisition of property by:, a female Hindu including acquisition in lieu of maintenance.
Where such property was possessed by her at the date of commencement of the Act or was subsequently acquired and possessed, she would become the full owner of the property.
[268 G] (b) The words "any property" are large enough to cover any and every kind of property but in order to expand the reach and ambit of the, section and make it all comprehen sive, the Legislature has enacted the explanation.
[268 B] (c) Whatever be the kind of property movable or immova ble and whichever be.
the mode of acquisition, it would be covered by sub section
(1 ), the object of the Legislature being to wipe out the disabilities from which a Hindu female suffered in regard to ownership of property under the old Sastric Law, to abridge the stringent provisions against proprietary rights and to recognise her status as an inde pendent and absolute owner of property.
[268 D] (d) In Gummalapura Taggina Matada Kotturuswami vs Setra Veeravva [1959] Supp. 1 SCR 968, this Court construed the words "possessed of" in a broad sense and in their widest connotation to mean as "the state of owning or having in one 's hand or power" which need not be actual or physical possession or personal occupation of the property by the Hindu female, but may be possession in law.
It may be actual or constructive or in any other form recognised by law.
[268 E F] .
(e) Sub section (2), which is in the nature of a proviso to sub s.(1), excepts certain kinds of acquisition of property by a Hindu female from the operation of sub section
[269 B] (f) Sub section (2), must be read in the context of sub s.(1) to.
leave as large a scope for operation as possible to sub s.(1).
So read, it must be confined to cases where property is acquired by a female Hindu for the first time.
as a grant without any pre existing right under a gift, will, instrument, decree, order or award, the terms of which prescribe a restricted estate in the property.
[269 H] (g) The legislative intendment in enacting sub s.(2) was that this subsection should be applicable only to cases where the acquisition of property is made by a Hindu female for the first time without any pre existing right.
Where.
however, property is acquired by a Hindu female at a partition or in lieu of her right to4 maintenance iris in virtue of a pre existing right and such acquisition would not be within the! scope and ambit of sub s.(2) even if the instrument allotting the property prescribes a restricted estate in the property.
Where property is acquired by a Hindu re,male under art instrument in virtue of a preex isting right such as a right to obtain property on partition or a right to maintenance.
and under the law as it stood prior to the enactment of the Act, she should have no more than limited interest in the property a provision in the instrument giving her limited interest in the property would be merely by way of record or recognition of the true legal position and the restriction on her interest being a disa bility imposed by law would be wiped out and her limited interest would be enlarged under sub section
[270 D; 272 A B] In the instant case the appellant claimed maintenance out of the joint family properties in the hands of her deceased husband 's brother, and the claim was decreed and in execution of the decree the respondent entered into a com promise and allotted properties to her in lieu of her claim for maintenance.
The appellant must in the circumstances be deemed to have become full owner of the properties notwith standing that the compromise prescribed a limited interest for her in the properties.
It is sub s.(1) and not sub s.(2) of section 14 which must be held to be applicable on these facts.
S.S. Munna Lal vs
S.S. Raikumar, [1962] Supp. 3 SCR 418 Gummalapura Teggina Matada Kotturaswami vs Setra Verrayva [1959] Supp.
I SCR 968 Mangal Singh vs Ratno, ; Badri Pershad vs Smt.
Kanso Devi 263 ; Nirmal Chand vs Vidya Wanti (dead) by her Legal representatives.
C.A. No. 609 of 1965, decided on January 21, 1969, Rani Bai vs
Shri Yadunandan Ram; , referred to.
B.B. Patil, vs Gangabai, AIR. , Sumeshwar Misra vs Swami Nath Tiwari AIR 1970 Pat.
348, Reddayya vs Varapula Venkataraju AIR 1965 A.P. 66, Lakshmi Devi vs Shankar Jha, AIR. , N. Venkanagouda vs Hanamangouda, AIR 1972 Mys. 286, Smt.
Sharbati Devi vs Pt.
Hiralal AIR , Sesadhar Chandra Dev.
vs Smt.
Tara Sundari Dasi, AIR 1962 Cal.
438, Saraswathi Ammal vs
Anantha Shenoi, AIR 1966 Ker.
66 and Kunji Thomman vs Meenakshi, ILR approved.
Gurunadham vs Sundarajulu, ILR Sentha nam vs Subramania, ILR , section Kachapalaya Gurukkal vs V.Subramani Gurukkal, AIR 1972 Mad. 279 Shiva Pujan Rai vs Jamune Missir, ILR [1947] Pat. 1118 Gopisetti Kondaiah vs Gunda Subbrayudu, ILR , Ram Jag Missir vs The Director of Consolidation, U.P. AIR 1975 All.
151 and ,4lab Singh vs Ram Singh AIR 1959 J&K 92 not ap proved.
(per Fazal Ali, J concurring) The High Court was in error in holding that the appel lant would have only a limited interest and in setting aside the alienations made by her.
The compromise by which the properties were allotted to her in lieu of her maintenance were merely in recognition of her pre existing right ,of maintenance and, therefore, her case would be taken out of the ambit of section 14(2) and would fall within section 14(1) read with the Explanation thereto.
[311 G] The incidents and characteristics of a Hindu woman 's right to maintenance are: (i) that a Hindu woman 's right to maintenance is a personal obligation so far as the husband is concerned, and it is his duty to maintain her even if he has no property.
If the husband has property then the right of the widow to maintenance becomes an equitable charge on his property and any person who succeeds to the property carries with it the legal obligation to maintain the widow.
[286 D] (ii) though the widow 's right to maintenance is not a right to property but it is a pre existing right in proper ty, that is, it is a ]us ad rein and not ]us in rem and it cannot be enforced by the widow who can get a charge created for the maintenance on the property either by an agreement or by obtaining a decree from the civil court.
[286 E] (iii) that the right of maintenance is a matter of moment and is of such importance that even if the joint property is sold and the purchaser has notice of the widow 's right to maintenance, the purchaser is legally bound to provide for her maintenance.
[286 F] (iv) that the right to maintenance is a pre existing right which existed in the Hindu law long before the passing of the Act of 1937 or the Act of 1946, and is, therefore, a pre existing right.
[286 G] (v) that the right to maintenance flows from the social and temporal relationship between the husband and the wife by virtue of which the wife becomes a sort of co owner in the property of her husband, though her co ownership is of a subordinate nature.
[286 H] (vi) that where a Hindu widow is in possession of the property of her husband, she is entitled to retain the possession in lieu of her maintenance unless the person who succeeds to the property or purchases the same is in a position to make due arrangementS for her maintenance [287 A] Digest of Hindu Law, Vol.
II, pp. 121, 123 and 243 by Colebrooke.
Hindu Law by Golyal Chandra Sarkar Sastri, p. 533.
Treatise on Hindu Law & Usage by Mayne, 11th edn.
684, 813, 816, 822, Hindu Law by Mulla, p. 597.
264 Narayan Rao Ramchandra Pant vs Ramabai, L.R. 6 I.A., 114, Lakshman Ramchandra Joshi & anr.
vs Satyabhamabai, I.L.R. , Narbadabai vs Mahadeo Narayan, Kashinath Narayan and Shamabai, I.L.R. , Mst.
Dan Kaur vs Mst.
Sarla Devi, L.R. 73 LA. 208, Prataprnull Agarwalla vs Dhanabati Bibi, L.R. 63 I.A. 33, Rani Bai vs Shri Yadunandan Ram & anr.
; , Sheo Dayal Tewaree vs Judoo nath Tewaree , Srinath Das vs Prabodh Chun der Das, , Hernangini Dasi vs Kedarnath Kundu Chowdhry I.L.R. K.V. Thangavelu vs The Court of Words, Madras , Sarojinidevi vs Sub rahrnanyam I.L.R. , .Jayanti Subbiah vs Alamelu Mangamma I.L.R. and Yellawa vs Bhirnangavda I.L.R. referred to.
An examination of the decisions of this Court estab lishes the following principles of law: (i) that the provisions of section 14 'of the 1956 Act must be liberally construed in order to advance the object of the Act which is to enlarge the limited interest possessed by a Hindu widow which was in consonance with the changing temper of the times; [295A] (ii) it is manifestly clear that sub section
(2) of section 14 does not refer to any transfer which merely recognises a pre existing right without creating or conferring a new title on the widow.
This was clearly held by this Court in Badri Pershad 's case.
[295B] (iii) that the Act of 1956 has made revolutionary and far reaching changes in the Hindu society and every attempt should be made to carry out the spirit of the Act which has undoubtedly supplied a long felt need and tried to do away with the invidious distinction between a Hindu male and female in matters of intestate succession.
[295C] (iv) that sub section
(2) of section 14 is merely a proviso to sub section
(1) of section 14 and has to be interpreted as a proviso and not in a manner so as to destroy the effect of the main provision.
[295D] Thus on a conspectus of the Shastric Hindu Law, the provisions of the 1956 ' Act and the decisions of this Court the following conclusions emerge: 1.
A Hindu female 's right to maintenance is not an empty formality or an illusory claim but is a tangible right against property which flows from spiritual relationship between the husband and the, wife and is recognised and enjoined by pure Shastric Hindu law and has been strongly stressed even by the earlier Hindu jurists starting from Yajnavalkya to Manu.
Such a right may not be a right to property but is a right against property and the husband has a personal obligation to maintain his wife and if he or the family has property the female has the legal fight to be maintained therefrom.
If a charge is created for the main tenance of a female, the said right becomes a legally en forceable one.
At any rate, even without a charge the claim for maintenance is a pre existing right so that any transfer declaring or recognising such a right does not confer any new title but merely endorses or confirms the pre existing rights.
[310 BC] 2.
Section 14(1) and the Explanation thereto have been couched in the widest possible terms and must be liberally construed in favour of the females so as to advance the object of the 1956 Act and promote the socio economic ends sought to be achieved by this long needed legislation.
[310D] 3.
Section 14(2) is in the nature of a proviso and has a field of its own without interfering with the operation of section 14(1) materially.
The proviso should not be construed in a manner so as to destroy the effect of the main provision or the protection granted by section 14(1) or in a way so as to become totally inconsistent with the main provision.
[310 E] 4.
Section 14(2) applies to instruments, decrees, awards, gifts etc., which create independent and new titles in favour of the females for the first time and has no application where the instrument concerned merely seeks to confirm.
endorse, declare or recognise pre existing rights.
In such cases a restricted estate in favour of a female is legally permissible and section 14(1) will not operate 265 in this sphere.
Where, however, an instrument merely de clares or recognises a pre existing right, such as to a claim to maintenance .or partition or share to which the female is entitled, the sub section has absolutely no appli cation and the female 's limited interest would automatically be enlarged into an absolute one by force of section 14(1) and the restrictions placed, if any, under the document would have to be ignored.
Thus where a property is allotted or transferred to a female in lieu of maintenance or a share at partition, the instrument is taken out of the ambit of sub section (2) and would be governed by section 14(1) despite any re strictions placed on the powers of the transferee.
[310F G] 5.
The use of express terms like "property acquired by a female Hindu at a partition", "or in lien of maintenance", "or arrears of maintenance" etc., in the Explanation to section 14(1) clearly makes sub section
(2) inapplicable to these catego ries which have been expressly excepted from the operation of sub section
[310H] 6.
The words "possessed by ', in section 14(1) are of the widest amplitude and .
include the state of owning a proper ty even though the owner is not in actual or physical pos session of the same.
Thus, where a widow gets a share in the: property under a preliminary decree before or at the time.
when the 1956 Act had been passed but had not been given actual possession under a final decree, the property would be deemed to be possessed by her and by force of section 14(1) she would get absolute interest in the property.
It is equally well settled that the possession of the widow, however, must be under some vestige of a claim, right or title, because the section does not contemplate the posses sion of any rank trespasser without any right or title.
[311 A B] 7.
That the words "restricted estate" used in section 14(2) are wider than limited interest as indicated in section 14(1) and they include not only limited interest but also any other kind of limitation that may be placed on the transferee.
[311 C] In the instant case, the properties in dispute were allotted to the appellant under a compromise certified by the Court.
Secondly, the appellant had taken only a life interest in the properties and there was a clear restriction prohibiting her from alienating the properties.
Thirdly, despite these restrictions, she continued t0 be in posses sion of the properties till the alienations which she had made in 1960 and 1961 were after she had acquired an abso lute interest in the properties.
Naraini Devi vs Smt.
Ramo Devi & ors [1976] 1 S.C.C.574 over ruled.
S.S. Munnalal vs
S.S. Rajkumar [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 418; Eramina vs Verrupanna ; Mangal Singh vs Smt.
Rattno ; ; Sukhram & anr.
vs Gauri Shankar & anr.
; ; Badri Parshad vs Smt.
Kanso Devi ; and Nirmal Chand vs Vidya Wanti (dead) by her Legal Representative C.A. 609 of 1966 decided on January 21, 1969 referred to.
B.B. Patil vs Gangabai A.1.R. ; Gaddam Reddayya vs Varapula Venkataraju & Anr.
A.I.R. 1965 A.P. 66; Sumeshwar Mishra vs Swami Nath Tiwari A.I.R. 1970 pat.
348; H. Venkanagouda vs Hansumangouda A.I.R. 1972 Mys. 286; Smt.
Sharbati Devi vs Pt.
Hiralal & Anr.
A.I.R. 1964 Punjab 114; Sasadhar Chandra Der vs Smt.
Tara Sundart Desi A.I.R. 1962 Cal.
438, approved.
Narayan Patra vs Tara Patrant [1970] 36 Cuttack Law Times A.I.R. 1970 Orissa 131; Shiva Pulan Rai & Ors.
vs Jamuna Missir & Ors.
I.L.R. 47 Pat.
1118; Gopisetti Kondaiah vs Gunda Subbarayudu I.L.R. ; Ram Jag Misir vs The Director of Consolidation, U.P. ; Ajab Singh & Ors.
vs Ram Singh & Ors.
A.I.R. 1959 L & K. 92; Surnadham vs Sundararajulu I.L.R. ; Kacha palaya Gurukkal vs
V. Subramania Gurukkal A.I.R. 1972, Mad. 279 not approved.
