The Central Provinces and Berar Municipalities .Act, 1922, empowers a municipality to assess and recover octroi duty on goods brought within the municipal limits for sale.
consumption and use therein.
Under the Act an appeal against assessment or levy or refusal to refund any tax lies to a designated official.
A person aggrieved by the decision of the appellate authority has a right to apply to the State Government for revision.
The Act also provides for refer ence to the High Court on questions like liability to as sessment or principles of assessment and so on.
Section 84 (3) lays down that "no objection shall be taken to any valuation.
assessment or levy nor shall the liability of any person to be taxed or assessed be questioned in any other manner or by any other authority than is provided in the Act." Rule 14(b) of the Rules framed under the Act provides that any person importing or bringing any dutiable articles within the octroi limits of a municipality without paying the duty or without giving a declaration to the octroi Moharrir, shall be liable to pay double the duty and shall in addition be liable to be prosecuted for evasion of duty.
The plaintiffs imported within the municipal limits for sale in their retail shops articles manufactured by them in their factories situated at different places in the country.
They paid the octroi levied by the municipality at a certain rate.
But Sometime later the municipality reopened and revised the assessment and charged octroi at a different rate.
It also levied double the duty by way of penalty on the ground that the plaintiffs had intentionally evaded payment of duty on the goods.
The appellate author ity modified the decision of the municipality but upheld the assessment of double duty.
The plaintiffs ' revision appli cation was rejected by the Board of Revenue.
The plaintiffs paid the duty and penalty under protest and filed a suit for recovery of the amount on the ground that the municipality was not entitled to recover the amount of octroi duty and penalty.
Overruling the defendant munic ipality 's objection as regards the civil court 's jurisdic tion to entertain the suit the trial court decreed the suit.
On appeal, the High Court held that the defendants were entitled to revise and reopen the assessment and that the reassessment of duty fixed in appeal by the appellate au thority could not be questioned by the plaintiffs in a civil court.
In appeal it was contended in this Court by the plain tiffs that section 84(3) may bar a suit to challenge an act which was within the purview of the Act, but it could not bar a suit to challenge an act which was outside the Act or the Rules and since in this case the defendant had no power to revise or reopen the assessment.
its action was wholly lacking in jurisdiction and so the suit was competent.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: Since section 84(3) expressly prohibits a challenge to valuation, assessment or levy "in any other manner . . than is provided in this Act" and since the Act has devised its own special machinery for inquiring into and adjudicating upon such challenges, the common remedy .of a suit stands necessarily cxcluded and cannot be availed of by a person aggrieved by an order 183 assessment to octroi duty.
Similarly the sub section excludes expressly the power of "any other authority than is provided in this Act" to entertain an objection to any valuation, assessment or levy of octroi.
This art of the provision is in the nature of ouster of jurisdiction of civil courts, at least by necessary implication, to enter tain an objection to any valuation, assessment or levy. [187 A] 1.
Two of the propositions bearing on the construction of statutes which expressly or by necessary implication bar the jurisdiction of civil courts stated in Dhulabhai & Ors.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; and which are relevant for the purposes of this case are: (i) where the statute gives finality to the orders of special tribunals the civil court 's jurisdiction must be held to be excluded if there is an adequate remedy to do what the civil courts would normally do in a suit.
Such provision, howev er, does not exclude cases where the provisions of the particular Act have not been complied with or the statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial procedure, (ii) questions of the correctness of the assessment, apart from its constitution ality, are for the decision of the authorities and a civil suit does not lie.
if the orders of the authorities are declared to be final or there is an express prohibition in the particular Act, In either case the scheme of the par ticular Act must be examined because it is a relevant en quiry.
[189 D F] (a) In the instant case, the various provisions of the Act show in the first place that the municipality possesses the right and the power to assess and recover octroi duty and double duty on goods brought within the municipal limits for sale, consumption or use therein.
The circumstance that the municility might have acted in excess of or irregularly in the exercise of that power could not support the conclusion that the assessment or recovery of the tax was without jurisdiction.
If the appropriate authority, while exercis ing its jurisdiction and powers under the relevant provi sions of the.
Act, holds erroneously that an assessment already made can be corrected or that an ,assessee is liable to, pay double duty, it cannot be said that the decision of the authority is without jurisdiction.
[192 E F] (b) Both the Act and the Rules contain provisions ena bling the aggrieved party to challenge an illegal assessment or levy of double duty.
By reason of the existence and availability of those special remedies, the ordinary remedy by way of a suit would be excluded on a true interpretation of section 84(3) of the Act.
[193 H] (c) Levy of double duty, though not justified by the terms of r. 14(b) goes to the correctness of the levy and not to the jurisdiction of the assessing authority.
Assuming that neither of the two eventualities mentioned in r. 14(b) occurred and, therefore, there was no justification for imposing double duty, the error could be corrected only in the manner provided in the Act and by the authority pre scribed therein.
The remedy by way of a suit is barred.
[193 A B] (d) The suit for refund of double duty or revised duty is not maintainable because in the first place the assess ment was made by the authority duly empowered to do so and secondly the authority was acting under the Act while revis ing the assessment and imposing double duty.
It had the power to assess and levy double duty.
If it exceeded that power it acted wrongly, but not without jurisdiction.
[193 C D] (e) It is not correct to say that the Act protects correct assessments only and that every incorrect or wrong order of assessment can be challenged by a suit though the statute gives it finality and provides full and effective remedies to challenge it.
Except in matters of constitu tionality and the like a selfcontained Code must have priority over the common means of vindicating rights.
If the appropriate authority, while exercising its jurisdic tion anti power under the relevant provisions of the Act.
comes to an erroneous conclusion it cannot be said that the decision is without jurisdiction.
[193 F. G] Dhulabhai and Others vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; Kamla Mills Ltd. vs State of Bombay ; applied.
13 240SCI/77 184 Bharat Kala Bhandar Ltd. vs Municipal Committee, Dha mangaon; , , B.M. Lahani vs Malkapur Munici pality, and Firm Seth Radka Kishan vs Administrator, Municipal Committee, Ludhiana [19541 2 SCR 273, 284 distinguished.
Wolverhamton New Waterworks Company vs Hawkerford ; Secretary of State vs Mask & Company, 67 I.R. 222, Naville vs London "Express" Newspaper, Limited, , Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar.
and Firm and Illuri Subbaya Chetty & Sons.
vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, ; referred to.
(f) The instant case does not fall within the proposi tions in Dhulabhai 's case because section 84(3) not merely gives finality to the orders passed by the special tribunal but expressly provides that such orders shall not be questioned in any other manner or by any other authority than is pro vided in the Act.
[194 B] (g) In the instant case, the plaintiffs availed them selves of the remedies provided under the Act and.
succeeded to art extent.
Having exhausted their remedies under the Act and having been benefited by the appellate decision, they turned to the civil court to claim refund.
This is impermissible under section 84(3).
[194 F G]
