The respondent No. 1 is an Under Secretary in the Central Government He was in occupation of residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government and was required by the Government order to vacate such residential accommo dation on the ground that he owned in Delhi a residential accommodation in his own name at Shakti Nagar.
The Shakti Nagar House is a two storeyed house.
The first floor was let out to the appellant tenant and the ground floor to another tenant.
Relying on section 14A of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, the respondent evicted the tenant on the ground floor.
Thereafter, the respondent sought eviction of the appellant on the same ground.
The Controller direct ed eviction refusing leave to the tenant to contest the application for eviction.
The Revision Application filed by the appellant before the High Court failed.
In appeal by special leave the appellant contended: (1) In view of the eviction of the tenant on the ground floor the right of the respondent to evict the tenant under section 14A was exhausted.
(2) The respondent No. 1 claims to be a legatee of the deceased landlord under a Will.
He has not got the will probated.
(3) Respondent No. 1 is only one of the co owners and, therefore, cannot file the application for eviction.
(4) The respondent No. 1 has not let out the premises to the appellant and the premises does not stand in the name of the respondent No. 1.
At the hearing, the parties settled their dispute by agree ing that the appellant would vacate the first floor premises consisting of 4 rooms and shift to the ground floor and respondent No. 1 would be handed over the possession of the first floor.
The parties also agreed to certain adjustment in the rent.
Disposing of the appeal in terms of the compromise the Court observed: (1) The landlord cannot use the same weapon.
of section 14A in getting two dwelling houses vacated.
It is contrary to the intendment of section 14A. The object of section 14A is fulfilled once the landlord recovers immediate possession of his premises from one of his tenants.
The right is exhausted thereby and is not available for continual applications for eviction against all other tenants holding under him.
This is made clear by the proviso to .s.
14A(1) which makes plain that the section shall.not be construed as conferring a right on a landlord owning two or more dwelling houses to recover possession of more than one dwelling house.
Of course, it gives choice to the landlord to indicate the particular house among a plurality owned by him, the pos session of which he intends to recover.
[417 A D] (2) A co owner is as much an owner of the entire proper ty as any sole owner of the property.
He owns every part of the composite property along with others and it cannot be said that he is only a part owner.
The absence of other co owners on record cannot disentitle the first respondent from suing for eviction.
From the definition of landlord in section 2(c) and tenant in section 2(1) when read in the context of the Rent Control Law is the simple sense of the situation is that there should be a building which is let.
There must be a landlord who 413 collects rent and a tenant who pays it to the one whom he recognises as landlord.
The complications of estoppel or the concepts of the Transfer of Property Act need not neces sarily or inflexibly be imported in the proceedings under the Rent Control Law, tried by special Tribunals under a special statute.
The Court left open the question if some co owner seek eviction of a tenant and others oppose it whether such application would be maintainable.
[416 C E]
