Section 3 of the Punjab Professions, Trades, Callings and Employment$ Taxation Act, 1956, imposes a tax in re spect of a profession, trade, calling or employment carried on or followed within the State.
Section 5 lays down the manner of determination of tax .on the gross income.
The term "total gross income" is defined by section 2 of the Act as "aggregate gross income derived from various professions, trades, callings and employments".
The words "whether such profession or calling is followed, trade is carried on or employment within or outside the State" were added to the section by an amendment of 1962.
Before the amendment of section 2(b), the High Court had taken the view that in determining the aggregate gross income, only the income derived within the State by a call ing, occupation, trade or profession must be taken into account for the purposes of taxation.
On the question whether the Act restricts taxation of income made within the State.
Allowing the State 's appeal and remitting the case to the High Court HELD: By reading the provisions of section 5 and section 2 togeth er, it is clear that the determination in accordance with the scale laid down in the Schedule, of the aggregate gross income on which tax is assessed, will have to take into account the income of the individual concerned earned both inside and outside the State.
[409 G] 1 (a) The High Court has clearly erred in interpreting section 3 in such a manner as to make section 2(b) read with section 5 of the Act, useless in determining the tax in.
accordance with the gradation laid down in the Schedule to the Act.
This amounts nothing short of legislation.
[410 E F] (b) The only condition for making a person taxable under the Act is that he must also have some profession, trade, calling or occupation which is to be taxed, which he carries on within the State.
It does not matter whether the person is employed or carries on the same or other profession, trade, or calling outside the State also.
Section 3 is only meant to indicate that the person who is to be made liable had carried on some profession, calling, trade, or occupa tion within the State and it has nothing to do with the calculation of the aggregate amount of the tax to be levied.
That is dealt with by section 5 read with section 2(b) as amended.
In determining the amount of tax, the amount an assessee makes outside must also be added to what he makes inside the State.
His total gross income determines only his grade or amount of tax he has to pay.
His subjection to a profession or calling tax depends only on the fact that he carries on some business or has some trade or calling within the State.
[410 A C] 2.
The principle that where a provision 'is capable of one of two interpretations, the interpretation which vali dates rather the one which may invalidate a provision ap plies only where two views are possible.
It cannot be pushed so far as to alter the meaning of the clear words used in an enactment and to repeal statutory provisions by making them useless without holding them to be void.
[410 F] [The case was remanded to the High Court for deciding the validity of the amendment made to section 2(b) of the Act] 409
