In the biennial elections of 1974 for filling six vacancies to the Rajya Sabha from the State of Tamil Nadu, there were eight contestants, including both the appellants and one R. Mohanarangam, the petitioner in Election Petition No. 1 of 1974.
The requisite quota to secure the election of a candidate was fixed at (22400 +1)/6+1 +1 =3201 and the appellant John secured 3700 votes.
While the appellant Subrahmanyam secured 300 votes, Mohanarangam failed to secure any.
The rest of them secured more than the quota, thus leaving "surplus votes" for transfer within the mean ing of Rule 71 (6) of the Conduct of Election Rules.
In the election petitions filed by Mohanarangam and Subrahmanyam, the election of Sri John was assailed on the ground that on March 12, 1974, the date of the scrutiny of the nominations, he was less than 30 years of age and as such he did not possess the qualifications as to age laid down under article 84(b) of the Constitution that the improper acceptance of John 's nomination has materially affected the election.
The petitioners prayed that the election of Sri John be declared void and set aside under section 100 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951.
Each of the petition ers claimed that in the event of Sri John 's election being set aside, he be declared elected under section 101 of the Act.
A recrimination petition No. 1/74 under section 97 read with section 83 of the Representation of Peoples Act was also filed by the appellant Subramanyam, opposing Mohanarangam 's relief for the declaration under section 101 of the Act, alleging that since the petitioner Mohanarangam in E.P. 1/74 had not secured any vote, he, in the event of the election of Sri John being set aside, was not entitled to be declared elect ed in the place of John.
The trial Judge of the High Court held that on the date of the scrutiny of nominations Sri John being.less than 30 years of age was not qualified under article 84(b) of the Constitution to contest the election to,the Rajya Sabha and accepting the election petition pro tanto set aside John s election.
The trial Judge, however, declined t.o grant further declaration under section 101 in favour of either of the election petitioner.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: (1) From the evidence on record it stood clearly established that on the date of the scrutiny of nominations Sri John was less than 30 years of age 539 and in view of article 84(b) of the Constitution he was not competent to contest the election for the Rajya Sabha.
His nomination was, therefore, improperly accepted by the Re turning Officer, and this improper acceptance has, in so far as ' it concerned the returned candidate, Sri John materially affected the result of the election.
[547 F G] (2) The onus of proving that on the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations, a contestant was less than 30 years of age was on the election petitioners.
In the instant case, the petitioners had amply discharged this onus by bringing on record over whelming documentary evidence of a cogent and convincing character.
This documentary evidence includes no less than a dozen previous admissions and declarations made between March 1964 and July 1973 by Sri John himself about his age, to the effect that he was born in 1946 and that his date of birth was 14.5.1946.
Apart from the evidence of these prior admissions the election petitioners had brought other documentary evidence viz., the school record purport edly signed by John 's guardian, Secondary School Leaving Certificate 'and various other documents of the educational institutions, Marriage Register Bar Council Record and Church records etc.
pointing to the conclusion that Sri John was born on 14.5.1946 and not on 14 5 1943.
[542 D H, 543 A B F] (3) It is well settled that a party 's admission as de fined in sections 17 to 20 fulfilling the requirements of section 21, Evidence Act is substantive evidence proprio vigore.
An admission, if clearly and unequivocally made is the best evidence against the party making it and though not conclusive, shifts the onus on to the maker on the principle that "what a party himself admits to be true may reasonably be presumed to be so" and until the presump tion was rebutted the fact admitted must be taken to be established.
In the instant case, there are a number of clear admissions in prior declarations precisely and delib erately made in solemn documents by Shri John.
These admis sions were made ante litem motam during the decade preceding the election in question.
These admissions were entitled to great weight.
They had shifted the burden on the appellant (Shri John) to show that they were incorrect.
The appel lant had miserably failed to show that these admissions were incorrect.
[543 C E] (4) Under Rule 71(1) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961, "Continuing candidate" means any candidate not elected and not excluded from the poll at any given time.
Two elements must, therefore, be satisfied before a candidate can be said to be a Continuing candidate.
He should be a "candidate not elected" and further he must not be excluded from the poll at any given time.
In the instant case Sri Mohanarangam fulfils both these conditions.
[550 B, 552 C] (5) The contention that an essential prerequisite to the continuance of a candidate is the allotment of a "bas ket" or "parcel" under Rule 74 and only such candidate is entitled to the allotment of a basket who at the end of the count gets some vote to his credit and opens his account, and since Mohanarangam did not get any vote whatever he stood automatically excluded is not correct.
There is nothing in Rule 74 or any other Rule which, at an election to fill more than one seat, requires or empowers the Return ing Officer to exclude a candidate from the poll merely on the ground that in the counting of the first preferences, he has not received any valid vote.
[552 E H] (6) Sub Rule (3) of Rule 75 which requires the Return ing Officer to exclude from the poll a candidate.
whose score is the lowest governs the counting of votes where only one seat is to be filled and at the end of any count, no candidate can be declared elected.
Sub Rule (3) of Rule 75 has no application to the instant case.
[552 G] (7) Rule 80 can have n6 application because, it comes into operation at a stage "after all surpluses have been trans ferred.
That stage never arrived in the instant case because in the first counting.
itself all the six seats were filled up six candidates (including Shri John) having received the requisite quota of first preference votes.
Nor did the stage for applying Rule 81 arise, because at the end of the first count, no vacancy remained untitled.
In the instant case, shri Mohanarangam did not get automatically excluded.
Both he and Sri Subrahmanyam were continuing candidates.
Sri Subrahmanyam could not be declared elected as he had not obtained the required quota of 3201 votes.
[522 H; 553 A] 540 (8) The ratio decidendi of Viswanatha vs Konappa is applica ble only where, (a) there are two contesting candidates and one of them is disqualified (b) and the election is on the basis of single non transferable vote.
In the instant case the election in question was not held by mode of single non transferable vote according to which a simple majority of votes secured ensures the success candidate, but by proportional representation with single transferable yore under which system the success of a candidate normally depends on his securing the requisite quota.
Shri Subrah manyam was not the sole surviving continuing candidate left in the field, after exclusion of the disqualified candi date, Shri John.
[554 G H, 555 A] Wiswanatha vs Konappa AIR 1969 S.C. 604, distinguished.
All the votes that had polled in favour of Shri John who has been found by the court to be statutorily disqualified for election cannot be regarded as thrown away and in conse quence, the appellant Shri Subrahmanyam who secure 300 votes as against none obtained by Shri Mohanarangam cannot be declared elected.
Shri Subrahmanyam was neither the sole continuing candidate not had be secured the requisite quota of votes.
It is nobody 's case that the electors who voted for Shri John had at the time of election knowledge or notice of the statutory disqualification of this candidate.
On the contrary, they must have been under the impression that Shri John was a candidate whose nomination had been validly accepted by the Returning Officer.
Had the electors notice of Shri John 's disqualification, how many of them would have voted for him and how many for the other continu ing candidates including Sarvashri Subrahmanyam and Mohana rangam and in what preferential order, remains a question in the realm of speculation and unpredictability.
[553 B E] R.M.
Seshadri vs
G.V. Pai ; @ p. 701, fol lowed.
