The appellant a foreign company within the meaning of section 2(5A) of Income Tax Act, entered into an agreement with M/s. Carborandum Universal Ltd., having its registered office at Madras on June 22, 1955 and rendered certain technical and knowhow services.
In view of the said serv ices it was to 'receive from the Indian company an annual service fee equal to 3 per centum of the net sale proceeds of the products manufactured by the latter.
During the year of account relevant to the assessment year 1957 58 the appellant company received a sum of Rs. 95,762/ from the Indian company as its service fee.
A good slab of it was deducted at source on account of incometax and super tax.
The appellant company fried its return of income for the year in question with an application for refund of the entire tax deducted at source.
The income tax officer took the view in his assessment order that 5% of the technical fee paid to the American company was earned by it in India and only that small amount was assessable to in come tax and directed the refund of major portion of the tax deducted at source to the assessee company.
The Commission er of Income tax in exercise of his revisional powers under section 33B of the Act took the view that at least 75% of the technical fee earned by the assessing company during the year of account had accrued or .arisen in India even though the technical information was supplied by the assessee company from outside India and the technical personnel furnished by the assessee company to the Indian company although worked under the control of and was paid for by the latter inasmuch as the situs of the services so rendered was in India.
Treating the technical fee in the nature of royalty paid, it directed the Income tax Officer to revise the assessment on the basis that 75% of it should be taken as income accruing or arising in India to the assessee company.
On appeal, the Appellate Tribunal set aside the said order and restored that of the Income tax Officer even though it was of the view that even 5% of the technical fee could not be taken as income of the assessee.
company taxa ble under the Act.
The Tribunal held that the use of the technical assistance and know how given by the American Company and made use of by the Indian Company in the taxable territory could not make the former liable to payment of income tax on the amount of technical fee received by it nor was it any royalty.
It also rejected a new stand taken by the Revenue that the assessee company must be deemed to be working in conjunction with the Indian Company in the manu facture of its products.
On reference under section 66( 1 ).
of the Act the Revenue.
took another new plea that the agree ment clearly established a business connection between the two companies and as such technical fee received by the assessee company had accrued or arose from such business connection assessable to income tax under section 4(1)(c) read with section 42 of the Act.
The objection of the assessee.
company to the entertainment of the new point at the refer ence stage that it did not arise out of the Tribunal 's order was over ruled by the High Court on the ground that the question referred to was in general terms and comprehensive enough to embrace within its ambit the point of applicabili ty of section 42(1) of the Act to the transactions in question.
Upholding the stand taken on behalf of the Revenue the High Court answered the question referred to it in its favour against the assessee company.
On appeal by certificate the appellant contended: 476 (1) That the High Court could not go into the matter of business connection between the two companies when such a question was never raised or in issue at any earlier stage; (2) That the High Court was wrong in rounding the tax liability of the assessee company on the basis of the alleged business connection.
Its finding or view in that regard is wholly erroneous.
(3) That even assuming that the High Court was right in its view of basing the tax li ability of the assessee company on the alleged business connection, it failed to examine the question of apportionment under section 42(3) of the Act.
(4) That apportionment under section 42(3) and determination of the tax liability of the assessee company in pursuance thereof could not be more than the liability to pay tax on 5% of the total technical fee as found by the Income taxOfficer and upheld by the Tribunal, HELD: (1) The technical service fee received by the assessee company from the Indian company during the accounting year relevant to the assessment year 1957 58 did not accrue or arise in India.
Since 5% of the technical service fee was brought to tax by the I.T.O. and no appeal was filed against it on behalf of the assessee company, the technical fee in excess of 5% was not taxable.
[484 B D] (2) The High Court did not keep in view the distinction between the concept of actual accrual and the notion of deemed accrual evidenced from section 4(1) (c) & section 42 but mixed the one with the other while answering the reference in question.
The income assessable to income tax section 4(1)(c) is of two kinds viz. (1) accruing or arising in the taxable territories and (ii) deemed to accrue or arise to the non resident in the taxable territory.
The concept of actual accrual or arising of income in the taxable territories, although not depending upon the receipt of the income in the taxable territories is quite distinct and apart from the notion of deemed accrual or arising of the income.
[481 A B].
(3) The High Court was wrong in entertaining at the reference stage on the basis of the alleged general and compendious nature of the question referred to it by the Tribunal the new point based upon the theory of business connection, which was neither raised before the Tribunal nor considered by it; nor did it arise on the findings of fact recorded by it.
[481 F G] Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. ; , followed.
(4) The High Court went wrong in its approach to the question raised before it and did not quite correctly appre ciate the scope and applicability of section 42 of the Act.
On a plain reading of sub sections (1) and (3) of section 42, it would appear that income accruing or arising from any busi ness connection in the taxable territories even though the income may accrue or arise outside the taxable territories will be deemed to be income accruing or arising in such territory, provided operations in connection with such business, either all or a part, are carried out in the taxable territory.
If all such operations are carried out in the taxable territory, sub section (1.) would apply and the entire income accruing or arising outside the taxable territory but as a result of the operations in connection with the business giving rise to the income would be deemed to accrue or arise in the taxable territories.
If, however, all the operations are not carried out in the taxable terri tories, the profits and gains of the business deemed to accrue or arise in the taxable territories shall be only such 'profits and gains are reasonably attributable to that part of the operations carried out in the taxable territo ries.
Thus comes in the question of apportionment under subsection (3) of section 42.
[482 C F] Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab vs R.D. Aggarwal & Co. and Anr.56 ITR 20, referred to.
(5) In the instant case the High Court was wrong in its view that activities of the foreign personnel lent or deput ed by the American company amounted to a business activity carried on by that company in the taxable territory.
The service rendered by the American company in that connection was wholly and 477 solely rendered in the foreign territory.
No part of the activity or operation could be said to have been carried on by the American company in India, even if there was any business connection between the earning of the income in the shape of the technical fee by the American company and the affairs of the Indian company.
In the absence of such a sustainable finding, the provisions of section 42 either of sub section (1) or of sub section (3):were not attracted at all.
In order to rope in the income of a non resident under the deeming provision it must be shown by the Department that some of the operations were carried out in India in respect of which the income is sought to be assessed.
[483 E H] Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras I vs Carborandum Co. overruled.
C.I.T. Bombay City IV.
Tata Chemicals Ltd. , approved.
