The appellants were the sole selling agents of the Oriental Carpet Manufacturers India Pvt. Ltd. in respect of yarn, cloth and blankets manufactured by them and for the sales effected by the appellants, as such sole selling agent 's commission was paid to them by OCM.
Since the appellants showed very satisfactory turnover from year to year, OCM started giving to them, in addition to the usual commission, over riding commission @ 21/2 per cent on the sales effected by the appellants.
Since the turnover of the sales reached the figure of Rs. 54.28 lacs and over riding commission increased to Rs. l,13,449/ during the previous year corresponding to the assessment year 1963 64, the appellants paid out of the over riding commission received by them a sum of Rs. 22,690/ (i.e. at the rate of 1/2% of the sales) each to two of their employees viz., Saheb Dayal and Gurditta Mall since they were primarily responsible for the increased prosperity of the appellants.
The commission so paid viz. Rs. 45,380/ was claimed by the appellants as a deductible expenditure in their assessment to income tax for the assessment year 1963 64.
The Income Tax Officer disallowed the claim on the ground that there was no evi dence to show that the increase in sales during the relevant accounting year was due to the efforts of Saheb Dayal and Gurditta Mal.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the appeal preferred to him and held that since no evidence had been produced by the assessee to prove that the activi ties of Saheb Dayal and Gurditta Mal in the relevant account year were of a nature different from those: in the earlier years so that they put in any extra time or energy in the conduct of the business of the assessee so as to justify the payment of the commission, it could not be said that the commission was paid for services rendered by them.
The Tribunal, in further appeal took the same view and held that since there was no proof to show that any extra services were rendered by Saheb Dayal and Gurditta Mal for which payment of commission in addition to salary and bonus could be justified, commission could not be said to have been paid for services rendered so as to attract the applicability of section 36(1)(ii) of the Act.
The High Court was also of the same view and answered the reference made to it, in favour of the Revenue.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The sum of Rs. 45,380/ paid by the assessee to Saheb Dayal and Gurditta Mal by way of commission during the 'relevant accounting year was reasonable, having regard to all the circumstances of the case and it ought to have been allowed as a deductible expenditure section 36(1)(ii) of the Income Tax Act.
[537 B] (2) Section 36, sub section (1) clause (ii) does not postulate that there should be any extra services rendered by an employee before payment of commission to him can be justified as an allowable expenditure.
What it requires, is only this, namely, that commission paid to an employee should be for some services rendered by him.
It is not necessary that the commission should be paid under a con tractual obligation.
It may be purely voluntary.
(3) It is immaterial that the services rendered during the relevant accounting year were in no way greater or more onerous than the services rendered in the earlier years.
There is no such requirement under the section and it is not justified by the language of section 36, sub section(l), clause (ii) and indeed if it were pushed to its logical extreme, even payment of bonus cannot be treated as permissible deduction under that provision.
[534 G H] 530 (4) It is now well settled that the mere fact that commission is paid exgratia would not necessarily mean that it is unreasonable.
Commercial expediency does not mean that an employer should not make any payment to an employee unless the employee is entitled to it under a contract.
What is the requirement of commercial expediency must be judged not in the light of the 19th Century laissez faire doctrine which regarded man as an economic being concerned only to protect and advance his self interest but in the context of current socio economic thinking which places the general interest of the community above the personal interest of the individual and believes that a business or undertaking is the product of the combined efforts of the employer and the employees and where there is sufficiently large profit, after providing for the salary or remuneration of the employer and the employees and other prior charges such as interest on capital depreciation, reserves etc., as part of it should in all fairness go to the employees.
[536 E G] (5) The question whether commercial expediency justified the payment of commission would have to be judged in the light of.
all the circumstances existing at the material time.
In the instant case, the assessee felt, on grounds of commercial expediency that a part of the over riding commis sion should be raid besides salary and bonus to its two employees who had worked so well and contributed to the prosperity of the assessee and did make the payment.
[525 AB] Laxmandas Sejram vs C.I.T. Gujarat approved.
(6) The question whether the amount of the commission is a reasonable amount or not has to be determined with refer ence to the three factors laid down in section 36(1)(ii).
Though described loosely as conditions, they are not really conditions on the fulfilment of which alone the amount of commission paid to an employee can be regarded as reasona ble.
The reasonableness of the amount of commission has to be considered from the point of view of a normal, prudent businessman, and not on any subjecting standard of the assessing authority.
[525 C D] Observation: It is high time that the administration of our tax law recognised the demand of social justice today viz., profit sharing by the employees and encouraged it by adopting a progressive and liberal approach in the applicability of section 36, subsection (1), clause (ii).
[536 H]
