The appellant, a Sub ordinate Judge was compulsorily retired under the Government of India Decision No. 23.
below Fundamental Rule No. 56 though the said rule was later substituted as FR 56(j).
A writ petition assailing the order of compulsory retirement as in violation of Article 311 was dismissed by the Judicial Commissioner for Manipur.
On appeal by certificate the appellant contended that the impugned order of compulsory retirement was null and void ab initio because: (1) Fundamental Rule 56 at the material time contained no reservation of any power in the appointing authority to retire him without any reason on three month 's notice after the age of 55 years: (2) the impugned order was made expressly under a non subsisting authority viz., Gov ernment of India Decision No. 23 below Fundamental Rule 56, at the time ' of impugned notice and (3) the Government of India Decision not having been incorporated in Fundamental Rule 56, it amounted to a mere executive instruction and not a rule within the meaning of Article 309.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court HELD: (1) Compulsory retirement is not a punishment, there being no stigma in it.
[1024 D] Tara Singh etc.
vs State of Rajasthan and Ors. ; reiterated.
(2) If power can be traced to a valid power the fact that 1he power is purported to have been exercised under non existing power does not invalidate the exercise of the power.
In the .present case, the affidavit evidence estab lishes that the Commissioner exercised his powers and was of the opinion that it was in public interest to make the order of compulsory retirement.
[1024 E 1025 A] L. Hazari Mal Kuthiala vs Income tax Officer, special circle Ambala Cantt.
and Anr.
I.T.R. 12 and Hukumchand Mills Ltd. vs State of Madhya Bharath and Anr. ; I.T.R. 583 followed.
(3) The absence of recital in the order of compulsory retirement that it was made "in public interest" is not fatal as long as power to make compulsory retirement in public interest is there and the power, in fact, is shown in the facts and circumstances of the case, to have been exer cised in public interest.
Whether the, order is correct or not is not to be gone into by the Court.
In the instant case, the Government affidavit is that the Chief Commission er made the order because he was of the opinion.
that it was in public interest to do so.
The order is made bona fide and nothing us on the record to show that the affidavit is unbelievable.
[1025 A B, E G] Union of India vs J. N. Sinha [1971] 1 SCR 791 applied.
Butail vs Union of India & Ors.
referred to. 1023
