The appellant and his father were charged section 2(1) (c) of the for adul teration of chilly powder.
The sample of chilli powder which was seized by the Food Inspector on April 13, 1974 contained 37.25% of the total ash against the permissible percentage of 8%.
It was stated in the Analyst 's report that the percentage of extraneous matter which was common salt mixed with the chilli power was 32.4%.
The judicial magistrate, Udgir, found that the chilli powder was adulter ated within the meaning of section 2(i) of the Act and convicted the appellant under section 16(1) (a) (i), proviso I of the r/w section 2(i)(1) and section 7(1) of the said Act and sentenced him to simple impris onment till the rising of the court and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/ and in default rigorous imprisonment for two months.
The appellant 's father was, however, acquitted.
The State of Maharashtra preferred an appeal against the order of acquittal of the father and against the inadequacy of the sentence awarded to the appellant.
The High Court dismissed the appeal against acquittal of the appellant 's father but allowed the appeal of the State with regard to the inadequa cy of the sentence.
Affirming the conviction of the appel lant under section 16(1) (a) (i) r/w sections 2(1)(i) and 7(1) of the Act, the High Court enhanced the sentence to six months ' simple imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 1000/ , in default simple imprisonment for two months.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, HELD: (1) The new Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has not abolished the High Court 's power of enhancement of sentence by exercising revisional jurisdiction suo motu.
The provision for appeal against inadequacy of sentence by the State Government or the Central Government does not lead to such a conclusion.
High Courts power of enhancement of sentence in an appropriate case by exercising suo motu power of revision is still extent section 397 read with section 401 Crimi nal Procedure Code, 1973, inasmuch as the High Court can "by itself" call for the record of proceedings of any inferior criminal court under its jurisdiction.
The provision of section 401 (4) is a bar to a party who does not appeal when appeal lies, but applies to revision.
Such a legal bar under section 401(4) does not stand in the way of the High Courts exercise of power of revision suo motu, which continues as before in the new .Code.
[545H, 546A C] 514 (2) Under sub section (1) of section 377, the State Govern ment has a right to appeal against the inadequacy of sen tence in all cases other than those referred to in sub section (2) of that section.
The true test under section 377(2) Criminal Procedure Code is whether the offence is investi gated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment or is investigated by any other agency empowered to make investi gation under any Central Act other than the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In other words, just like section 3 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, there should be an express provision in an Act empowering the making of investigation under the Act.
No such express provision is found in the .
Mere provision of an in built mechanism of some kind of investigation in that Act is not decisive of the matter.
There should be an express provision in that Act empowering the Food Inspectors to make investigation of offences under the Act.
In the absence of any express provision in the Act in that behalf, it cannot be held that the Food Inspectors are empowered to make investigation under the Act.
Section 377(2) Criminal Proce dure Code, therefore, is not attracted and the appeal under section 377(1), Criminal Procedure Code at the instance of the.
State Government is maintainable.
[517 A, H, 518A, B, C, F] (3) The provides that when conviction is under section 16(1) (a) (i) for selling an adulterated article coming within the definition of section 2(i)(1 ), the Magistrate by recording adequate and special reasons has jurisdiction to award a sentence less than the minimum, [519 H 520 A C] (4) Courts have to give due recognition to the intent of the Legislature in awarding proper sentence including the minimum sentence in appropriate cases described under the Act.
When the Legislature itself intends not to visit an offence under the Act with an equal degree of severity under specified circumstances, it is permissible for the courts to give the benefit in suitable cases.
[519 F G] (5) In an appeal under section 377, Criminal Procedure Code, the High Court may interfere with the sentence, if no rea sons for awarding a lesser sentence are recorded by the Magistrate.
Again if the reasons recorded by the Magistrate are irrelevant, extraneous, without materials and grossly inadequate, the High Court will be justified in enhancing the sentence.
In the instant case the reasons given by the Magistrate were not so grossly inadequate that the High Court could interfere with the sentence in a petty case.
[520 A B, C] (6) In an appeal against inadequacy of sentence it is not permissible to alter a conviction to an aggravated category of offence for which the accused was not convicted.
While the accused in such an appeal under section 377 can show that he is innocent of the offence, the prosecution is not entitled to show that he is guilty of graver offence and that on that basis the sentence should be enhanced.
The prosecution will only be able to urge that the sentence is inadequate on the charge as found or even on an altered less graver charge.
[519 D E] (7) When there is a decision of a co ordinate court, it is open to the judge to differ from it, but in that case,the only judicial alternative is to refer to a larger Bench and not to dispose of the appeal by taking a contrary view.
judicial discipline as well as decorum should suggest that as the only course.
[520 F]
