Purshottam Udeshi was travelling in a car which was driven by Manager of the first respondent company.
The car was insured with the second respondent.
The car dashed against a tree while proceeding from Nagpur to Pandurna.
Purshottam, who was aged 58 years at that time, died in the. accident.
His annual income was about Rs. 9000/ .
The widow and children of Purshottam filed a claim for compensation for a sum of Rs. 1 lac under section 110 of the , before the Claims Tribunal.
The respondents denied that the vehicle was driven in a rash or negligent manner and contended tbat the vehicle at the time of accident was perfectly in sound condition.
It was also contended that Purshottam was travelling in the said vehicle on his own responsibility and for his own purpose absolutely gratis and not on behalf of or at the instance of respondent No. 1 or the driver of the vehicle and, therefore, the claimants were not entitled to any compensation.
The respondent pleaded inevitable accident.
The Tribunal found that the accident was as a result of negligent driving of the vehicle by the Manager.
It also found that the first respondent the owner of the company was liable, to pay compensation to the claimants on account of negligence of their employee.
Tribunal awarded Rs. 31,209/ as general damages on the basis of 5 years ' earning less the, amount which the deceased might have spent on himself and Rs. 2,000/. as special damages for funeral and post funeral expenses.
The Tribunal took into account the pay, D.A., conveyance allowance etc.
for the purpose of determining income of the deceased.
Both the respond ents.
filed appeals in the.
High Court.
The High Court did not decide the question as to whether the accident was due to rash and negligent driving or the quantum of compensation allowed by the Tribunal was proper or not on the ground that the respondent No. 1 cannot be held vicariously liable for the act of their Manager in taking Purshottam as a passen ger as the said act was neither in the course of his employ ment nor under any authority whatsoever; that no evidence was led to show that the respondent No. 1 was aware that Purshottam was being taken in the car as a passenger by their Manager.
The High Court held that Purshottam was no better than a trespasser as far as respondent No. 1 is concerned and that, therefore., respondent No. 1 cannot be made vicariously liable.
In an appeal by certificate, the appellants claimants con tended: (1) That the accident was due to the, rash and negligent driving of the Manager of re spondent No. 1.
(2) The accident took place during the course of the employment of the driver.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) The car was being driven rashly and negligent ly.
Although no eye witness was examined P.W.I. the brother of the deceased who went to the spot soon after the accident was examined.
He deposed that the car dashed 373 against a tree.
The tree was on the right hand side of the road, 4 ft.
away from the right hand side of the main met alled road.
The road was 15 ft. wide and was a metalled road.
On other side of the road there were fields at lower level.
The tree against which the car dashed was uprooted about 9 to 10" from the ground.
The car dashed so vio lently that it was broken in the front side.
The vehicle struck so violently that the machine of the car went back about a foot from its original position.
The steering wheel of the engine of the car receded back on the driver 's side and the said impact on the driver 's side and by the said impact the occupants died and front seat also moved back.
The witness was not cross examined on these facts.
The maxim of "Res ipsa 1oquitur" clearly applies in the present case.
In view of the proved facts the burden was on the respondents to prove the inevitable accident.
[376 B H] Eller vs Selfridge , referred to.
The normal rule is that it is for the plaintiff to prove negligence but in some cases considerable hardship is caused to ' the plaintiff as the true, cause! of the accident is not known to him but is solely within the knowledge of the, defendant who caused it.
The plaintiff can prove the acci dent but cannot prove how it happened to establish negli gence on the part of the defendant.
This hardship is sought to be avoided by applying the principle of res ipsa 1oqui tur.
It means the accident "speaks for itself" or "tells its own story".
The car could not have gone to the right extremity and dashed with such violence with the tree if the driver had exercised reasonable care and caution.
The Court did not think it necessary to remand the matter to the High Court to consider the question of rash and negligent driving since the evidence was convincing.
[377 D E, 378, A. E] (2) It is an admitted fact that the driver of the car, the Manager of respondent No. 1, was proceeding from Nagpur to Pandhurna for purpose of delivering an amount of Rs. 20,000/ .
He was driving the car in the course of the employment of respondent No. 1.
It is now firmly estab lished that the master 's liability is based on the ground that the.
act is done in the scope or sourse of his employ ment or authority.
[379 A G] Young vs Edward Box and Co. Ltd. at 793, approved.
Sitaram Motilal Kalal vs Santanuprasad Jaishankar Bhatt (1966)3 SCR 527; Conway vs George Wimpey & Co. Ltd. and , distinguished.
Ormrod and Another vs Crosville Motor Services Ltd. (1953)2 All E.R. 753 and Canadian Pacific Railway Co. vs Lockhart , referred to.
(3) The Manager permitted Purshottam to have a ride in the car.
Taking into account the high position of the driver who was the Manager of the company it is reasonable, to presume in the absence of any evidence to the contrary the Manager had authority to carry Purshottam or acting in the course of his employment.
There is nothing to support the conclusion of the High Court that the driver was not acting in the course of his employment.
[382 D F] Cox vs Midland Counties Ry.
Co. ; and Honghton vs Pilkington, distinguished.
Twine vs Bean 's Express, Ltd. 62 T.L.R.p.
155, year 1945 46 distinguished.
Recent trend in law is to make the master liable for acts which do not strictly fall within the term "in the course of employment" as ordinarily understood.
[383 F] 5.
The High Court did not go into the question of quantum of compensation.
The Tribunal, however, ought not to have taken D.A., Conveyance Allowance etc.
, into account for the purposes of determining the income of the deceased.
Thus, the income of 5 years would stand reduced from Rs. 31,000/to Rs. 25,500/ over and above special damage of Rs. 2,000/ [385 A, C D] 374 6.
As far as respondent No. 2 Insurance Co. is con cerned it contended that since the Company had specifically limited its liability in respect of injury to passengers to Rs. 15,000/ it cannot be made liable for anything in excess of Rs. 15,000/ .
The respondent No. 1 contended that the insurance cover under the Act extended to the injury to the passengers also and relied on Section 95(1) (b)(i) which provides against any libility to the owner which may be incurred by him in respect of death or bodily injury to any person or damage to any person of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place.
Section 95 of the as amended by Act 56 of 1969, is based on the Road Traffic Act of 1960 or the earlier Act of 1930 in England.
Section 95(a) and 95(b)(i) of the Act adopts the provisions of the English Road Traffic Act, 1960, and excludes the liability of the Insurance Co. regarding the.
risk to the passengers.
Section 95 provides that a policy of insurance must be a policy which insures the persons against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of death or bodily injury to any person or damage.
to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of use of the vehicle in a public place.
Proviso 2 to Section 95(b) makes it clear that it is not required that a policy of insurance should cover risk of the passengers who are not carried for hire or reward.
Under section 95, the risk to a passenger in a vehicle who is not carried for hire or reward is not required to be insured.
The Insurer can however always take policies for a risk which is not covered by section 95.
In the present case, the insurer had insured with the Insurance Co. the risk to the passenger to the extent of Rs. 15,000/ .
Clause 1 of the section 2 to the Insurance Policy which requires the Insurance Co. to indemnify the insured in respect of claimants ' claim which becomes legally payable: in respect of death of or bodily injury to any person is not happily worded.
However, since the said clause .talks of "except so far as necessary to meet the requirements of section 95 of the " would indicate that the liability is restricted ,to the liability aris ing out of the statutory requirements under section 95.
The policy read with the other clauses makes it clear that the respondent No. 2 would be liable to the extent of Rs. 15,000/ .
[385 G H, 386 A, F, A D]
