Under section 12(1 ) of the Bombay Rents.
Hotel and lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, a tenant is entitled to claim protection from eviction so long as he is willing and ready to pay the standard rent as defined in section 5(10) and permit ted increases and observes other conditions of the Act.
The protection is subject to the limitations contained in section 12(2) and 12(3).
Under section 12(3)(a) where the rent is pay able by the month and there is no dispute regarding the amount of standard rent or permitted increases, if such rent or increases arc in arrears for a period of 6 months or more and the tenant neglects to make payment thereof until the expiration of the period of one mouth after notice referred to in sub section (2), the court may pass a decree for eviction in any such suit for recovery of possession.
Under a 12(3)(b) no decree for eviction shall be passed in any suit if on the first day of hearing of the suit or on or before such other date as the court may fix the tenant pays or tenders in court the standard rent and permitted in creases then due and thereafter continues to pay or tender in court regularly such rent and permitted increases till the suit is finally decided and also pays costs of the suit as directed by the court.
The respondent tenant was in arrears of rent amounting to Rs. 990/ for the period from 6th March 1967 to 5th December 1969, house tax amounting to Rs. 27.49 and elec tricity charges amounting to Rs. 210.18.
The appellant landlord served a notice upon him under section 106 of the Trans fer of Property Act terminating the tenancy and filed a suit for eviction.
The respondent filed an application for fixation Of the standard rent within a month trader section 11(2) of the Act.
He also filed an application for fixation of interim rent on the ground that he being a poor man was unable to pay rent and the total amount due at once.
On these applications, the interim rent was fixed at Rs. 25/ by an order dated 3 2 1970 and he was directed to deposit arrears of rent and future rent at this rate on or before 1oth of the next month.
These applications were dismissed for non prosecution later on.
The trial court held that as the respondent tenant was "ready and willing" to pay the rent to the appellant landlord, the suit for ejectment could not be decreed in spite of the fact it found that the notice was validly issued and the arrears were true and correct.
The appellate court held that the unwillingness of the respondent to pay the rent which was apparent from the patent facts and admissions and conduct disentitled him from the protection under section 12 and decreed the suit for eject ment.
The High Court.
however, relying on an affidavit dated 18 9 75 filed by the respondent allowed the revision application made by him under section 29(2) of the Act.
Allowing the apppeal by special leave, the Court.
HELD: (1) The statutory protection can only be given in accordance with the terms on which it is permissible.
The Bombay Rents.
Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 does not confer a power upon the court to excuse a violation of the provisions of the Act by making wrong assumptions or on compassionate grounds.
The Court.
could not, therefore, exercise what would be in effect a power to condone infringement of the Act.
[575F, 576B] (2) In cases where there is no dispute regarding the amount of standard rent if the provisions of section 12(3)(a) are nor shown to be complied with.
570 the Court is bound to pass a decree for eviction.
Where a tenant does not prosecute an application for fixation of standard rent and deliberately permits to be dismissed for non prosecution, it could be reasonably inferred that it was not a bona fide application at all.
[575 G H, 576 A] (3) A fixation of standard rent can only take place by means of the specified procedure provided for it.
There is nothing in the instant case which could be "deemed" a fixa tion under the Act.
It being admitted that the agreed rent was Rs. 30/ per mensem that would be the standard rent as defined by section 5(10) of the Act.
That was the rate on which the rent was payable.
Non prosecution of the application for standard rent indicate that there was no real dispute regarding standard rent or permitted increases.
[571A 573G, 575FG] (4) Section 12(3)(b) applies only to cases where either on the first hearing of the suit or on such other dates as the court may fix for the purpose, the tenant pays or tenders in court the standard rent with permitted increases pays or In the instant case the respondent did not comply with the orders dated 3 2 1970 fixing the interim rent.
Under the order dated 3 2 1970, the tenant had to deposit arrears of rent and in addition he had to deposit future rent at the rate fixed for the interim rent.
The part of the order for future rent could not refer to arrears of rent.
If the tenant was not quite clear about the meaning of the order, he could have applied to the court to clarify the orders and could have gone on depositing rent at Rs. 25/ per month after depositing arrears of rent so clarified.
[575 FG, 574 B C] Vora Abbashai Alimahorned vs Haji Gulamnabi Haji Safibhai ; referred to.
(5) The readiness and willingness of the tenant to pay could be found only if he had complied with the provisions of the Act.
The Act does not cover the case of a person who is unable to pay owing to want of means but is otherwise "ready and willing".
The Act, unfortunately, does not enable courts to make special law for such hard cases which fall outside the statutory protection.
The instant case is clearly outside the protection conferred upon tenants under section 12 of the Act.
The tenant could not be said to be "ready and willing" to pay the rent so as to avoid passing of a decree for eviction against him, in the face of detailed findings given by the appellate court.
After assuming quite erroneously that the standard rent was fixed for the first time in the appellate court and by accepting the version of the tenant respondent that his default was due to his diffi culty in finding money to pay the rent, the High Court had erroneously condoned all defaults in payment of rent right upto the time of the making of the application before it on 18 9 1975.
[576 B G] Shah Dhansukhlal Chaganlal vs Dalichand Virchand Shroff & Ors. ; applied.
