The Nellore Ramapuram route passing over a short dis tance of 8 K.m.
through Tamil Nadu was proposed to be natio nalised by the Andhra, Pradesh Government.
The appellant an existing private operator on the route challenged the scheme on the ground that the route being an inter state route, noncompliance with section 68 D(3) of the aborted the Nationalisation.
The High Court held that the decisive test turned on whether both the termini fall within the same state and it did in this case and so on question of inter state route arose.
On appeal by Certifi cate the court HELD: (1) (a) The route Nellore Ramapuram is an inter state route; (b) the Scheme of Nationalisation is operative even in the absence of the previous approval of the Central Government so far as the portions which fall within Andhra Pradesh are concerned and (c) the nationalisation cannot become effective over the strip in Tamil Nadu and ,private operators may still be permitted to ply their services over that strip by the concerned authority within Tamil Nadu State, but (d) The Andhra Pradesh State Transport Corpora tion may ply its buses over the Tamil Nadu enclave even without counter signature, exemption having been granted in that behalf by the 2nd proviso to section 63(1 ) of the .
[567H, 568 A B] (2) The definition of 'Route ' in section 2(28A) of the Act is not a notional line "as the crow flies" but the actual highway as a motor vehicle traverses from one terminus to another.
A route is transformed into an inter state one, if the highway it covers passes through more than one state.
An inter state route may be of the categories either con necting two states or traversing two or more states.
[564 D E] (3) Ordinarily not invariably the two termini test is a, working solution and not an inflexible formation.
The termini test may lead to strange results, fatal to federal ideas.
A route which originates in Srinagar, runs down South to Kanyakumari and rises North to end again in Kashmir, completing a Bharat Darshan, cannot sensibly be called an interstate one, without doing violence to lan guage, geography and federalism.
And in the absence of a statutory definition of inter state route non violence to English and conformance to commonsense dictate the adoption of the conventional meaning that if a route traverses more than one state it is inter state.
[564 B C, D] (4) Undoubtedly, where the termini fall in different states the route is inter state.
But that does not ex clude other categories of inter state route such as where it crosses a state other than the originating state although gets back into it later.
If the territory of more than one state is covered even if both the termini eventually fall within the same state, the route is inter not intra state.
[564H, 565A] 563 Kazan Singh ; ; Ahwathanarayan vs State ; pp.
100 101.
explained.
(5) If the whole of the route lies within a single state it is intra state and not inter state, even though the road over which the route lies runs beyond the borders of that single state as national highways do.
It is elementary that there can be inter state routes which run into or through more than one state.
A part of that long route may itself be a separate route and may fall wholly within a single state in which case the former may be inter state while the latter will be an intra state route.
[565G H, 566A] (6) There can be no doubt that the scheme notified by one State will, even in the case of an inter state route, operate to the extent it lies within that State.
Its extra territorial effect depends on securing of prior Cen tral Government approval under the proviso to Section 680(3).
However, the permit granted in one state may still be valid in.
another state, if the condition specified in the 2nd proviso to section 63(1) is fulfilled.
The portion of the route, in the instant case, falling outside Andhra Pradesh (both termini being within that state) is admittedly less than 16 k.m.
and so no question of countersignature by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of Tamil Nadu arises.
The portion of the inter state route which fell within Andhra Pradesh stand nationa lised and consequently exclude private operators.
But that strip of the inter state route which falls within Tamil Nadu cannot be taken to have been nationalised to the exclusion of private operators although the Andhra Pradesh State Transport Buses could ply on that strip also in view of the 2nd proviso to section 63(1) of the .
[567 A B, E F]
