Shri Alladi was a member of the Hindu coparcenary con sisting of himself his wife (Smt.
Alladi) and three sons.
Shri Alladi who died before the came into force, during his life time had settled certain proper ties absolutely on his wife and had also declared certain other properties to form part of the joint family proper ties.
Alladi died on January 5, 1956, a few months before the passing of the .
The Assistant Controller of Estate Duty valued her estate at a total amount of Rs. 7,25,527/ including a sum of Rs. 2,02,271/ being the value of her 1/4th share in the joint family properties, on the footing that as Smt.
Alladi was a member of the Hindu coparcenary, her interest in the joint family properties.
passed on her death to the other three sons and the value Of this interest being 1/4th, the heirs would be liable to pay estate duty on the value of the 1/4th, share.
The respondent filed an appeal before the Central Board of Revenue and contended that as Smt.
Alladi died as a Hindu widow she possessed no coparcenary interest which could pass on her death; her interest merged without any benefit accruing or arising to the coparceners and hence section 7 subsection (1) had no application.
This plea did not find favour with the Board.
which upheld the order of the Assistant Controller of Estate Duty as correct.
The Board further held that the Hindu widow 'section estate created by section 3(2) of the Hindu Widows Rights to Property Act, 1937, was an interest in property which ceased on the death of the widow attracting estate duty.
Thereupon, the respondent moved the Board to make reference to the High Court of Madras for decision of the questions of law involved in the case.
The Board referred three questions to the High Court under section 64(1) of the Act, but at the time of the hearing of the reference, the respondent confined his arguments only to the following issue, namely "Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case 1/4th share of the deceased in the joint family properties to which she was entitled under section 3 of the Hindu Womens Rights to Property Act, 1937, was correctly included in her estate as property deemed to pass on her death under section 7 of the ." The High Court relying on the decisions of the Privy Council in Attorney General of Ceylon vs Arunachalam Chettiar and Gartside vs Inland Revenue Commissioners ; held that the interest of Smt.
Alladi was not a coparcenary interest which could have passed under section 7(1) of the Act and as the said interest was incapable of valuation, it was not exigible to estate duty and thus held against the Revenue and in favour of the accountable person.
Allowing the appeal by certificate, the Court, HELD: (1) By virtue of the provisions of the Act of 1937 a Hindu widow undoubtedly possess a coparcenary interest as contemplated by section 7(1) of the Act and she is also a member of the Hindu coparcenary as envisaged by section 7(2) of the Act.
[734 B] 722 (2) Prior to the passing of the Act of 1937 a Hindu Woman had no right interest at all in a Hindu coparcenary.
The Act of 1937 bettered the rights a Hindu widow and conferred on her by section 3 the same interest as possessed her husband.
[727 A] (3) The words "the same interest as he himself had" in sub section (2) of section 3 of the Act of 1937 clearly indicate that the statute gave effect to the well settled doctrine of Hindu shastric law that the persons of the husband after his death continues through his wife who is a surviving half and the husband continues to live through the widow so long as the widow is alive.
When the Legislature used the expres sion ' "the same interest as he himself had", it would in clude all the rights possessed by the husband which could devolve on the wife.
Thus, a Hindu widow was introduced for the first time into the Hindu coparcenary having the same rights as her husband and became as it were a member of the Hindu coparcenary with two qualifications, namely, (i) she had only a limited interest and (ii) that she could not be a coparcener because having regard to the nature of her entry into the family after marriage with her husband, there was no question of her getting interest in the Hindu copar cenary by birth which is one of the most important incidents of a Hindu coparcenary.
[727 D E] (4) The essence of coparcenary property is the unity of ownership which is vested in the whole body of coparceners and the two principal incidents of coparcenary are that the interest of coparceners devolve by survivorship and not by inheritance and that the male issue of a coparcenary ac quires an interest in the coparcenary property by birth and not as representing his father.
[729 D E] (5) A Hindu coparcenary has six essential characteris tics, namely, (i) that the lineal male descendants upto the third generation acquire an independent right of ownership by birth and not as representing their ancestors; (ii) that the members of the coparcenary have the right to work out their rights by demanding partition; (iii) that until parti tion, each member has got ownership extending over the entire property jointly with the rest and so long as no partition takes place it is difficult for any coparcener to predicate the share which he might receive; (iv) that as a result of such co ownership the possession and enjoyment of the property is common; (v) that there can be no alienation of the property without the concurrence of the other copar ceners unless it be for legal necessity and (vi) that the interest of a deceased member lapses on his death and merges in the coparcenary property.
Applying these tests to the interest of a Hindu widow who has been introduced into a coparcenary by virtue of the Act of 1937, it will be seen, that short of the first condition she possesses all the necessary indicia of a coparcenary interest.
The fact that before the Act of 1956 she had the characteristic of a widow estate in her interest in the property does not detract any the less from this position.
Therefore, though a Hindu widow cannot be a coparcener she has conarcenary interest and is also a member of the coparcenary by virtue of the rights conferred on her under the Act of 1937.
[731 F H, 732 A B D] State Bank of India vs Ghamandi Ram (dead) through Shri Gurbax Rai 686 applied.
(6) If the widow has not chosen to exercise her right of partition, there no severenee of the Hindu coparcenary and on her death the interest of the widow merges in the copar cenary property or lapses to the other coparceners.
Parappagari Parappa alias Harmmanthappa and Anr.
vs Parappagari Nagaman and Ors.
ILR 1954 Madras 183; S.T. Sabujpari and Anr.
vs Satrughan Isser and Ors.
AIR 1958 Patna 405, 410 and Mst.
Khatrant Kuer vs Smt.
Tapeskwari Kuer AIR 1964 Pat 261, approved.
(7) It was not the intent of the legislature which was folly aware of the statutory interest conferred on a Hindu widow by virtue of the Act of 1937 and the incidents thereof that though a Hindu widow has got the same interest as her husband in the Hindu coparcenary and has also the right to demand 723 partition and her interest is a fluctuating one would lapse to the other coparceners in case of her death without seek ing partition in the same manner as that of other coparcen ers, yet it should be exempt from estate duty.
In the instant case, Smt.
Alladi was a member of the Hindu coparce nary, her interest was undoubtedly a coparcenary interest which lapsed on her death and merged into the coparcenary.
It was clearly capable of valuation, it being covered by section 39 of the Act.
The High Court was in error in basing its decision on the Arunachalam Chettiar 's case and also in Gartside 's case ignoring the decisions of this Court and also the peculiar and special provisions of the Act.
A C] Attorney General of Ceylon vs Arunchalam Chettiar 34 ITR (E.D.) 20 and Gattside vs Inland Revenue Commissioners ; ITR 663 (H.L.) held inapplicable.
(8) It is wrong to contend that the widow could not be treated either as a member of the Hindu coparcenary or as having been conferred coparcenary interest in the property.
Even though the widow is not a coparcener in the strictly legal sense of the term, the interest which she has is the same interest as her husband and that is the coparcenary interest with the only limitation placed on her by section 3(3) of the Act of 1937, namely, that her interest would be limited interest, of a Hindu widow.
In the instant case, Smt.
Alladi possessed a coparcenary interest which lapsed on her death and merged into the coparcenary and was clearly covered by the inclusive part of sub section
(1) of section 7 and under section 39, the value of the benefit accruing or arising from the cesser of the coparcenary interest was to be deter mined by taking the principal value of the share and the joint family property which would have been allotted to her had there been partition immediately before her death.
The present case squarely falls within the ambit of section 7(1) latter part and sub section
(2) of section 7 of the Act which at tracts section 39.
By reason of the inclusive part of sub a.
(1) of section 7 it must be taken to have passed on her death and was hence exigible to estate duty.
[733 D G] (9) When the phraseology of a particular section of the statute takes within its sweep the transaction which is taxable, it is not for the court to strain and stress the language of the section so as to enable the tax payer to escape the tax.
The legislative intent reflected in the Act of 1937 and , must be given full effect to.
[733 H, 734 A]
