Section 21(1) of the Wealth Tax Act provides that in case of assets chargeable to tax under the Act which are held by . . any trustee appointed under a Trust, wealth tax shall be levied upon and recoverable from the trustee in the like manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon and recoverable from the person on whose behalf the assets are held.
Sub section (4) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the shares of the persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit any such assets are held are indeterminate or un known, wealth tax shall be levied upon and recovered from the trustee as if the persons on whose behalf or for whose benefit the assets are held were an individual for the purposes of this Act.
The corpus of a family trust created by the Nizam of Hyderabad was notionally divided into 175 equal units, out of which 1611/2 units were allocated amongst relatives mentioned in the Second Schedule to the Deed in the manner specified therein.
The essence of the Trust was that none of the beneficiaries was entitled to the corpus of the units allocated to him or her but was only entitled to be paid the income from the units allocated to him or her.
The trust deed made detailed and elaborate provisions as to the dispo sition of the different units allocated to the various beneficiaries and also provided for every other contingency in such a manner that at any particular point of time one could say, if the owner of the life interest were to die at that point of time, who the beneficiaries entitled to the corpus would be.
The Wealth Tax Officer assessed wealth tax on the value of the respective units allocated to each of the several beneficiaries.
In appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld the assessees ' contention that since each of them was enti tled only to a life interest in the corpus of the units allocated, they could not be assessed in respect of the entire value of the corpus.
When assessments were made on this basis, the value of the remainder wealth escaped tax.
The Wealth Tax Officer, therefore, assessed the remainder wealth under section 21(4) taking the view that the beneficiaries in respect of the several remainder estates after the lives of the immediate beneficiaries were unknown and their shares were indeterminate.
On appeal the appellate Assistant Commissioner, without, deciding the contention as to the applicability of section 21(4), annulled the assessments on the ground that though the trust deed was one, it created several distinct and separate trusts, one in favour of each beneficiary with its own independent and complete provision in regard to devolution.
after the death of each beneficiary and the Wealth Tax Officer was not justified in clubbing the entire remainder wealth in a single assessment.
Before the Appellate Tribunal the.
Revenue contended that the assessees were liable to be assessed as an individ ual under section 3 in respect of the entire corpus of the trust fund and section 21(4) being merely a machinery provision did not have the effect of overriding the charge imposed under section 3. 736 The Tribunal held (i) that 8. 3 was subject to section 21 and the assessees could not be assessed to wealth tax under that section in respect of the entire corpus ignoring the provisions of section 21; (ii) that section 21(1) was not applicable in this case and (iii) that section 21(4) was applicable because the beneficiaries in respect of the remainder estate were unknown.
The following questions, among others, were referred by the Tribunal the High Court: 1.
Whether the trustees were liable to be taxed under section 3 in the status of an "individual"? 2.
Whether the Tribunal was right in hold ing that the provisions of section 3 should be considered as subject to the provisions of section 21 ? 3.
Whether the Tribunal was correct in holding that under section 21(4) the remainder wealth could be assessed in respect of each of the several units or groups of units allocated in favour of the beneficiaries ? 4.
Whether the Tribunal was right in holding that the provisions of section 21(4) are applica ble? The High Court held that (i) since the terms "individu al" occurring in section 3 is wide enough to include a group of persons forming a unit, the trustees were liable to be assessed under section 3 but, section 3 being subject to the provi sions of section 21, it was not permissible to tax the trustees under s 3 ignoring the provisions of section 21; (ii) it was not possible to say, on the valuation date, that the benefici aries of the remainder estate in respect of each unit were unknown or their shares were indeterminate so as to attract the applicability of section 21(4); and (iii) section 21(1) was ap plicable because it could be predicated with certainty and definiteness on the relevant valuation date as to who would succeed to the corpus of each set of unit and in what shares, if the conditions for the vesting of the corpus who fulfilled on that date.
Dismissing the appeals in part, HELD: The trustees constituted an assessable unit and were liable to be assessed to wealth tax as "individual" under section 3.
[747 E] (1)(a) Section 3 imposes the charge of wealth tax sub ject to other provisions of the Act and these other provi sions include section 21.
Section 3 is, therefore, made express ly subject to section 21 and it must yield to that section in so far as the latter makes special provision for assessment of a trustee.
[748 D E] (b) Section 21 is mandatory On a combined reading of ss 3 and 21,it is clear that an assessment on a trustee must be made in accordance with the provisions of s 21 Every case of assessment on a trustee must necessarily fall under section 21 and he cannot be assessed apart from and without reference to that section.
To hold otherwise would be to refuse to give effect to the words "subject to the other provisions of this Act" in section 3 and to deny mandatory force and effect to the provisions of section 21.
[749 E G] C.R. Nagappa vs Commissioner of Income tax , Commissioner of Income Tax vs Nandial Agarwal at 762 and Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Bihar & Orissa vs Kripashankar Dayashanker Worah followed.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Ahmedabad vs Balwantrai Jetha lal Vaidya approved.
(c) The assessment which is contemplated to be made on the trustee under section 21(1) or section 21(4) is assessment in a representative capacity.
It is really the beneficiaries who are sought to be assessed in respect of their interest in the trust properties through the trustee.
Section 21(1) can apply only where the trust properties are held by the trus tee for the benefit of a single beneficiary 737 or where there are more beneficiaries than one, the individ ual shares of the benenciaries in the trust properties are determinate and known.
Where such is the case wealth tax can be levied on the trustee in respect of the interest of any particular beneficiary in the trust properties in the same manner and to the same extent as it would be leviable upon the beneficiary and in respect of such interest in the trust properties, the trustees would be assessed in a repre sentative capacity as representing the beneficiary.
The beneficiary would always be assessable in respect of his interest in the trust properties since such interest belongs to him and the right of the Revenue to make direct asesss ment on him in respect of such interest stands unimpaired by the provisions enabling assessment to be made on the trus tees in a representative capacity.
[750 G H, 751 A B, C] (d) The Revenue has thus two modes of assessment: (a) it may either assess such interest in the hands of the trustee in a representative capacity under sub section (1); or (b) assess it directly in the hands of the beneficiary by in cluding it in the net wealth of the beneficiary.
In either case what is taxed is the interest of the beneficiary in the trust properties and not the corpus of the trust properties.
So also where beneficiaries are more than one and their shares are indeterminate or unknown, the trustee would be assessable in respect of their total beneficial interest in the trust properties.
In the instant case it is the beneficial interest which is assessed to wealth tax in the hands of the trustee and not the corpus of the trust properties.
Since under sub sections
(1) and (4) of section 21 it is the beneficial interest which is taxable in the hands of the trustee in a representative capacity and the liability of the trustee cannot be greater than the aggregate liability of the beneficiaries, no part of the corpus of the trust properties can be assessed in the hands of the trustee under section 3 and any such assessment would be contrary to the plain mandatory provisions of section 21.
[751 D E, G H] (e) The consequences that flow from the proposition laid down in section 21(1) that the trustee is assessable "in the like manner and to the same extent" as the beneficiary, are: (i) There would have to be as many assessments on the trustee as there are beneficiaries with determinate and known shares, though for the sake of convenience, there may be only one assessment order specifying separately the tax due in re spect of the wealth of each beneficiary; (ii) The assessment of the trustee would have to be made in the same status as that of the beneficiary whose interest is sought to be taxed in the hand of the trustee; and (iii) The amount of tax payable by the trustee would be the same as that payable by each beneficiary in respect of his beneficial interest, if he were assessed directly.
[752 B D] N.V. Shanmugham & Co., vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, , Padmavati Jaykrishna Trust vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Gujarat , at 73 4, Trustee of Putlibai R.F. Mulla Trust vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax , at 657 8 and Chintamani Ghosh vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax at 341 referred to.
(f) Once it is established that a trustee can be assessed only in accordance with the provisions of section 21 and under these provisions, it iS only the beneficial interests which are taxed in the hands of the trustee, it must follow that no part of the value of the corpus in excess of the aggre gate value of the beneficial interests can be brought to tax in the assessment of the trustee.
To do so would be con trary to the scheme and provisions of section 21.
It would be deafly erroneous to assess the trustee t.o wealth tax on the excess of the value the corpus over the actuarial valuations of the life interest and the reversionary interest of the beneficiaries.
[753 C D] Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Gujarat vs Smt.
Arundhati Balkrishna Trust approved.
(g) No part of the corpus of the trust funds could be assessed in the hands of the trustees but the assessment could be made on them only in respect of the beneficial interests of the beneficiaries in the trust funds under sections 21 (1) and (4).
[754 A] 738 (2)(a) Even if the beneficiaries were indeterminate or unknown, section 21(4) would apply and the trustees would be liable to be assessed in respect of the totality of the beneficial interest in the remainder as if it belonged to one single beneficiary.
The expression 'where the shares of the beneficiaries are indeterminate or unknown ' carries with it by necessary implication a situation where the benefici aries themselves are indeterminate or unknown.
[754 F G] (b) The correct interpretation of section 21(4) must be that even where the beneficiaries of the remainder are indetermi nate or unknown, the trustees can be assessed to wealth tax in respect of the totality of the beneficial interest in the remainder, treating the beneficiaries fictionally as an individual.
[755 B] (c) The Wealth Tax Officer has to determine as to who the beneficiaries are in respect of the remainder on the relevant date and whether their shares are determinate and known.
So long as it is possible to say on the relevant valuation date that the beneficiaries are known and their shares are determinate, the possibility that 'the benefici aries may change by reason of subsequent events such as birth or death would not take the case out of the ambit of section 21(1), [755 D El Khan Bahadur M. Habibur Rehman vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar & Orissa Subashini Karuri vs Wealth Tax Officer, Calcutta , Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Bombay vs Trustees of Mrs. Hansabai Tribhu wandas Trust and Padmawati Jaykrishna Trust vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Gujarat , at 73 4 approved.
(d) In order to determine the applicability of section 21(1) on the relevant valuation date, it has to be seen whether it is possible to say with certainty and definiteness as to who would be the beneficiaries and whether their shares would be determinate and specific, if the event on the happening of which the distribution is to take place occurred on that date.
If it is, section 21(1) would apply, if not, the case will be governed by section 21(4).
In the instant case the trust deed provided for every contingency and whenever a relative specified in Second Schedule, who is the owner of the life interest in the set of unit or units allocated to him or her dies, there would always be beneficiaries capable of being easily ascertained and identified who would be entitled to the corpus of such unit or units in determinate and specific shares, either immediately on the death of such life tenant or after anoth er life interest.
The remainder in respect each set of unit or units allocated to the respective relative specified in the Second Schedule was, there fore, liable to be as sessed in the hands of the trustees under section 21(1) "in the same manner and to the same extent" as each beneficiary in respect of his determinate and known share in such remain der.
That excluded the applicability of s.21 (4) in the assessment of the remainder.
[756 'D E, F, H, 757 A C]
