Article 171(3) of the Constitution of India provides that of the total number of members of the Legislative Council of a State one third shall be elected by electorates consisting of members, among others, of local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify.
Part IV of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 which deals with electoral rolls for council constituencies provides in section 23(3) that no amendment, transposition or deletion of any entry shall be made under section 22 and no direction for the inclusion of a name in the electoral roll of a constituency shall be given under this section after the last date for making nominations for election in that constituency.
Section 33(1) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 requires that each candidate shall deliver to the Returning Officer a nomination paper "between 11 o 'clock in the forenoon and 3 o 'clock in the afternoon.
" By a notification issued under section 30 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 the Electoral Registration Officer appointed April 17, 1974 as the last date for presenting nomination papers from the local authorities constituency.
In the election that ensued the appellant was declared elected with 64 votes polled by him as against 54 polled by respondent No. 1.
In his election petition the respondent alleged that the appellant, in collusion with the electoral officer, surreptitiously introduced names of 16 persons representing a taluk board after 3 p.m. on April 17, 1974 and that this act of his constituted a corrupt practice within the meaning of section 123 of the 1951 Act and that the election was void.
The High Court set aside the election on the ground that any inclusion of additional names in the electoral roll of a constituency after 3 p.m. on the last date for making nominations fixed under section 30(a) was illegal, and after deducting the 16 votes cast by those persons from the total votes polled by the appellant, declared the respondent duly elected.
Allowing the appeal in part and remitting the case to the High Court.
HELD : (1) There was no telling material other than speculation or weak suggestion that there was corrupt participation on the part of the officers.
The material link to make out invalidation of the election on account of corrupt practice under section 123(7) was missing because it had not been made out in the evidence that there was collusion between the second respondent and the appellant.
[201A] 2.
(a) The expression 'last date for making nominations ' must mean the last hour of the last date during which presentation of nomination papers is permitted under section 33 of the 1951 Act.
In short section 23(3) of the 1950 Act and section 33(1), (4) and (5) of the 1951 Act interact, fertilise and operate as a duplex of clauses.
So viewed the inclusion of the names in the electoral roll after 3 p.m. on April 17, 1974 is illegitimate and illegal.
[204F] The sixteen names brought into the electoral register subsequent to 3 p.m. of April 17, 1974 must be excluded from the reckoning to determine the returned candidate.
[205E] 194 Baidyanath ; and Ramji Prasad Singh ; referred to.
(b)The prohibition contained in section 23(3) of the 1950 Act is based on public policy and serves a public purpose.
Any violation of such a mandatory provision conceived to pre empt scrambles to thrust into the rolls, after the appointed time, fancied voters by anxious candidates or parties spells invalidity and there can be no doubt that if, in flagrant violation of section 23(3), names have been included in the electoral roll, (he bonus of such illegitimate votes shall not accrue, since the vice of viodance must attach to such names.
[202F] (c)In our electoral scheme as unfolded in the 1951 Act every elector ordinarily can be a candidate.
Therefore, his name must be included in the list on or before the date fixed for nomination.
Otherwise he loses his valuable right to run for the elective office.
It is thus vital that the electoral registration officer should bring in the names of all the electors into the electoral roll before the date and hour fixed for presenting the nomination paper.
[202G H] (d)Section 33(1) specifies that the nomination paper shall be presented "between the hours of 11 o 'clock in the forenoon and 3 o 'clock in the afternoon".
That means that the duration of the day for presentation of nomination papers terminates at 3 o 'clock in the afternoon.
If an elector is to be able to file his nomination paper, his name must be on the electoral roll at 3 p.m. on the last day for filing nominations.
So the temporal terminus ad quem is also the day for finalisation of the electoral register and by the same token, that day terminates at just that hour when the returning officer shuts the door.
[204C] (e)The inference that could be drawn from section 33(4) is that there must be a completed electoral roll when the time for filing the nomination paper expires.
Therefore, the final electoral roll must be with, the returning officer when the last minute for delivering the nomination paper ticks off.
Subsequent additions to the electoral register will inject confusion and uncertainty about the constituents or electors, introduce a disability for such subsequently included electors to be candidates for the election.
[203D] (f)The cumulative effect of the various strands of reasoning and the rigour of the language of s.23(3) of the 1950 Act leaves no doubt that inclusion of the names in the electoral roll of a constituency after the last date for making nominations for an election in that constituency, must be visited with fatality.
[203E] [The case had been sent to the High Court for scrutinising the 16 ballots for the limited purpose of discovering for whom, bow many of the invalid sixteen had been cast.]
