The appellant, though charged with offences sections 323 and 302 I.P.C., was convicted only section 323 and sentenced to suffer 6 months ' rigorous imprisonment.
The appeal preferred by the State against acquittal section 302, I.P.C. was accepted by the High Court and the appellant was convicted under that charge and sentenced to life imprisonment.
As required under Rule 6, Order XXI of the Supreme Court Rules, the appellant surrendered before the trial court and preferred special leave which was granted on 28 2 1974; but the application for bail, preferred subsequently, was rejected on 10 1 1975.
Since the appeal did not come up for hearing for a long time, the appellant preferred another application for bail.
Allowing the application, the Court, HELD : No practice howsoever sanctified by usage and hallowed by time can be allowed to prevail if it operates to cause injustice.
Every practice of the court must find its ultimate justification in the interest of justice.
The practice not to release on bail a person who has been sentenced to life imprisonment was evolved on the basis that once a person has been found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment, he should not be let loose so long as his conviction and sentence are not set aside; but the underlying postulate of this practice was that the appeal of such person would be disposed of within a measurable distance of time so that if he is ultimately found to be innocent, he would not have to remain in jail for an unduly long period.
The rationale of this practice can have no application where the court is not in a position to dispose of the appeal for five or six years.
It would, indeed, be a travesty of justice to keep a person in jail for a period of five or six years for an offence which is ultimately found not to have been committed by him.
So long as this court is not in a position to hear the appeal of an accused within a reasonable period of time, the court should ordinarily, unless there are cogent grounds for acting otherwise, release the accused on bail in cases where special leave has been granted to the accused to appeal against his conviction and sentence.
In the instant case, the very fact that this court has granted to the appellant special leave to appeal against his conviction shows that, in the opinion of this court, he has, prima facie, a good case to consider and in the circum stances, namely, that he has been in jail and the total period he has spent in jail so far is about 4 1/2 years, it would be highly unjust to detain him in jail any longer during the hearing of the appeal and he should be released on bail.
[386 D G, 387 A D]
