Article 329(b) of the Constitution provides that notwithstanding anything in the Constitution no election to either House of Parliament or to the House, or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the appropriate legislature.
Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 provides that if the High Court is of the opinion that the result of the election so far as it concerns a returned candidate has been materially affected by any non compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules or orders made under this Act the High Court shall declare the election of the returned candidate to be void.
The appellant and the third respondent were candidates for election in a Parliamentary constituency.
The appellant alleged that when at the last hour of counting it appeared that he had all but won the election, at the instance of respondent No. 3 mob violence broke out and postal ballot papers and ballot boxes from certain Assembly segments, while being brought for counting, were destroyed and the Returning officer was forced to postpone the declaration of the result.
The Returning Officer reported the happening by wireless to the Chief Election Commissioner.
An officer of the Election Commission who was deputed to be an observer at the counting stage gave a written report to the Commission in addition to an oral report about the incidents which marred the last stages of the counting.
The appellant met the Chief Election Commissioner and requested him to declare the result.
Eventually, however, the Chief Election Commissioner issued a notification stating that the counting in the constituency was seriously disturbed by violence and that ballot papers of some of the assembly segments had been destroyed by violence, as a consequence of which it was not possible to complete the counting of votes in the constituency and declare the result with any degree of certainty.
The notification further stated that taking all circumstances into account, the Commission was satisfied that the poll had been vitiated to such an extent as to affect the result of the election.
In exercise of the powers under article 324 of the Constitution it cancelled the poll already held and ordered a re poll in the entire constituency.
In a petition under article 226 of the Constitution the appellant alleged that the action of the Chief Election Commissioner in ordering repoll in the whole constituency was arbitrary and violative of any vestige of fairness.
The respondents in reply urged that the High Court had no Jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition in view of article 329(b) and that the Commission 's action was well within its powers under article 324.
273 The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that it had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition.
Yet on merits it held that article 324 does not impose any limitation on the function contemplated under that article; that principles of natural justice were not specifically provided for in that article but were totally excluded while passing the impugned order and that even if the principles of natural justice were impliedly to be observed before passing the impugned order the appellant was heard not only before the issue of the notification but in any case after the notification.
In the repoll the appellant did not participate though his name appeared on the ballot and respondent No. 3 was declared elected.
On the question of application of principles of natural justice it was contended on behalf of the respondents that the tardy process of notice and hearing would thwart the conducting of elections with speed that unless civil consequences ensued, hearing was not necessary and that the right accrues to a candidate only when he is declared elected and lastly the decision of the Election Commission is only provisional and that it is he the election court which is the final authority on the subject.
HELD: The catch alljurisdiction under article 226 cannot consider the correctness, legality or otherwiseof the direction for cancellation integrated with repoll.
[269 D] 1(a) Article 329(b) is a blanket ban on litigative challenge to electoral steps taken by the Election Commission for carrying forward the process of election to its culmination in the formal declaration of the result.
[322 D] (b) The sole remedy for an aggrieved party, if he wants to challenge any election, is an election petition.
This exclusion of all other remedies includes constitutional remedies like article 226 because of the non obstante clause in article 329(b).
If what is impugned is an election the ban operates provided the proceeding "calls it in question" or puts it 'm issue : not otherwise.
[289 E F] (c)Part XV of the Constitution is a Code in itself, providing the entire groundwork for enacting the appropriate laws and setting up suitable machine for the conduct of elections.
Articles 327 and 328 take care of the set of laws and rules making provisions with respect to all matters relating to or in connection with elections.
Election disputes are also to be provided for by laws made under article 327. 'Be Representation of the People Act, 1951 is a self contained enactment so far as elections are concerned.
Section 80 which speaks substantially the same language as article 329(b) provides that no election shall be called in question except by an election petition presented in accordance with the provisions of Part IV of the Act.
The Act provides for only one remedy and that remedy being by an election petition to be presented after the election is over, there is no remedy provided at any of the intermediate stages.
[292 C D; F G 293 B C] Smt.
Indira Gandhi vs Raj Narain , 504 505 referred to.
(d)The compendious expression "election" commences from the initial notification and culminates in the declaration of the return of a candidate.
The paramount policy of the Constitution framers in declaring that no election shall be called in question except the way it is provided for in article 329(b) and the Representation of the People Act, 1951 necessitates the reading of the Constitution and the Act together as an integral scheme.
The reason for postponment of election litigation to the post election stage is that elections shall not unduly be protracted or obstructed.
[294 D E] (e)No litigative enterprise in the High Court or other court should be allowed to hold up the on going electoral process because the parliamentary representative for the constituency should be chosen promptly.
Article 329 therefore covers "electoral matters".
[294 F] (f)The plenary bar of article 329(b) rests on two principles : (1) the peremptory urgency of prompt engineering of the whole election process without intermediate interruptions by way of legal Proceedings challenging the 274 steps and stages in between the commencement and the conclusion; and (2) the provision of a special jurisdiction which can be invoked by an aggrieved party at the end of the election excludes other forms, the right and remedy being creatures of statutes and controlled by the Constitution.
[295 H, 296 ] Durga Shankar Mehta [1955] 1 SCR 267 referred to.
(g)If the regular poll for some reasons has failed to reach the goal of choosing by plurality the returned candidates and to achieve this object a fresh poll (not a new election) is needed, it may still be a step in the election.[296 E F] (h)A writ petition challenging the cancellation coupled with repoll amounts to calling in question a step in 'election ' and is, therefore, barred by article 329(b).
[296 G] (i)Knowing the supreme significance of speedy elections in our system the framers of the Constitution have, by implication, postponed all election disputes to election petitions and tribunals.
In harmony with this scheme section 100 has been designedly drafted to embrace all conceivable infirmities which may be urged.
To make the project fool proof section 100(1)(d)(iv) has been added to absolve everything left over.
Section 100 is exhaustive of all grievances regarding an election.
What is banned is not anything whatsoever ,done or directed by the Election Commissioner but everything he does or directs in furtherance of the election, not contrarywise.
[297 B, C, D] (j)It is perfectly permissible for the Election Court to decide the question as one falling under section 100(1)(d)(iv).
The Election Court has all the powers necessary to grant all or only any of the reliefs set out in section 98 and to direct the Commissioner to take such ancillary steps as will render complete justice to the appellant.
[319 C, E] (k)It is within the powers of the Election Court to direct a repoll of particular polling stations to be conducted by the specialised agency under the Election Commission and report the results and ballots to the Court.
Even a repoll of postal ballots can be ordered In view of the wide ranging scope of implied powers of the Court, the appellant 's claims are within the Courts powers to grant.
[322 A B] 2(a) Article 324 does not exalt the Election Commission into a law unto itself.
The Article is wide enough to supplement the powers under the Act subject to the several conditions on its exercise.
[300 A B] (b)The Election Commissioner 's functions are subject to the norms of fairness and he cannot act arbitrarily.
The Constitution has made comprehensive provision in article 324 to take care of surprise situations.
That power has to be exercised in keeping with the guidelines of the rule of law without stultifying the Presidential notification or existing legislation.
It operates in areas left unoccupied by legislation and the words "Superintendence, direction and control" as well as "conduct of all elections" are in the broadest terms.[299 A, B C] (c)If imparting the right to be heard will paralyse the process, the law will exclude it.
In any case it is untenable heresy to lockjaw the victim or act behind his back by invoking urgency, unless the clearest case of public injury flowing from the least delay is evident.
The Election Commission is an institution of central importance and enjoys far reaching powers and the greater the power to affect other 's rights or liabilities the more necessary is the need to hear.
[304 D, G H, 305 B C] (d)It is well established that when a high functionary like the Commissioner is vested with wide powers, the law expects him to act fairly and legally.
Discretion vested in a high functionary may be reasonably trusted to be used properly, not perversely.
If it is misused certainly the Court has power to strike down the act.
[299 D E] Virendra ; and Harishankar [1955] 1 1104 SCR referred to.
(e)Article 324 vests vast functions which may be powers or duties, essentially administrative and marginally even judicative or legislative.
_ [302 H] 275 (f)The dichotomy between administrative and quasi judicial functions vis a vis the doctrine of natural justice is presumably obsolescent after Kraipak which marks the water shed in the application of natural justice to administrative proceedings.
The rules of natural justice are rooted in all legal sys tems, and are not any 'new theology.
They are manifested in the twin principles of nemo index in sua causa and audi alteram partem.
It has been pointed out that the aim of natural justice is to secure justice, or, to put it negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice.
These rights can operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made; they do not supplant the law of the land but supplement it.
The rules of natural justice are not embodied rules.
What particular rule of natural justice should apply to a given case must depend to a great extent on the facts and circumstances of that case, the framework of the law under which the inquiry is held and the constitution of the tribunal or body of per sons appointed for that purpose.
Whenever a complaint is made before a court that some principle of natural justice has been contravened, the court has to decide whether the observation of that rule was necessary for a just decision on the facts of that case.
Further, even if a power is given to a body without Specifying that rules of natural justice should be observed in exercising it, the nature of the power would call for its observance.
[300 F G, 301 B D, 303 D] Kraipak , In re: H.K. (an infant) and Ridge vs Baldwin ; referred to.
(g)Even where the decision has to be reached by a body acting judicially, there must be a balance between the need for expedition and the need to give full opportunity to the defendant to see the material against him.
There might be exceptional cases where to decide a case exparte would be unfair and it would be the duty of the Tribunal to take appropriate steps to eliminate unfairness.
Even so no doctrinaire approach is desirable but the court must be anxious to salvage the cardinal rule to the extent permissible in a given case.
[307 D, E] 3(a) Civil consequences cover infraction of not merely property or personal rights but of civil liberties, material deprivations and non peciiniary damages.
In its comprehensive connotation, everything that affects a citizen in his civil life inflicts a civil consequence.
The interest of a candidate at an election to Parliament regulated by the Constitution and the laws comes within its gravitational orbit.
A democratic right, if denied inflicts civil consequences.
Every Indian has a right to elect and he elected and this is a constitutional as distinguished from a common law right, and is entitled to cognizance by courts subject to statutory regulation.
C, E] (b)A vested interest in the prescribed process is a processual right, actionable if breached.
The appellant has a right to have the election conducted not according to humour or hubris but according to law and justice.
So natural justice cannot be stumped out on the score.
In the region of public, law locus standi and person aggrieved, right and interest have a broader import.
[309 G, H] (c)In the instant case the Election Commission claims that a hearing had.
been given but the appellant retorts that all that he had was vacuous meeting where nothing was disclosed.
But in law degrees of difference may at a, substantial stage spell difference in kind or dimensions.
[309 H, 310 A] (d)The case of Subhash Chander in which this Court held that it was not necessary to give an opportunity to the candidates for an examination as to why the whole examination should not be cancelled because the examination was vitiated by adoption of unfair means on a mass scale.
But the ratio of that decision has no application to this case.
The candidates in an election who have acquired a very vital stake in the polling going on properly stand on a different footing from the electorate in general.
The interest of the electorate is too remote and recondite, too feeble and attenuate to be taken note of in a cancellation proceeding.
What really marks the difference is the diffusion and dilution.
The candidates in an election are really the spearheads, the combatants.
They have set themselves up as nominated candidates organised the campaign and galvanised the electorate for the polling and counting.
Their interest and claim are not indifferent but immediate.
They are the 5 1114SCI 77 276 parties in the electoral dispute.
In this sense they stand on a better footing and cannot be deniedthe right to be heard.
In Ghanshyamdas Gupta in which the examinationresult of three candidates was cancelled this Court imported principles ofnatural justice.
This case may have a parallel in electoral situations.
if the Election Commission cancelled the poll it was because it was satsfied that the procedure adopted had gone awry on a wholesale basis.
Therefore, it all depends on the circumstances and is incapable of generalisation.
In a situation like the present it is a far cry from natural justice to argue that the whole constituency must be given a hearing.
[310 F, H, 311 G H, 312 A, D, E,] Col. Singhi [1971] 1 SCR 791, Binapani ; , Ram Gopal ; ; Subhash Chander Singh ; field inapplicable.
Ghanshyam Das Gupta [1962] Supp.
3 SCR 36 followed.
4(a) Whether the action of the Election Commission in ordering repoll beyond certain segments of the constituency where the ballot boxes were destroyed was really necessary or not is for the Election Court to assess when judging whether the impugned order was arbitrary, whimsical or was arrived at by extraneous considerations.
[316 H, 317 A B] (b) Independently of natural justice, judicial review extends to an examination of the order as to its being perverse, irrational, bereft of application of the mind or without any evidentiary backing.
If two views are possible, the Court cannot interpose its view.
If no view is possible the Court must strike down.
[317 B] (c)The philosophy behind natural justice is participatory justice in the process of democratic rule of law.
In the vital area of election where people 's faith in the, democratic process is hypersensitive it is realism to keep alive audi alteram even in emergencies.
Hearing need not be an elaborate ritual.
In situations of quick despatch, it may be minimal, even formal.
Fair hearing is a postulate of decision making, although fair abridgement of that process is permissible.
It can be fair without the rules of evidence or forms of trial.
[316 D F] (d)The silence of a statute has no exclusionary effect except where it flows from necessary implication.
Article 324 vests a wide power and where some direct consequence on candidates emanates from its exercise this functional obligation must be read into it.
[316 F] Observations (a)When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise.
Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to court on account of a challenge, gets validated by additional grounds later brought out.
[283 B C] (b)An obiter binds none, not even the author and obliteration of findings rendered in supererogation must allay the appellant 's apprehensions.
The High Court should have abstained from its generosity.
[284 C] (Per Goswami and Shinghal, JJ.
concurring) (1) The appellants ' argument that since article 324(6) refers to "functions" and not "powers", there can be no question of the Election Commission exerrising any power under that Article, is without force.
The term "functions" includes powers as well as duties.
It is incomprehensible that a person or body can discharge any functions without exercising powers.
Powers and duties are integrated with functions.
[330 D E] 2(a) It is well established that an express statutory grant of power or the imposition of a definite duty carrie with it by implication, in the absence of a limitation, authority to employ all the means that are usually employed and that are necessary to the exercise of the power or the performance of the duty.
That which is clearly implied is as much a part of a law as that which is expressed.
[331 E F] 277 (b)In a democratic set up power has to be exercised in accordance with law.
Since the conduct of all elections is vested under article 324(1) in the Election Commission, the framers of the Constitution took care to leaving scope for exercise of residuary power by the Election Commission, in the infinite variety of situations that may emerge from time to time.
Yet, every contingency could not be foreseen and provided for with precision.
The Commission may be required to cope with some situation, which may not be provided for in the enacted laws and rules.
The Election Commission, which is a high powered and independent body, cannot exercise its functions or perform its duties unless it has an amplitude of powers.
Where a law is absent, the Commission is not to look to any external authority for the grant of powers to deal with the situation but must exercise its power independently and see that the election process is completed in a free and fair manner.
Moreover, the power has to be exercised with promptitude.[330 G, H, 331 A B, C E, G] N.P. Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Nanakkal Constituency and Others, ; followed.
(c) Section 19A of the Act, in terms, refers to the functions not only under the Representation of the People Act, 1950 and representation of the People Act, 1951 or the rules made thereunder, but also under the Constitution.
Apart from the several functions envisaged by the two Acts and the rules, the Commission is entitled to exercise certain powers under article 324 itself on its own right in an area not covered by the Acts and rules.
[332 A B] (d)Whether an order passed is wrong, arbitrary or is otherwise invalid, relates to the mode of exercising the power and does not touch upon the existence of the power in an authority if it is there either under the Act or the rules or under article 324(1).
[331 G] 3(a) The contention that the Election Commission had no power to make the impugned order for a repoll in the entire constituency.
is without substance.
[332 H] (b) Both under s.58 and under section 64A the poll that was taken on a particular polling station can be voided and a fresh poll can be ordered, by the Commission.
These sections cannot be said to be exhaustive.
It cannot be said that they rule out the making of an order to deal with a similar situation if it arises in several polling stations or sometimes as a general feature in a substantially large area.
Although these two sections mention "a polling station" or "a place fixed for the poll" it may, where necessary embrace multiple polling stations.
[332 G H] (c)The Election Commission is competent, in an appropriate case, to order repoll of an entire constituency.
If it does that it will be an exercise of power within the ambit of its functions under article 324.
Although in cxercise of powers under article 324(1) the Election Commission cannot do some thing impinging upon the power of the President in making a notification under section 14 of the Act, after the notification has been issued by the President, the entire electoral process is in the charge of the Commission.
The Commission is exclusively responsible for the conduct of the election without reference to any outside agency.
There are no limitations under article 324(1).
J333 C E] 4.The writ petition is not maintainable.
Since the election covers the entireprocess from the issue of the notification under section 14 to the declaration of theresult under s.66 of the Act, when a poll that has already taken place has been cancelled and a fresh poll has been ordered, the order is passed as an integral part of the electoral process.
The impugned order has been passed in exercise of the power under article 324(1) and section 153 of the Act.
Such an order cannot be questioned except by an election petition under the Act.
[333 G H, 334 A] 5(a) There is no foundation for a grievance that the appellants will be without any remedy, if their writ application is dismissed.
If during the process of election at an intermediate or final stage.
the entire poll has been wrongly cancelled and a fresh poll has been wrongly ordered, that is a matter which can be agitated after the declaration of the result on the basis of the 278 fresh poll, by questioning the election in the appropriate, forum.
The appellants will not be without a remedy to question every step in the electoral process and every order that has been passed in the process of the election includ ing the countermanding of the earlier poll.
The Court will be able to entertain their objection with regard to the order of the Election Commission countermanding the earlier poll and the whole matter will be at large.
[334 B F] (b)The Election Commission has passed the order professedly under article 324 and section 153 of the Act.
If there is any illegality in the exercise of the power under this Article or under any provision of the Act, there is no reason why section 100(1)(d)(iv) should not be attracted.
If exercise of power is competent either under the provisions of the Constitution or under any other provision of law, any infirmity in the exercise of that power is on account of noncompliance with the provisions of law, since law demands exercise, of power by its repository in a proper, regular, fair and reasonable manner.
[335 B D] Durga Shankar Mehra vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh and others, [1955] 1 SCR 267 referred to.
(c)The writ petition is barred under article 329 (b) of the Constitution and the High Court has rightly dismissed it on that ground.
Both article 329(b) and section 80 of the Act provide that no election shall be called in question except by an election petition.
All reliefs claimed by the appellant in the writ petition can be claimed in the election petition and the High Court is competent to give all appropriate reliefs to do complete justice between the parties.
It will be open to the High Court to pass any ancillary or conse quential order to enable it to grant the necessary relief provided under the Act.
[335 D G] 6.It will not be correct for this Court, in this appeal, to pronounce its judgment finally on merits either on law or on facts.
The pre eminent position conferred by the Constitution on this Court under Article 141 of the Constitution does not envisage that this Court should lay down the law, in an appeal like this, on any matter which is required to be decided by ' the election court on a full trial of the election petition, without the benefit of the opinion of the Punjab and Haryana High Court which has the exclusive jurisdiction under section 80A of the Act to try the election petition.
[335 H, 363 A]
