In Appeal No. 1347(N) 1977 by special leave against the interlocutory orders dated 21 4 1977 of the Company Judge of the Calcutta High Court in the company petition No. 85/75, filed by the respondents sections 397/398 of the Companies Act, '1956, complaining of oppression by majority and praying for certain reliefs against the appellants and also the orders dated 25 4 1977 of the Division Bench against that order, this Court made an order on 31 5 1977, in terms of an agreement reached between the par ties.
By one such term the company was directed to purchase 1300 shares held by the respondents petitioners.
The price of the shares was to be determined by Messrs. Price Water House and Peet, Chartered Accountants and Auditors, as on the date of the filing of the petition sections 397 398, on the basis of the existing as also contingent and anticipated debts, liabilities, claims, payments and receipts of the ' company.
The Chartered Accountants were to determine the value of the shares after examining accounts and calling for necessary explanations and after giving opportunity to both the groups to be heard in the matter and the determination of the value by the Chartered Accountants was to be final and binding and not open to any challenge by either side on any ground whatsoever.
After such determination of the value the company has to purchase the shares, and, on such purchase, the share capital of the company was to stand reduced protanto.
The order made it ;fear that if the value of the shares is more than Rs. 65/ per share, the company will have to pay the balance, and, if it is less than Rs. 65/ per share, the respondents who have to sell the shares, will have to refund the difference between.
the price of the shares calculated at the rate of Rs. 65/ per share and the rate determined by the Chartered Accountants and Auditors within four weeks from the date of determination.
After the appeal was thus disposed of, the interveners, claiming to be the creditors of the company to the extent of 40 lakhs, in their petition dated 22 8 1977 requested the Court (i) to permit them to be heard and (ii) to postpone the purchase of shares by the company until such time as the company adopts proceedings in a competent court by following the procedure laid down by the , particularly in Sections 100 to 104 for reduction of the share capital.
In the alternative they prayed for safeguarding their interests by modifying the Court 's order dated 31 5 1977.
Rejecting the petition to interfere with its order dated 31 5 1977, the Court, after hearing the interveners, HELD : (i) Section 77 envisages that, on the purchase by a company of its own shares, reduction of its share capital may be effected and sanctioned in either of two different modes : (i) according to the procedure prescribed in Sections 100 to 104; or (ii) under section 402, depending upon the circumstances in which reduction becomes necessary.
[427E F] (ii) Section 77 of the prohibits the company from buying its own shares unless the consequent reduction of capital is effected and sanctioned in pursuance of Sections 100 to 104 or Section 402.
It places an embargo on the company purchasing its own shares so as to become its own member, but the embrago is lifted, if the company reduces its share capital protanto.
[427E] 423 (iii) Section 77 leaves no room for doubt that reduction of share capital may have to be brought about in two different situations by two different modes.
Undoubtedly, where the company has passed a resolution for reduction of its share capital and has submitted it to the Court for confirmation, the procedure prescribed by Sections 100 to 104 will have to be followed, if they are attracted.
On the other hand, where the Court, while disposing of a petition under Ss. 397 and 398, gives a direction to the company to purchase shares of its own members, consequent reduction of the share capital is bound to ensue, and, before making such a direction it is not always necessary to give notice of the consequent reduction of the share capital to the creditors of the company.
No such requirement is laid down by the Act.
The two procedures ultimately bringing about reduction of the share capital are distinct and separate and stand apart from each other; and one or the other may be resorted to according to the situation.
That is the clearest effect of the disjunctive 'or ' in section 77.
[428H, 429AB] (iv) Where the reduction of share capital is necessitated by directions given by the Court in it petition under sections 397 and 398, the procedure prescribed in Sections 100 to 104 is not required to be followed in order to make the direction effective.
[428G] (v) It would not be correct to say that, whenever it becomes necessary to reduce the capital of a company, the reduction can be brought about only by following the procedure prescribed in Ss. 100 to 104.
Sections 100 to 104 specifically prescribe the procedure for reduction of share capital where the Articles of the company permit and the company adopts a special resolution which can only become effective on the Court according sanction to it.
Reduction of share capital may also take pursuant to a direction of the Court requiring the company to purchase the shares of a group of members while granting relief u/s 402.
Both the procedures, by which reduction of capital of a company may be effected, are.
distinct and separate and stand apart from each other.
[427F H] (vi) The scheme of Ss. 397 to 406 is to constitute a code by itself for granting relief to oppressed minority shareholders and for granting appropriate relief, a power of widest amplitude, inter alia, lifting the ban on company purchasing its share under Court 's direction, is conferred on the Court.
When the Court exercises this power by directing a purchase of its shares by the company, it would necessarily involve reduction of the capital of the company.
Such a power of the Court is not subject to a resolution to be adopted by the members of the company which, when passed with, statutory majority, has to be submitted to Court for confirmation.
No canon of construction would permit such an interpretation in which the statutory power of the Court for its exercise depends upon the vote of the members of the company.
[428C E] (vii) If reduction of share capital can only be brought about by resorting to the procedure prescribed in Ss. 100 to 104, it would cause inordinate delay and the very purpose of granting relief against oppression would stand self defeated.
[428E F] (viii) When minority shareholders complain of oppression by majority and seek relief against oppression from the Court under Ss. 397 and 398 and the Court, in a petition of this nature, considers it fair and just to direct the com pany to purchase the shares of the minority shareholders to relieve oppression, if the procedure prescribed by Ss. 100 to 104 is required to be followed, the resolution will have to be first adopted by the members of the company, but that would be well nigh impossible because the very majority against whom relief is sought would be able to veto it at the threshold and the power conferred on the Court would be frustrated.
That could never have been the intention of the Legislature.
[428F H] (ix) The object_behind prescribing this procedure requiring, in special circumstances as contemplated in Section 101(3), the court to give notice to the creditors is that the members of the company may not unilaterally act to the detriment of the creditors behind their back.
If such a procedure were not prescribed, the Court might, unaware of all the facts, be persuaded by the members to confirm the resolution and that might cause, serious prejudice to the creditors.
But such a situation would not be likely to arise in a petition 424 under Ss. 397 and 398.
In such a petition the Court would be in a better position to have all the relevant facts and circumstances before it and it would be the Court which would decide whether to direct purchase of shares of the members by the company.
Before giving such a direction, the Court Would certainly, keep in view all the relevant facts and circumstances, including the interest of the creditors.
Even if the petition is being disposed ' of on a compromise between the parties, yet the Court, before sanctioning the compromise, would certainly satisfy itself that the direction proposed to be given by it pursuant to the consent terms, would not adversely affect or jeopardise the interest of the creditors.
Therefore, it cannot be said that merely because section 402 does not envisage consent of the creditors before the Court gives direction for reduction of share capital consequent upon purchase of shares of some of the members by the company.
there is no safeguard for the creditors.
[430EH] In the instant case, there is no scope for apprehension on behalf of the interveners that the reduction of share capital to be effected under the Court 's direction, without reference or notice to creditors, would adversly affect their interests because : (1) As per the order of the Court dated 31st May, 1977 while ascertaining the break up value of the shares on the date of filing the petition under Sections 397 and 398, the Chartered Accountants and Auditors will have to take into account the assets of the company as also the existing, contingent and anticipated debts, liabilities, claims, and demands etc., as revealed in the accounts of the company for the last five years, which would indisputably include the claims made by the interveners in the two suits filed by them to the extent to which they appear genuine and well founded and.
(ii) the order of the Court did not fix any minimum price at which the shares shall be purchased by the company.
[431A C, D] (x) A right to notice by reason of any rule of natural justice, which a party may establish, must depend for its existence upon proof of an interest which is bound to be injured by not hearing the party claiming to be entitled to a notice and to be heard before an order is passed.
If the duty to give notice and to hear a party is not mandatory, the actual order passed on a matter must be shown to have injuriously affected the interest of the party which was to be given no notice, of the matter.
[431G] In the instant case, after hearing the intervener , it was found that no interest of theirs has been injured by not hearing them before the order was passed.
The order passed by this Court on 31st May, 1977, is not vitiated on the ground of non issue of notices to them under the inherent powers of the Court under Rule 9 of the Company (Court) Rules, 1959, even though there was no statutory duty to hear them.
[431H. 432A] (xi) Undoubtedly, when a petition is made to the Court under Ss. 397 and 398, it is obligatory upon the Court to give notice u/s 400 of the petition to the Central Government and it would be open to the Central Government to make a representation and if any such representation is made, the Court would have to take it into consideration before passing the final order in the proceeding.
But Section 400 does not envisage a fresh notice to be issued at the appellate stage.
[432C D] (The Court directed to expedite the suit Nos.
729/74 and 933/76 filed by the interveners in the Bombay High Court and dispose off within a period of six months).
