The appellant was appointed in March 1948 by the Chief Justice of the Calcutta High Court as Registrar and Accountant General of the High Court on its original side and confirmed therein in November 1948.
He was dismissed from that post with effect from 1st September 1951 by the Chief Justice by his order dated 3rd September 1951.
There were various charges against the appellant and Mr. Justice Das Gupta was deputed by the Chief Justice to make an enquiry and submit a report.
Mr. Justice Das Gupta made a full enquiry and submitted a report in which he exonerated the appellant in respect of some of the charges but found him guilty in respect of other charges.
His conclusion was that the appellant must be held guilty of misconduct and dishonest conduct and that he was unfit to hold the office of Registrar of the Original Side of the Calcutta High Court.
The Chief Justice issued notice to the appellant intimating that he agreed with the report and asked him to show cause why he should not be dismissed from his post.
After be was given an opportunity to show cause, the appellant was dismissed by an order of the Chief Justice.
The appellant 's petition to the Governor for the cancellation of the above order was dismissed.
Subsequently his application for review to the Chief Justice of the prior order of dismissal and a writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution filed in the High Court in respect of his dismissal were also dismissed one after the other.
The appellant obtained leave to appeal to the Supreme Court.
The three main points for consideration by the Supreme Court were: 1.
Whether the Chief Justice of the High Court had no power to dismiss the appellant; 2.
Even if the Chief Justice had such power whether be could not delegate the enquiry into the charges to another Judge but should have made the enquiry himself; and 168 1332 3.
Whether the order of dismissal by the Chief Justice could have been passed without previous consultation with the Public Services Commission as provided by article 320 of the Constitution.
Held (1) that the Chief Justice was competent to dismiss the appellant because both by virtue of the provisions of clause 8 of the Letters Patent of the Calcutta High Court read with clause 4 of the same as well as articles 229(1), 313 and 367(1) of the Constitution read with section 16 of the General Clauses Act, the power of appointment includes the power of dismissal; (2) the objection to the validity of dismissal on the ground that the delegation of enquiry amounted to a delegation of power is without substance because the exercise of power to appoint or dismiss an officer is the exercise not of a judicial power but of an administrative power and it is well settled that a statutory functionary exercising such a power cannot be said to have delegated his function merely because he has deputed a responsible and competent official to enquire and report; and (3) it was not necessary to have the previous consultation with the Public Service Commission for the dismissal of the appellant by the Chief Justice because article 320(3) of the Constitution taken as a whole is inconsistent with article 229 of the Constitution and also because the language thereof is not applicable to the High Court Staff.
North West Frontier Province vs Suraj Narain Anand ([1948] L.R. 75 I.A. 343), Barnard vs National Dock Labour Board, ([1953] 2 Q.B. 18, 40), Board of Education vs Bice ([1911] A.C. 179), and Local Government Board vs Arlidge ([1915] A.C. 120), referred to.
