A long standing enmity between Baburam and Munnalal, triggered by proceedings u/s 107/117 Cr.
P.C., initiated by them against each other, resulted in an attack on Baburam 's party, by Munnalal 's party, in which Baburam died.
The appellants were convicted, inter alia, u/s 302/149 I.P.C., and sentenced to imprisonment for life.
The factum of the recovery of four live cartridges by the Investigating Officer at the spot, was challenged by the accused at the appellate stage.
The High Court examined the Sessions Judge and the Investigating Officer u/s 540 Cr.
P.C. but denied the appellants an opportunity to adduce evidence to rebut this fresh evidence.
Dismissing the appeals on merits, after completely excluding the, evidence of the witnesses examined by the High Court u/s 540 Cr.
P.C., the Court HELD: 1.
The principles on the basis of which this Court would interfere in an appeal by special leave are as follows : 1.
That this Court would not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact based on pure appreciation of evidence even if it were to take a different view on the evidence; 2.
That the Court will not normally enter into a reappraisement or review of the evidence, unless the assessment of the High Court is vitiated by an error of law or procedure or is based on error of record, misreading of evidence or is inconsistent with the evidence, for instance, where the ocular evidence is totally inconsistent with the medical evidence and so on; 3.
That the Court would not enter into credibility of the evidence with a view to substitute its own opinion for that of the High Court; 4.
That the Court would interfere where the High Court has arrived at a finding of fact in disregard of a judicial process, principles of natural justice or a fair bearing or has acted in violation of a mandatory provision of law or procedure resulting in serious prejudice or injustice to the accused; 5.
This Court might also interfere where on the proved facts wrong inferences of law have been drawn or where the conclusions of the, High Court are manifestly perverse and based on no evidence" [68C G] Dalbir Kaur and Ors.
vs State of Punjab, [1977] 1 S.C.R. 280; followed.
Judges should not be allowed to become witnesses in cases which they decide, otherwise that would lead to most anomalous results and would undermine the confidence of the people in the judiciary.
A Judge has to decide the cage according to the evidence and the circumstances before him and it cannot 60 be allowed to fill up gaps left by the prosecution or the defence by giving statement on oath before a Court of law.
Under section 540 of the Cr.
P.C. the High Court may examine the Sessions Judge or the Trial Court, when very necessary, on very rare occasions where all other remedies are exhausted.
[64D H, 65A] The Most Noble the Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry and the Metropolitan Board of Works (1871 2) V E and 1, Appeal Cases 418; Regina vs Gazard, ; applied.
The condition of giving an opportunity to the accused to rebut any fresh evidence sought to be adduced against him either at the trial or the appellate stage, is implicit under section 540 of the Cr.
P.C. and a refusal of the same amounts not only to an infraction of the provisions of the Code, but also of the principles of natural justice, and offends the famous maxim Audi Alteram Partem.
[65 D E H] Channulal and Anr.
vs Rex, A.I.R. 1949 All. 692, Rangaswami Naicker vs Muruga Naicker, A.I.R. 1954 Mad. 169; Shugan Chand and Anr.
vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1925 Lahore 53 1; The Queen vs Assanoollah, 13 S.W.R. (Crl.) 15; approved.
Documents like the Inquest report, seizure lists or the site plans consists of two parts, one of which is admissible and the other is inadmissible.
That part of such documents which is based on the actual observation of the witness at the spot being direct evidence in the case, is clearly admissible, under section, 60 of the evidence Act, whereas the other part which is based on information given to the Investigating Officer, or on the statement recorded by him inadmissible under section 162 Cr. P.C., except for the limited purpose mentioned in that section.
[72G H, 73A] Baladin and Ors.
vs State of U.P., A.T.R. ; Surian and Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan ; Ch.
I Rizak Ram vs Ch.
J. section Chouhan and Ors.
, ; Caetano Piedade Fernandes and Anr.
vs Union Territory of Goa.
Daman and Diu, Panaji, Goa ; fit Singh State of Punjab, A.I.R., 1976 S.C. 1421; distinguished.
