From time to time the Life Insurance Corporation and its employees arrived at settlement relating to the terms and conditions of service of Class III and Class IV employees including bonus payable to them.
Clause (8) of the Settle ment dated January 24, 1974, which related to payment of bonus, provided (i) that no profit sharing bonus shall be paid but the Corporation may, subject to such directions as the Central Government may issue from time to time, grant any other kind of bonus to its Class III and Class IV employees; (ii) that an annual cash bonus will be paid to all Class III and Class IV employees at the rate of 15% of the annual salary actually drawn by an employee in respect of the financial year to which the bonus relates and (iii) that save as provided therein all other terms and conditions attached to the admissibility and payment of bonus shall be as laid down in the Settlement on bonus dated June 26, 1972.
Clause (12) of the Settlement which refers to the, period of settlement provided (1) that the Settlement shall be effective from April 1, 1973 for a period of four years and (2) that the, terms of the Settlement shall be subject to the approval of the Board of the Corporation and the Central Government.
One of the administrative instructions issued by the Corporation in regard to the payment of cash bonus under cl.
8(ii) of the Settlement was that in case of retirement or death, salary up to the date of cessation of service shall be taken into account for the purpose, of determining the amount of bonus payable to the employee or his heirs and the other was that the bonus shall be paid along with the salary for the month of April but in case of retirement or death, payment will be made soon after the contingency.
The payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act.
1976 considerably curtailed the rights of the employees to bonus in industrial establishments.
But in so far as the employees of the Corporation were concerned this Act had no application because by reason of section 32 of the Payment of Bonus Act, the Corporation was outside the purview of its operation.
The Central Government however decided that the employees of establishments which were not covered by the Bonus Act would not be eligible for payment of bonus but exgratia payment in lieu of bonus would be made to them.
Pursuant to this decision the L.T C. was advised by the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, that no further payment of bonus should be made to its employees without getting the same cleared by the Government.
The Corporation accordingly issued administrative instructions not to pay bonus to its employees under the existing provisions until further instructions.
To the employees ' assertion that the Corporation was bound to, 335 pay bonus in accordance with the terms of the Settlement the Corporation cOntended that payment of bonus by the Corporation was subject to such directions as the Central Government might issue from time to time, and since the Central Government had advised it not to make any payment of bonus without its specific approval, bonus could not be paid to the employees.
Thereupon, the All India Insurance Employees ' Association moved the High Court for issue of a writ directing the Corporation to act in accordance with the terms of the Settlement dated January 24, 1974 read with administrative instructions dated March 29, 1974 and not to refuse to pay cash bonus to Class III and Class IV employees.
A single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ petition.
While the Letters Patent Appeal was pending, Parliament passed the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 (which is the Act impugned in this case).
In the Letters Patent Appeal the Corporation stated that in view of the impugned Act , there was no necessity for proceeding with the appeal and hence the Division Bench made no order in the appeal.
Since the effect of the impugned Act was to deprive Class III and Class IV employees of bonus payable to them in accordance with the terms of the Settlement, two of the associations filed writ petitions in this Court challenging the constitutional validity of the impugned Act.
It was contended on their behalf that even if the impugned Act rendered cl.
(8) (ii) ineffective with effect from April 1, 1975 it did not have the effect of absolving the Life Insurance Corporation from its obligation to carry out the writ of Mandamus issued by the High Court and (2) that the right of Class III and Class IV employees to annual cash bonus for the years 1975 76 and 1976 77 under Cl.
8(ii) of the Settlement was property and since the impugned Act provided for compulsory acquisition of this property.
without payment of compensation, it was violative of article 31(2) of the Constitution.
Allowing the writ petitions Beg C.J. (concurring with the majority) HELD : Section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation (Modification of Settlement) Act, 1976 is struck by the provisions of article 19(1)(f) and is not saved by article 19(6) of the Constitution.
[346 A] 1.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act discloses that the purpose of the impugned Act was to undo settlements arrived at between the Corporation and Class III and Class IV employees on January 24 and February 6, 1974 and recognised by the High Court.
In Smt.
Indira Gandhi vs Raj Narain this Court held that even a constitutional amendment cannot authorise the assumption of judicial power by Parliament.
One of the tests laid down was whether the decision is of a kind which requires hearing to be given to the parties i.e., whether it involves a quasi judicial procedure.
A decision reached by the Central Government is the result of a satisfaction on matters stated there and would imply quasi judicial procedure where the terms of a settlement had to be reviewed or revised.
But, the legislative procedure.
followed in this case does not require that to, be done.
It would be unfair to adopt legislative procedure to undo a settlement which had become the basis of a decision of a High Court.
Even if legislation can remove the basis of a decision it has to do it by an alteration of general rights of a class but not by simply excluding two specific settlements between the Corporation and its employees from the purview of section 18 of the which had been held to be valid and enforceable by a High Court.
[341 G, H, 342 A C] 2(a) The object of the Act was in effect to take away the force of the judgment of the High Court.
Rights under that judgment could be said to, rise independently of article 19, of the Constitution.
To give effect to that judgment is not the same thing as enforcing a right under article 19.
It may be that a right under article 19 becomes linked up with the enforceability of the judgment.
Nevertheless the two could be viewed as separable sets of rights.
If the right conferred by the judgment independently is sought to be set aside section 3 would be invalid for trenching upon the judicial power.
[343 B D] 336 (b) A restriction upon a right may even cover taking away of the right to increased remuneration in the interests of the general public.
But the present is a pure and simple case of deprivation of rights of the employees without any apparent nexus with any public interest.
In the instant case the impugned Act is a measure which seeks to deprive workers of the benefits of settlement arrived at and assented to by the Central Government under the provisions of the .
Such a settlement should not be set at naught by an Act designed to defeat the purpose.
In judging the reasonableness of an Act the prospects held out, the representations made, the conduct of the Government and equities arising therefrom may all be taken into consideration.
[342 E F, 344 E F] 3.
Even though the real object of the Act was to set aside the result of mandamaus, the section does not mention this object.
This was perhaps because the jurisdiction of a High Court and the effectiveness of its orders derived their force from article 226 of the Constitution.
Even if section 3 seeks to take away the basis of the judgment without mentioning it, yet where the rights of the citizens against the State are concerned the court should adopt an interpretation which upholds those rights.
Therefore, the rights which had passed into those embodied in a judgment and become the basis of a mandamus from the High Court, could not be taken away in an indirect fashion.
[343 D E].
Even though the Directive Principles contained in article 43, cast an obligation on the State to secure a living wage for the workers and is part of the principles declared fundamental in the governance of the country, it is not a fundamental right which can be enforced.
Even though the Directive Principles give a direction in which the fundamental policies of the State must be oriented, yet this Court cannot direct either the Central Government or the Parliament to proceed in that direction.
Even if the Directives are not directly enforceable by a Court they cannot be declared ineffective.
They have the life and force of fundamentals.
The best way to give vitality and effect to them is to use them as criteria of reasonableness.
[344 B C] 5(a) Articles 358 and 359(1A) provide that as soon as the Proclamation of emergency cease to operate the effect of suspension must vanish "except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have effect. ' [346 B C] (b) The term "things done or omitted to be done", should be interpreted very narrowly.
In the present case it means that the settlements are not to be deemed to be wiped off.
All that it means is that no payment of bonus could be demanded during the emergency but as soon as the emergency was over, the settlement would revive and what could not be demanded during the emergency would become payable even for the period of emergency for which payment was suspended.
In other words valid claims cannot be washed off by the emergency per se.
They can only be suspended by a law passed during the operation of articles 358 and 359(1A).
[346 C F] (Per Chandrachud, Fazal Ali and Shinghal, JJ.).
Concurring with the majority.
The impugned Act violates article 31(2) and is, therefore, void.
[369 G] (Per Bhagwati, Iyer and Desai, JJ.) Irrespective whether the impugned Act is constitutionally valid or not, the Corporation is bound to obey the Writ of Mandamus issued by the, High Court and to pay annual cash bonus for the year 1975 76 to Class III and Class IV employees.
[352 D E] 1.
Section 3 of the impugned Act merely provided that the provisions of the Settlement, in so far as they related to payment of annual cash bonus to Class in and Class IV employees, shall not have any force or effect and shall not be deemed to have had any force or effect from April 1, 1975.
The writ of Mandamus issued by the High Court was not touched by the impugned Act.
The right of the employees to annual cash bonus ' for the year 1975 76 became 337 crystallised in the judgment and this right was not sought to be taken away by the impugned Act.
The Judgment continued to subsist and the corporation was bound to pay bonus in obedience to the writ of Mandamus.
By the time the Letters Patent Appeal came up for hearing, the impugned Act had already come into force and the Corporation could have successfully contended in the appeal that since the Settlement, in so far as it provided for payment of annual cash bonus, was annihilated by the impugned Act with effect from 1st April, 1975 and so the employees were not entitled to bonus for the year 1975 76 and hence no writ of Mandamus could issue against the Corporation directing it to make payment of bonus.
If such contention had been raised, there is little doubt that the judgment of the single Judge would have been upturned.
But that was not done, and the judgment of the single Judge became final and binding oil the parties.
[353 A F, 355 C] Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Broach Borough Municipality, [1970] 1 SCR 358 and Patel Gordhandas Hargovindas vs Municipal Commissioner, Alimedabad, ; ; distinguished and held inapplicable. 2(a).
The argument on behalf of the Corporation that on a proper interpretation of the clauses annual cash bonus payable under cl.
8(ii) was, by reason of cl.
8(i) subject to the directions issued by the Central Government from time to time and the Government having stopped further payment of bonus, the employees were not entitled to claim annual cash bonus, is erroneous.
The employees had absolute right to receive annual cash bonus from the Corporation in terms of el. 8(ii) and it was not competent to the Central Government to issue any directions to the Corporation to refuse or withhold payment of the same.
[356 D H] (b) Although under regulation 58 of the Service Regulations non profit sharing bonus could be granted subject to the directions of the Central Government and if the Government issues a direction to the contrary bonus could not be paid by the Corporation, in the instant case, as provided in cl. 12 of the Settlement, the Central Government approved the payment of bonus under cl. 8(ii).
That having been done it was not competent to the Central Government thereafter to issue another contrary direction which would have the effect of compelling the Corporation to commit a breach of its obligation under section 18(1) of the to pay annual cash bonus under clause 8(ii).
The overriding power given to the Central Government to issue directions from time to time contained in cl.
8(i) is conspicuously absent in cl. 8(ii).
The power contained in cl.
8(i) cannot be projected or read into cl. 8(ii).
These two clauses are distinct and independent.
While cl. 8(i) is a general provision, el. 8(ii) specifically provides that cash bonus in the manner prescribed therein shall be paid to the employees.
This specific provision is made subject only to the approval of the Central Government, which was obtained.
[357 A F] (c) Moreover, under cl.
8(ii) read with the administrative instruction issued by the Corporation, annual cash bonus accrued from day to day, though payable in case of retirement, resignation or death on the happening of that contingency and otherwise on the expiration of the year to which the bonus related, Thus the annual cash bonus payable for the year 1975 76 was a debt due and owing from the Corporation to each of the employees.
, On the date when the impugned Act came into force each of the employees was entitled to a debt due and owing to him from the Corporation.
[357 H, 358 A] 3(a) The impugned Act must be held to be violative of article 31(2) since it did not provide for payment of any compensation for the compulsory acquisition of the debts.
[369 C] (b) The direct effect of the impugned Act was to transfer ownership of the debts due and owing to Class III and Class IV employees in respect of cash bonus to the Life Insurance Corporation and since the Corporation is a Corporation owned by the State, the impugned Act was a law providing for compulsory acquisition of the debts by the State within the meaning of article 31(2A).
1369 B C] 338 (c) Choses in action can be acquired by the State.
So long as the acquisition sub serves a public purpose, it would satisfy the requirement of article 31(2).
There is a fundamental distinction between a chose in action and money.
A chose in action has not the same mobility and liquidity as money, and its value is not measured by the amount recoverable under it but depends on a variety of factors.
Where money is given as compensation for taking money the theory of forced loan may apply, but it is not applicable where a chose in action is taken and money representing its value is given as compensation.
[363 A, D F] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; Madhav Rao Scindia vs Union of India : ; reiterated.
State of Bihar vs Kameshwar Singh, ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ranojirao Shinde, ; ; dissented; Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar, [1971] Suppl.
S.C.R. 634; State of Punjab vs K. R. Erray & Sobhag Rai Mehta, ; ; State of Gujarat, vs Sri Ambica Mills Ltd., ; and Slat(, of Kerala vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd., ; followed; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ranojirao Shinde, [1968] 3 S.C.R. 489; State of Bihar vs Kameshwar Singh, and Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. vs State of Bombay, ; explained; ; and ; held no longer good law.
(d) The debts due and owing from the Corporation in respect of annual cash bonus were clearly property of the employees within the meaning of article 31(2) and they could be compulsorily acquired under article 31(2).
Similarly their right to receive cash bonus for the period from the date of commencement of the impugned Act upto March 31, 1977 was a legal right enforceable through Court of law.
[360 B C] (a) Property within the meaning of articles 19(1)(f) and 31(2) comprises every form of property, tangible or intangible, including debts and choses in action such is unpaid accumulation of wages, pension, cash grants etc.
[360 A] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; ; H. H. Maharajadhiraja Madhay Rao Jiwaji Rao Scindia Bahadur & Ors.
vs Union of India; , ; State of M.P. vs Ranojirao Shinde & Anr., ; ; Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 634; State of Punjab vs K. R. Erry & Sobhag Rai Mehta, [1973] 2 S.C.R. 485; and State of Gujarat & Anr vs Shri Ambica Mills Ltd., Ahmedabad, ; referred to.
4(a) The contention of the Corporation that when ownership of a debt is transferred it continues to exist as a debt but that when the debt is extinguished it ceases to exist as a debt and that extinguishment of a debt does not therefore involve transfer of ownership of the debt to the debtor is not well founded.
Where, by reason of extinguishment of a right or interest of a person, detriment is suffered by him and a corresponding benefit accrues to the State, there would be transfer of ownership of such right or interest to the State.
The question would always be : who is the beneficiary of the extinguishment of the right or interest effectuated by the law ? If it is the State, then there would be transfer of ownership of the right or interest to the State, because what the owner of the right or interest would lose by reason of the extinguishment would be the benefit accrued to the State [367 H, 368 B C] (b) Extinguishment of the debt of the creditor with corresponding benefit to the State or State owned/controlled Corporation would involve transfer of ownership of the amount representing the debt from the former to the latter.
This is the real effect of extinguishment of the debt and by garbing it in the form of extinguishment, the State or State owned/controlled Corporation cannot obtain benefit at the cost of the creditor and yet avoid ' the applicability of 339 article 31(2).
The verbal veil constructed by employing the device of extinguishment of debt cannot lot permitted to conceal or hide the real nature of the transaction [368 F B]
