The term 'Award ' has been defined by section 2(b) of the to mean an interim or a final determination of any industrial dispute or of any question relating thereto by a Labour Court.
Section 10, which describes the matters that can be referred to a Labour Court etc.
for adjudication 'provides in sub s.(1) that where an appropriate government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended it may, at any time, by order in writing. (c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected with or relevant to the dispute, if it relates to any matter specified in the second sched ule, to a Labour Court for adjudication.
Under section 19(3) an award shall remain in operation for a period of one year from the date on which the award becomes enforceable under section 17A. An industrial dispute relating to the dismissal of three workmen of the appellant had been referred to a Labour Court.
The Labour Court held that the reference was in valid because, as the workmen had not served demand notice on the management prior to the reference, no industrial dispute could legally come into existence before the refer ence.
After serving a demand notice on the management within a month thereafter the workmen raised an industrial dispute relating to the same matter.
The Labour Court rejected the employer 's preliminary objection that in view of section 19, the second reference was not competent in that it was made within one year of the first award, and decided the case on merits.
The Labour Court held that the termination of the services of the workmen was illegal and ordered reinstatement with back wages from the date of termination.
The employer 's writ petition under article 226 of the Constitution impugning the Labour Court 's decision was dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The Labour Court 's determination in the first reference did not possess the attributes essential to bring it within the definition of an award.
The mere fact that this order was published by the Government under section 17(1), did not confer that status on it.
[339 D] 1(a) The definition of `award ' under section 2(b) falls in two parts (i) determination, final or interim, of any indus trial dispute and (ii) of any question relating to an indus trial dispute.
The basic postulate common to both the parts of the definition is the existence of an industrial dispute, actual or apprehended.
The `determination ' contemplated by the definition is of an industrial dispute or a question relating thereto on merits.
[338 D] (b) In the instant cases the order of the Labour Court in the first reference did not determine the question or points specified in government order of reference, nor was it an adjudication on merits of any industrial dispute or a question relating thereto.
The only question determined by the Labour Court was about the existence of an industrial dispute which in its opinion was a sine qua non for the validity of the reference.
Rightly or wrongly it found that this preliminary jurisdictional fact did not exist because no industrial dispute had come into existence in accordance with law and in consequence the reference was invalid.
There was, therefore, no determination of the dispute on merits on the question relating thereto.
[339 C D] 333 Technological Institute of Textiles vs Its Workmen and Ors. , followed.
Management of Bangalore Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Workmen and Anr. ; , referred to.
Workmen of Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. vs Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. Kanpur and Ors.
42 Indian Factories Journal p. 255, not approved.
(b) Moreover the decision of the Labour Court in the first reference did not impose any continuing obligation on the parties bound by it.
The second reference was, there fore, not barred by anything contained in sub section (3 ) or other provisions of section 19.
[340 C] 2.
The Labour Court was not justified in awarding com pensation to the workmen for wages relating to the period prior to the date on which the demand notice for reinstate ment was served on the management.
[340 H]
