In exercise of the power conferred by section 241(2)(b) of the Government of India Act, 1935 the Governor of Bombay framed rules called Recruitment Rules of the Bombay Service of Engineers (Class I and Class II 1939), Rule 2 laid down the method of recruitment to Class I of the Service by direct recruitment and by promotion from the existing Bombay Service of Engineers or from the Bombay Service of Engineers Class II.
Rule 10 provided that recruitment to Class II service shall be either by direct recruitment or by promo tion from (i) the Bombay Subordinate Engineering Service (ii) permanent or temporary supervisors and (iii) tempo rary engineers.
In 1941 the Government of.
Bombay passed a resolution directing that in the case of direct recruits appointed substantively on probation, seniority should be determined with reference to the date of appointment on probation, while in the case of officers promoted to substantive vacan cies, seniority should be determined with reference to the date of their promotion to the substantive vacancies provid ed there had been no break in their service prior to their confirmation in these vacancies.
In 1949 the Chief Secretary to the Government of Bombay in reply to a representation made by the Bombay Civil Service Association regarding emergency recruitment to the I.A.S. and "other matters" stated that promotees could have no grievance in the matter of seniority since the seniority of a direct recruit to the cadre of Deputy Collector vis a vis a promoted officer was determined not according to the date of confirmation but according to the principles laid down in the Rules of 1941, i.e., with refer ence to the date of first appointment on probation in the case of direct recruits and of continuous officiation in the case of promoted officers.
In April 1960, a resolution embodying the rules of recruitment to Bombay Service of Engineers Class I and Class II was passed by the Government and signed by the Under Secretary to the Government "by order and in the name of the Governor of Bombay".
They provided for direct recruitment through common competitive examination conducted by the State Public Service Commission for both classes of service as well as by promotion.
Direct recruits were to be con firmed after two.
years in their respective cadets.
The rules also provided that the ratio of appointments by nomi nation and promotion to both classes shall, as far as prac ticable, be 75:25.
Rule 8(i) says that the various catego ries which manned the Class II sub divisional posts were being compiled into two lists: (i) of Bombay Service of Engineers, Class 11 cadre of permanent Deputy Engineers and (ii) of officiating Deputy Engineers.
The future recruit ment to Class II cadre was to be made by (a) nomination of candidates recruited directly by competitive examination and (b) promotion from the list of officiating Deputy Engineers in the ratio of 2: 1.
Rule 8(ii) provides that further officiating vacancies would be manned from the ranks of the Subordinate Service of Engineers.
For this purpose of state wise Select Seniority List was to be maintained of members of the Subordinate Service of Engineers, considered fit to hold sub divisional charge.
For inclusion in this list graduates.
diploma holders and non qualified persons had to have to their credit service of not less than 3, 8 and 13 years respectively.
For confirmation as a Deputy 776 Engineer the officer was expected to have put in not less than three years ' service as officiating Deputy Engineer.
Rule 8(iii) provides that the probationers recruited di rectly to the Bombay Service of Engineers, Class II cadre in any year shall, in a bunch, be placed senior to promotees confirmed during that year.
On July 29, 1963 the Government of Maharashtra passed a resolution superseding the 1941 rules and framing new rules for determining inter se seniority of direct recruits and promotees.
On December 19, 1970 the State Government passed a resolution superseding the resolution of 1960.
Rule 33 of the 1970 rules provides that the seniority list in respect of each of Class I and Class II shall consist of: Part A confirmed officers and Part B, not confirmed officers, that Part A shall be arranged with reference to the year of confirmation and confirmed officers shall be treated as senior to the unconfirmed officers in the respective cadre and Part B, names shall be arranged with reference to the date of continuous officiation except where a promotion in an officiating capacity was by way of purely temporary or local arrangement.
Immediately after the 1960 rules were made by the Government of Bombay the State of Bombay was bifurcated into the State of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
The Government of Gujarat passed a resolution on May 1, 1960 providing that all rules, regulations, circulars etc., prevailing in the former State of Bombay will continue to operate in the new State of Gujarat until changed or modified.
In 1965 the Government of Gujarat modified the 1960 rules in exer cise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution and introduced a new clause 10 in the 1960 rules.
On the bifurcation certain permanent and temporary posts of Deputy Engineers were allocated to the State of Gujarat.
Some of the promotee Deputy Engineers from the lower ranks were also allocated to the State of Gujarat and several of them having completed three years ' qualifying service had become eligible for confirmation under r. 8(ii) of the 1960 rules but were not confirmed.
The two appellants who were recruited as Overseers in 1953 were promoted temporarily as Deputy Engineers in 1959 and 1957 and were confirmed as Deputy Engineers in 1970.
Respondents Nos. 2 and 3, who were direct recruits, were appointed as Deputy Engineers in 1963 and 1959 and were confirmed in 1965 and 1961.
The two appellants alleged that though they had been in continuous service as Deputy Engineers since 1959 and 1957, respondents 2 and 3, who were appointed in 1963 and 1959 were shown as senior to them and that their (the appel lants ') seniority should have been fixed under the 1941 rules.
In any case the 1960 rules could not take away the right accrued to them under the rules existing at the time of their promotion in 1959 and 1957 and that r. 8(iii) of the 1960 rules and r. 33 of the 1970 rules were ultra vires articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The respondents on the other hand contended that neither the 1941 rules nor 1963 rules had any application to them and that under the 1960 rules which superseded the 1939 rules, posts of Deputy Engineers were required to be filled in by direct recruits and promotees in the ratio of 75:25 and the question of seniority of the appellants could not arise until they were confirmed and their seniority fixed from the date of confirmation in terms of r. 8(iii) of the 1960 rules.
HELD:I (a) Except the Bombay Rules of 1939 and the Gujarat notification dated August 21, 1965 the rest of the rules are in the nature of executive instructions, which, unlike rules regulating recruitment and conditions of serv ice framed under the proviso of article 309 of the Constitution or section 241(2)(b) of the Government of India Act, 1935 cannot have any retrospective effect.
The rules of 1941, 1960, 1963, 1965 and 1970 were not framed by the State Government in the exercise of constitutional or statutory power.
The rules of 1960 and 1970 were issued "By order and in the name of the Governor" but that 777 does not mean that the two sets of rules must be deemed to have been made under article 309 of the Constitution.
All executive action of the Government of a State is required by article 166 to be taken in the name of the Governor.
[790 B E] (b) The 1939 rules have constitutional authority but being rules made "to regulate the methods of recruitment" they afford no assistance in finding a solution to the problem.
They neither fix a quota for recruitment from the two avenues nor do they provide in any other manner a guide line for fixation of seniority as between appointees re cruited from different sources.
Rule 10 is beside the point because the crux of the promotees ' grievance is not that they are denied opportunities of promotion but that they are discriminated against in the matter of seniority in compari son with the direct recruits.
[790 E G] (c) The departmental promotees are being treated un equally in the matter of seniority because whereas, promo tees rank for seniority from the date of their confirmation, seniority of direct recruits is reckoned from the date of their initial appointment.
The disparity is so glaring that though direct recruits have to successfully complete a two year probationary period before confirmation, even that period is not excluded while counting their seniority.
A promotee ranks below the direct recruit even if be has officiated continuously as a Deputy Engineer for years before the appointment of the direct recruit is made and even if the promotees could have been confirmed in an avail able substantive vacancy before the appointment of the direct recruit.
[789 B D] 2(a) The 1941 resolution expressly.
governed the senior ity of direct recruits and promoted officers in all provin cial services except the Bombay Service Engineers, Class I. Since Deputy Engineers do not belong to Class service, their seniority was governed by the Resolution.
[791 A] (b) The wording of the Resolution leaves no doubt that the Government of Bombay applied two different standards for fixing inter se seniority of direct recruits and promo tees appointed as Deputy Engineers, The former were enti tled to reckon their seniority with effect from the date of their initial appointment on probation while the seniority of the latter had to be determined with reference to the date of their promotion to substantive vacancies subject to the further qualification that there was no break in their service prior to their confirmation in those vacancies.
Thus, for the purposes of seniority, the promotees had to depend firstly on the availability of substantive vacancies and secondly on the arbitrary discretion of the Government to confirm or not to confirm them in those vacancies.
The fact that a substantive vacancy had arisen and was available did not proprio vigore, confer any right on the promotee to be confirmed in that vacancy.
The 1941 rules contained the real germ of discrimination because the promotees had to depend upon the unguided pleasure of the Government for orders of confirmation.
In the pre Constitution era, such hostile treatment had to be suffered silently as a necessary incident of government service.
[791 B D] (c) It is difficult to uphold the claim of the promotees that the 1941 rules were modified by the letter dated Janu ary 11, 1949.
The Chief Secretary 's letter cannot improve the promotees ' case.
[791 G] (d) The part of the letter on which the promotees rely deals exclusively with the case of Deputy Collectors which makes it difficult to extend the benefit of what is said therein to Deputy Engineers, working in an entirely differ ent branch of government service.
The Association had addressed its letter, not to the Ministry which handled problems of Engineering Services, but to the Ministry of Home and Revenue, the latter of which was concerned to consider the grievance of Deputy Collectors.
The opening sentence of paragraph 2 of the Chief Secretary 's reply shows that he was referring to a class of service in which a quota system was then operating, which did not apply either under the 1939 or under the 1941 rules to Engineering Serv ices.
[792 A C] 778 3(a) Clause 8(iii) is highly discriminatory against promotees and accords preferential treatment to direct recruits and must be struck down as unconstitutional.
(b) There is no Universal rule either that a cadre cannot consist of both permanent and temporary employees or that it must consist of both.
That is primarily a matter of rules and regulations governing the particular service in relation to which the question regarding the composition of a cadre arises.
[793 E] Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India, [1973] 3 S.C.C. 1 and A. K. Subraman vs Union of India, [1975] 2 S.C.R. 979 referred to.
Ganga Ram & Ors.
vs Union of India, ; distinguished.
(c) It is difficult to hold that the officiating Deputy Engineers do not belong to Class II of the Bombay and Gujarat Service of Engineers.
[794 A] (d) The contention that in view of cll.
(i) and (ii) of r. 8 of the 1960 rules officiating Deputy Engineers do not belong to Class Ii cadre of the Bombay and Gujarat Service of Engineers must be rejected since the point is concluded by the decision of this Court in P.Y. Joshi vs State of Maharashtra It was held in that case that the list referred to in cl.
(ii) of r. 8 is the same list which is referred to in the latter part of cl.
(i) of that rule which speaks of "future recruitment".
Consequent ly a promoted officiating Deputy Engineer, who belonged to Class II cadre, was held entitled to be considered for promotion under r. 7 to the post of officiating Executive Engineer if he had put in 7 years ' qualifying service.
The eligibility for promotion did not require that the offici ating Deputy Engineer must have put in 7 years ' service after the date of confirmation.
[795 B E] (e) It must necessarily follow that "promotion" with the latter part of r. 8(i) relating to future recruitment speaks of means promotion as an officiating Deputy Engineer from the Select List prepared under r. 8(ii).
A person thus promoted from the Select List as an officiating Deputy Engineer is as full and complete a member of the Class II cadre as a person directly appointed as a Deputy Engineer.
In this view of the matter, the prescription contained in the closing sentence of r. 8(i) that "the number of such promotions shall be about 1/3rd the number of direct re cruits appointed in that year" would apply to initial ap pointments and cannot govern the confirmation of those who have already been appointed to Class II cadre.
In other words, direct recruits and promotees have to be appointed in the proportion of 75: 25 to Class II cadre, the former as, Deputy Engineers and the latter as officiating Deputy Engi neers, but once that is done, the quota rule would cease to apply with the result that confirmations in the post of Deputy Engineers are not required to be made in the propor tion in which the initial appointments had to be made.
Thus r. 8(i) only requires that for every three direct recruits appointed as Deputy.
Engineers only one promotee can he appointed as officiating Deputy Engineer.
The rule cannot be construed to mean that for every three confirmations of Deputy Engineers not more than one promotee can be confirmed as Deputy Engineer.
[795 F H, 796 A] A. K. Subraman vs Union of India [1975] 2 S.C.R. 979 fol lowed.
(f) Though drawn from two different sources, the direct recruits and promotees constitute in the instant case a single integrated cadre.
They discharge identical func tions, bear similar responsibilities and acquire an equal amount of experience in their respective assignments.
Yet clause (iii) of r. 8 provides that probationers recruited during any year shall in a bunch be treated as senior to promotees confirmed in that year.
This formula gives to the direct recruit even the benefit of his one year 's period of training and another year 's period of probation for the purposes of seniority and denies to promotees the benefit of their long and valuable experience.
If there was some intelligible ground for this differentiation bearing nexus with efficiency in public services, it might perhaps have been possible to sustain such a 779 classification.
Instead of adopting an intelligible differentia, r. 8 (iii) leaves seniority to be determined on the sole touchstone of confirmation.
Confirmation is one of the inglorious uncertainties of government service de pending neither.on efficiency of the incumbent nor on the availability of substantive vacancies.
In the instant case officiating Deputy Engineers were not confirmed even though substantive vacancies were available in which they could have been confirmed.
[796 C G] (g) There is no substance in the plea that direct recruits must be given weightage on the ground that the engineering services require the infusion of new blood since it is a highly specialised service.
Were it so, the Government would not have itself reduced the proportional representa tion gradually so as to tilt the scales in favour of promotees.
Besides, the plea that engineering service is a specialised service is made not by the Government but by recruits who are interested in so contending.
Nor is the apprehension justified that the higher echelons of engi neering service will in course of time be manned predomi nantly by promotees.
Those recruited directly as Assistant Engineers in Class I can, under the rules, officiate as Executive Engineers after four years ' service and are eligible for confirmation as Executive Engineers after a total service of 9 years.
Promotees can hardly ever match with that class in terms of seniority.
[797 A C] B.S. Gupta vs Union of India ; and V.B. Badami vs State of Mysore [1976] 1 S.C.R. 815 distin guished.
In the instant case rule 8(ii) adopts seniority cure merit test for preparing the state wise Select List of seniority and yet cl.
(iii) rejects the test of merit altogether.
The vice of that clause is that it leaves the valuable right of seniority to depend upon the mere accident of confirma tion.
That under articles 14 and 16, is impermissible and, therefore, r. 8(iii) must be struck down as unconstitu tional.
[797 G H] 4.
The High Court was right in rejecting the contention of the promotees that the 1963 rules superseded the 1960 rules by implication and, that, therefore, the State Government had no power or authority to apply the criterion of seniori ty fixed under the 1960 rules, after their repeal by 1963 rules.
The quota system was the very essence of 1960 rules and if it was desired to abrogate that system it is un likely that the 1963 rules will not even refer to those of 1960.
The rules of 1941 having been expressly superseded by 1963 rules, it is difficult to accept that along with the 1941 rules the resolution of 1963 would not have re ferred to the 1960 rules also.
Secondly, the resolution of 1970 of the Government of Maharashtra expressly superseded the 1960 rules which shows that the latter were in force until 1970 and were not superseded by the 1963 rules.
The resolution of 1970 refers to all previous resolutions except the resolution of 1963 which shows that the latter was not applicable to engineering services.
[798 C E] 5.
Rules 33 of the 1970 rules in so far as it makes seniority dependent upon the fortuitous circumstance of confirmation, is open to the same objection as r. 8(iii) of the 1960 rules and must be struck down for identical rea sons.
[800 A B] 6.
The circulars dated January 12, 1961, March 15, 1963 and October 18, 1968 which the promotees want to be enforced were issued by the Finance Department and being in the nature of inter departmental communications they cannot confer any right on the promotees.
[800 A B] 7.
The High Courts were right on the view that the rules under consideration do not in any manner violate the provisions of the Bombay Reorganisation Act.
11 of 1966.
[800 B] 8.
The argument in the Gujarat Writ Petitions that though originally the 1960 rules were in the nature of executive instructions they have acquired a statutory force and character by reason of their amendment by the rules of 780 1965 was rightly rejected by the High Court, because all that was done by the 1965 rules was to introduce a new rule, r. 10, in the 1960 rules.
The rules of 1960 were neither reiterated nor reenacted by the rules of 1965; and the new rule introduced into the rules of 1960 is not of such a character as to compel the inference that the rule making authority had applied its mind to the rules of 1960 with a view to adopting them.
[798 G H, 799 A] Bachan Singh vs Union of India, ; inap plicable.
