The respondent which is a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act does the business of Clearing and Forwarding and as Steamship agents.
In 1970, respondent acted as the shipping agents of "Aluminium Company of Canada Ltd." which is a non resident company.
The Aluminium company time chartered a ship "M.V. Sparto" belonging to another nonresident company.
Clause 4 of the Charter party provided for the payment by the charterers "for the use and hire" of the vessel at the rate of U.S. 4.50 dollars per ton on vessels ' total dead weight carrying capacity per calendar month commencing on and from the date of delivery of the ship.
"hire to continue until the hour of the day of her redelivery".
The said 'ship called at the port of Betul.
Goa on March 1, 1970 and loaded 13000 long tons of bauxite belonging to the time charterers, the Aluminium Co. The ship was allowed to leave the port of Betal on the basis of the guarantee bond executed by the respondent in favour of the President of India undertaking to pay the income tax payable by the time charterers under Section 172 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
On April 15, 1970, the First Income Tax Officer, Margoa issued a demand notice to the respondent for the payment of Rs. 51,191/ by way of income tax under the aforesaid provision.
The respondent filed a Writ Petition asking for a mandamus directing the Income Tax Officer to withdraw the notice.
The petition was allowed by the Judicial Commissioner Goa.
Dismissing the appeal by Certificate, the Court HELD : 1.
The amount which the time charterers were required to pay, to the owners of the ship was not payable on account of the carriage of goods but was payable on account of the use and hire of the ship.
[947 E F] 2.
It is true that one cannot place over reliance on the terms which the parties give to their agreement or on the label which they attach to the payment due from one to the other.
One must have regard to the substance of the matter and if necessary, tear the veil in order to see whether the true character of a payment is something other than what, by a clever device of drafting, it is made to appear.
[947 F G] In the instant case there is no reason to hold that the real intention of the parties was something different from what the words used by them, convey in their accepted sense.
The charter party was drawn in a standard form approved by the "New York Produce Exchange" and there is no warrant for supposing that though the payment which the charterers bound themselves to make to the owners of the ship was on account of the carriage of goods, the parties described it as being payable for the use and hire of the vessel, in order to avoid the payment of Indian income Tax.
The character of the payment cannot change according to the use to which the charterers put the ship or according as to whether the ship is loaded with goods in a port in India.
What is payable as hire charges for the use of the ship cannot transform itself into an amount payable on account of the carriage of goods, by reason 944 of the circumstance that the ship was loaded with goods in India.
The time charterers loaded the ship at Betul, Goa, with their own goods.
They did not sub let the ship for the purpose of carriage of goods nor did they load the ship with goods belonging to a third party in which event they might have earned some freight on account of the carriage of goods.
They paid hire charges to the owner of the ship for the use of the ship and since they loaded the ship with their own goods, they received nothing on account of the carriage of the goods.
Neither the one nor the other, therefore, received any amount on account of the carriage of the goods.
[947 G H, 948 A, B, F G] 3.
A contract by charter party is a contract by which an entire ship or some principal part thereof is let to a merchant who is called the charterer, for the conveyance of goods on a determined voyage to one or more places, or until the expiration of a specified period.
The contract ' in the instant case is of the nature of time charter party, whether there is a demise of the ship or not being immaterial.
Clause 4 of the charter party provides for the payment by the charterers "for the use and hire" of the vessel at the rate of U.S. 4.50 dollars per ton on vessel 's total dead weight carrying capacity ' per calendar month, commencing on and from the date of delivery of the ship, "hire to continue until the hour of the day of her redelivery".
These clauses of the charter party show that the Aluminium Company took the ship from its owners on a time charter party, that the owners were entitled to payment for the use and hire of the ship, that the amount was payable irrespective of what use the ship was put to by the time charterers or indeed, whether it was put to any use at all and that no part of the payment can be said to have been made on account of the carriage of goods.
[948 G H, 949 D F]
