The appellants are owners of theaters in the twin cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad, where fulls are exhibited.
Within the same premises as the theaters, in every case, there is a canteen and a cycle stand, leased out to contractors under instruments of lease.
The contractors employ their own servants to run the canteen and the cycle stand.
In regard to persons so employed by the contractors the owners of the theaters were treated as 'principal employers ' and notices of demands were issued to them calling upon them to pay contribution under the Employees State Insurance Act.
Thereupon the appellant filed an application under section 75 of the Act before the Employees Insurance Court for a declaration that the provisions of the Act were not application to their theaters and that they were not liable to any contribution in respect of the persons employed in the canteen and the cycle stands attached to their theaters.
The Insurance Court found "that the canteens are meant primarily for the convenience and comfort for those visiting the cinema theaters though in a few cases the persons in charge of the canteens seem to be allowing the general public also to have access to the canteens" and that the cycle stands "are meant exclusively for the convenience of the persons visiting the theaters".
The Insurance Court held that the owners of the theaters were, therefore, principal employers with reference to the persons employed by the contractors in the canteens and the cycle stands attached to the theaters and rejected the application filed by the contractors under section 75 of the Act.
In appeal the High Court confirmed the said findings and hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the court ^ HELD: (1) Law is essentially the formal expression of the regulation of.
economic relations in society.
In view of the complexities of modern business organisations, 'the principal employer ' is made primarily liable for payment of contribution "in respect of every employee, whether directly employed by him or by or through an immediate employer," under the Insurance Act, the main purpose of which is to insure all employees in factories or establishments against sickness and allied disabilities, but the funding.
to implement the policy of insurance is by contribution from the employers and the employees.
The benefits belong to the employees and are intended to embrace as extensive a circle 81 as is feasible.
In short the social orientation, protective purpose and human A coverage of the Act are important considerations in the statutory construction, more weighty than mere logomachy or grammatical nicety.
[83A, 85G H, 86A B] (2) In the field of labour jurisprudence, welfare legislation and statutory construction which must have due regard to Part IV of the Constitution, a teleological approach and social perspective must play upon the interpretative process. 'The reach and range of the definition of 'employee ' in section 2(9) of the E.S.I. Act is apparently wide and deliberately transcends pure contractual relationships.
[88C] (3) Clause (9) of section 2 contains two substantive parts.
Unless the person employed qualifies under both he is not an employee.
Firstly he must be employed "in or in connection with" the work of an establishment.
The expres sion "in connection with the work of an establishment ' ' ropes in a wide variety of workmen who may not be employed in the establishment.
Some nexus must exist between the establishment and the work of the employee but it may be a loose connection.
"In connection with the work of an establishment" only postulates some connection between what the employee does and the work of the establishment.
He may not do anything directly for the establishment concerned; he may not clo anything statutorily obligatory in the establishment; he may not do anything which is primary or necessary for the survival or smooth running of the establishment or integral to the adventure.
It is enough if the employee does some work which is ancillary, incidental or has relevance to or link with the object of the establishment.
Surely, the amenity or facility for the customers who frequent the establishment has connection with the work of the establishment.
the question is not whether without theat amenity or facility the establishment cannot be carried on but whether such amenity or facility even peripheral may be, has not a link with the establishment.
Nor indeed is it legal ingredient that such adjunct should be exclusively for the establishment if it is mainly its ancillary.
C] The primary test in the substantive clause being thus wide, the employees of the canteen and the cycle stand may be correctly described as employed in connection with the work of the establishment.
A narrower constriction may be possible but a larger ambit is clearly imported by a purpose oriented interpretation.
The whole goal of the statute is to make the principal employer primarily liable for the insurance of kindred kinds of employees on the premises, whether they are there in the work or are merely in connection with the work of the establishment.
Merely being employed in connection with the work of establishment, in itself, does not entitle a person to be an "employee".
He must not only be employed in connection with the work of the establishment but also be shown to be employed in one or other of the three categories mentioned in section 2(9) (1).
[89D F] (4) section 2(9) (i) covers only employees who are directly employed by the 'principal employer '.
It is imperative that any employee who is not directly employed by the principal employer cannot be eligible under section 2(9) (i).
In the present case the employees concerned are admittedly not directly employed by the cinema proprietors.
[89F G] 82 (5) The language of section 2(9) (ii) is extensive and diffusive imaginatively embracing all possible alternatives of employment by or through an independent employer.
In such cases the principal employer has no direct employment relationship since the immediate employer of the employee concerned is someone else.
Even so such an employee if he works (a) on the premises of the establishment, or (b) under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent on work which is ordinarily part of the work of the establishment or which is preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the establishment", qualifies under section 2(9) (ii).
The plurality of persons engaged in various activities who are brought into the definitional net is wide and considerable and all that is necessary is that the employee be on the premises or be under the supervision of the principal employer or his agent.
[89G H, 90A B] (6) A thing is incidental to another if it merely appertains to something else as primary.
Surely such work should not be extraneous or contrary to the purpose of the establishment but need not be integral to it either.
such depends upon time and place, habits and appetites, ordinary expectations and social circumstances.
Keeping a cycle stand and running a canteen are incidental or adjuncts to the primary purpose of the theatre.
[90D E] (7) May be punctilious sense of grammar and minute precision of language may sometimes lend unwitting support to narrow interpretation.
But language is the handmaid, not mistress.
Maxwell and Fowler move along different streets, sometimes.
It will defeat the objects of the statute to truncate its semantic sweep and throw out of its ambit those who obviously are within the benign contemplation of the Act, when, as in section 2(9) the definition has been cast deliberately in the widest terms and the draftsman has endeavoured to cover every possibility so as not exclude even distant categories of men employed either in the primary work or cognate activities.
Salvationary effort, when the welfare of the weaker sections of society is the statutory object and is faced with stultifying effect, is permissible judicial exercise.
The findings, in the instant case, arc correct and the conclusion reached deserves to be affirmed.
[90G H, 91A B] [In view of the fact that the contribution was determined without hearing under section 45 A of the ESI Act, the Court directed the Corporation authorities to give a, fresh hearing to the principal employers i.e. the employers in tune with the ruling of this Court in the Central Press case [19771] 3 SCR 351.
