The plaintiff respondent claiming to be an assignee of a debt under a deed dated 27th April, 1965, filed a suit against the defendant appellant for recovery of a certain sum alleged to be due to M /s Chitra Multipurpose Cooperative Society, the assignor.
On an interlocutory application moved by the respondent under order XI rules 14 and 18 C.P.C. for the production of certain documents, despite the objection by the appellant the Trial Court directed their production.
The appellant produced all the documents in his possession on 7 2 67, but he was permitted to take back The account books as they were required to Be produced before the Income Tax officer on that day with the direction that he should produce them on 23 2 67.
On 23 2 67, when the appellant appeared in the Court with his books the trial judge directed him to produce them on 16 3 67 and in the meanwhile allow their inspection to the respondent with three days ' notice.
The appellant accordingly sent a. letter dt.
25 2 67 asking the respondent to take inspection of the account books on 27 2 67 at 6 p.m. in the office d his Counsel.
On his failure to do so, the appellant sent once again a registered letter dt.
1 3 1967 asking the respondent to inspect the records on 9 3 67 in his lawyer 's office between 7 p.m. and 9 p.m.
The respondent never sent any reply to the notice.
Nor, did he avail of the opportunity of inspecting the account books at the office of the appellant 's lawyer on 9 3 67.
On 16 3 67 the Trial Court passed an order saying that the appellant should produce the books within four days in the Court to enable the respondent 's counsel to inspect them before 29 3 67 i.e. the date fixed for evidence.
After the examination of three witnesses of the respondent, the trial Court asked the respondent 's Counsel to apply under order XI rule 21 to strike out the defence of the appellant.
On 31 3 67 the respondent filed an application accordingly which was vehemently opposed by the appellant.
The appellant also moved both the District Court and the High Court for transfer of the suit to some other Court of competent jurisdiction.
The High Court declined to interfere.
Thereupon the trial Court passed an order on 23 5 67 striking out the defence of the appellant and on 21 6 67 refused permission to the appellant 's counsel to cross examine the respondent 's witnesses.
The revision filed by the appellant in the High Court was rejected on 14 8 1968.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The penalty imposed by order XI, rule 21 is of a highly penal nature and ought only to be used in extreme cases and should in no way be imposed unless there is a clear failure to comply with the obligations laid 5 520SCI/78 58 down therein.
The stringent provisions of order XI, rule 21 should be applied only in extreme eases where there is contumacy on the part of the defendant or a wilful attempt to disregard the order of the Court is established.
[62E, 63E] 2.
The test laid down is whether the default is wilful.
In the case of the plaintiff, it entails in the dismissal of the suit and, therefore, an order of dismissal ought not to be made under order XI, rule 21, unless the Court is satisfied that the plaintiff was wilfully withholding the documents which the defendant sought to discover.
In such an event, the plaintiff must take the consequence of having his claim dismissed due to his default i.e. by suppression of information which he was bound to give.
In the case of defendant, he is visited with the penalty that his defence is liable to be struck out and to be placed in the same position as if he had not defended the suit.
[63 B D] 3.
The power for dismissal of a suit or striking out of the defence under order XI, rule 21, should be exercised only where the defaulting party fails to attend the hearing or is guilty of prolonged or inordinate and inexcusable delay which any cause substantial or serious prejudice to the opposite party.
The rule must be worked with caution and may be made use of as a last resort.
[63D,E] Denvillier vs Myers, , Banshi Singh vs Palit Singh, 7 C.I.J. 295, Haigh, , Twycroft vs Grant, , Reg vs Senior, [1889](1) QBD 283; quoted with approval.
Khajah.
Assenoolla Joo vs Khajah Abdool Aziz, I.L.R. and Allahabad Bank Ltd. vs Ganpat Rai, T.L.R. ; approved.
It is travesty of justice that the trial Court should have, in the facts and circumstances of the case, passed an order striking out the defence of the defendant under order XI, rule 21 and that the High Court should have declined to set it aside.
[62D E] 5.
Applying the principle governing the Court 's exercise of its discretion under order XI, rule 21, in the instant case, there was no wilful default on the part of the defendant of the Court 's order under Order XI, rule 18(2) for the production of documents for inspection, and consequently, the order passed by the trial court on 23 May, 1967, striking out the defence of the defendant must be vacated and the trial must proceed afresh from the stage where the defendant was not permitted to participate.
[66C E] 6.
A perusal of order XI, rule 21 shows that where a defence is to be struck off in the circumstances mentioned therein, the order would be that the defendant 'be placed in the same position as if the has not defended '.
This indicates that once the defence is struck off under order XI, rule 21, the position would be as if the defendant had not defended and accordingly the suit would proceeds ex parte.
If the Court proceeds ex parte against the defendant under order IX, rule 6(a), the defendant is still entitled to cross examine the witnesses examined by the plaintiff.
If the plaintiff makes out a prima facie ease the court unable pass a decree for the plaintiff.
If the plaintiff fails to make out a prima facie case, the Court may dismiss the plaintiff 's suit.
Every Judge in dealing with an ex parte case has to take care that the plaintiff 's case is, at least, prima facie proved.
[66E G] Santram Singh vs Election Tribunal, ; referred to.
