The Governments of the States of Punjab and Delhi entered into an agreement about 30 years back providing for the running of public service vehicles on routes which covered each of the two States so that every one of such routes had one terminus in one of the States and the other in the other.
In Pursuance of the agreement one of the Governments would issue permits under the and the same would be countersigned by the other State before the former plied its buses on the routes covered by such routes.
One such permit related to the Delhi Karnal route and was countersigned by the State 'Transport Authority, Delhi.
The routes were extend d by the Punjab State authorities under permits granted by them for intra state routes connecting different towns in the State of Punjab itself.
Thus a permit was issued in favour of the Punjab Roadways for the route from Karnal to Chandigarh so that the bus operating on the Delhi Karnal route would carry passengers from Delhi to Chandigarh via Karnal.
In 1966, the appellant objected to the exploitation by the State of Punjab of the inter State routes in the manner above stated, that is, by extending them beyond the termini specified in That behalf under the counter signatures made by the State of Delhi, and approached the Inter State Transport Commission constituted under section 63 A of M.V. Act With a request for interference.
The Commission answered it in favour of the appellant State, and held that it would not be in order that if one vehicle operating of two permits for two routes were to book direct passengers travelling on both the routes.
Operations which would contravene this advice should be stopped and the services be so regulated to ensure that the provisions of the are not violated".
The State of Punjab went up in appellate to the Inter State Transport Appellate Tribunal under rule 24 of the Inter State Transport Commission Rules 1960.
The appeal was dismissed and the respondent State filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court which was allowed by the Division Bench.
Dismissing the appeal by certificate the Court, ^ HELD: (1) According to clause (xiv) of sub section (3) of section 48 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1959, the conditions attached to the grant of permit, under section 63(2) ibid, may be; (a) that the tickets issued to passengers, shall bear specified particulars; (b) that the tickets shall show the fares actually charged; and (C) that records of the tickets issued shall be kept in the manner specified.
None of these conditions embraces a restriction on the permit holder that he shall not ply his vehicles beyond the specified inter state route even if that is done under another permit which is valid according to law and, therefore, clause (xiv) of section 48(3) read with section 63(2) of the Act will be of no avail.
[76H, 77A C] 71 (2) 'The words "Tickets will be issued for the destinations between Delhi and Karnal.
Destination boards should be exhibited" merely lay down positive instruction which the permit holder had to carry out, namely, that he would not refuse the issue of a ticket between the two termini, i.e, Delhi and Karnal.
and that he would also exhibit a board stating that the vehicle in question would cover the route from Delhi to Karnal.
Beyond that the words do not go and cannot be construed to mean that the vehicle could not ply beyond Karnal or that a board saying, that it was going to Canceling via Karnal could not be exhibited, or that tickets could not be issued for any stations except those lying between Delhi and Karnal.
In fact, the authority counter signing the permit had no concern at all with any route beyond Karnal.
The plying to the vehicle from Karnal to Chandigarh would be governed not by the permit covering the Delhi Karnal route or by the counter signature on it by another permit issued by the authority competent to deal with the route between Karnal and Chandigarh.
[77D H] (3) The plying of vehicles by the Haryana,.
Roadways beyond the inter state route.
under valid permits issued by the competent authority does not amount to an "extension" of the route such as is prohibited by the Act.
[77H. 78A] The language of sub section (8) of section 57 of the Act applies only to a case Where the permit holder applies for variation of the conditions of his permit by inclusion of a new route or routes or a new area or by increasing the number of services above the specified maximum In the instant case, this situation does not arise at all inasmuch as the Haryana.
Roadways has not applied for The vacation of any permit in any way and has, on the other hand, taken and exploited quite another permit for an entirely different rout from another competent authority.
[78E F] OBSERVATlON: [If any long distance passengers arc given preference over those leaving Delhi for a station Lying between the termini; specified in any permit bearing the counter signature of the Delhi state authorities.
a peremptory condition attached to the counter signature would have been violated and that State would l be entitled to take such action as may be open to it under the law].
