Respondents are the ex proprietors, and occupants of the agricultural lands within their Malguzari villages situated in Sakoli Tahsil of District Bhandara in Maharashtra State.
Since the construction of the reservoir called Navegaon Bandh by one Kawdu Patel three hundred years earlier, the holders or the lands including the respondents were enjoying the right of irrigation from generation to generation free of charge with the only obligation which is inherent in the right viz. putting the tank in proper repairs.
In the Wazib Ul Arz an obligation was put on the Malgluzars to allow the tenants to irrigate their fields for rice (dhan) and sugar cane cultivation free of charge.
The respondents, therefore, were using the water of this reservoir for irrigating their fields as of right without any payments a right acquired by them by custom, grant or agreement or by prescription, duly recorded in the Wazib ul Arz at the time of the various settlements and as recognised as such by the State Government till 1964 i.e. even after the said Tank came to vest in the State under Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1951.
Thereafter, the appellant purporting to act under the Central Provinces Irrigation Act, 1931 (CP Act III of 1931) declined to allow taking of water to the respondents unless they executed an agreement in writing agreeing to pay Rs. 7/ per acre for rice cultivation and Rs. 45 per acre for sugar cane as charges for the use of water from Navegaon Bandh.
The respondents, therefore, challenged the levy of the said charges and asked for the appropriate writ against the appellants.
The High Court of Bombay allowed the writ petition and held that (a) the right to free water was a customary right recognised and recorded in Wazib ul Arz.
(b) the said right was preserved and was not destroyed by M.P. Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act, 1980 or by the M.P. Land Revenue Code, 1954 and (c) the State Government was not.
competent under the Irrigation Act to levy the water charges.
However.
the High court granted a certificate under article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: The provisions of Sections 45, 46 and 47 of the Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act read with the entries made in the Wazib ul Arz which was prepared at the time of the settlement under the Land Revenue Act 1917, make it crystal clear that the occupancy tenants and malik makbuza who were appropriating the water.
Of Navegaon Bandh tank for raising paddy and sugar cane crops before the date of vesting under Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act were 164 to continue lo enjoy those rights without any let or hindrance even after the date of vesting. 'The wounds "in the same rights" occurring in sub section 1 of section 45.
in fact leave no room for doubt that the absolute occupancy tenants and occupancy tenants were to continue to enjoy the irrigation and other water rights which were enjoyed by them before the date of vesting.
[172G 173F G] (2) The right of free irrigation which accrued lo the occupancy tenants and malguzars under sections 45 to 47 of the Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act were not only destroyed but were also saved by section 239 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code.
1954 and, are therefore.
to continue to be enjoyed by the occupancy tenants and malguzars without being affected.
curtailed or whittled lower in any manner despite the repeal of section 45 to 47 of the Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act by section 238 of the Code.
[174G H, 175A] The words "all rights acquired" occurring in Section 239 of the Code are comprehensive enough to take in the irrigation and other rights acquired by the tenants and malik makbuza under sections 45 to 47 of the Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act which stood repealed by virtue OF section 238 of the Code.
thus fully protecting and preserving the said right of free irrigation.
[174E G] State of punjab V. Mohar Singh ; , reiterated (3) Section 26 of the Central Provinces Irrigation Act, 1931 vests in the Government all rights in the water of any river natural stream or natural drainage channel natural lake or other natural collection of water.
[175B] In the instant case, the tank being not a natural like, the Government was not competent to recover water charges by virtue of section 26 of the Central Provinces lrrigation Act, 1931.
the water rights which could be acquired by custom and were, in fact, acquired by custom by the respondents and were recognised and preserved both under the Abolition of Proprietary Rights Act and the Code cannot in any manner be interfered with by the appellants.
[175C D] Harrop v Hirst ; Allen V Petrick, 69 Mont. 373, 377, 379, 380 452, 453 (1924); quoted with approval.
