Constitution of India, 1950, Arts, 84, 101, 102.
1O3(2) and 1O4 Scope of Powers of the Election Commission under Sections 10A, 146 (1) (2) of the Representation of the People Act, read with article 103 (2) of the constitution.
Respondent No. 2 who is a voter in the Srikakulam Constituency submitted a petition to the President of India under Articles 84, 101.
103 and 104 of the Constitution of India alleging that respondent No. 1, a returned candidate to the Lok Sabha on April 28, 1967 in a bye election from that constituency, had become subject to the disqualifications contained in Article 102(1).
The President.
exercising his powers under Article 103(2) of the Constitution.
sought the opinion of the appellant by an order dated May 18, 1968.
The appellant issued a notice dated June 6, 1968 to respondent No. 1 calling upon him to submit his reply to the allegations contained in respondent 's petition lo the President.
Earlier to this, the appellant condoned the delay in submission; of account of election expenses by respondent No. 1.
On June 26, 1968, respondent No. 1, therefore, filed a Writ Petition in the Andhra Pradesh High Court asking for a writ of prohibition forbidding the appellant from taking further action pursuant to the Notice dated June 6 and for a declaration that the appellant had no jurisdiction to inquire into the petition submitted by respondent No. 2 to the President.
The High Court allowed the petition and issued a writ of Prohibition.
It has granted to the appellant a certificate of fitness under Article 133(1)(c) of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The President acted both in the exercise of constitutional authority and in the discharge of his constitutional obligation in referring the question raised by respondent No. 2 's petition for the opinion of the appellant.
Upon the presentation of a petition by respondent 2 to the President of India;,. alleging that respondent 1 had become subject to the disqualifications mentioned in article 102(1) of the Constitution, a question clearly arose as to whether respondent 1 had truly become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in that article.
By clause (2) of article 103 the President was bound to obtain the opinion of the appellant before giving` his decision on the question.
Not only that, but the President was further bound to act according to the opinion given by the appellant.
[213D E] 2.
The Election Commission, by reason of the provisions of Section 146(1) and (2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, had the power and authority to require respondent 1 to furnish information on matters which were relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry, namely, the allegations contained in the petition presented by respondent 2 to the President of India. [214B C] (a) The Representation of the People Act, 1951, confers extensive powers on the Election Commission in regard to inquiries pertaining to the questions referred by the President for its opinion under Article 103 of the Constitution.
[213F G] 211 (b) article 103(2), as it stood then, required the President to obtain the opinion of the Election Commission before deciding the question referred to in clause (1) of that article.
The President was bound to act according to the opinion given by the Commission.
By the Forty second Amendment Article 103(2) requires the President to consult the Election Commission.
The Amendment Article expressly confers power on the Commission to make? for that purpose, "such inquiry as it thinks fit".
The implication of the unamended Article was in truth and substance the same namely.
that since the Commission was charged with the obligation to tender its opinion to the President, it had the power to make such inquiry as it thought fit in order to enable it to express its opinion.
which under the law as it stood then, was binding on the President.
The Forty second amendment expressed clearly what was necessarily implicit in the old provision.
If the Constitution envisages that the Commission should have the power to make such inquiry as it thinks fit even when its opinion is not binding on the President who is merely required to "consult` ' the Commission, it cannot be that the Commission could tender its binding opinion without the right and pay the duty, of making, the necessary inquiry.
[214D G] (c) Article 103(1) gives finality to the President 's decision which, under old provision, had to be in conformity with the opinion of the Election Commission.
Before giving an opinion which thus had finality, the Commission acted but fairly in asking respondent l to submit his say.
In giving to respondent I an opportunity to submit his explanation.
the appellant, far from acting beyond the scope of the statutory and constitutional powers acted in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
[215B] 3.
In the instant case? though respondent 2 was not in a position to make a categorical assertion in his petition that respondent 1 had incurred a specific disqualification, he did make allegations, generally, in regard to disqualifications said to have been incurred by respondent 1. Upon the making of those allegations a question arose as contemplated by Article 103(1)(a) of the Constitution and the President had to obtain the opinion of the Election Commission on that question.
Respondent 2 's petition could not have been rejected by the President without reference to the Election Commission on the around that the allegations made by respondent 2 were unfounded or unsubstantial.
The High Court was not correct when it held that the question whether respondent 1 had become subject to any disqualification under Section 10A of the Representation of the People Act did not arise on the facts stated in the petition by respondent No. 2.
[215H, 216A B] Brundeban Nayak vs Election Commission of India and Anr., ; ; discussed and applied.
(b ) By Section 10A of the Representation of the People Act.
the Election Commission has the power to declare a person to be disqualified if it is satisfied that he has failed to lodge an account of election expenses within the time and in the manner required by or under the Act and has no good reason or justification for the failure.
A declaration of disqualification made in pursuance of power conferred by section 10(A) is a declaration made by the Election Commission under a law made by Parliament.
It, therefore, attracts Article 102(1) (e) and consequently article 103(1) of the Constitution.
The High Court therefore misdirected itself in reaching the conclusion that the appellant acted beyond 212 its jurisdiction in issuing notice to respondent I in calling upon him to submit his explanations in regard to the allegations made by respondent No. 2 in his petition to the President.
[215C D, F H]
