The appellant Corporation, which grants or guarantees the loan to be raised By industrial concerns either from the scheduled banks or state Cooperative Banks or those floated in public market, is entitled to make, for one or more of the reliefs set out in Section 31 ( 1 ) of the state Financial Cooperation Act, an application to the District Judge within the limits of whose jurisdiction the industrial concern carries on the whole or substantial part of its business, when any such concern defaults in repayment of loan or fails to comply with the terms of the agreement.
The Corporation made several applications purporting to be under Section 31(1) of the Act in various district courts in the State of Gujarat.
question was raised in the District Courts about the proper court fee payable on sch applications. ' The Corporation contended that the application would be governed k Article 1 (c) of Schedule II of the Bombay Court Fees Act, 1959 and a fixed court fee in the amount of 65 paise would be payable in respect of the application.
But the state contended that the application could be governed either by Article I of Schedule I or at any rate Article 7 of Schedule I and the court fee payable would be ad valorem on the amount of value o the subject matter in dispute or on the amount of the monetary gain or loss to be prevented according to the scales prescribed under Article 1 of Schedule I.
All the district courts except Broach accepted the contention of the state; but the Broach district court opined that the application under Section 31(1) was in the nature of an execution application and it would be governed by Article I (c) of Schedule II.
Both the Corporation and state of Gujarat went in revision before the High Court.
The High Court by a common judgment held that an appellation under Section 31(1) should bear an ad valorem court fee.
In reaching this conclusion, the High Court treated the application under Section 31(1) of the Act on par with a suit by a mortgagee to enforce the mortgage debt by sale of the mortgaged property which is being treated as a money suit falling within the purview of Article I of Schedule I. Alternatively, it was held the even if the application under Section 31(1) is not plaint within the meaning of Article I of Schedule I it would fall within the purview o Article 7 of Schedule I.
Allowing the appeal, by special leave the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The form of the application, the nature of the relief, the compulsion to make interim order, the limited enquiry contemplated by sub section (6) of Section 32 and the nature of relief that can be granted and the manner of execution clearly show that the application under Section 31 (1) is neither a plaint as contemplated by Article 1 of Schedule I nor an application in the nature of a plaint as contemplated by Article 7 of the Court Fees Act.
182 B C] 373 Once Article 7 of the Schedule I of the Court Fees Act is excluded there A was (and could be) no dispute that an application under Section 31(1) of trill Act would be covered by the residuary Article 1 (c) of Schedule II of the Court Fees Act and it should bear a fixed court fee in the sum of 65 paise.
[382 D] 2.
Section 31(1) of the Act prescribes a special procedure for enrichment of the claims of the Financial Corporation.
The Corporation is to make an application for the reliefs set out Indecision 31(1).
The reliefs that a Court can gram are the sale of the property mortgaged etc.
to a Financial Corporation as security for the loan or advance; transfer of the management of the industrial concern to the Financial Corporation; or restraining the industrial concern from transferring or removing its machinery or plant or equipment from the industrial concern without the permission of the Board of the Financial Corporation.
An application for such a relief is certainly not a plaint in a suit for recovery of mortgage loan.
It is not even something akin to a suit by a mortgage to recover mortgage money by sale of mortgaged property.
The distinguishing features noticeable between a suit for recovery of mortgage money by sale of mortgaged property and an application under section 31 for one or more of the relief specified therein lares that even if the Corporation as applicant so chooses, it cannot in the application, pray for a preliminary decree for accounts or a final decree for payment of money nor can it seek to enforce any personal liability even if such one is incurred under the contract of mortgage.
At any rate in an application under Section 31 ( 1 ) the Corporation does not and cannot pray for a decree for its outstanding dues.
It can make an application for one of the three reliefs, none of which, if granted, results in a money decree or decree for recovery of outstanding loans or advance.
The foreign of the relief by itself would not attract one or the other Article of Court Fees Act.
Section 32 of the Act clearly points to the conclusion that the proceedings under Section 31(1) of the Act are not in the nature of a money recovery proceedings.
Article 1 of Schedule I would, therefore not be attracted.
attracted 3.
The whole conspectus of provisions in Section 32 coupled with the nature relief sought under section 31(1) makes it clear that special provision is made for certain types of reliefs that can be obtained by a Corporation by an application under Section 31 ( I ) which could not be styled as substantive relief for repayment of mortgage money by sale of mortgaged property.
Nor can it be said to be a proceeding to obtain substantive relief capable of being valued in terms of monetary gain or prevention of monetary loss.
The substantive myself in an application under Section 31(1) is something akin to an application for attachment of property in execution of a decree at a stage posterior to the passing of the decree.
It may be that in the ultimate analysis the result would be that the property will be sold for repayment of the loan or advance taken by the industrial concern from the Corporation but it could not be said that it is substantive relief claimed by the Corporation which can be valued in terms of monetary gain or prevention of monetary loss as envisaged by Article 7 of Schedule I of Court Fees Act.
[382 A C & 381G H] Sub section (6) of Section 32 of the Act has to be read in the context in which it is placed.
It does not expand the contest in the application as if it is suit between a mortgagee and the mortgagor for sale of mortgaged property.
[38 I E] 374 Observation: [When dealing With a question o court fee, the perspective should be informed by the spirit of the magna carta and of equal access to justice which suggests that a heavy price tag on relief in Court should be regarded as unplayable.] [382E]
