Pursuant to the directions of the Supreme Court for releasing the petitioner appellant "on hail to the satisfaction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate," the Magistrate ordered that a surety in a sum of Rs. 10,000/ be produced.
When the petitioner produced one.
the magistrate made an odd order refusing to accept the suretyship of the petitioner 's brother because he and his asset were in another district.
Frustrated by magisterial intransigence the prisoner moved, this Court again to modify the original order "to the extent that the petitioner be released on furnishing surety to the tune of Rs. 2,000/ or on executing a personal bond or pass any other order or direction as this Hon 'ble Court may deem fit and proper".
Directing the Magistrate to release the petitioner on his own bond in a sum of Rs. 1,000/ the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Social Justice is the signature tune of our Constitution and the littleman in peril of losing his liberty is the consumer of social justice.
And the grant of bail can be stultified or made impossibly inconvenient and expensive if the Court is powerless to dispense with surety or to receive an Indian bailor across the district borders as good or the sum is so excessive that to procure a wealthy surety may be both exasperating and expensive.
The problem is plainly one of human rights, especially freedom vis a vis, the lowly and necessitates the Supreme Court to interdict judicial arbitrariness deprivatory of liberty and ensure "fair procedure" which has a creative connotation after Maneka Gandhi [1978] 2 SCR 621.
[338 C F. 339 A B] (2) Bail covers release on one 's own bond with or without sureties, as the legal literature, Indian and Anglo Amemrican on bail jurisprudence lends countenance and the need for liberal interpretation in areas of social justice, individual freedom and indigent 's rights justifies.
When sureties should be demanded and what sum should be insisted on are dependent on variables.
[344 G, 347 C] (3) A semantic smog overlays the provisions of bail in the Code and prisoners ' rights, when cast in ambiguous language become precarious.
[345 C] (a).
'Bail ' in section 436 of the Criminal Procedure Code suggests 'with or without sureties.
And, 'bail bond` in section 436(2) covers own bond.
[345 E] (b) 'Bail ' in section 437 (2) suggests release, the accent being on undertaking to appear.
when directed, not on the production of sureties.
But section 137(2) distinguishes between bail and bond, without sureties.
[345 F G] 336 (c) Section 445 suggests, especially read with the marginal note that deposit of money will do duty for bond 'with or without sureties '.
[345 G] (d) Superficially viewed, section 441 ( 1 ) uses the words 'bail ' and 'own bond ' as antithetical, if the reading is liberal.
Incisively understood, Section 441(1) provides for both the bond of the accused and the undertaking of the surety being conditioned in the manner mentioned in the sub section.
To read "ail" as including only cases of release with sureties will stultify the sub section, for then, an accused released on his own bond without bail, i.e. surety, cannot be conditioned to attend at the appointed place.
Section 441(2) uses the word 'bail ' to include 'own bond ' loosely as meaning one or the other or both.
Moreover, an accused, in judicial custody, actual or potential, may be released by the Court to further the ends of justice and nothing in s 441(1) compels a contrary meaning.
section 441(2) and (3) use the word 'bail ' generically because the expression is intended to cover bond with or without sureties; [345 H, 346 A C] (e) When the Court of appeal as per the import of section `389(1) may release a convict on his own bond without sureties, surely, it cannot be that an undertrial is worse off than a convict or that the power of the Court to release increases when the guilt is established.
It is not the Court 's status but the applicant guilt status that is germane.
That a guilty man may claim judicial liberation pro tempore without sureties while an undertrial cannot, is a reductio ad absurdum.
[346 D E] (5) The Supreme Court 's powers to enlarge a prisoner, as the wide words of order 21 Rule 27 (Supreme Court Rules 1966) show, contain no limitation based on sureties, which means that a murderer, concurrently found to be so, may.
theoretically be released on his own bond without sureties while a suspect, presumed to be innocent cannot be.
Such a strange anomaly could not be, even though it is true that the Supreme Court exercises wider powers with greater circumspection.
[346 F G] (6) If sureties are obligatory even for juveniles, females and sickly accused while they can be dispensed with.
after being found guilty, if during the trial when the presence to District lawyers is more necessary, an accused must buy release only with sureties while at the appellate level, suretyship is expendable, there is unreasonable restriction on personal liberty with discrimination writ on the provisions.
The hornet 's nest of Part III need not be provoked if the Court reads 'bail ' to mean that it popularly does.
and lexically and in American Jurisprudence is stated to mean, viz. a generic expression used to describe under release from custodia juris.
[347 A B] (7) article 14 protects all Indians qua Indians, within the territory of India.
article 350 sanctions representation to any authority, including a Court, for redress of grievances in any language used in the Union of India.
Equality before the law implies that even a vakalat or affirmation made in and State language according to the law in that State must be accepted everywhere in the territory of India, same where a valid legislation to the contrary exists.
Otherwise, an Adivasi will be unfree in Free India, and likewise many other minorities.
The process of making Indians aliens in their own homeland should be inhibited.
Swaraj is made out of united stuff.
The best guarantee of presence in Court is the reach of law, not the money tag.
[347 G H, 348 A B, D] The Court left open to the Parliament to consider whether in our socialist republic with social justice as its hallmark, monetary supersti 337 tion, not other relevant consideration like family ties, roots in the community, membership of stable organisations should prevail or bail bonds to ensure that the 'bailee ' does not flee justice.]
