The petitioner a convict having to serve two sentences of long imprisonment, plus record of one escape and one attempt of suicide and interpol.
reports of many crimes abroad in addition to several cases pending in India against him, through this writ petition contended that barbarity and inhuman treatment have been hurled at him and that intentional discrimination has been his lot throughout and, therefore sought the assistance or this Court for directing the jail authorities to give him finer foreigner as companions, and to remove him from a high security ward like Ward l to a more relaxed ward, be invoking the provisions of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the Writ Petition the Court, ^ HELD: (1) Imprisonment does not spell farewell to fundamental rights although, by a realistic re appraisal,, Courts will refuse to recognise the full panoply of Part lII of the Constitution enjoyed by a free citizen.
Whenever fundamental rights are flouted or legislative protection ignored to any prisoner 's prejudice, this Court 's writ will run breaking through stone walls and iron bars, to right the wrong and restore the rule of law.
Then the parrot cry of discipline thrill not deter, of security will not scare, of discretion will not dissuade, the judical process.
For if courts 'cave in ' when great rights and sound within the sound proof, sight proof precincts of prison houses where often disenters and minorities are caged, Bastilles will be re enacted.
When law ends tyranny begins, and history whispers, iron has never ben the answer to the rights of men.[514 H, 515 A Bl (2) article 21 of the Constitution read with article 19(1)(d) and (5) is capable of wider application than the imperial mischief which give its birth and must draw its meaning from the evolving standards of decency and dignity that mark the progress of a mature society.
Fair procedure is the soul of article 21, reasonableness of the restriction is the essence of article 19(5) and sweeping discretion degenerating into arbitrary discrimination is anthema for article 14.
Constitutional Karuna is thus injected into incarceratory strategy to produce prison justice.
[ 515 CD] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Admn.
& ors.
and Charles Gurumukh Sobraj.
State of Delhi [1979] I SCR 392 referred to, 513 Kharak Singh vs State of U.P. ; applied.
(3) Prison justice implies Court 's continuing duty and authority to ensure that the judicial warrant which deprives a person of his life or liberty is not exceeded, subverted or stultified.
It is a sort of solemn covenant running with the power to sentence.
Where a prison practice or internal instruction places harsh restrictions on jail life, breaching guaranteed rights, the Court directly comes in.
Every prison sentence is a conditioned deprivation of life auld liberty.
with civilized norms built in and unlimited trauma interdicted.
In this sense judicial policy of prison practices is implied in the sentencing power.
The Criminal judiciary have thus a duty to guardian their sentences and visit prisons when necessary.
The penological goals which may be regarded as reasonable justification for restricting the right to move freely within the confines of a penitentiary are now well settled.
And if prisoners have title to Articles 19, 21 and 14 rights, subject to the limitations, there must be some correlation between depriviation of comfort and legitimate function of a correctional system.
[515 G, 516 E, F G] (4 ) Deterrence, both specific and general rehabilitation, and institutional security are vital considerations.
Compassion wherever possible and cruelty only where inevitable is the art of correctional confinement.
When prison policy advances such a valid goal, the Court will not intervene officiously.
But when an inmate is cruelly restricted in a manner which supports no such relevant purpose, the restriction becomes unreasonable and arbitrary, and unconstitutionality is the consequence.
Traumatic futility is obnoxious to pragmatic legality.
Social defence is the raison d 'etre of the penal code and bears upon judicial control over prison administration.
If a whole atmosphere of constant fear of violence, frequent torture and denial of opportunity to improve oneself is created or if medical facilities and basic elements of care and comfort necessary to sustain life are refused, then also the humane jurisdiction of the Court will become operational based on article 19.
[516 G H, 517 D E] 5) Prisoners retain all rights enjoyed by free citizens except those lost necessarily as an incident of confinement.
Rights enjoyed by prisoners under Arts 14, 19 and 21 though limited are not static and will rise to human heights when challenging situations arise.
[518 A B] R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; Menaka Gandhi vs F Union of India & Anr., , Mohammad Giasuddin vs State of Andhra pradesh ; referred to.
(6) However, a prison system may make rational distinctions in making assignments to inmates of vocational, educational and work opportunities available but it is constitutionally impermissible to do so without a functional classification system.
Courts cannot be critical of the administration if it makes a classification between dangerous prisoners and ordinary prisoners.
A distinction between the under trials and convicts is reasonable.
In fact lazy relaxation on security is a professional risk inside a prison.
[517 F, (G, 519 B, Cl 'The petitioner being a foreigner cannot claim rights under article 19.
Moreover he is now a convict and is not in solitary confinement.
[519 D] OBSERVATlON: [The Court must not rush in where the jailor fears to tread.
While the country may not make the prison boss the sole sadistic arbiter of incarcerated 514 human, the community may be in no mood to handover central prisons to be run by Courts Each instrumentality must function within its province)
