The appellant plied a luxury coach for public benefit under a permit o 1971 for five years, in the Tamil Nadu State.
He applied for a renewal of the permit two months prior to its expiry, but was refused the same by the State Transport Authority, on the ground that the facilities provided by tho public sector undertakings were adequate, and the renewal of the applicant 's permit would be redundant in the circumstances and also result in unhealthy competition.
Applications for more permits were invited and some granted since the impugned refusal.
On appeal u/s 64 of the .
the State Transport Appellate Tribunal affirmed the rejection, using the same reasoning.
Thereafter the High Court rejected the appellant 's revision application, refusing to go into questions of fact.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
If a small man, whose heavy investment in ll tourist coach is to be sterilised altogether, it is a social trauma, and if fundamental rights are disposed of as if by executive fiats, this Court must intervene under article 136, to uphold the credibility in the rule of law and prevent its derailment.
The touchstone is not the little man and his little lis.
but the large issue and the deep portent.
[554 G H] 2.
The Authority must remember that a permit holder 1st has an ordinary right of renewal unless it is shown that outweighing reasons of public interest lead to a contrary result.
The bare ipse dixit that the S.T.A. considers the facilities provided by public sector undertakings are adequate is not intelligible, without some basis.
Some objective assessment to exclude the petitioner, based on tangible data is the minimum for a judicial negation of a fundamental right.
Another circumstance effectively negating the story of supernumerary vehicles is the admitted fact that applications for more permits have been invited and some granted.
The basic reason for quashing the order of refusal is the untenable reason assigned to support the order.
[555 A, H, 556 A, D, F]
