On the ground that 50% of the transactions recorded in a rough note book detected and seized by the Inspecting officer from the Head office of the firm were not entered in the regular books of accounts maintained by the assessee, the Sales Tax officer made an addition of 10% to the admitted turnover and completed the assessment.
In an appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, reduced the addition to 5% of the admitted turnover.
The respondents preferred a second appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.
But the Department neither filed an appeal against the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner nor raised any cross objections in the assessee 's appeal After issuing a show cause notice to the assessee, the Tribunal, under section 39(4) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act 1963, directed the addition of a certain amount to the taxable turnover.
In its Tax Revision Petition, the respondent contended before the High Court that the order of the Tribunal was wrong in that it had no jurisdiction or power to enhance the assessment in the absence of an appeal or cross objections by the Department.
Setting aside the impugned order of the Tribunal the High Court remanded the case for hearing the appeal afresh.
In appeal to this Court, the appellant (Department) contended that on a true construction of section 39(4) of the Act, the Appellate Tribunal should be regarded as possessing the power to enhance the assessment even in the absence of any appeal or cross objections by the Department against the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 's order.
Dismissing the appeal ^ Held: (1) The Tribunal has no jurisdiction or power to enhance the assessment in the absense of an appeal or.
cross objections by the Department.
[543 E] (2) To accept the construction placed by the counsel for the appellant on sub section (4)(a)(i) would be really rendering sub section (2 of section 39 otiose, for if in an appeal preferred by the assesses against, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 's order, the tribunal would have the power to enhance the assessment, a provision for cross objections by the Department was really unnecessary.
[1543 D] 539 (3) The elementary principle found in the Code of Civil Procedure that the respondent who has neither preferred his own appeal nor filed cross objections in the appeal preferred by the appellant must be deemed to be satisfied with the decision of the lower authority and that he will not be entitled to seek relief against a rival party in an appeal preferred by the latter, is equally applicable to revenue proceedings.[543 G] Motor Union Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax Bombay and New India Life Assurance Co. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Excess Profits Tax, Bombay City.
approved.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, orissa vs Chunnilal Parmeshwar Lal (1961) 12 STC 677 distinguished.
