The appellant runs a hotel in which meals are served to non residents also in the restaurant located in the hotel.
The sales tax authorities treated a portion of the receipts as representing the price of foodstuffs served and levied tax.
The High Court affirmed the view of the sales tax authorities.
On the question whether the transaction constituted sale of foodstuffs.
Allowing the appeals ^ HELD. 1.
Service of meals to non residents in the restaurant of 'the appellant is not taxable under the Bengal Finance (Sales Ta%) Act 1941, as extended to the Union Territory of Delhi.
This is so whether a charge is imposed for the meal as a whole or according to the dishes separately ordered.
[562 F; 2.
In State of Punjab vs M/s. Associated Hotels of India ; this Court held that there was no sale when food and drink were supplied to guests residing in the hotel.
The Court pointed out that the supply of meals was essentially in the nature of a service provided to the guests and could not be identified as a transaction of sale.
This Court declined to accept the position that the Revenue was entitled to split up the transaction into two parts, one of service and the other of sale of foodstuffs.
If that be true in respect of hotels, a, similar approach seems to be called for on principle in the case of restaurants.
Like the hotelier, a restaurateur provides many services in addition to the supply of food.
He provides furniture and furnishings, linen, crockery and cutlery, and he may add music, an area for floor dancing and in some cases a floor show.
The classical legal view being that a number of services are concomitantly provided by way of hospitality, the supply of meals must be regarded as ministering to a bodily want or to the satisfaction of a human need.
No reason has been shown for preferring any other view.
[562 B, 560 F G, 562 C] State of Punjab vs M/s. Associated Hotels of India Ltd. ; applied.
M/s. Associated Hotels of India Ltd., Simla vs Excise and Taxation Officer Simla not approved.
Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs Laxmi Narain Tandon and Another not approved.
Crisp vs Pratt [1639] Cro.
Car 549, Parker vs Flint [1699] 12 Mod.
254 Newton v .
Trigg 3 Mod.
327, Saunderson vs Rowles Electa B. 558 Merrill vs James W. Hodson , and Mary Nisky vs Child Company SO A.L.R. 227 referred.
