The 'any felts ' manufactured by the appellant assessee were held by the assessing authorities to be not 'textiles ' within the meaning of Item 30 of Schedule 'B ' the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1318 and thereafter, on appeal the Tribunal and on reference the High Court also confirmed this view.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1. 'Dryer felts ' are 'textiles ' within the meaning of that expression in Item 30 of Schedule 'B ' to the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948.
[551 E] 2.
In a taxing statute words of every day use must be construed not in their scientific or technical sense but as understood in common parlance, meaning "that sense which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing would attribute to it." [548 A, F] Ramavatar Budhaiprasad vs Assistant Sales Tax officer, Akola, A.l.R. , M/s.
Motipur Jamindary Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, A.l.
R. , State of West Bengal vs Washi Ahmed. ; and Madhya Pradesh Pan Merchant 's Association, Santara Market, Nagpur vs State of Madhya Pradesh, 7 S.T.C. 99 at 102 referred(1 to E Gretfell vs IR.C. [1876)] I exhibit D. 242 at 248, Planters Nut and Choco Co. Ltd. vs The King, [1951] 1 DLH 385 and 200 Chests of 'Tea, (1824) 9 Wheaton (U.S.) 430 at 438; quoted with approval.
Where a word has a scientific or technical meaning and also an ordinary meaning according to common parlance, it is in the latter sense that in a taxing statute the word must be held to have been used, unless contrary intention us clearly expressed by the Legislature.
The reason is that the Legislature does not suppose our merchants to be 'naturalists, or geologists, or botanists".
In the instant case the word 'textiles ' is not sought by the assessee to be given a scientific in preference to its popular meaning.
It has only one meaning namenamely a woven fabric and that is the meaning or technical meaning which it bears in ordinary parlance.
[550 E G].
The concept of 'textiles ' is not a static concept.
It has, having regard to newly developing materials, methods techniques and processes, a continually expanding content and new kinds of fabric may be invented which may legitimately, without doing any violence to the language be regarded as textiles [550 H] The word 'textiles ' is derived from Latin 'texere ' which means 'to weave ' and it means woven fabric.
When yarn, whether cotton, silk.
woollen rayon, nylon or of any other description or made out of any other material is woven into a fabric, what comes into being is a 'textile ' and is known as such.
Whatever be 546 the mode of weaving employed, woven fabric would be 'textile '.
What is necessary is no more than meaning of yarn and weaving would mean binding or putting together by some process so as to form a fabric.
A textile need not be of any particular size or strength or weight.
the use to which it may be put is also immaterial and does not bear on its character as a textile.
The fact that the 'dryer felts ' are used only as absorbents of moisture in the process of manufacture in a paper manufacturing unit, cannot militate against 'dryer felts ' falling within category of textiles, if otherwise they satisfy the description of textiles.
The refers to textile fabrics in this sense.
[549 C D, E F., G H] Ramavatar Budhaiprasad vs Assistant Sales lax officer Akola; , and M/s. Motipur Jamindary Co. Ltd. vs Stale of Bihar, ; , distinguished.
