The appellant is the Mahant of Emhar Math of Puri which is an ancient Public Hindu Religious Trust.
Being a trustee, the appellant has been assessed in the status of an "individual" under the Orissa Agricultural Income Tax Act, 1947 for the assessment years 1948 49 to 1967 68 in respect of the income derived from agricultural lands owned by the trust.
These assessments were made after granting the exemption under section 8(1) of the Act which provides that "any sum derived from land held under such trust and actually spent for the said purpose (charitable or religious purposes) shall not be included in the total agricultural income of such assessee.
" The appellant challenged the constitutional validity of section 8 (1) of the Act under which the assessments were made principally on the ground that section 8(1) was discriminatory and hit by article 14 of the Constitution, in as much as under the said provision, in respect of non public muslim trusts created for religious or charitable purposes the exemption contemplated therein was con fined to such agricultural income or was actually spent for the public purposes of charitable or religious nature, while in the case of muslim trusts (Waqfs) the entire agricultural income whether spent for charitable or religious purpose or not, was exempt from the operation of the Act under section 9 of the Act.
The Orissa High Court, negatived the said contention on an examination of the provisions of Sections 8 and 9 in the context of the scheme of the Act and dismissed the Writ Petition.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court.
^ HELD: ( 1 ) section 8 ( 1 ) of the Orissa Agricultural Income tax Act, 1 947 is free from the vice of discrimination under article 14 of the Constitution and the said provision is perfectly valid and constitutional.
[663 G Hl (2) The scheme of the Act is that under the charging provision agricultural income tax is levied on the total agricultural income of the previous year of every assessee subject to the exemption which have been provided for under Sections 8, 9 and 16.
[661 C D] The legislative intent of granting of limited exemption is brought out by Sections 8(1) and 16 of the Act.
Whereas exemption in regard to the amount actually spent for charitable purposes under section 8(1) is in relation to the agricultural income of a public charitable trust, the exemption of similar nature and extent contemplated by section 16 is in regard to the agricultural income of any assessee who may not be a trustee owning lands under a public charitable trust, in other words, in either case, the exemption is confined to such part of the agricultural income which is actually spent.
by the assessee f. charitable purposes.
[661 D E] 657 (3) Section 9 of the Act, in terms, says that the exemption thereunder is confined to Muslim Trusts "referred to in section 3 of the Musalman Waqf Validating Act, 1913".
section 3 of the Validating Act refers only to muslim trusts which are in the nature of Waqf alal aulad.
The exemption in section 9 of the Act, therefore clearly applies only to Muslim Trusts which are in the nature of Waqf alal aulad.
The marginal note to section 9 as well as the proviso to the section make this clear.
[662 B, 633 B C] If that be so, then all muslim trusts other than Waqf alal aulad squarely fall under section 8 ( I ) and to all such waqfs the limited exemption contemplated therein would apply.
If that be so, the gravamen of complaint that all waqfs (Muslim Trusts) other than waqf alal aulad are receiving favourable treatment as against non Muslim public charitable trusts must fall to the ground.
[663 C, E] As regards Muslim trusts which are in the nature of waqf alal aulad which alone are covered by section 9 the proviso clearly shows that the share of the beneficiary under such a trust far from being exempted is brought tb tax and the tax is made realisable from the mutawali and read with the proviso the main provision really confines the benefit of exemption only to ultimate illusory or remote public charitable or religious purpose an(l is thus completely consistent with the object and scheme of the Act.
[663 F G] Fazlul Rabbi Pradhan vs State of West Bengal & ors ; , applied.
