In the General Election to the Legislative Assembly of Kerala in March 1977 the petitioner and the appellant were the contesting candidates from Malappuram constituency.
The Appellant was declared elected by polling 56,276 votes defeating the petitioner who secured 39,362 votes.
The petitioner filed an election petition alleging that the appellant had committed various corrupt practices falling within the ambit of section 123(3),(3A) and (4) of the Representation of People Act 1951.
The main allegation was that the appellant was the Chief Editor of Malayalam daily paper called 'Chandrika ' which was the official organ of the Muslim League According to the petitioner the paper contained articles, extracts of speeches and cartoons which tended to ask the muslims to vote for the appellant on religious and communal grounds and also promted ill will and hatred between two classes of citizens, namely, the Janasangh and the Muslim League.
At the hearing, the petitioner confined his case only to the corrupt practices alleged by him under section 123(3A).
The petition was contested by the appellant.
He took the stand that he made no speech which offended section 123(3A) of the Act, nor was he aware of any of the offending articles or cartoons published in Chandrika prior to the election.
He denied that he was an editor of Chandrika and admitted that he was the Chief Editor and.
that too.
Only in name.
, He denied that he had to do any thing with the editorial work of Chandrika or the publication of the speeches.
The High Court held that the petition was maintainable.
According to the High Court, the appellant was really the editor of the paper and the presumption under section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act 1867 would apply.
Allowing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: The object of the Press Act is to regulate printing presses and newspapers in order to preserve copies of newspapers and books.
In order to avoid multiplicity of suits and uncertainties of liabilities, it was considered necessary to choose one of the persons from the staff and make him liable for all the articles or matters to be published in the paper so that any person aggrieved may sue only the person so named under the provisions of Press Act and a litigant is relieved from the necessity of making a fishing or roving enquiry.
Under section 1 ( 1 ) the Editor is defined to mean the person who controls the selection of the matter that is to be published in a newspaper.
Section 5(1) requires that every copy of every newspaper shall contain the names of the owner and editor, printed clearly on such copies and also the 665 date of the publication.
Section 8A provides that where any person 's name A has appeared as an editor in a newspaper, although he was not an editor, he shall, within two weeks of his becoming aware that his name has been so published, appear before a magistrate and make a declaration that he has been incorrectly published.
In the present case, the following are the 1.
That the issues of Chandrika shown to us clearly and unmistakably mention the name of Aboobaker as the printer, publisher and editor of Chandrika and does.
not mention the appellant as the Editor of Chandrika.
The appellant is merely shown as the Chief Editor but this is an officer which is not at all contemplated by the Press Act.
That if the appellant was really the editor of the paper then P.W. 2 Aboobaker ought to have resorted to section 8(A) to correct the mistake in the paper where his name was shown as the editor but no such thing has been done.
On the other hand, P.W. 2 Aboobaker tacitly and clearly admits that he is the editor of the paper.
That the petitioner has not at all pleaded in his petition the nature of the duties performed or responsibilities shouldered by the appellant as Chief Editor;.
There is no averment at all in the petition that the appellant controls the selection of matter that is published in the newspaper which alone would make him an editor as defined in section 1(1) of the Press Act.
The word 'Chief Editor ' is clearly absent from the Press Act and in fact foreign to it because the Press Act has selected only one person who as a special status and that is the editor who can be sued if necessary or can sue and against whom alone a presumption under section 7 or the Press Act can be drawn.
While holding that the presumption under section 7 is available the High Court has completely overlooked the aforesaid aspect.
[671 D E, 672 A C673 E H, 674 A C] State of Maharashtra vs Dr. R. B. Chowdhury and ors. ; and D. P. Mishra vs Kamal Narain Sharma and ors.
[1971] 3 S.C.R 257 and Narasingh Charan Mohanty vs Surendra Mohanty [19741 2 S.C.R. 39; relied on.
In the present case, the paper clearly shows the name of Shri Aboobakar as the editor.
There is sufficient evidence both led by the petitioner and the appellant that Aboobaker was incharge of the paper and that he was functioning as the editor.
The Court came to this conclusion on a detailed appreciation of the evidence of witnesses examined by both the sides.
[685 H, 686 A The petitioner failed to prove either that the appellant was an editor of the paper or that he was performing the functions, duties or shouldering the responsibilities of the editor.
The presumption under section 7 of the Press Act could be drawn that only the person concerned was the editor within the meaning of the Press Act.
The High Court had 'no justification to draw a presumption against the appellant under section 7 of the Act.
[686 H, 687 A B] 666 Even if it is assumed that the appellant was the editor the presumption under section 7 is rebuttable and the evidence in the case shows that the presumption has been sufficiently rebutted.
[687 B C] The publication of the material promoting hatred between two classes of citizens is undoubtedly.
a corrupt practice.
It is well settled by long course of decisions of this Court that such practices must be clearly alleged and all the necessary particulars must be proved not by the standard of preponderance of probabilities but beyond reasonable doubt.
Mohan Singh vs Bhanwar Lal and ors.
; , Magrai Patodia vs R. K. Birla and Ors.
[19711 2 S.C.R. 118, Dr Venkata Reddy vs R. Sultan & ors ; Ramanbhai Nagibhai Patel vs Jaswant Singh Udesingh Dabhi and ors A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 1162: relied on.
Neither the writer of the article nor the speaker who delivered the speech, nor the reporter, nor even the manuscript of the speeches, had been produced before the Court.
All these articles and speeches are inconsequential until they are shown, to have been made with the knowledge and consent, of the appellant.
[689 B C] The following facts meaningly emerge: 1.
The petitioner has not mentioned the name of a single person who had actually heard the speech and made a report.
According to the evidence of P. W. 1 he was present at the place where the speech was delivered by the appellant and yet this fact, though a very material particular, does not find mention in the avernment in the petition referred to above.
3.It is not indicated in the petition as to how and in what manner the speech tended to promote feelings of enmity or hatred between two classes of citizens against whom hatred was preached by the speaker has not been mentioned.
[691 C E]` The allegations in the petition are vague.
No evidence was produced by the petitioner to prove whether the extract of the speech was correct and was a reproduction of the very words used by the appellant.
It is well settled that the admission unless it is separable has to be taken as a whole or not at all.
[691 F, G, 692 A] Hanumant vs The State of Madhya Pradesh , Palvinder Kaur.
vs The State of Punjab and Dadarao vs The State of Maharashtra ; relied on.
Even from the extract of the speech it is clear that the speech was not intended to preach hatred or enmity between the two classes of citizens. 'The petitioner has not produced either the reporter who was present at the meeting when the appellant spoke, nor has he called for the script of the speech, the extract of which was given in the newspaper.
It is very difficult to interpret a part of the speech completely torn from its context.
The entire speech was made against political background and for a political purpose.
The petitioner has not examined any independent member of the public belonging to the place where a speech was delivered to show that the speech tended to promote enmity or hatred between different communities.
[694 C, D, F G H, 969 D] 667 The reliance placed on the cartoon in para 11 of the petition is as under: "In Chandrika dated 12 3 1977 on the front page a cartoon is published.
lt is depicting Janasangh as a Pig and Shri E. M. Sankaran Namboodiripad the Marxist Leader, cutting the flesh of the pig and serving, it to the Muslim.
This is an attempt to promote feelings of enmity, and hatred between different classes of citizens of India on grounds of religion, It is well known that to eat pork is pardial ansthma (haram) for true Muslims.
The publication of this cartoon in Chandrika is with the consent and knowledge of the respondent which promoted hatred of the Muslims against the United Front of Marxist Party and Janta party and Muslim League (opposition) of which the petitioner is a candidate from the concerned constituency.
" The petitioner has failed to prove that the cartoon was published with the consent and knowledge of the appellant.
The term consent is a much stronger word than Knowledge because it implies assent.
There is nothing to show that the appellant gave his consent to the publication of the cartoon at any time.
There is no evidence either of consent or knowledge.
On the contrary, there is evidence to negative this fact.
[697 F, H, 698 A C] The Court came to the conclusion that the petitioner has not been able to establish the corrupt practices alleged against the appellant.
There is no legal or satisfactory evidence to prove that the speech made by the appellant promoted or tended to promote a feeling of enmity and hatred between two classes of citizens.
There is no evidence to prove the knowledge or consent of the appellant to the publication of the cartoon.
[699 B C, E G]
