The appellant was charged and tried for the offence under Section 302 I.P.C. for causing the murder of his wife.
The Sessions Judge though on a consideration of the evidence led in the case including the direct testimony of Mst.
Jelki(PW 3) and Mst.
Modan (PW 8) found that the appellant attacked his wife.
Gajri with dagger (Ext.
I) and caused injuries on her person out of which injury No. 2 which had injured the liver and caused the perforation of the large colon was sufficient to cause her death in the ordinary course of nature, convicted him under Section 304 Part II I.P.C. and acquitted him of the charge under Section 302 Penal Code, in view of the fact that Dr. Laxmi Narain (PW 1) who conducted the postmortem examination of the body of Mst.
Gajri had said in the course of his examination that "if immediate expert treatment had been available and emergency operation had been performed there were chances of the survival".
In State appeal, the High Court altered the conviction of the appellant from one under Section 304 Part II I.P.C. to that under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
Hence the appeal under Section 2(a) of the Supreme Court(Enlargement of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act (Act 28) 1970.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Explanation 2 to Section 299 of the Indian Penal Code clearly lays down that where death is caused by bodily injury the person who causes such bodily injury shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment the death might have been prevented.
The mere fact that if immediate expert treatment had been available and the emergency operation had been performed, there were chances of survival of the deceased can be of no avail to the appellant.
[749H. 759A] 2.
The injury in the opinion of the doctor being sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of the deceased, the case squarely fell within the ambit of clause, Thirdly of Section 300 I.P.C. [749G] In the instant case, the appellant appears to have intended to cause the death of Mst.
Gajri otherwise there was no necessity for him to carry the dagger with him when he went to the village of his in laws to fetch his wife.
745 That the appellant intended to cause the death of the deceased is further clear from the fact that he inflicted a through and through penetrating wound on the posterior axillary line which seriously injured the vital organs of the deceased viz. the liver and the large colon leading to internal haemorrhage and shock.
[749F G] Virsa Singh vs The State of Punjab; , and State of Andhra Pradesh vs Rayavarapu Punnayya and Anr., ; ; reiterated.
