The respondents ' father took a Tagai loan from the Government for the purpose of digging wells in his land by offering his land as security for the loan.
When he failed to repay the loan, the suit land was auctioned under the revenue recovery proceeding and it was purchased by the appellants.
In a suit for recovery of possession, the respondents alleged that their father had no saleable interest in the land because, prior to the date of auction.
in the partition between themselves and their father, the suit land came to their share and therefore the land which belonged to them could not have been sold in an auction for recovering a personal debt of their father.
The trial court declared the sale as void.
The High Court affirmed the trial Court 's order.
In appeal to this Court the respondents contended that the debt was not a joint family debt; neither was the father acting as Karta of the joint family nor was the loan for the benefit of the joint family and therefore the joint family property could not be made liable for such loan.
Allowing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: 1 (a) The suit land was joint family property of the respondents and their father.
[961C] (b) If the loan, for the recovery of which the suit property was brought to auction, was joint family debt and if the suit property was joint family property it would be liable to be sold for recovery of joint family debt.
[963A] (c) Whether the Karta acted in his personal capacity or representative capacity has to be gathered from all the surrounding circumstances.
The father borrowed the loan in his capacity as Karta of the joint family for improvement of the joint family lands and for this purpose he offered as security the land which was joint family property.
It is not necessary that the Karta acting in his capacity as Karta should describe himself as Karta to affirm his representative capacity.
Therefore he must be deemed to have acted in the transaction on behalf of the family.
[961G H] 956 (d) Agriculture was one of the occupations which the father was carrying on as Karta of the joint family.
If agriculture was one of the occupations of the joint family and if the loan was borrowed for the purpose of improving the joint family lands, the loan would ipso facto be for legal necessity and it would be joint family debt.
[962H] (e) Where the sons are joint with their father and debts have been contracted by the father for his personal benefit the sons are liable to pay the debts provided they were not incurred for illegal or immoral purpose.
This liability to pay the debt had been described as pious obligation of the son to pay the father 's debt if it is not tainted with illegality or immorality.
[960F] Muttayan vs Jamindar of Sivagiri, [1883] 9 I.A. 128 Anthonyswmy vs M. R. Chinnaswamy Koundan (dead) by L. Rs. Ors.
; ; referred to.
(f) If at a partition amongst the members of the joint family no provision was made for joint family debts, then despite the partition and allotment of shares to different coparceners, the joint family property acquired by partition would still be liable for the joint family debts.
[964D] Sat Narain vs Das, [1936] 63 I.A. 384; Pannalal & Anr.
vs Mst.
Naraini & Ors.
; at 558; Vriddhachalam Pillai vs Shaldean Syrian Bank Ltd. & Anr. ; ; referred to (g) In the instant case the property sold was liable for the discharge of the father 's debt.
The debt being a pre partition debt which was not shown to be tainted with illegality or immorality, could be recovered from the joint family property in the hands of the sons.
[965F] (h) The pious obligation of the sons continues to be effective even after partition.
If the creditor, in execution of a decree, obtained prior to partition, seizes the property in execution without making the sons parties to the suit and the property was sold at an auction and the purchaser was put in possession, the remedy of the sons would be to challenge the character of the debt in an appropriate proceeding.
The sale cannot be voided on the only ground that it took place after partition and the property sold was one which was allotted to the sons on partition.
Partition in such a situation merely provides a different mode of enjoyment of property without affecting the joint family 's liability for discharge of pre partition debts.
[968D F] section M. Jakati & Sons & Anr.
vs section M. Barkar & Ors., referred to.
(i) In the instant case the debt was not shown to be tainted with illegality or immorality.
Therefore, even if the respondents were not parties to the proceeding held by the Revenue Authorities, once the sale was confirmed and the purchaser was put in possession, the sons can challenge the sale only by establishing the character of the debt.
[968G, 969A] (2) The loan sought to be recovered being Tagai loan advanced under the Loans Act, it can be recovered as arrears of land revenue.
The Bombay land Revenue Code, provides procedure for realisation of land revenue, recovery of which could be made as if it was arrears of land revenue and other revenue demands.
[969C] 957 (3) When a loan was taken under the Loans Act and was being recovered as arrears of land revenue, the order of the Revenue Authority would tantamount to a decree and when a proclamation of sale was issued it amounted to execution of the decree.
[970F] 4 (a) The High Court was wrong in holding that since the Act was applicable to all communities in India and not merely to the Hindus, if it legislature intended to include manager of a family in the word 'borrower ', it should have said so in express terms.
There is nothing in the language of section 7 of the Loans Act to show that the borrower must always and of necessity be an individual.
If the construction suggested by the High Court is accepted it would put the joint Hindu family at disadvantage in borrowing loans under the Loans Act because the Karta of a joint Hindu family, if he has no separate property of his own, and if he cannot borrow the loan in his representative capacity, has no security to offer.
Nor would he be able to take advantage of the beneficial provision of the Act for improving the land belonging to the joint Hindu family.
[973C E] (b) Moreover there is no justification for restricting the word 'borrower ' to be an individual alone.
The Act itself contemplates joint borrowers.
A Karta of a joint Hindu family can be a borrower in his representative capacity.
[973F] Sankaran Nambudripad vs Ramaswami Ayyar, Madras 691; Chinnaswami Mudaliar vs Trimalai Pillai, Madras 572, inapplicable.
