on the vesting of the forests belonging to the appellants in the State of U.P. by virtue of Section 4 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Act 1 of 1951), the question arose about the assessment and payment of compensation therefor to the heirs of the intermediary.
The compensation officer held that the average annual income from the said forests which could be taken into consideration while computing its compensation was Rs. 4551/ as disclosed by the appellants ' accounts for a period of 22 years preceding the date of vesting in terms of clause (i) of Section 39(1)(e) of the Act and Rs. 450/ was its annual yield on the date of vesting as per terms of clause (ii) of Section 39(1)(e) of the Act.
The compensation officer held that Rs. 5001/ was the annual income from the aforesaid forest to the intermediaries.
The High Court in appeal held that Rs. 2000/ and not Rs. 450/ was the income under clause (ii) of Section 39(1)(e) of the Act and therefore came to the conclusion that Rs. 3000/ was the average annual income on the basis of which gross assets had to be calculated in computation of compensation in respect of the said forest.
Dismissing the appeals by certificate the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The opening words of Section 39(1)(e) of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition Act, 1950 which is couched in very emphatic terms govern not only clause (1), but also clause (ii) of the Section.
Consequently neither of the two factors mentioned in Section 39(1)(e) of the Act can be ignored while computing the average annual income.
The connotation of the word 'average ' does not admit of any doubt.
[31A B] (ii) On a true construction of Section 39(1)(e) of the Act, it is clear that the Legislature cast an obligation on the compensation officer to work out the compensation by computing the average annual income giving due weight to both the factors mentioned in the aforesaid clauses (i).
and (ii).
He cannot adopt either of these sub clauses.
Under sub clause (ii) the annual yield on the date of vesting is to be appraised by taking into consideration, inter alia, the number and age of the trees, the area under forest and the produce.
[31C, 32E] Durgi Devi and Ors.
vs State of U.P. [1978] 3 SCR p. 595, Ganga Devi vs State of U.P., ; applied. 29
