The appellants plaintiffs sought the eviction of the respondents defendants from the suit premises which was leased to the latter for a period of ten years only and for running a hotel, on the grounds (a) of personal requirement to run a hotel business themselves and (b) of the failure of the respondents to deliver possession after the expiry of the period of lease despite notices issued.
The Trial Court and the High Court in appeal having dismissed the suit, the appellants obtained special leave of this Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD : 1.
The Jammu and Kashmir Houses and Shops Rent Control Act, 1966 is a piece of social legislation aimed at easing the problem of accommodation, protecting the tenants from evictions inspired by profit hunting motives and providing certain safeguards for the tenants and saving them from great expense, inconvenience and trouble.
But the Act does not completely overlook the interest of the landlord and has under certain conditions granted a clear right to the landlord to seek eviction on proof of the grounds mentioned in section 1.
Of the Act.
Thus, the Act appears to have struck a just balance between the genuine need of the landlord on the one 'land and great inconvenience and trouble which may be caused to the tenants on the other.
In the instant case.
the defendants had taken the property on lease only for a period of I O years and now they have been in prossession of the same for over 30 years.
If the plaintiffs found that their present business had become dull and was not yielding sufficient income to maintain themselves and therefore, it was necessary to occupy the house so as to run a hotel business, it cannot by any stretch of imagination be said that the plaintiffs had merely a desire rather than a bonafide need for evicting the tenants.
The findings of the High court that the plaintiffs had not proved that they had a bonafide need for occupation of the building in dispute is incorrect.
[7E H, 8A] 2.
Section 11(h) of the Act uses the words 'reasonable requirement ' which undoubtedly postulate that there must be an element of need as opposed to a mere desire or wish.
The distinction between desire and need should doubtless be kept in mind but not so as to make even the genuine need as nothing but a desire as the High Court has done in this case.
The connotation of the term 'need ' or 'requirement ' should not be artificially extended nor its language so unduly stretched or strained as to make it impossible or extremely difficult for the landlord lo get a decree for eviction.
Such a course would defeat the very pur 2 pose of the Act which affords The facility of eviction of the tenant to the landlord on certain specified grounds. 'This is the general scheme of all the Rent Control Acts, prevalent in other States in the country.
The word "requirement" merely connotes that there should be an element of need.
In such cases the main test should be whether it was necessary for the landlords t() need the premises for their own use or occupation.
[8A D, F] In the instant case, the plaintiffs had proved that The requirement for the house for starting a hotel business was both genuine and reasonable and even imperative, because the scanty income of the plaintiffs was not sufficient to maintain them or to afford them a decent or comfortable living.
[9A B] Phiroze Ramanji Desai vs Chandrakant N. Patel and Ors ; ; applied.
B. Baliah v Chandoor Lachaiah, A.I.R. 1965 A.P. 435 (D.B.) approved.
The words "own occupation" in section ll(h) cannot be so narrowly interpreted as to indicate actual physical possession of the landlord personally and nothing short of that.
The provision in section ll(h) of the Act is meant for the benefit of the landlord and, therefore, it must be so construed as to advance the object of the Act.
The word 'occupation ' does not exclude the possibility of the landlord starting a business or running a hotel in the shop which also would amount to personal occupation by the landlord.
The section contemplates the actual possession of the landlord, whether for his own residence or for his business.
It is manifest that even, if the landlord is running a hotel in the house, he is undoubtedly in possession or occupation of the house in the legal sense of the term.
Furthermore, the section is wide enough/to include the necessity of not only the landlord but also of the persons who are living with him as members of the same family.
[9G H, 10A and D] In the instant case there can be no manner of doubt that the house was required for the personal residence or occupation of all the three plaintiffs who admittedly were the owners of the house.
The fact that the plaintiffs wanted to occupy the property for running hotel would not take their case out of the ambit of personal necessity and the occupation of a house may be required by the owner for personal purposes.
He may choose to reside himself in the house or run a business in the house or use it as a paying guest house and derive income therefrom.
In all these cases even though the owner may not physically reside in the house, the house in law would nevertheless be deemed to be in actual occupation of the owners.
[10A C] 4.
(a) In deciding the aspect of balance of convenience of the parties in an eviction suit each party has to prove its relative advantages or disadvantages and the entire onus cannot be thrown on the plaintiffs to prove that lesser disadvantages will be suffered by the defendants and that they were remediable.
[10H, 11A] (b) It is no doubt true that the tenant will have to be ousted from the house if a decree for eviction is passed, but such an event would happen when ever a decree for eviction is passed and was fully in contemplation of the legislature when section ll(l)(h) of the Act was introduced in the Act.
This by itself would not be a valid ground for refusing the plaintiffs a decree for eviction.
[10F G] 3 M/s. Central Tobacco Co. vs Chandra Prakash, Civil Appeal No. 1175/69 [SC] dated 23 4 1969 and Phiroze Ramanji Desai vs Chandrakant N. Patel and Ors.
[1974] I S.C.C. 661; referred to.
Kelley vs Goodwin, [1947] All E.R. P. 810; quoted with approval; K Parasuramaiah v Pokuri Lakshmamma AIR 1965 A.P. 220 approved.
(c) Being the owners of the house they cannot be denied eviction and be compelled to live below the poverty line merely to enable the respondents to carry on their flourishing hotel business, at the cost of the appellants.
This shows the great prejudice that will be caused to the plaintiffs if their suit is dismissed.
The plaintiffs have already produced material before the court to show that their income does not exceed more than Rs. 8000 to Rs. 9000/ per year as the yearly income tax paid by them is Rs. 70 to Rs. 80 only.
There is no other means for them to augment their income except to get their own house vacated by the defendants so as to run a hotel business.
[12H, 13A B] (d ) on a careful comparison and assessment of the relative advantages and disadvantages of the landlord and the tenant, it is clear that the scale is tilted in favour of the plaintiffs in the instant case.
The inconvenience, loss and trouble resulting from denial of a decree for eviction in favour of the plaintiffs far outweigh the prejudice or the inconvenience which will be caused to the defendants.
The High Court has unfortunately not weighed the evidence from the point of view.
[14H, 15A] Observation: Normally Supreme Court does not interfere with concurrent findings of facts but as the High Court as also the Trial Court have made a legally wrong approach to this ease and have committed a substantial and patent error of law in interpreting the scope and ambit of the words "reasonable requirement" and "own possession" appearing in section ll(I)(h) of the Act and have thus misapplied the law and overlooked some of the essential features of the evidence, the merits of the case had to be looked into in order to prevent grave and substantial injustice being done to the appellant.
[15B C]
