Per BOSE, and CHANDRASEKHARA AIYAR JJ.
(VENKATKRAMA AYYAR J. dissenting).
It is well settled that the High Court should not set aside an order of acquittal under section 417 of the Code of Criminal Procedure simply because it differs from the trial Court as to the appreciation of the evidence; there must be substantial and compelling reasons for doing so.
Where the trial Court takes a reason.
able view of the facts of the case, interference is not justifiable unless there are really strong reasons for holding otherwise.
Amar Singh vs State of Punjab ([1953] S.C.R. 418) and Surajpal Singh vs State ([1952] S.C.R. 193), referred to.
The accused in a criminal case must be given the benefit of every reasonable doubt and, therefore, when he offers a reasonable explanation of his conduct, although he cannot prove it, that explanation should ordinarily be accepted unless the circumstances indicate that it is false.
Consequently, in a case where an accused person, charged under SS. 302 and 447 of the Indian Penal Code, repudiated his confession at the earliest opportunity as having been made under Police threats administered to him at night while in jail custody and there was evidence to show that the Police had access to him there, and there was nothing to displace his statement that he was threatened by them, the finding of the Sessions Judge that the confession was not voluntary in character was fair and reasonable and in the absence of any compelling reason the High Court should not have set aside the order of acquittal.
1286 As the evidence otherwise was insufficient to warrant a conviction the accused was acquitted.
Per VENKATARAMA AYYAR J.
This is not a case in which the Supreme Court should interfere under article 136 of the Constitution.
The Constitution by specifically providing for an appeal on facts under article 134(1) intended to exclude it under article 136 and like the Privy Council this Court will not function as a further Court of appeal on facts in criminal cases.
The fact that the appeal in the High Court was one against an order of acquittal makes no difference as the powers of an appellate Court are the same in all appeals, whether against acquittal or against conviction.
Pritam Singh vs The State ([1950] S.C.R. 453), Sheo Swarup vs King Emperor ([1934] L.R. 61 I.A. 398) and Nur Mohammad vs Emperor (A.I.R. , relied on.
The expression "compelling reasons" used in Surajpal Singh 's case should be read only in the context of that case and should not be treated as a rigid formula so as to restrict the powers of the Court, or the right of appeal conferred on the State by section 417 of the Code or to place a judgment of acquittal in a position of vantage and give the accused a protection which the law does not afford to them.
Such a formula can be of use only as guiding principle for the appellate Courts in deter mining questions of fact.
Surajpal Singh vs The State ([1952] S.C.R. 193), considered.
Consequently, the findings arrived at by the High Court were not open to review by this Court under article 136 of the Constitution and as there was evidence apart from the retracted confession to support the view, it had taken on merits, the appeal must be dismissed.
