The respondent Board realised terminal tax on goods experted by the appellants.
In suits filed by the appellants for refund of the amounts which they claimed were collected without authority of law, the respondent Board pleaded that the levy was in accordance with law and that the suits where barred by limitation.
The trial court decreed the suits and on appeal the District Judge affirmed the trial Court 's decrees.
In second appeal the High Court held that the levy was illegal.
The High Court, however, allowed the appeals in respect of those amounts which were found to be within limitation under section 179(2) of the Act and dismissed the others.
On the question whether the levy could be said to be a thing done or purported to be done under the Act.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The suits did not fall within the purview of section 179 of the Act and were not barred by limitation.
[172 D] 1.
(a) It is well established that if levy of a tax is prohibited by an Act and is not in pursuance of it, it could not be said to be purported to be done in pursuance of the execution or intended execution of the Act.
[172 B] Poona City Municipal Corporation vs Dattatraya Nagesh Deodhar, ; followed.
(b) The terminal tax could not be imposed under any of The provisions of the Act.
The High Court was right in holding that the amounts ` paid by the appellants by way of terminal tax were recoverable by the suits.
[173 F G 174 Al 2.
The Bikaner State Municipal Act, 1923 (which was the predecessor of the present Act) authorised the levy of terminal tax and the Board accordingly levied the tax until January 26, 1950.
With the coming into force 12 SCI/78 170 of the Constitution, by virtue of article 277 it was permissible for the Board to continue to levy the terminal tax until provision to the contrary was made by Parliament by law.
But with effect from December 22, 1951 the Bikaner Act was repealed and the present Act was brought into force.
the repeal, however, did not affect the validity of those taxes which had already been imposed and which could be "deemed` ' to have been imposed under the Act.
But the provisions of the Act the clear that the terminal tax in question could not be imposed thereunder.
The levy could not, therefore, be saved by cl.
(b) of the proviso to section 2.
on the other hand it is clear that the State Legislature had decided to discontinue the levy by excluding it from the purview of the saving clauses.
The further levy of the tax, therefore, became illegal and it was not permissible to continue it any longer under article 277 which merely gave the authority concerned the option to continue to levy if it so desired.
[173A, F G]
