Section 6(1) of the U.P. Agricultural Income tax Act, 1948 gives an option to an assessee to select one of the two alternative methods of computation of agricultural income as provided in section 6(2), whichever is more advantageous to him.
Such option is required to be indicated along with his return submitted under section 15 of the Act.
While submitting its return for the assessment year 1954 55 the assessee chose the option to be assessed under section 6(2) (b) of the Act.
It later submitted a revised return under section 15(4) but stuck to the option to be assessed under section 6(2) (b) .
The assessing authority, notwithstanding the filing of these two returns by the assesses, called upon it to file a return of the income computed under section 6(2)(a).
Thereafter the assessing authority served a notice on the assesses requiring it to produce evidence in support of it return.
After the assesses produced the required evidence, the assessing authority issued a notice to the effect that certain income escaped assessment and called for its objections, if any.
The assesses asked for inspection of records; but it was refused.
At the instance of the assesses the Revision Board directed true assessing authority to permit inspection of the record.
After inspection of the record he assesses filed a fresh (third) return.
At this stage the assesses preferred the method of computation of income provided under section 6(2)(a) instead of section 6(2)(b) which it chose earlier.
Without deciding the question as to whether the assesses was entitled to change the option, the assessing authority made a best judgment assessment under section 6(2)(b).
On appeal the Commissioner directed the assessing authority to first decide the question relating to change of option whereupon the assessing authority held that the assesses had no right to change its earlier option.
On further appeal the Revision Board upheld the order of the assessing authority.
In the assessee 's writ petition challenging the order of the assessing authority a single Judge of the High Court held that it was open to the assesses to change its option at the time of filing a subsequent or fresh return.
But the Division Bench was of the view that the assesses had no right to change its option.
In its appeal the assessee contended before this Court that (1) it is open to the assessee to change its option not merely every year but during the year by filing a fresh return or a revised return provided it is done before tho assessment is completed (2) although the assessee filed its first return and the 110 revised return, the assessing authority issued a notice under 8.
15(3) along with a statement of provisional estimate computed in accordance with section 6(2) (a) pursuant to which the assessee filed the third return exercising the option for computation in accordance with section 6(2) (a) and, therefore, the assessing authority had to make the assessment in accordance with section 6(2) (a) and (3) in any event since the assessing authority had proceeded to make a best judgment assessment under section 16(4) it had no option but to make the assessment with due regard to the provisional estimate served under section 15(3B) notwithstanding any option exercised under section 6(1) of the Act.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: The Division Bench of the High Court was wrong in holding that when once the option is exercised by an assessee by filing the requisite declaration he will have no right to change the option by filing a fresh return or revised return before the assessment is made for that year.
[121 Cl 1.
Whatever restrictions had been imposed on the change of option by the original proviso to section 6(1) had been removed and the concept of "first return ' was deleted from r. 5 That being so, the expression "his return of income" occurring in r. S would apply to any of returns contemplated under section 15, In fact r. 5 is obligatory and makes it incumbent upon an assessee to file, along with his return, a, declaration indicating his option under section 6(1).
The exercise of such option.
including a change of option indicated in the declaration filed along with a subsequent return or a fresh return or a revised return, will be valid provided the return itself is validly submitted.
[120 G H] 2.
If the return was filed under section 15(4), then in order to avail of the change of the option the assessee will have to show that it was really a revised return in the sense that the same had been filed because of a wrong statement discovered in the earlier returns.
Clearly the third return was filed in response to) the notice issued by the assessing authority under section 15(3).
This return was rejected by the assessing authority not on the ground that it had been filed beyond time but on the ground that the assessee had no right to change its option which suggests that the return was treated by the assessing authority as having been filed within time but was rejected on merits holding that the assessee was not entitled to change its option.
Therefore the third return was not a revised return under section 15(4) but a fresh return filed within time in response to the notice under section 15(3) and as such the assessee was entitled to change its option and have the computation made in accordance with section 6(2) (a).
The fact that the assessee had produced come evidence in pursuance to the notice in relation to its earlier returns or that it took inspection of the records cannot and does not amount to acquiescence or waiver of its right to file a declaration indicating its option afresh along with the return validly filed in response to the notice under section 15(3) of the Act.
[121 F G;122D; G H] 3.
Moreover, irrespective of whatever option might have been exercised by the assessee the best judgment assessment has to be made by the assessing authority by having due regard to the statement of provisional estimate of agricultural income made in accordance with section 6(2) (a).
Under section 16(4) whenever the assessing authority proceeds to make the assessment the same is required to be made "with due regard to the statement, if any, sent under 111 section 15(3 B) notwithstanding any option exercised under section 5(1).
" The scheme of section 16(4) clearly shows that in regard to the best judgment assessment there is nothing sacrosanct about the option exercised by the assessee under section 6(1); equally it can be said that in regard to the assessments other that best judgment assessments under the scheme of section 15 there is nothing sacrosanct about tho particular option previously exercised by the assessee and he need not be held bound by it provided he changes the option by filing a subsequent or a fresh or a revised return in accordance with the applicable provisions in section 15.
So far as the assessing authority is concerned such option, whether original or subsequent, would be binding on it.
[124F; H]
