A Hindu Undivided Family consisting of Thakur Dan Singh and his son, Thakur Mohan Singh was carrying on business as forest contractors.
There was a total disruption of the family in March, 1956.
On that day, the written down value of three trucks owned by the Hindu Undivided Family was nil on account of depreciation allowance granted under the Income Tax Act, 1922.
On the same day when the joint family was disrupted, Thakur Dan Singh and his son Thakur Mohan Singh constituted a partnership firm.
The business of Hindu Undivided Family was taken over as a running concern by the firm.
The firm sold the three trucks for Rs. 24,252/ .
The Income Tax officer held that the entire sale proceeds should be deemed to be profits of the firm by virtue of the second proviso to section 10(2)(vii) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 and 1: he included that amount in the total income of the appellant.
The decision of the Income Tax officer was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal and the High Court.
The High Court took the view that inasmuch as the partners of the appellants were the same individuals who were the members of the Hindu Undivided Family and as the business was taken over as a running concern by the appellants from the family, there was merely a change in the style and nature of the Hindu Undivided Family.
According to the High Court, the original cost of the trucks to the appellant would be the same as it was to the Hindu Undivided Family.
Allowing the appeal by the assessee, ^ HELD: The second proviso to section 10(2)(vii) seeks to recover back from the assessee the benefit allowed to him by way of depreciation allowance earlier.
It does so by imposing a balancing charge on the excess of the sale price over the written down value to the extent of the total depreciation allowance granted to the assessee in the past.
In the present case, the appellant could not have been allowed any depreciation allowance for the reason that from the outset when the three trucks became his property the written down value was nil.
No question of imposing a balancing charge, therefore, can arise in this case.
It is immaterial that the business was taken over as a running concern.
It is also immaterial that the partners of the firm are the same as the members of the Hindu Undivided Family.
Under s.2 of the Income Tax Act, a firm is a distinct assessable entity.
[226G H, 227A, B C] 225 Commissioner of Income Tax, Bengal vs A. W. Figgics & Co. and Ors., S.C.I. Raja Bejoy Singh Dudhuria vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bengal, ; relied upon.
When depreciation allowance was allowed to the Hindu Undivided Family in its assessment proceedings, it was a step taken in determining the taxable Income of the family.
The depreciation allowance allowed to the family cannot be regarded as depreciation allowed to the appellant firm.
[227GH, 228A]
