To provide for the better administration and supervision of Wakfs, the Wakfs Act 1954, sought to bring the management of wakfs under the supervision of the State.
The Act envisages the appointment of a Commissioner of Wakfs for the purpose of survey of wakf properties existing at the time of the commencement of the Act.
The Commissioner is enjoined to submit his report to the State Government after making such enquiries as he may consider necessary.
While making enquiries the Commissioner is invested with powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 6 of the Act provides that if any question arises as to whether a particular property specified in the list of wakfs published under section 5(2) was wakf property or not and such other related matters, the Board of Muslim Wakfs or the Mutawalli of the wakf or any person interested therein may institute a suit in a Civil Court for decision of the question.
Respondents 1 and 2 were mortgagee purchasers of the property in dispute, which was claimed to be wakf property.
Respondent.
No. 3 in his application to the Commissioner of Wakfs alleged that the property in dispute being wakf property its transfer by the mutawalli to the respondents was invalid and prayed that the property be taken over by the wakf committee.
While denying that the property in dispute was wakf property respondents 1 and 2 contended before the Commissioner that he had no jurisdiction to make an enquiry whether a particular property was wakf property or not.
The Commissioner rejected these contentions and submitted a report to the State Government.
On receipt of the Commissioner 's report the Board of Muslim Wakfs included the property in the list of wakfs in the Stat.
In the respondents ' Writ Petition, the High Court held (i) that the jurisdiction of the Board of Wakfs was confined to matters of administration of the wakfs and not to adjudication of questions of title and that the Act did not invest either the Board or the Commissioner with power to decide the question whether a property belonged to a wakf or not and therefore the Commissioner had no jurisdiction under section 4(3) of the Act to enquire whether or not the property was wakf property and (ii) that the failure of a stranger to the wakf to institute a suit in a court of competent jurisdiction within a period of one year on the question whether a particular property was wakf property or not could not make the inclusion of such property in the list of wakfs final and conclusive.
149 In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (i) the words "for the purpose of making a survey of wakf properties" are wide enough to confer power on the Commissioner to investigate and adjudicate upon the question whether a particular property was or was not wakf property and (ii) failure of the respondents to file a suit within the time allowed by s, 6(1) made the inclusion of the property in the list of wakfs final and conclusive.
The word "therein" occurring in "any person interested therein" in section 6 ( 1 ) qualifies the words "wakf property" and not "person interested in the wakfs" as wrongly assumed by the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court ^ HELD: While the High Court was right in determining the scope of section 6(1), it was clearly in error in curtailing the ambit and scope of enquiry by the Commissioner under section 4(3 ) .
[160 E] 1.
(a) The Commissioner of wakfs acted within his jurisdiction in holding the disputed property to be wakf property.
[168 C] (b) The whole purpose of the survey of the wakfs by the Commissioner under section 4(1) is to inform the Board of Wakfs as to existence of the wakfs in the State in order that all such wakfs should be brought under the supervision and control of the Board.
[160 D] (c) The words "for the purpose of making a survey" are the key to the construction of the section.
If the Commissioner has the power to make a survey it is but implicit that in the exercise of such power he should enquire whether or not a wakf exists.
The making of such an enquiry is a necessary concomitant of the power to survey.
The High Court was, therefore, wrong in holding to the contrary.
[162 A Bl (d) It would be illogical to hold that while making a survey of wakf properties existing in the State the Commissioner of wakfs should have no power to enquire whether a particular property was wakf property or not.
After making the survey the Commissioner is required to submit a report to the State Government in regard to the several matters referred to in clauses (a) to (f) thereof.
There may be a dispute as between the Board, the mutawalli or a person interested in the wakf, as regards the existence of wakf i.e. whether a particular property is wakf property, whether it is a Shia wakf or a Sunni wakf, the extent of the property attached to the wakf, the nature and object of the wakf and so on.
While making such an enquiry, the Commissioner is invested with the powers vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
In view of the comprehensive provisions contained in the Act the enquiry which the Commissioner makes is not purely of an administrative nature but partakes of a quasi judicial character in respect of persons falling within the scope of section 6(1).
[161 F; C E] (e) The power of the Commissioner to survey wakf properties or to enquire and investigate into the several matters set out in sub section (3) cannot be curtailed by taking recourse to section 4(S).
Sub section (S) only lays down that, if during an enquiry any dispute arises as to whether a particular wakf is a Shia wakf or Sunni wakf and if there are clear indications in the deed of wakf as to its nature, the dispute shall be decided on the basis of 150 such deed.
It, therefore, makes the wakf deed conclusive as to the nature of the wakf Sub section (5) cannot be projected into sub section (1) determining the question whether a certain property is a wakf property or not.
Nor does it enter into an enquiry as to several of the matters adverted to in some of the clauses of sub section (3).
[162 D E] (f) Moreover section 6 and section 6(1) clearly envisage that the enquiry by the Commissioner was not confined to the question as to whether a particular wakf was a Shia Wakf or Sunni Wakf.
It might also embrace a dispute is to whether a wakf existed or not.
[162 H] 2.
(a) Where a stranger is a non Muslim and is in possession of certain property, his right.
title and interest therein cannot be put in jeopardy merely because the property is included in the list of wakfs.
Such a person is not required to file a suit for a declaration of his title within a period of one year.
The special rule of limitation laid down in proviso to section 6(1) is not applicable to him.
In other words, the list published by the Board of Wakfs under section 5(2) can be challenged by him by filing a suit for declaration of title even after the expiry of the period of one year, if the necessity of filing such suit arises.
h 167 A B] (b) The word "therein" occurring in section 6(1) after the words "any person interested therein" must necessarily refer to the "Wakf" which immediately precedes it.
It cannot refer to the wakf property.
Section 6 ( 1 ) enumerates the persons who can file suits and also the questions in respect of which such suits can be filed.
In enumerating the persons who are empowered to file suits under this provision only the Board, the mutawalli of the Wakf; and "any person interested therein", thereby necessarily meaning any person interested in the wakfs, are listed.
Its provisions empower only those who are interested in the wakfs to institute suits.
[164 E Fl Sirajul Hag Khan & Ors.
vs The Sunni Central Board of Wakf, U.P. Ors., , referred to.
(c) The word "therein" in section 6(1) must mean "any person interested in a wakf" as defined in section 3(h).
The object of the section is to narrow down the dispute between the Board of Wakfs, the Mutawalli and the person interested in the wakf as defined in section 3(h).
[165 H] (d) The right of the respondents 1 and 2 in respect of the disputed property, if at all they have any, will remain unaffected by the impugned Notification.
They are at liberty to bring a Suit for the establishment of their right and title, if any, to the property.
[168 E]
