Prakash Chand an overseer Section officer in the Delhi Development Authority office, was charged under section 5(1)(d) read with 8.
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruptions Act and section 161 IPC, for demanding and accepting Rs. 30/ bribe from the trap witness Ram Niwas Sharma.
an architect, for permitting him to make some necessary corrections in the building plans submitted by him to comply with certain objections raised by the D.D.A. On a report by Shri Sharma, an Inspector of Anti Corruption Establishment, accompanied him to the D.D.A office, with two panch witnesses and on receiving a pre arranged signal, entered the room and challenged the accused who was stunned and kept mum.
Then three pre marked ten rupees notes were found in the file dealing with Sharma 's matter, the file was found under the table and the accused had his foot on it.
The panch witnesses did not fully support the prosecution csse.
They resiled from their earlier statements made in the course of investigation were treated as hostile by the prosecution, and were disbelieved by the Court.
The accused was duly tried, convicted and sentenced, and the conviction was upheld by the High Court.
It was contended that the uncorroborated testimony of a trap witness was not sufficient to found the conviction? and also that the evidence relating to the conduct of the accused when challanged by the police inspector was excluded by.
section and was inadmissible in evidence.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) We are unable to agree that no conviction can ever be based on the uncorroborated testimony of a "trap witness".
Where the circumtance justify it, a court may refuse to act upon the uncorroborated testimony of a. trap witness.
On the other hand a court may well be justified in acting upon the uncorroborated testimony of a trap witness, if the court is satisfied from the facts and circumstances of the case that the trap witness is a witness of truth.
[334C E] The State of Bihar vs Basawan Singh, ; , and Bhanuprasad Hariprasad Dave & Anr.
vs The State of Gujarat, ; , applied.
Ram Prakash Arora vs The State of Punjab, AIR 1973 SC 498 and Darshan Lal vs The Delhi Administration, AIR 1974 SC, 218; differentiated.
The conduct of a person against whom an offence is alleged, is admissible under s.8 of the Evidence Act.
What is excluded by s.162 Cr.
P.C is the 331 Statement made to a police officer in the course of investigation and not the evidence relating to the conduct of an accused person (not amounting to a statement) when confronted or questioned by a police officer, during she course of an investigation.
[336G H, 337A] D. V. Narasimluan vs State, AIR 1969 A.P. 271, held inapplicable.
Himachal Pradesh Administration vs Om Prakash, ; and Zwinglee Ariel vs State of M.P., AIR 1954 SC 15; reaffirmed.
Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & Anr.
vs State of Vindhya Pradesh, ; and State of Madras v.A. Vaidyanatha Iyer; , , applied.
