The appellant was convicted under section 8 read with section 16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Jalaun and sentenced to six months rigorous imprisonment, the minimum sentence awardable under the P.O.F.A. 1950.
In appeal the Session Court reversed it, but in further appeal by the State against his acquittal and reversal of the trial court decision, the High Court of Allahabad set aside the Session 's orders and restored that of the trial court.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Sections 8 and 9 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1950 as amended by section S of the Amending Act 49 of 1964 cannot be read as repealing the old sections and empowering the Central Government or the State Government to appoint the Public Analyst or the Food Inspector after the coming into force of the amending Act, implying that any prior appointment o '.
a Public Analyst or Food Inspector stood repealed.
[345A] 2 Whether the notifications of the Government in 1968 appointing the public Analyst and the Food Inspector with retrospective effect from March 05 are valid or not need not be looked into because being an amendment Act, the appointment of the Public Analyst and the Food Inspector made by the State Government continued to be valid.
[345B C] 3.
The amended sections 8 and 9 do not in any way repeal sections 8 and 9 as they originally stood.
As to the effect of the amendment the language of the amending sections will have to be examined to find out whether the original conditions were intended to be repealed.
The amending provisions should be held as part of the original statute.
[345D E] 4.
Whenever the amended section has to be applied subsequent to the date of the amendment, the unamended provisions of the Act have to be read along with the amended provisions as though they are part of it.
Reading the amended section, it is clear that there is no provision, express or implied, repealing the existing provisions or the rules made thereunder.
The section will have to be construed as being in addition to what had already existed.
The effect will be that the power of the State Government which already existed under the unamended section and the appointments made thereunder preserved and the action taken under the amended sections with be in addition to the powers of the State Government and the appointments which had already been made.
[345F G] 342 Nagar Mahapalika, Lucknow vs Ram Dhani, A.I.R. 1971 All. 53 approved.
The contention that the analysis of the milk after 44 days must yield to an adverse inference against the State as to adulteration cannot be accepted.
[346A] In the present case there is evidence of the Food Inspector that he added formalin as a preservative and the report of the Public Analyst that no change had taken place in the constituents of milk which would have interfered with the analysis.
This statement of the analyst was not challenged in any of the courts below.
Apart from the statement of the Analyst not having been questioned, in this case it is admitted that formalin was added to the milk by the Food Inspector.
The Food Inspector added 16 drops of formalin in each of the bottles and had them sealed properly.
Rule 20 of the Prevention of Food Aduleration Rules requires that in the case of milk, cream Dahi, Khoa and Gur a preservative known as "formalin", that is to say, a liquid containing about 40 per cent of 'formaldehyde ' in aqueous solution in the proportion of 0.1 ml.
(two drops) for 25 ml.
Or 25`grams shall be added.
There is also the clear evidence of Public Analyst that no change had taken place in the constituents of milk which would interfere with the analysis.[346D G, 347A] Babboo vs State, A.I.R. 1970 All 122; approved.
Dattappa Mahadappa vs Secy.
, Municipal Committee, Baldana, A.I.R. 1951 Nag.191 referred to.
