^ HELD: 1. Assurance of a fair trial is the first imperative of the dispensation of justice and the central criterion for the Court to consider when motion four transfer is made is not the hypersensitivity or relative convenience of a party or easy availability of legal services or the like mini grievances.
Something more substantial, more compelling, more imperilling, from the point of view of public justice and its attendant environment is necessitous, if the Court is to exercise its power of transfer.
This is the cardinal principle although the circumstances may be myriad and vary from case to case.
courts must test the petitioner 's grounds on this touch stone bearing in mind the rule that normally the complainant has the right to choose any Court having jurisdiction and the accused cannot dictate where the case against him should be tried.
Even so, the process of justice should not harass the parties and from that angle the Court may weigh the circumstances.
[380F H] 2.
The meat of the matter, in a case of defamation is something different than the common ground usually urged like the avoidance of substantial prejudice to a party or witnesses on account of logistics or like factors, especially when an alternative venue will not seriously handicap the complainant and will mitigate the serious difficulties of the accused.
The main witnesses are those who speak to having read the offending matter and other relevant circumstances flowing therefrom.
[381A B] In this case, the witnesses belong to Bombay and the suggestion that Delhi readers may be substitute witnesses and the complainant may consent herself with examining such persons is too presumptuous for serious consideration.
[381 C] 3.
The sophisticated processes of a criminal trial certainly require competent legal service to present a party 's case.
If an accused person, for any particular reason, is virtually deprived of this facility, an essential aid to fair trial fails.
If in a certain Court the whole Bar, for reasons of hostility or otherwise refuses to defend an accused person an extraordinary situation difficult to imagine, having regard to the ethics of the profession it may well be put forward as a ground which merits the attention of the Supreme Court.
Glib allegation like the services of an efficient advocate may not be easy to procure involves a reflection on the members of the Bar in Bombay and, therefore, is cannot be easily accepted without incontestible testimony in that behalf which is absent in this case.
apart from the ipse dixit of the party; Popular frenzy or official wrath shall not deter a member of the Bar from 379 offering his services to those who wear unpopular names or unpalatable causes and the Indian advocate may not fail this standard.
[381C E] 4.
It is true that a detached atmosphere of a fair and impartial judicial trial is a must.
The tendency of toughs and street roughs to violate the serenity of Court is obstructive of the course of justice and must surely be stamped out.
Likewise, the safety of the person of an accused or complainant is an essential condition for participation in a trial and where that is put in peril by commotion, tumult or threat on account of pathological conditions prevalent in a particular venue, the request for a transfer may not be dismissed summarily.
It causes disquiet and concern to a Court of justice if a person seeking justice is unable to appear present one 's case, bring one 's witnesses or adduce evidence.
Indeed, it is the duty of the Court to assure propitious conditions which conduce to comparative tranquility at the trial.
Turbulent conditions putting the accused 's life in danger or creating chaos inside the Court hall may jettison public justice.
If this vice is peculiar to a particular place and is persistent the transfer of the case from that place may become necessary.
Likewise, if there is general consternation or atmosphere of tension or raging masses of people in the entire region taking sides land polluting the climate, vitiating the necessary neutrality to hold a detached judicial trial, the situation may be said to have deteriorated to such an extent as to warrant transfer.
[381 H, 382A C] In the instant case, none of the allegations made by the Petitioner.
read in the pragmatic light of the counter averments of the respondent and understood realistically makes the contention credible that a fair trial is impossible.
[383A B] G. X. Francis vs Banke Bihari Singh, A.I.R. 1958 SC 809 and 810; referred to.
Observation : The frequency of mobbing manouvres in Court precincts is a bad omen for social justice in its wider connotation.
Mob action may throw out of the gear the wheels of the judicial process.
Engineered fury may paralyse a party 's ability to present his case or participate in the trial.
If the justice system grinds to a halt through physical manouvres or sound and fury of the senseless populace, the rule of law runs aground.
Even the most hated human anethema has a right to be heard without the rage of ruffians or huff of toughs being turned against him to unnerve him as party or witness or advocate.
Physical violence to a party, actual or imminent, is reprehensible when he seeks justice before a tribunal.
Manageable solutions must not sweep the Supreme Court off its feet into granting an easy transfer but uncontrollable or perilous deterioration will surely persuade this Court to shift the venue.
It depends.
[383D F] Therefore (a) the trial Court should readily consider the liberal exercise of its power to grant for the accused exemption from personal appearance save on crucial occasions.
[383G] (b) Where tranquil Court justice is a casualty, the collapse of an constitutional order is an inevitability.
The Magistrate is the master 380 of the orderly conduct of court proceedings and his authority shall not hang limp if his business is stalled by brow beating.
It is his duty to clear the Court of confusion, yelling and nerve racking gestures which mar the serious tone of judicial heaving.
The officials whose duty is to keep the public peace shall, on requisition, be at the command of the Court to help it run its process smoothly.
When the situation gets out of hand the remedy of transfer surgery may be prescribed Every fleeting rumpus should not lead to a removal of the ease as it may prove to be a frequent surrender of justice to commotion.
The Magistrate shall take measures to enforce conditions where the Court functions free and fair and agitational our muscle tactics yield no dividends.
[384A C]
