In appeal to this Court it was contended that the appellant had become a hereditary tenant under section 180(2) of the Tenancy Act by reason of the fact that he had been in cultivator possession of the land for a number of years and no steps had been taken to evict him within two years of his entry into possession of the land, (2) that since he had been paying rent to the Government he was not in unauthorised occupation of the land and (3) failure of the Public Authority to refer the dispute to a Civil Judge under Section 7 of the Act vitiated the order of eviction Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: l(a) The appellant 's claim was not that he lawfully entered into possession of the land but that he took possession without any grunt, settlement or leases from the owner.
By claiming acquisition of a hereditary tenancy) under section 180(2) he admitted that he had taken possession without any title anal without the consent of the land owner.
1180 C] (b) The provisions of Section 2(18), 30, 180(2) of the Tenancy Act are to be construed in harmony with each other.
So construed, a person occupying land belonging to the State Government, as a trespasser or without title or a person holding over after the revocation or cancellation of the lease, allotment or a grant in accordance with the condition thereof, cannot be "a tenureholder.
from the State Government under the U.P. Act, 1939.
" within the meaning of Sec.
2(e)(i) of the Tenancy Act.
There was thus no doubt that the land was "public land" within the meaning of the Eviction Act.
[181 A B] (2) The obligation to refer the question whether or not the land is public land, under Section 7, is not basic but contingent.
Although the Public Authority did not say in the phraseology of the statute that the objection raised by the 176 appellant was prima facie baseless, yet, in substance, it well nigh came to the same conclusion.
It was, therefore, not obligatory for the authority to refer the question to the Civil Court.
[181 F] (3) The plea that the notice did not comply with the requirements of section 3 of the Eviction Act and for that reason illegal had not been raised in the Courts below.
It is not a pure question of law.
The appellant has not produced a copy of the notice served on him.
Tn the circumstances, the maxim omnia prae sumuntur vite essa acta will be attracted.
It will be presumed that the purpose for which the appellant was sought to be evicted was duly specified in the notices compliance with the requirements of section 3(2).
[182 A B]
