The appellant company cultivates sugarcane and manufactures sugar in its factory, by crushing the sugar cultivated by it and purchased from other cultivators.
The State Government enacted the M.P. Sugarcane (R.S.P.) Act, 1958 which came into force on July 1, 1959.
The State Government issued a notification under section 23 of the Act imposing a cess of 12 paise per maund on the entry of sugarcane during a crushing season in the area comprised within "such of the factories in which the total quantity of cane entering for consumption, use or sale to the factory during such season exceeded 10 lakh maunds.
" The High Court, on a writ application by the appellants, declared the notification illegal as the imposition of the levy was with reference to particular premises.
The Parliament thereupon enacted the .
Section 3 of the Validation Act was taken to validate the imposition and collection of the cess under the State Act.
In April, 1964, the appellant received an intimation from the Additional Collector stating that a sum of Rs. 5,49,262.92 was due from it as cess for the period 1959 60 to December 25, 1961, and asking for a bank guarantee for payment of the balance.
The appellant replied that the amount of cess worked out only to Rs. 5,44,835.69 and the Collector had not assessed the cess in accordance with the rules.
Its objection was ignored and a demand notice was served on it under s.146 of the M.P. Land Revenue Code, 1959, for Rs. 5,49,262.92.
The appellant filed a writ petition challenging the constitutionality of the Validation Act under which the Collector had demanded the cess.
The High Court upheld the imposition of cess but reduced it to Rs. 5,44,835.69.
It was contended that section 23 of the State Act was not ultra vires the Constitution, as the expression "an area" in section 23(1) means "a local area" within the meaning of Entry 52 of List II, 7th Schedule of the Constitution, and the Parliament could not, therefore, enact an Act validating a valid Act.
It was further contended that when a law provides for the assessment of a cess or tax, it is required to be done by a specific order to that effect, but it was not made in this case.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 606 ^ HELD: 1.
Section 23 of the State Act was ultra vires the Constitution, and cannot be upheld on such a construction of the words "an area" in section (1) as to restrict it to mean a "local area".
The proper meaning to be attached to the words "local area" in Entry 52, List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution; (when the area is a part of the State imposing the law) is an area administered by a local body like a Municipality, a district board, a local board, a union board, a panchayat or the like.
The premises of a factory are therefore not a "local area" falling within Entry 52 of the State List, and there is no other Entry in the State List or the Concurrent List in which the Act could fall, [608 E H] Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. and Anr.
vs State of U.P. & Anr.
; and Jaora Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs State of M.P. and Ors.
, ; followed.
What the Parliament had done by enacting section 3 of the Validation Act, was not to validate the invalid State statute, but to make a law concerning the cess covered by the said statute and to provide that the said law shall come into operation retrospectively.
By virtue of section 3, the command under which the cess would be deemed to have been recovered, would be the command of the Parliament, because the relevant sections, notifications, orders and rules had been adopted by the Parliamentary Statute itself.[609 B C] 3.
The State Act and the Rules do not require that the Collector shall make a formal order of assessment, and then collect the cess.
The purpose of an assessment is to compute the amount of the cess payable by the person concerned.
"Assess" is a comprehensive word and in a taxing statute it often means the computation of the income of the assessee, the determination of tax payable by him, and the procedure for collecting or recovering the tax.
In a case where there is a dispute about the identity of the assessee, the order of assessment serves the purpose of establishing that identity and naming the person from whom the tax is to be recovered.
The responsibility of the Collector for purposes of assessing and collecting the tax under section 60 of the Rules, is to see that the full amount of the cess has been credited to the treasury by the occupier of the factory.
If he finds that this is not so, it is his duty to call upon the occupier by a written notice to deposit the amount due from him within the period specified in the notice.
[611E H,612A]
