The respondents in each of the four appeals were convicted and sentenced under section 409 IPC by the Sub Divisional Magistrate.
On appeal the Sessions Judge affirmed the conviction and sentences passed against them.
In revision the High Court set aside the judgments and orders passed by the trial court and the Sessions Court and acquitted the respondents of all the charges.
On the question of (i) the scope of the power of revision of the High Court under section 439 read with section 435 Cr.
P.C. 1898 and when it should be exercised; and (ii) whether, in arriving at a concurrent finding, the trial court and the Sessions 1 judge committed a manifest error on a point of law which had resulted in flagrant miscarriage of justice.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) Although the revisional power of the High Court under section 439 read with 9.
435 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 is as wide as the power of Court of Appeal under section 423 of the Code, it is well settled that normally y the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 439 is to be exercised only in exceptional cases when there is a glaring defect in the procedure or there is a manifest error on a point of law which has consequently resulted in flagrant miscarriage of justice.
In Akalu Ahir vs Ramdeo Ram, ; this Court held that in spite of the wide language of section which empowered it to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or properiety of any finding.
sentence or order recorded or passed by any inferior court situate within the limits of its jurisdiction and as to regularity of any proceeding of such inferior court and in spite of the fact that under section 439 of the Code it can exercise, inter alia, the power conferred on a Court of appeal under section 423, the High Court is not expected to act under section 435 or section 439 as if it is hearing an appeal.
The power being discretionary it has to be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily or lightly.
Judicial discretion means a discretion which is in formed by tradition, methodised by analogy and disciplined by system.
[447H; 448A B] Amar Chand Agarwalla, vs Shanti Bose & Anr.
; , and Akalu Ahir vs Ramdeo Ram, ; followed.
(2) Neither the trial court nor the Sessions Court committed any error of fact or of law in arriving at their conclusions and the High Court misdirected itself in upsetting their concurrent findings ignoring the well recognised principles for the exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
From the material on record it is clear that the offences with which the respondents were charged were brought home to them beyond reasonable doubt.
[456E] 443
