In 1911 King George V conferred the "dignity, status and degree" of a Baronet on Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim of Bombay.
To provide for the upkeep and dignity of the Baronetcy the Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Act, 1913 was passed by virtue of which considerable properties belonging to Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim were settled upon the trust.
Section 8 of the Baronetcy Act provided that the residue of income from the properties settled under the trust was to be paid to the first Baronet and the heir male of his body, who would, for the time being succeed to the title of Baronet.
Section 27 provided for the vesting of all properties and funds in the Trust "upon failure and in default of heirs male of the body of the last Baronet.
" The First Baronet left behind a Will in respect of certain other properties.
On the death of the First Baronet his eldest son assumed the title of Second Baronet and on the death of the Second Baronet his eldest son Hussainbhoy became the Third Baronet.
The Third Baronet migrated to Pakistan between the years 1947 and 1949.
He was, therefore, declared an evacuee.
Certain properties belonging to him were declared vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
Two other immovable properties as well as the right, title and interest of the Third Baronet in the Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Trust were declared as evacuee properties and vested in the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
On the death of the Third Baronet in Pakistan in 1952 his eldest son Mohamedbhoy succeeded as the Fourth Baronet.
At that time the Fourth Baronet was residing in India, but shortly thereafter he migrated to Pakistan.
The Deputy Custodian of Evacuee Property made an order declaring the Fourth Baronet an evacuee and notified his beneficial interest in the Trust as evacuee property vesting in the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
The Fourth Baronet having migrated to Pakistan along with his son, the Bombay Legislature passed the Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy (Repealing & Distribution of Trust Properties) Act, 1959.
The Repealing Act inter alia revoked and extinguished the trusts, powers, provisions, declaration and purposes declared and expressed in the Sir Currimbhoy Ebrahim Baronetcy Act and vested the properties and funds in the Official Trustee for the purpose of 700 distributing them amongst the persons rightfully entitled thereto, according to law.
The Official Trustee thereupon called upon the persons claiming interest in the trust properties to submit their claims.
On the Official Trustee 's application under section 7(2) of the Repealing Act seeking orders and directions of the High Court as regards distribution of the trust properties amongst the several claimants, a single Judge of the High Court took the view that the Custodian was not entitled to the share of the Fourth Baronet in the Trust properties because the beneficial interest of the Fourth Baronet which had vested in the Custodian came to an end on the extinction of the Trust that the Repealing Act had the effect of giving rise to a resulting trust in favour of the settlor, the first Baronet; that the trust properties reverted to his estate on his death, that they must be deemed to pass by inheritance, according to the Muslim personal law, and that the residuary clause in the will executed by the First Baronet did not cover the trust properties.
A Division Bench of the High Court on appeal held that on the terms of the Will a contrary intention had been manifested by the First Baronet that in the event of the failure of the Trust the trust properties shall, after his life time, be held for the benefit of the Baronet for the time being and therefore the Fourth Baronet was entitled to the trust properties absolutely in his own right.
The claim of the Custodian of Evacuee Property to the corpus of the trust properties was rejected.
^ HELD: 1.
Upon the provisions of the Baronetcy Act and of the Will a direction by the First Baronet must necessarily be presumed that if the trust created by the Baronetcy Act failed or was revoked the trust properties and funds must go to the last Baronet.
[710 G].
(a) Although the trust was created by statute, it was created at the instance of the First Baronet so as to keep the trust in perpetuity for the upkeep of the dignity and title of the Baronetcy at all times.
A trust of this nature has been regarded as a private trust.
[707 B].
(b) Section 83 of the Indian Trusts Act provides that where a trust is incapable of being executed or where the trust is completely executed without exhausting the trust property, the trustee, in the absence of a direction to the contrary, must hold the trust property for the benefit of the author of the trust or his legal representatives.
On the terms of this section, which incorporates in codified form the concept of what is known as a resulting trust, a resulting trust can arise only in the absence of a direction to the contrary.
[707 E F].
(c) In the instant case the various clauses of the will show that substantially large sums of money were gifted by the First Baronet in equal shares to each of the sons except the eldest son.
In all these clauses the eldest son Mohamedbhoy was not included because he would succeed as Baronet to the benefit of the trust constituted under the Act.
There is no reason to suppose that the First Baronet intended to exclude Mohamedbhoy from the benefit of his bounty.
According to the terms of the Act, the benefits of the trust created under the Baronetcy Act were to devolve on the male heirs of 701 the body of the First Baronet who took the name of Currimbhoy Ebrahim, and when executing the will, the First Baronet had that benefit in mind for Mohamedbhoy.
The First Baronet had the line of Mohamedbhoy in mind for supplying future Baronets.
Therefore the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the trust properties created under the Act were intended by the First Baronet to vest in Mohamedbhoy and his heirs.
Although section 27 comes into play only upon the failure and in default of heirs male of the body of the said Currimbhoy Embrahim, the intention of the First Baronet was that the trust properties and funds should be confined even ultimately to the line of Mohamedbhoy his eldest son.
They would go to the heirs of the last Baronet and not be distributed among his own heirs.
[709 B 710F] 2.
While ordinarily the trust properties and funds would have devolved on the Fourth Baronet, the ultimate determination of the case must turn on the validity of the claim made by the Custodian of Evacuee Property under section 7(4) of the Repealing Act.
[710H] (a) The Repealing Act was passed by the State Legislature under Entry 41 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and received the assent of the President.
In case of any repugnancy between the Repealing Act and the the former will prevail by reason of article 254(2) of the Constitution.
Section 7(4) is not repugnant to any provision of the 1950 Act.
It is in the nature of additional legislation on the subject.
[714 B].
(b) Section 7(4) of the Repealing Act was passed because the Fourth Baronet had been declared an evacuee and his interest in the trust properties under the Baronetcy Act had been declared evacuee property under the 1950 Act.
With the repeal of the Baronetcy Act and the revocation and extinction of the trust, that interest came to an end and the declaration ceased to have effect.
The Legislature presumed that when the Official Trustee took proceedings for the distribution of the trust properties under section 7 of the Repealing Act, the Fourth Baronet would be found entitled to the trust properties or part thereof.
He had already been declared an evacuee and consistently with the earlier declaration vesting his interest in the trust properties as evacuee property in the Custodian, the Legislature intended that the trust properties falling in full ownership to the Fourth Baronet on repeal should likewise be vested in the Custodian.
That could not be accomplished by a declaration under the , in view of section 7A thereof which prohibited such a declaration after May 7, 1954.
The result could be accomplished under some other law and section 7(4) of the Repealing Act was passed to make provision accordingly.
The trust properties were evacuee property because they belonged to an evacuee [vide section 2(f) , [1950], and by the operative clause in section 7(4) of the Repealing Act they were vested in the Custodian.
The law relating to evacuee property was applied to the right, title and interest of the evacuee in the trust properties even as they applied to any other evacuee property under that law.
The terms in which the law relating to evacuee properties has been applied to the trust properties fully confirms the conclusion that the trust properties falling to the Fourth Baronet were to be treated at par with evacuee property generally.
[714 F H].
(c) Section 7(4) of the Repealing Act requires three conditions to be satisfied.
They are: (i) that a person is entitled to the trust properties or 702 any part thereof; (ii) that such person has been or is declared as an evacuee within the meaning of the , and (iii) that his right, title and interest in the trust properties has been or is declared to be evacuee property under the .
If these conditions are satisfied the official trustee is required to transfer and vest in the Custodian the trust properties or so much thereof as is found to be evacuee property and the law relating to evacuee property shall apply to such right, title and interest in the trust properties as they apply to any other evacuee property under that law.
[711 G H].
In the present case the first condition is satisfied because the Fourth Baronet had been found to be entitled to all the trust properties and funds settled and created under the Baronetcy Act.
The second condition is satisfied because the Fourth Baronet was declared an evacuee.
Similarly, the third condition is satisfied because the right, title and interest of the Fourth Baronet in the trust properties was declared to be evacuee property.
All three conditions having been satisfied, section 7(4) takes effect and the direction contained in it must be carried out.
The Official Trustee is required to transfer and vest in the Custodian the trust properties count to be evacuee property.
[712 B D].
There is no substance in the contention that on the death of the Third Baronet before the Repealing Act was passed, the trust properties devolved on the heirs of the Third Baronet i.e. his widow, son and two daughters.
On the death of the Third Baronet the benefit of the trust created by the Baronetcy Act passed to the Fourth Baronet.
[715 D].
