The appellant firm filed appeals against orders assessing it to income tax and super tax for the years 1945 1946 and 1946 1947 beyond the time prescribed by section 30(2) of the Income tax Act.
The appeals were numbered, and notices were issued for their hearing under section 31.
At the hearing of the appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Department took the objection that the appeals were barred by time.
The appellant prayed for condonation of delay, but that was refused, and the appeals were dismissed as time barred.
The appellant then preferred appeals against the orders of dismissal to the Tribunal under section 33 of the Act, and the Tribunal dismissed them on the ground that the orders of the Assistant Commissioner were in substance passed under section 30(2) and not under section 31 of the Act and that no appeal lay against them under section 33 of the Act.
On a reference under section 66(1) of the Act the High Court held that the orders of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were made under section 30(2) and were not appealable under section 33 of the Act.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court the question for determination was whether an order dismissing an appeal presented under section 30 as out of time was one under section 30(2) or under section 31 of the Act because if it was the former there was no appeal provided against it; if it was the latter it was open to appeal under section 33.
Held that the orders of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner fell within section 31.
A right of appeal is a substantive right and is a creature of the statute.
section 30(1) confers on the assessee a right of appeal against certain orders and an order of assessment under section 23 is one of them.
The appellant had therefore a substantive right under section 30(1) to prefer appeals against orders of assessment made by the Income Tax Officer.
167 An appeal presented out of time is an appeal and an order dismissing it as time barred is one passed in appeal.
Section 31 is the only provision relating to the hearing and disposal of appeals and if an order dismissing an appeal as barred by limitation as in the present case is one passed in appeal it must fall within section 31 and as section 33 confers a right of appeal against all orders passed under section 31, it must also be appealable.
To fall within section 31 it is not necessary that the order should expressly address itself to and decide on the merits of the assessment and it is sufficient that the effect of the order is to confirm the assessment as when the appeal is dismissed on a preliminary point.
An order rejecting an appeal on the, ground of limitation after it had been admitted is one under section 31, though there is no consideration of the merits of the assessment.
Held therefore that the orders of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner holding that there were no sufficient reasons for excusing the delay and rejecting the appeals as time barred would be orders passed under section 31 and would be open to appeal, and it would make no difference in the position whether the orders of dismissal were made before or after the appeals were admitted.
Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Mtt.
`r. section Ar.
Arunachalam Chettiar, ([1953] S.C.R. 463), explained.
Case law discussed.
