In respect of the assessment year 1959 60 the assessee was allowed deduction of interest paid to creditors from whom it claimed to have borrowed moneys on hundis.
In January, 1968 the Income Tax Officer issued a notice to the assessee under section 147(a) of the Income tax Act, 1961 on the ground that the transactions of loans represented by the hundis were bogus and no interest was paid by it to any of the creditors shown in the hundis, that it was wrongly allowed as a deduction and therefore a part of the assessee 's income had escaped assessment by reason of its failure to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for the assessment.
In the assessee 's writ petition before the High Court the Income Tax Officer at first declined to disclose the facts which had weighed with him in reaching the belief that income had escaped assessment on the ground that if they were disclosed it would cause great prejudice to the interests of revenue and would frustrate the object of reopening the assessment.
Later however, realising that this stand was untenable he gave his reasons for issuing the notice.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the assessee 's writ petition.
On appeal a Division Bench held that there was no failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts and that in any event the Income Tax Officer had no reason to believe that any part of the income had escaped assessment by reason of such failure on the assessee 's part.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: There was no failure on the part of the asscssee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for its assessment and the condition for the applicability of section 147(a) was not satisfied.
The notice in the circumstances was void.
[1910 A] (1) In CIT vs Burlop Dealers Ltd., this Court held that there was no obligation on the part of the assessee to disclose that the documents produced by it were bogus and that the entries made in its books of account were false.
The assessee discharged its obligation by disclosing its books of accounts and evidence from which material facts could be discovered and it is for the Income Tax Officer to decide whether the documents were genuine or false.
In the instant case the assessee could not be said to have failed to make true and full disclosure of the material facts by not confessing before the Income Tax Officer that the hundis and the entries in the books of account produced before him were bogus.
[909 G] CIT vs Burlop Dealers Ltd. ; applied.
(2) All that the Income Tax Officer stated in his affidavit was that he discovered that the transactions of loan against security of hundis were not genuine and that the credits against the names of certain persons who were alleged to have advanced the loans were bogus.
He merely stated his belief but did not set out any material on the basis of which he had arrived at such belief.
[910 C] (3) The existence of reason to believe on the part of the Income Tax Officer is a justiceable issue and it is for the court to be satisfied whether in fact the Income Tax Officer had any material on the basis of which he could reasonably entertain such belief.
[907 D]
