A criminal case, arising out of F.I.R. 72 of 1967 against one Sri Bali Ram Sharma and two others for the offence of the theft of two sandstone pillars of great antiquity, beauty and value from the Suraj Kund Temple, in village Amin, Dist.
Karnal, ended in the acquittal of the accused.
During the pendency of this case, on an application made by him one Narinder Nath Malik (N. N. Malik) an alleged research scholar and a friend of H. L. Mehta, the then Chief Judicial Magistrate was given the custody of these two sandstone pillars which had been recovered from the accused.
The pillars remained in the custody of N. N. Malik from 1 3 1968 to 27 5 1968 and on the acquittal of the accused on 16 7 1968, they were handed over to the Lambardar of Village Amin.
Later, it came to light that the pillars returned by Malik were not the original pillars but fakes.
Thereupon, F.I.R. RC 2 71 CIA/SPE/CBI was registered at Delhi against Malik and H. L. Mehta under Section 120 B read with Sections 406 and 420 I.P.C.
After completing the investigation a charge sheet No. RC 2 of 1971 was filed on 30 12 1972, in the Court of Special Magistrate, Ambala against Malik and H. L. Mehra for the aforesaid offences noted in the F.I.R. Though an order was passed on 17 5 1976 directing the framing of charges, no charges were actually framed.
However, on 16 5 77, on an application dated 17 4 77 filed by the Public Prosecutor under Section 494 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, the Special Magistrate permitted the withdrawal of the case and discharged the accused.
During the pendency of the case, the two genuine pillars were traced and found in London in the ware house of Spink & Co. It was suspected that Manohar Lal Narang and Ramlal Narang had engaged Balkishan Rawal and Nathubai Rawal of Delhi to make three sets of fakes and had exported the genuine pillars to London.
This resulted in the registering of F.I.R. RC 4/76 CIU(A)/SPE by the Superintendent of Police, CIV (Antiquities SPE/CBI, New Delhi) against Manohar Lal Narang and others for alleged offences under Section 120B, read with Section 411 I.P.C. and Section 25 (1) of the .
An application under section 306 Cr.
P.C. filed by N. N. Malik on 26 6 1976 before the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, New Delhi with reference to this F.I.R. RC 4/76, was accepted on 3 7 1976 and Malik was granted pardon, after confessional statement was recorded.
On 19 7 1976 a charge sheet was filed (RC 4 of 1976) before the same Court for offences under Sections 120B, I.P.C. read with Section 420, 411 and 406 I.P.C. and Section 25 of the .
The case was transferred to the Court of Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.
On 20 7 1976 the Magistrate issued process for the appearance of the accused including the three Narang brothers out of whom the appellant in Crl.
Appeal 373 of 1978 was already under detention under MISA and COFEPOSA.
The other two who were in London were extradited and brought 924 to India on 27 7 1977.
An application filed by Ramlal Narang in March 1977 immediately after his release from detention, to drop the proceedings against him, to cancel the extradition warrants against his two brothers and to discharge all the accused on the ground of illegality of the Delhi case in view of the fact that a case on the same facts was already pending in the Ambala Court failed.
Thereafter two applications filed by the three Narang brothers on 21 6 1977 in the Delhi High Court under Section 482 Crl.
P.C. once again challenging the legality of the proceedings arising out of charge sheet RC4 of 1974 were admitted on 22 6 1977, but dismissed on 10 1 1978.
During the pendency of these two appeals Malik died sometime during May 1977 and Mehra was made a co accused in the Delhi case on 1 8 1977 in view of the withdrawal of the Ambala case on 16 5 1977.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The police have the statutory right and duty to 'register ' every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence.
The police also have the statutory right and duty to investigate the facts and circmstances of the case where the commission of a cognizable offence was suspected and to submit the report of such investigation to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report.
These statutory rights and duties of the police were not circumscribed by any power of superintendence or interference in the Magistrate; nor was any sanction required from a Magistrate to empower the police to investigate into a cognizable offence.
[937 F H] (a) The scheme of the 1898 Code of Criminal Procedure was that the First Information Report was followed by investigation, the investigation led to the submission of a report to the Magistrate, the Magistrate took cognizance of the offence on receipt of the police report and finally, the Magistrate taking cognizance issued process to the accused.
As such ordinarily the right and duty of the police would end with the submission of a report under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code upon receipt of which it was up to the Magistrate to take or not to take cognizance of the offence.
[937 E F, 938 F] (b) There was no provision in the 1898 Code prescribing the procedure to be followed by the police, where after the submission of a report under Section 173(1) Criminal Procedure Code and after the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence, fresh facts came to light which required further investigation.
Similarly, there was no express provision prohibiting the police from launching upon an investigation into the fresh facts coming to light after the submission of the report under Section 173(1) or after the Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence.
Therefore further investigation was permissible and was not altogether ruled out merely because cognizance of the case has been taken by the Court; defective investigation coming to light during the course of a trial could also be cured by a further investigation, if circumstances permitted it.
[938 F H, 941 C D] King Emperor vs Khwaja Wazir Ahmed, 71 Indian Appeals, PC 203: followed.
Diwakar Singh vs A. Ramamurthy Naidu, AIR 1919 Madras 751.
In re.
Palaniswami Goundan, AIR 1946 Madras 502; Mohd. Niwaj vs The Crown, Lahore; Prosecuting Inspector vs Minaketan 925 Monato, AIR 1952 Orissa 350; Ramashankar vs State of U.P., AIR 1956 All.
525; In re.
State of Kerala vs State Prosecutor, p. 1288 (Kerala) D.B.; approved.
H. N. Rishbud vs State of Delhi, ; ; Tara Singh vs State ; referred to.
(a) Neither Section 173 nor section 190 lead to the conclusion that the power of the police to further investigate was exhausted by the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence.
Practice, convenience and preponderance of authority, permitted repeated investigations and discovery of fresh facts.
Notwithstanding that a Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence upon a police report submitted under Section 173 of the 1898 Code, the right of the police to further investigate was not exhausted and the police could exercise such right as often as necessary when fresh information came to light.
Where the police desired to make a further investigation, the police could express their regard and respect for the Court by seeking its formal permission to make further investigation.
[943 G H, 944 A] (b) When it comes to the notice of the investigating agency that a person already an accused of an offence has a good alibi or where the involvement of persons who are not already accused comes to the notice of the investigating agency, the investigating agency cannot keep quiet and refuse to investigate the fresh information.
It is their duty to investigate and submit a report to the Magistrate upon the innocence or involvement of the persons concerned.
In either case, it is for the Magistrate to decide upon his future course of action depending upon the stage at which the case is before him.
If he has already taken cognizance of the offence, but has not proceeded with the enquiry or trial, he may direct the issue of process to persons freshly discovered to be involved and deal with all the accused in a single enquiry or trial.
If the case of which he has previously taken cognizance has already proceeded to some extent, he may take fresh cognizance of the offence disclosed against the newly involved accused and proceed with the case as a separate case.
What action a Magistrate is to take in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure in such situations is a matter best left to the discretion of the Magistrate.
A further investigation by the police cannot be considered as trenching upon the proceedings before the Court because whatever the police may do, the final discretion in regard to further action is with the Magistrate.
That the final word is with the Magistrate is sufficient safeguard against any excessive use or abuse of the power of the police to make further investigation.
[942 F H, 943 A D] Ram Gopal Neotia vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1969 Cal.
316 Hanuman and Anr.
vs Raj.
AIR ; State vs Mehr Singh and Ors., ILR 2 Cal.
LJ 970; over ruled.
(c) Where the report of the second investigation is submitted to a Magistrate other than the Magistrate who has already taken cognizance of the first case, it is up to the prosecuting agency or the accused concerned to take necessary action by moving the appropriate superior Court to have the two cases tried together.
The Magistrate themselves may take action suo motu.
[944 B] 926 In the instant case; the prosecution did not act with any oblique motive or out of any malice by submitting a charge sheet to the Delhi Court and by withdrawing the case in the Ambala Court.
In the charge sheet filed in the Delhi Court, it was expressly mentioned that a case had been filed in the Delhi Court against Mehra and others and, therefore, it was not necessary to prosecute Mehra in the Ambala Court.
The Court granted its permission for the withdrawal of the case.
[944 C E] 3.
Where the conspiracy discovered later is found to cover a much larger canvas with broader ramifications, it cannot be equated with the earlier conspiracy which covered a smaller field of narrower dimentions.
[936 B C] In the present case, (a) the conspiracies which are the subject matter of the two cases cannot be said to be identical though the conspiracy which is the subject matter of the first case, may perhaps be said to have turned out to be part of the conspiracy which is the subject matter of the second case.
When investigation commenced in First Information Report No. RC4 of 1976, apart from the circumstance that the property involved was the same, the link between the conspiracy to cheat and to misappropriate and the conspiracy to dispose of the stolen property was not known.
[936 C D] (b) A comparison of the two First Information Report coupled with the several facts and circumstances show that the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the second case could not be said to be identical with the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the first case.
The conspirators were different.
Malik and Mehra alone were stated to be the conspirators in the first case, while the three Narang brothers were alleged to be the principal conspirators in the second case.
The objects of the two conspiracies were different.
The alleged object of the first conspiracy was to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court by cheating and to misappropriate them.
The alleged object of the second conspiracy was the disposal of the stolen property by exporting the pillars to London.
The offences alleged in the first case were Section 120B read with Section 420 and 406 Indian Penal Code while the offences alleged in the second case were section 120B read with section 411 IPC and Section 25 of the .
[935 D F] (c) No fault could be found with the police for registering a first information Report against the Narang brothers for the offence of conspiracy to commit an offence under section 411 Indian Penal Code.
In the course of the investigation into this offence, it transpired that the Narang brothers were also parties to the original conspiracy to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court by cheating Facts came to light which indicated that the conspiracy which was the subject matter of the case pending in the Ambala Court was but part of a larger conspiracy.
The fresh facts which came to light resulted in the filing of the second charge sheet.
[935 C D] (d) Neither at the time when the First Information Report pertaining to the Ambala Case was registered nor at the time when the Charge sheet was filed in the Ambala Court, were the Narang brothers known to be in the picture.
The investigating agency was not also aware of what Malik and Mehra had done with the pillars after they had obtained possession of the pillars from the Court and substituted and returned fake pillars to the Court.
The First Information Report and the charge sheet were concerned primarily with the 927 offences of conspiracy to cheat and to misappropriate committed by Malik and Mehra.
At that stage, the investigating agency was not aware of any conspiracy to send the pillars out of the country.
It was not known that Narang brothers were also parties to the conspiracy to obtain possession of the pillars from the Court.
It was much later, that the pillars surfaced in London were discovered to be in the constructive possession of Narang brothers.
Even then, the precise connection between Malik and Mehra on the one side and Narang brothers on the other was not known.
All that was known was that the pillars which were stolen property within the definition of the expression in Section 410 Indian Penal Code were found to be in the possession of Narang brothers in London.
On the discovery of the genuine pillars in the possession of Narang brothers, without anything further to connect Narang brothers with Malik and Mehra, the police had no option but to register a case under Section 411 Indian Penal Code against Narang brothers.
That was what was done.
[934 F H, 935 A B] Observation: In the interests of the independence of the magistracy and the judiciary, in the interests of the purity of the administration of criminal justice and in the interests of the comity of the various agencies and institutions entrusted with different stages of such administration, it would ordinarily be desirable that the police should inform the Court and seek formal permission to make further investigation when fresh facts come to light.
[943 E]
