The petitioner was detained with effect from October 24, 1977 by an order passed by the Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra under Section 3(1) of COFEPOSA.
The Advisory Board reported on 23 12 77 that there was sufficient cause for the detention but the Government did not pass any order confirming the detention within three months from the date of detention.
The petitioner assailed it as violative of article 22(4) of the Constitution.
Allowing the petition the Court.
HELD : 1.
since no order of confirmation of the detention was made under clause (f) of Section 8 within three months of the date of detention by the appropriate Government, further detention of the petitioner after the expiry of that period is without the authority of law.
[822 C] 2.The law does not lend its authority to the continuance of the detention even for a day more than the initial period of three months if the Government does not take a decision for that purpose on the report of the Advisory Board within three months of the commencement of the detention.
[822 A B] 3.The expression "may confirm" in clause (f) of Section 8 of COFEPOSA, is significant.
It imports a discretion.
Even where the Advisory Board makes a report that in its opinion, there is sufficient cause for the detention of the detenu concerned, the Government may not confirm the detention order.
Read in the light of Article 22(4) of the Constitution and the context of the words "continue the detention", the expression definitely leads to the conclusion that the sine qua non for continuing the detention made beyond the period of three months.
is the confirmation of the detention order by the appropriate Government.
Conversely, non confirmation of the initial order by the appropriate Government before the expiry of the period of three months detention, shall automatically result in revocation and termination of the legal authority for its continuance.
This position is further clear from the language of Section 10, which provides : "The maximum period for which any person may be detained in pursuance of any detention order. which has been confirmed under clause (f) of Section 8, shall be one year from the date of detention.
" The crucial words in the Section are : "which has been confirmed under clause (f) of Section 8." They underscore the same policy which underlies the constitu tional mandate in Article 22(4).
These words put it beyond doubt that if the initial order of detention is not confirmed by the appropriate Government within three months of the date of the detention, the detention after the expiry of that period ipso facto becomes unauthorised and illegal.
[821 C F] Ujjal Mandal vs State of West Bengal, ; reiterated; Shibapada Mukherjee vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1972 SC 1356, Deb Sadhan Roy vs State of West Bengal, ; Micki Khan etc.
vs The State of West Bengal.
AIR 1972 SC 2262; and Satyadeo Parshad Gupta vs State of Bihar, ; referred to. 818
