The respondent was appointed as a Sub Inspector of police in a temporary post in 1955.
He was discharged from service on July 13, 1957.
A Writ Petition filed by him in the Allahabad High Court was allowed on August 4, 1959 and consequently he was re instated in service on December 15, 1959.
Thereafter, on January 21, 1960 his services were terminated on the ground that they were no longer required by the State.
A suit for declaration that the said order of termination was null and void was decreed in his favour by the trial court which was affirmed in appeal and also by the High Court in second appeal.
Allowing the State appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The considerations which prevailed with the High Court in reaching its findings on the application of Article 311(2) of the Constitution and the bona fides of the superior authority in making the impugned order of termination simpliciter are not warranted in law.
[1130D] 2.
The order terminating the services was order of termination simpliciter passed in accordance with the rules applicable to temporary Government servants.
After the original order of discharge was quashed by the High Court, the respondent was reinstated, allowed increment in pay and one month 's salary in lieu of notice under the 'general rules for termination of services of temporary government servants was also given.
[1128F G] 3.
It was open to the superior authority to terminate the respondent 's services on the ground on which it did so.
And the evidence disclosed no personal motive had influenced the order or that it was passed by way of punishment.
A departmental enquiry is not required under the law.
Instead of instituting disciplinary proceedings against the government servant, the suitability for retention in service could be decided.
[1128H, 1129A, E] State of U.P.v.
Ram Chandra Trivedi; , ; Champaklal Chimanlal Shah vs The Union of India, , Jagdish Mitter vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 449 and State of Punjab & Anr.
vs Shri Sukh Raj Bahadur, ; ; referred to.
Union of India & Ors.
vs R. section Dhaba, , State of Bihar & Ors.
vs Shiva Bhikshuk Mishra and R. section Sial vs The State of U.P. and Ors., ; applied.
The State of Bihar vs Gopi Kishore Prasad, A.I.R. 1960 SC 689 and Madan Gopal vs The State of Punjab, [1963] 3 SCR 716; distinguished. 1127
