The appellant entered into a contract with the respondent for the execution of a work the essential term of which was that the contract should be completed in 12 months from the commencement of the work.
On the ground that the appellant had not completed the work within the stipulated time the respondent rescinded the contract.
In his suit for damages for illegal and wrongful recision of the contract the appellant claimed that the date for commencement of the work was merely nominal and that in any case time was not of the essence of the contract.
The appellant also alleged that on account of several difficulties such as excessive rains in the area, lack of proper road and means of approach to the site, rejection of materials on improper grounds by the Government officers, completion of the work was delayed, extension of time was wrongfully refused by the officers of the Government, and that none of these factors had been taken into account by the Government while refusing to give extension of time, and in ultimately rescinding the contract.
Holding that time was not of the essence of the contract the trial Court decreed the suit, but disallowed certain claims of the appellant.
On appeal by both sides the High Court, without deciding the question whether time was of the essence of the contract, held that the recision of the contract was not arbitrary and unreasonable or unjustified.
On further appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (i) the High Court was in error in not deciding the main question whether or not time was essence of the contract; and (ii) it was not the appellant 's case that the recision was mala fide and that, therefore, the High Court erred in considering that question.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The question whether or not time was of the essence of the contract would essentially be a question of the intention of the parties to be gathered from the terms of the contract.
Even where the parties have expressly provided that time is of the essence of the contract such stipulation would have to be read alongwith other provisions of the contract and such other provisions may, on construction of the contract, exclude the inference that the completion of the work by a particular date was intended to be fundamental.
For instance if the contract were to include clauses providing 1148 for extension of time in certain contingencies or for payment of fine or penalty for every day or week the work undertaken remains unfinished on the expiry of the time provided in the contract such clause would be construed as rendering ineffective the express provision relating to the time being of the essence of the contract.
[1155A B] Halsbury 's Laws of England, Vol.
4 p. 1174 referred to.
(i) In the instant case, having regard to the terms of the contract particularly the clauses pertaining to the imposition of penalty and extension of time, time was never intended by the parties to be of the essence of the contract.
The letter by which the contract was rescinded clearly waived the stipulation of 12 months ' period, the contractor having been allowed to do some more work after the expiry of the period.
[1157B] (ii) The approach adopted by the respondent and upheld by the High Court was not correct.
Long before the expiry of the period of 12 months the appellant had requested for extention of the period of completion.
Even if the grounds made out by the appellant were not agreeable to the Superintending Engineer some reasonable time making it the essence of the contract ought to have been granted.
Instead of making time of the essence at some stage or the other, the respondent rescinded the contract which was clearly illegal and wrongful.
[1158C] (iii) It was never the case of the appellant that the recision of the contract was mala fide.
The various reasons given by the appellant for delay in executing the work were put forward merely for showing that the refusal to extend time by the Superintending Engineer was unreasonable or unjustified.
The question was not whether the recision of the contract was unreasonable and, therefore, unjustified but whether the recision was wrongful and illegal.
If time was not of the essence or if the stipulation as to the time fixed for completion had, by reason of the waiver, ceased to be applicable then the only course open to the respondent was to fix some time making it the essence and if within the time so fixed the appellant had failed to complete the work, the respondent could have rescinded the contract.
[1157D G]
