The Interest Act, 1839 (32 of 1839) empowers the Court to allow interest to the plaintiff if the amount claimed is a sum certain which is payable at a certain time by virtue of a written instrument at la rate not exceeding the current rate of interest from the time when such amounts were payable and if the amount is payable otherwise, then from the time when the demand of payment shall have been made in writing.
As the amounts due in respect of a building works contract remained unpaid despite demands and notices, the respondent (plaintiff) filed a suit for its recovery together with interest.
Decreeing the suit, the trial court award ed interest at 4 1/2 per cent.
But in appeal, the High Court enhanced the rate of interest pendente life from 4 1/2 per cent to 6 per cent.
In the further appeal to this Court it was contended that the Interest Act 1839, was not applicable as no sum certain was payable and there was no demand for payment of interest.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The claim was for a "sum certain" within the meaning of the Act.
[9F] The claim was ascertainable on a calculation made in terms of the agreement and was therefore a sum certain within the meaning of the Act.
It is "a sum of money which is now playable or will become payable in the future by reason of a present obligation" and in any case it was not for the payment of any unliquidated damages or for the payment of any amount arising out of an inchoate obligation.
[9E F] 2.
The respondent issued two notices.
In the second notice a definite claim of interest had been made by them.
The term "loss by way of interest" mentioned in the first notice suggested that what was being claimed was compensation for the damages suffered by them.
The notice should not be construed literally or technically.
The mention of loss was only explanatory.
Without any manner of doubt the respondents were claiming interest as such.
[9G 10D] 3.
Nor again can it be said that there was no claim for future interest.
A claim for past interest would necessarily imply a claim for future interest.
[10E] 7 Kuppusami Pillai vs Madras Electric Tramway Co. Ltd., ILR ; Sita Ram & Ors.
vs Mrs. section Sullivan, [1901] 2 Punjab Law Reporter 464; referred to.
Mahabir Prashad Rungta vs Durga Datt, ; and Union of India vs A. L. Rallia Ram, ; ; distinguished.
Having regard to the various continuous defaults committed by the appellant and its officers the High court was justified in enhancing the rate of interest to 6 per cent.
