Meriappa Gounder respondent No. 1 in C.A. 466/69 and appellant 1 in C.A. 2375/69 filed a suit on August 23, 1950 in the District Court, Trichur, for specific performance of an agreement dated May 22, 1950 made by one Soliappa Chettiar.
The said Soliappa Chettiar pleaded inability to perform the contract in view of the refusal of one Neelakanta Iyer a lessee of the factory to give up possession.
Pending the suit Late Kochivareed, husband of the appellant in C.A. 466/69 obtained an assignment of the lease from Neelakanta Iyer on March 5, 1951.
On March 8, 1951 Soliappa Chettiar executed a sale deed of the suit property in favour of one George Thatil, a nephew of Kochivareed.
In the course of the proceedings the trial court appointed a Receiver to manage the suit property.
On March 21, 1951, Late Kochivareed obtained a lease, of the suit property at a rent of Rs. 15,000/ for a period of one year which was renewed for another year from the Receiver and a sum of Rs. 30,000/ SO collected as rent for two years was deposited in the Court by the Receiver.
The District Court on August 28, 1952 decreed the suit for specific performance and mesne profits at a reduced rate of Rs. 15,000/ per annum, instead of at Rs. 30,000/ per annum as claimed.
Against the decree two appeals were filed in the High Court by Kochivareed and George Thatil.
The High Court allowed the appeals and dismissed the suit by its judgment dated March 21, 1953.
The appeal filed by Meriappa Gounder (CA 129/56) was allowed by this Court as per its judgment and decree dated April 22, 1958.
On the question of the liability of the mesne profits, the present appeals arose out of interpretation of the direction (e) of this Court 's decree dated April 22, 1958.
Allowing the appeals by certificate in part the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Mesne profits being in the nature of damages, no invariable rule governing their award and assessment in every case can be laid down and the "Court may mould it according to the justice of the case".
Even so one broad basic principle governing the liability for mesne profits is discernible 59 from section 2(12) of the Code of Civil Procedure which defines 'mesne profits ' to mean 'those profits which the person in wrongful possession of property actually received or might with ordinary deligence have received therefrom together with interest on such profits, but shall not include profits due to improvements made by the person in wrongful possession." [68G H, 69A] Wrongful possession of the defendant is the very essence of a claim for mesne profits and the very foundation of the defandant 's liability therefor, Generally, the person in wrongful possession and enjoyment of the immovable property is liable for mesne profits.
But, where the plaintiff 's dispossession, or his being kept out of possession can be regarded as a joint or concreted act of several persons, each of them who participants in the Commission of that act would be liable for mesne profits even though he was not in actual possession and the profits were received not by him but by some of his confederates.
Possession through another, such as a tenant may be sufficient to create liability for mesne profits, if such possession is wrongful.
[69A C and G] 2.
In such a case, where the claim for mesne profits is against several tresoassers who had combined to Keep the plaintiff out of possession, it Is open to the Court to adopt either of the two courses.
It may by its decree hold all such trespassers jointly and severally liable for mesne profits leaving them to have their respective rights adjusted in a separate suit for contribution; or it may, if there is proper material before it ascertain and apportion the liability of each of them on a proper application made by the defendant during the same proceedings.
[69C D] 3.
A decree under Order XX Rule 12 of C.P.C., directing enquiry into mesne profits, howsoever expressed must be construed to be a decree directing the enquiry in conformity with the requirements of Rule 12(1)(c), 80 that the decreeholder is not entitled to mesne profits for a period (commencing from the date of the institution of the suit) extending beyond three years from the date of the preliminary decree.
[69E Fl Chitturi Subhanna vs Kudappa Subbanna, ; ; referred to.
The words "whichever event first occurs" in sub clause (c)(iii) of clause I of Rule 12 of Order XX Civil Procedure Code imply that the maximum period for which future mesne profits can be awarded is three years from the date of the decree for possession and mesne profits, finally passed.
The period of three years is to be computed from the date of decree of this Court i.e. from April 22, 1958 and it will expire on the date on which possession was delivered or relinquished by the defendant in favour of the decreeholder pursuant to that decree.
In other words, the decree mentioned in sub clause (iii) of clause (c) would be the appellate decree dated April 22, 1958 of this Court.
The period of three years mentioned in the said subclause is, therefore, to be reckoned from April 22, 1958.
[73G H, 74A B] 5.
Section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure, in terms, says that for the purpose of the restitution, the Court may make any orders, including orders for the payment of interest, damages compensation and mesne profits which are properly consequential on variation or reversal of the decree.
[77A B] There is nothing in the decree, dated April 22, 1958 of this Court which expressly or by implication, prohibits the payment of interest on the sum of 60 Rs. 30,000/ withdrawn by defendant 3 by way of restitution.
The trial court had rightly allowed interest.
[77B C] 6.
The decree dated April 22, 1958 of this Court was a composite decree, partly final, and party preliminary.
It was final in so far as it granted the reliefs of specific performance and possession on deposit of the price by the Plaintiff.
It was preliminary in as much as it directed an inquiry with regard to the assessment of mesne profits and as to who out of the defendants was/were liable for payment of those mesne profits.
But? it laid down in no uncertain terms that only such of the defendants would be liable for mesne profits "as may have been in possession of the property".
This direction in the decree means that only the defendant or defendants found in actual possession and enjoyment of the property would be liable for mesne profits.
[70A C] In the instant case: (a) The third defendant was in sole, actual possession and control of the suit property from March 3, 1951, when he obtained the alleged assignment of lease in his favour from Neelakanta Iyer.
In terms of the decree of this Court, therefore defendant 3 alone is liable for mesne profits in respect of the period he was in possession (excepting the period during which the property was under the management of the Court Receiver).
[71E F] (b) The contention that the possession of defendant 2 was the legal possession of an owner while that of defendant 3 was derivative possession of a lessee or licensee under the former is not correct, since at no stage, in the Courts below defendant 3 took up the position that he was in derivative possession of the property under defendant 2.
Nor was there even a whisper in the pleadings that defendant 2 and defendant 3 were joint tortfeasors and therefore jointly and severally liable for mesne profits.
[69H, 70C, G] (c) There is nothing in the decree of this Court dated April 22 1958, indicating that the amount deposited by the plaintiff towards the price should have been sel off against the liability of defendant 3 for mesne profits.
On the contrary, it allowed deduction of the amounts found due against defendant 1 and defendant 2 from the deposit of Rs. 85.000/ to be made by the plaintiff towards the price, and further directed that after such deduction, the balance of such deposit made by the plaintiff, if any, shall be paid to the third respondent (defendant 2) who is the assignee of the second respondent (defendant 1) pendente lite.
[71F H] (d) The plaintiff was not bound to suffer a set off in favour of defendant 3, merely because defendant 2 or his assignee withdrew the price deposited by the plaintiff without furnishing any security for its refund or adjustment towards the liability of defendant 3, there being no evidence whatever, on record to show that such withdrawal was the result of any collusion or conspiracy between the plaintiff and defendant 2 and defendant 3.
Even assuming that both defendants 2 and 3 were liable for mesne profits jointly and severally, then also, the plaintiff could at his option.
recover the whole of the amount of mesne profits from either of them; and how such inter se liability of the defendants was to be adjusted or apportioned was a matter between the defendants only.
[72A C] (e) Defendant 3 entered into possession of suit property under a l assignment of sham lease from Neelakanta Iyer on March 5, 1951 during the 61 pendency of the plaintiffs suit, which was instituted on August 25, 1950.
The A plaintiff had deposited Rs. 50,000/ sometimes after the presentation of the plaint.
Under the agreement of the sale, dated May 22, 1950 made by defendant 1 in favour of the plaintiff, the total sale considerations was fixed @ Rs. 90,003/ .
Out of it Rs 5,003/ had been paid to defendant I on the very date of the agreement.
It was further stipulated that out of the balance, Rs. 50,000/ would be paid by the plaintiff purchaser at the time of the registration of the sale deed which was to be executed and registered on or before July 15, 1950.
It was further stipulated that on payment of the further sum of Rs. 50,000/ the plaintiff would be entitled to be put in possession of the suit property.
Thus when defendant 3 entered into possession, first under the garb of an assignee of sham lease from Neelkanta Iyer, and then further purchased the property with his on funds in favour of defendant 2 pendente lite, he was fully conscious that he was purchasing a litigation.
His possession was therefore wrongful qua the plaintiff from its inception [72E H] (f) Disallowance of the claim for deduction for interest on the deposit of Rs. 50,000 which the plaintiff had withdrawn on August 19, 1953 and had redeposited on 9 2 1959 is incorrect.
The defendant is entitled to interest @ 6% per annum for the said period, after deduction the interest for the period during which the property was under the management of the Receiver.
[74D E] (g) The plaintiff`s claim for mesne profits @ the rate of Rs. 25,000/ has correctly been negatived.
Since the plaintiff did not object to the lease granted by the Receiver to defendant 3 on an annual rental of Rs. 15,000/ and since he did not produce any other reliable evidence, the High Court was not wrong in holding that the mesne profits should be on the basis of this rental value of Rs. 15,000/ [76A C] (h) The plaintiff, in view of the long drawn out litigation is entitled to interest @ 6% per annum upto March 29, 1959.
[76E F]
