The M. P. Prathmik Middle School Tatha Madhyamik` Shiksha (Pathya Pusthakon Sambandhi Vyavastha) Adhiniyam 1973 empowered the State Government to prescribe text books according to syllabus laid down and to undertake the preparation, printing and distribution of text books.
Section 2(d) of the Act defines "syllabi" as a document containing courses of instructions for each standard of primary, middle school and secondary education.
Section 3 empowers the State Government, in the case of primary and middle school education, and the Board in the dace of secondary education, to lay down the syllabi and publish the same.
Section 4 lakes the State Government the competent authority to prescribe the text books in accordance with the syllabus laid down under section 3.
Section 5 empowers the State Government to undertake the preparation, printing and distribution of text books itself or cause them to be done through such agency as it deems fit and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.
The appellant (State Government) exercised its power under section 5 of the Act and produced the necessary text book for "Rapid Reading" an item in the syllabus for secondary schools and distributed it among the students in many schools.
Until then, the books of the respondent, 2 private publisher were in use.
The respondent challenged the action of the State Government in the High Court on the ground that the State Government had not given consideration to the availability of text books in terms of the "syllabi" with private publishers as required by section 5 of the Act, before it produced and distributed the text books compiled by itself among the students of the secondary schools.
The High Court upheld the challenge and held that the statutory exercise envisaged under the Act had not been carried out before preparing and distributing the Government text books.
In the State Government 's appeal to this Court it was contended that (I) as section 2(d) envisages syllabus as a document containing courses of instruction, a broad outline, a demarcation if the topic would be sufficient compliance and that there need not be particularisation of details, and (2) 'publication ' of the syllabus, essential under section 3 means communication by the Board to the Government or the concerned authorities.
On behalf of the respondent it was submitted that the mere mention of topics in bare outline, as in the instant case did not constitute 'syllabi ' as defined in section 2(d) and that to fulfil, 4 196SCI/79 42 the statutory requisites a syllabus for a subject must concretise and constellate courses of instruction, short of which it is no syllabus in the eye of law.
Allowing the appeal in part, ^ HELD: 1.
The syllabus for 'Rapid Reading ', suffers invalidation under section 3 because it has not been published.
The publication must precede the Prescription of text books under section 4 or their preparation under section 5.
[56C] In the instant case the syllabus was published only on June 30, 1978 while the text books were prescribed in October, 1977.
So sections 3 and 4 have been breached and a fresh decision by Government prescribing text books for 'Rapid Reading ' must be taken.
[56D] 2.
The State Government shall take a fresh decision under sections 4 and 5 read Together.
If publishers of text books or pro bono publico representationists communicate relevant matters bearing on the selection of text books, their merits will be examined departmentally.
If, thereafter, Government considers it proper to take over the text books business under section 5 it is free to do so.
The private sector has no 'right ' and Government 's jurisdiction is wide, although the State need not be allergic to private publishers if books of excellence, inexpensive and well designed, are readily available.
[56G H] 3.
The laying down of the syllabus is a condition precedent to the prescription of text books, because the courses of instruction follow upon and should be in conformity with the syllabus and text books are in implementation of the courses of instruction.
[50B] 4.
To fulfil the statutory requisites, a syllabus for a subject must concretise and constellate courses of instruction, short of which it is no syllabus in the eye of law.
[51D] 5.
No private publisher has a right under section 4 that his text book shall be prescribed or necessarily considered by Government.
No such right as is claimed by the respondent publisher has, therefore, been violated by the State Government.
[54C] 6.
The syllabus for 'Rapid Reading ' is not bad as falling short of definitional needs, although it is desirable for the Board to be more expressive i when laying it down.
Wilful vagueness in syllabi will invite an adverse verdict.
[56A] 7.
A syllabus may helpfully give general features but may not cease to be so solely because only an outline is silhouetted. 'Courses of Instruction ' in section 2(d) simply means the rubric for teaching, not more.
It must be a syllabus of courses and so the courses must be spelt with relevancy, even though with brevity.
[51G, 52A] 8.
Functionally the syllabus must tell the publisher and pundits in the concerned field sufficient to enable them to help Government under section 4 to choose text books.
If this minimum is not complied with the court will use the lancet and issue an appropriate writ.
[52C D] 9.
The expression "syllabi" must be so interpreted as to fulfil the purpose of sections 3 and 4 which means there must be sufficient information for those concerned to know generally what courses of instruction are broadly covered 43 under the heading mentioned, so that they may offer text books for such A courses.
If there is total failure here the elements of syllabi may well be held to be non existent, even though experts might claim otherwise.
The law is what the Judges interpret the statute to be, not what the experts in their monopoly of wisdom assert it to be.
[52E F] 10. 'Publication ' means more than mere communication to concerned officials or departments.
The purpose of section 3 animates the meaning of the expression 'publish '. 'Publication is "the act of publishing anything; offering it to public notice, or rendering it accessible to public scrutiny. an advising of the public; a making known of something to them for a purpose." [52H, 53A B] 11.
The legislative objective is to ensure that when the Board lays down the 'syllabi ' it must publish 'the same ' so that when the stage of prescribing text books according to such syllabi arrives, both the publishers and the Stab Government and even the educationists among the public may have some precise conception about the relevant syllabi to enable Government to decide upon suitable text books from the private market or compiled under section S by the State Government.
[53C] 12.
"Publication" to the educational world is the connotation of the expression.
Even the student and the teaching community may have to know what the relevant syllabus for a subject is, which means wider publicity than minimal communication to the departmental officialdom.[53D] Only when they come to know about the syllabi prescribed representatives in the educational field or in the public sector may be able to tell the State Government what type of text books are available, what kind of books will make for excellence in teaching and what manner of material will promote the interests of the students in the subjects of study [53H 54A] 13.
Government has plenary power under section 5 to produce its own text books in tune with the syllabi prescribed under section 3.
No private publisher can quarrel with it on the ground that his profit is affected or that the State sector acquires a monopoly in text book production.
The legislature has empowered the State to do so and there is no vice of unconstitutionality whatever.
The caveat built into section S by the legislature is that it authorises Government to enter the text book field as a monopolist "if it considers so to do." [54E F] 14.
Nationalisation of the activity of preparation, printing or distribution of text books is a serious step and resort to that measure calls for a policy judgment.
[54G] 15.
The Court should not sit in judgment over Government decisions in these matters save in exceptional cases.
The law is complied with if Government has, before undertaking action under section 5, bestowed consideration on matters of relevance which may vary from time to time and from subject to subject.
Government may like to avoid expenditure from the public exchequer if books, inexpensive and qualitatively acceptable, are easily available.
The decision is that of the Government and it has a wide discretion.
Publishers have no right to complain, and if the mind of the Government has been relevantly applied to the subject, courts must keep their hands off.
[55B C] Naraindas Indutkhya vs State of M.P. & Ors., ; ; Black 's Legal Dictionary, p. 1386, referred to. 44
