Under Section 56(1)(c) of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolition and conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948, "where, after an estate is notified, a dispute arises as to (a) whether any rent due from a ryot for any fasli year is in arrear or (b) what amount of rent is in arrear or (c) who the lawful ryot in respect of any holding is, the dispute shall be decided by the Settlement Officer".
Section 56(2) of the Act provides for an appeal to the Estates Abolition Tribunal against the decision of the Settlement Officer whose decision was final and not to be questioned in any court of law.
The petition filed before the Tahsildar, Pathapatnam under section 13 of the Andhra Tenancy Act by the appellant, for the eviction of the respondents on the ground of default in payment of rent was dismissed on the ground, among others that the respondents had occupancy rights in the land.
The appeal before the Revenue Divisional Officer Tekkali was dismissed on the ground that the petition for eviction was not maintainable since the question as to who was the lawful ryot in respect of any holding in an estate had to be decided by the Settlement Officer under Section 56(1)(c) of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act and that the decision of such question was within the exclusive competence of the Settlement Officer.
In the revision petition filed before it under article 227 of the Constitution, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh agreed with the appellate order.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Interpretation of a statute contextual or otherwise must further and not frustrate the object of the statute.
[207 D] The object of the Andhra Pradesh (Andhra Area) Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 is to protect ryots and not to leave them in wilderness.
When the Act provides a machinery in Section 56(1)(c) to discover who the lawful ryot of a holding was, it is not for the Court to denude the Act of all meaning by confining the provisions to the bounds of Section 55 and 56(1) (a) and (b) on the ground of "contextual interpretation".
[207 C D] 202 2.
The scope of section 56(1)(c) cannot be restricted to mean that it was controlled by Section 55 and 56(1)(a) and (b) and that an enquiry into the question as to who was the lawful ryot of a holding under that section was permissible only for the purpose of identifying the person liable to pay the arrear of rent which had accrued in respect of the holding before the taking over of the estate.[204 E G] It would indeed be anomalous and ludicrous and reduce the Act to an oddity, if the Act avowedly aimed at reform by the conferment of ryotwary pattas on ryots and the abolition of intermediaries is to be held not to contain any provision for the determination of the vital question as to who was the lawful ryot of a holding.
Section 56(1)(c) is indeed such a provision.
A contextual interpretation may not be quite appropriate in view of the fact that Sections 55 and 56(1)(a) and (b) occur under the heading 'Miscellaneous '.
Any other interpretation would lead to conflict of jurisdiction and the implementation of the Act would be thrown into disarray.
A, B C] Munuswami Naidu (died) & Ors., vs R. Venkata Reddy and Ors., A.I.R. 1978 A.P. 200 (F.B.); approved.
The Andhra Pradesh Estates Abolition Act is a self contained Code in which a provision is also made for the adjudication of various types of disputes arising after an estate is notified by specially constituted Tribunals.
On general principles, the special Tribunals constituted by the Act must necessarily be held to have exclusive jurisdiction to decide disputes entrusted by the statute to them for their adjudication.
[204 D E] Appanna vs Sriramamurthy, ; approved.
