(Per majority Krishna Iyer and Desai, JJ.) ^ 1.
The only question before the Court is as to when and why shall capital punishment be pronounced on a murderer and why not in other cases, within the confines of the Code.
Urgency to the solution is obvious.
The overt ambivalence and covert conflict among judges concerning continued resort to the death sentence mirrors the uncertainties and conflicts of values in the community itself.
[89G & 90D] 2.
Section 302 of the IPC throws little light on when the court shall be the sentence of why the lesser penalty shall be preferred.
Since law reflects life, new meanings must permeate the Penal Code.
Deprivation of life under our system is too fundamental to be permitted except on the gravest ground and under the strictest scrutiny.
[90F: 94C D] 3.
To say that discretion of the Judge passing the sentence under section 302 IPC is guided by well recognised principles shifts the issue to what those recognised rules are.
The big margin of, subjectivism.
a preference for old precedents, theories of modern penology, behavioral emphasis or social antecedents, judicial hubris or human rights perspectives, reverence for outworn social philosophers this plurality of forces plays a part in swining the pendulum of sentencing justice erratically.
Until Parliament speaks, this Court cannot be silent.
[95; 97G] 4.
Executive commutation is no substitute for judicial justice, at best it is administrative policy and at worst pressure based partiality.
The criteria for clemency are often different [99C] 5.
In so far as section 302 IPC is concerned several attempts had been made to restrict or remove death penalty but never to enlarge its application.
Parliamentary pressure has been to cut down death penalty, although the section formally remains the same.
In the case of the Criminal Procedure Code the legislative development has shifted the punitive centre of gravity from life taking to life sentence.
In other words, the legislative trend seems to be while formerly the rule was to sentence to death a person who is convicted for murder, it is now to impose a lesser sentence for reasons to be recorded in writing.
Formerly, capital punishment was to be imposed unless special reasons could be found to justify the lesser sentence.
After 1955 courts were left equally free to award either sentence.
The 1973 Code has made an an mistakable shift in legislative emphasise under which life imprisonment for murder is the rule and capital sentence the exception for reasons to be stated.
[101D:104B C] 79 6.
Criminologists all the world over, however, argued that death has decisively lost the battle, and even in our Codes it has shrunk into a weak exception.
What are the exceptional cases ? Personal story of an actor in a shocking murder, if considered, may bring tears and soften the sentence.
He might have been a tortured child, an ill treated orphan, a jobless man or the convict 's poverty might be responsible for the crime.
[106G: 107B] 7.
In the post Constitution period section 302 IPC and section 345(3) of the Cr.
P.C. have to be read in the humane light of Parts III and IV illumined by the Preamble to the Constitution.
In other words the sacrifice of a life sentence is sanctioned only if otherwise public interest and social defence and public order would be smashed irretrievably.
Such extraordinary grounds alone constitutionally qualify as special reasons.
One stroke of murder hardly qualifies for this drastic requirement, however gruesome the killing may be.
The searching question the Judge must put to himself is what is so extra ordinari ly reasonable as to validate the wiping out of life itself and with it the great rights which inhere in him in the totality of facts.
[121F; 110E F] 8.
The retributive theory has had its day and is no longer valid.
Deterrence and reformation are the primary social goals which make deprivation of life and liberty reasonable as penal penacea.
[122C] 9.
The current ethos, with its strong emphasis on human rights and against death penalty, together with the ancient strains of culture spanning the period from Buddha to Gandhi must ethically inform the concept of social justice which is a paramount principle and cultural paradigm of our Constitution [l22C D] 10.
The personal and social, the motivational and physical circumstances, of the criminal are relevant factors in adjudging the penalty as clearly provided for under the Code of 1973.
So also the intense suffering already endured by prison torture or agonishing death penalty hanging over head consequent on the legal process.
[112D El 11.
Although the somewhat obsolescent Mc 'Naughten Rules codified in section 84 of the Penal Code alone are exculpatory, mental imbalances, neurotic upsets and psychic crises may be extenuatory and the sense of diminished responsibility may manifest itself in judicial clemency of commuted life incar ceration.
[l22F] 12.
The social justice which the Preamble and Part IV (article 38) highlight, as paramount in the governance of the country has a role to mould the sentence.
If the murderous operation of a die hard criminal jeopardizes social security in a persistent, planned and perilous fashion then his enjoyment of fundamental rights may be rightly annihilated.
One test for imposition of death sentence is to find out whether the murderer offers such a traumatic threat to the survival of social order.
Some of the principles are never hang unless society or its members may lose more lives by keeping alive an irredeemable convict.
Therefore social justice projected by article 38 colours the concept of reasonableness in article 19 and non arbitrariness in article 14.
This complex of articles validates death penalty in limited cases.
Maybe train dacoity and bank robbery bandits reaching menacing proportions, economic offenders profit killing in an intentional and organised way, are such categories in a Third World setting.
[112D: 114C: 112G] 80 13.
Survival of an orderly society without which the extinction of human rights is a probability compels the higher protection of the law to those officers who are charged with the fearless and risky discharge of hazardous duties in strategic situations.
Those officers of law, like policemen on duty or soldiers and the like have to perform their functions even in the face of threat of violence, sometimes in conditions of great handicap.
If they are killed by designers of murder and the law does not express its strong condemnation in extreme penalisation, justice to those called upon to defend justice may fail.
This facet of social justice also may in certain circumstances and at certain stages of societal life demand death sentence.
[123D E] 14.
Special reasons necessary for imposing death penalty must relate not to the crime as such but to the criminal.
[124E] Jagmohan Singh vs State of U.P., ; ; Ediga Annama vs State of A.P., ; ; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Admn.; , at 569 & 572; referred to.
Capital punishment in India; The Impact of the Ediga Anamma, by Prof. A. R. Blackshield (July 1977), referred to.
Rajendra Prasad 's case: The family to which the appellant and the deceased belonged were on inimical terms.
The appellant who was the son of one of the families murder ed the deceased.
After some years in the prison, he was released on Gandhi Jayanti day.
On return some minor incident ignited his latent feud and he stabbed to death a friend of the opposite family, he was sentenced to death.
The second murder is not to be confounded with the persistent potential for murderous attacks by the murderer.
This was not a menace to the social order but a specific family feud.
Here was not a youth of controllable violent propensities against the community but one whose paranoid preoccupation with a family quarrel goaded him to go the rival.
So long as the therapeutic processes are absent from prisons these institutions, for from being the healing hope of society, prove hardening schools to train desperate criminals.
Desperate criminal is a convenient description to brand a person.
Seldom is the other side of the story exposed to judicial view.
There is nothing on record to suggest that the appellant was beyond redemption; nothing on record hints at any such attempt inside the prison.
The appellant showed no incurable disposition to violent outbursts against his fellow men.
There is therefore, no special reason to hang him.
He should be awarded life imprisonment.
Kunjukunju 's case: The appellant, a married man with two children, developed illicit sex relations with a fresh girl.
In order to win her hand he murdered his wife and two children.
There is no evidence to show that he was a desperate hedonist or randy rapist.
He is not a social security risk altogether beyond salvage by therapeutic life sentence.
Death sentence is commuted to life imprisonment.
Dubey 's case: The appellant, a young man, aged about 20, stabbed to death three members of the family with whom his family had a quarrel over partition of 81 property.
It is illegal in this case to award capital sentence without considering correctional possibilities inside prison.
He was not a murderer born but made by the passion of family quarrel.
He could be saved for society with correctional techniques and directed into repentance.
A family feud, an altercation, a sudden passion, although attended with extraordinary cruelty, young and malleable age, reasonable prospect of reformation and absence of any conclusive circumstance that the assailant is a habitual murderer or given to chronic violence these catenate of circumstances bearing on the offender call fol the lesser sentence.
Sen l. (Dissenting) 1.
(a) It is constitutionally and legally impermissible for the Supreme Court while hearing an appeal by special leave under article 136 of the Constitution, on a question of sentence, to restructure section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or section 354, sub section
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, so as to limit the scope of the sentence of death provided for the offence of murder under section 302.
[131F G] (b) The question whether the scope of the death sentence should be curtailed or not, is one for the Parliament to decide.
The matter is essentially of political expediency and, as such, it is the concern of statesmen and, therefore, properly the domain of the legislature, not the judiciary.
[137E] (c) In an appeal confined to sentence under Article 136 of the Constitution, Supreme Court has not only the power but as well as the duty to interfere if it considers that the appellant should be sentenced 'differently ', that is, to set aside the sentence of death and substitute in its place the sentence of imprisonment for life, where it considers, taking the case as a whole, the sentence of death to be erroneous, excessive or indicative of an improper exercise of discretion; but at the same time, the Court must impose some limitations on itself in the exercise of this broad power.
In dealing with a sentence which has been made the subject of an appeal, the Court will interfere with a sentence only where it is 'erroneous in principle '.
The question, therefore, in each case is whether there is an 'error of principle ' volved.[134G Hl (d) The Court has the duty to see that on the particular facts and circumstances of each case the punishment fits the crime.
Mere compassionate sentiments of a humane feelings cannot be a sufficient reason for not confirming a sentence of death but altering it into a sentence of imprisonment for life.
In awarding sentence, the Court must, as it should, concern itself with justice, that is, with unswerving obedience to established law.
It is, and must be, also concerned with the probable effect of its sentence both on the general public and the culprit.
Judges are not concerned with the morales or ethics of a punishment.
It is but their duty to administer the law as it is and not to say what it should be.
It is not the intention of the Supreme Court to curtail the scope of the death sentence` under section 302 by a process of judicial construction inspired by the personal views [35B: 137D E] 2.
It is also not legally permissible for this Court while hearing an appeal in a particular case where a capital sentence is imposed, to define the expression "Special reasons" occurring in sub section
(3) of section 354 of the Code, in such 82 virtually has the effect of abolishing the death sentence.
[137H] (a) Under section 354, sub section
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court is required to state the reasons for a sentence awarded, and in the case of imposition of a sentence of death the Judge has to record "special reasons" for imposing death sentence.
Punishment for murder as a rule should be life imprisonment and death sentence is only an exception.
[l59A] (b) It is neither feasible nor legally permissible for this Court to give a definite connotation to the expression "special reasons" occurring in section 354 sub section
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
It is difficult to put "special reasons" in a straight jacket.
Each case must depend on its own particular facts.
The question of sentence must be left to the discretion of the Sessions Judge trying the accused.
Under the present Code, a trial for murder is divided into two stages.
There is a bifurcated trial.
The first part of the trial is directed solely to the issue of guilt or innocence, and concludes with the finding of the Sessions Judge on that issue.
At the end of the trial when he comes to a conclusion of guilt, he has to adjourn the case for hearing the accused on the question of sentence.
[159C D] Section 235, sub section
(2) of the Code specifically provides for an opportunity of hearing to the accused on the question of sentence after a verdict of guilt is recorded against him.
The burden is upon the prosecution to make out a case for imposition of the extreme penalty.
Where a sentence of death is passed, the Sessions Judge has to make a reference to the High Court under section 366, sub section
(1) of the Code.
Under section 367, sub section
(1) if the High court thinks a further inquiry should be made into, or additional evedence taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take such evidence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Sessions.
In a case submitted under section 366, the High Court under section 368(a) may either confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence, i.e. reduce the sentence of death into a sentence of imprisonment for life.
thereafter an appeal lies to this Court by a special leave under Article 136 on the question of sentence.
[159E H] Failing the appeal, there is the President 's power to grant reprieve and pardon under Article 72 (1), as well as the Governor 's power of commutation under Article 161 of the Constitution which is a sovereign function.
The power of the President and of the Governor to grant reprieves and pardons is wide enough to include the power to commute and to remit sentence of punishment.
All cases of capital punishment are closely scrutinised by the Executive at both the levels to see whether there are such extenuating circumstances as would justify a reprieve, and the power to commute a death sentence is freely exercised, whenever there is some doubt as to the severity of the punishment.
Under the present system the Prerogative of Mercy in the case , of persons under sentence of death works well and it produces results gene rally regarded as satisfactory.
It helps in mitigating the rigour of the death sentence, particularly in case of those murderers whose execution would offend the public conscience.
Very few persons under a sentence of death may be one or two in a year, in a State are usually executed.
It is, therefore, not proper for the Court to trench upon the President 's or the Governor 's perogative to grant pardon or reprieve under Articles 72(1) and 161 in taking 83 upon itself the task of commutation of a death sentence, which is properly imposed, in the facts and circumstances of a particular case, merely because there is a doubt that the Executive may commute the sentence ultimately, or by one 's views as to the utility of death penalty.
[160A E] Balwant Sing case ; Ambaram 's Case 11974] 4 SCC 298 and Sarveshwar Prasad Sharma 's case 11978] 1 SCR 360; referred to.
(c) Judges are entitled to hold their own views, but it is the bounden duty of the Court to impose a proper punishment, depending upon the degree of criminality and the desirability to impose such punishment as a measure of social necessity, as a means of deterring other potential offenders.
It is only in very grave cases where it is a crime against the society and the brutality of the crime shocks the judicial conscience that the Court has the power, as well as the duty, to impose the death sentence.
In view of these adequate safeguards, it can hardly be asserted that the sentence of death provided for an offence of murder punishable under section 302, is 'dehumanizing ' or that it is 'unnecessary '.
Where the crime is cruel and inhuman a death sentence may be called for.
[160F H] Ediga Anamma; , ; Bishan Das & Ors. ; referred to.
(d) If Parliament thought it right to give to the Judges discretion as to the sentence, they would not or ought not to shrink from their onerous responsibility.
It would not be appropriate to curtail the ambit of their discretion by judicial process.
A sentence of a wrong type, that is, to substitute a sentence of imprisonment for life where the death sentence is called for, causes grave miscarriage of justice.
A sentence or pattern of sentences which fails to take due account of gravity of the offence can seriously undermine respect for law.
[164E F] (e) In the three cases there were 'special reasons ' within the meaning of section 354, sub section
(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for the passing of the death sentence in each and, therefore, the High Courts were justified in confirming the death sentence passed under section 368(a) of the Code.
Indeed, they are illustrative of the rate type of cases, that is, first degree murders, where a death sentence is usually awarded in any civilised country.
These were cases of diobolical, cold blooded brutal murders of innocent persons, that is, first degree murders of extreme brutality or depravity.
The inhumanity of some of the offences defied belief Any interference with the sentence of death, would be wholly unwarranted in each case.
[l64G] (f) It is the duty of the Court to impose a proper punishment depending upon the degree of criminality and desirability to impose such punishment as a measure of social necessity as a means of deterring other potential offenders.
Failure to impose a death sentence in such grave cases where it is a crime against the society particularly in cases of murders committed with extreme brutality, will bring to nought the sentence of death provided for by section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
To allow the appellants to escape with the lesser punishment after they had committed such intentional, cold blooded deliberate and brutal murders will deprive the law of its effectiveness and result in travesty of justice.
[l68A B] 84 (g) In these appeals it cannot be asserted that the award of death sentence to the appellants was "erroneous in principle".
Nor can it be said that the sentence of death passed on them was arbitrary or excessive or indicative of an improper exercise of discretion.
[167H] (i) Rajendra Prasad 's case is destructive of the theory of reformation.
The 'therapeutic touch ' which it is said is the best way of preventing repetition of the offence has been of no avail.
Punishment must be designed so as to deter, as far as possible from commission of similar offences.
It should also serve as a warning to other members of society.
In both respects, the experiment of reformation has miserably failed.
There is no doubt, with the commutation of his death sentence, the accused will commit a few more murders and he would again become a menace to the community.
[165G] (ii) In Kunjukunju Janardhan 's case the accused, who acted as a monster, did not even spare his two innocent minor children in order to get rid of his wife and issues through her.
The death sentence was the only and appropriate penalty which should be awarded in such a case.
[166D] (h) There is no inexorable rule that either the extreme youth of the accused or the fact that he acted in a heat of passion must always irrespective of the enormity of the offence or otherwise be treated as a sufficient ground for awarding the lesser punishment.
The Court has to take into consideration all the circumstances which do not merit the extreme penalty.
In the facts and circumstances of this particular case i.e. Sheo Shanker .
Dubey 's case these factors cannot outweigh other considerations.
Three precious lives have been lost by the dastardly act of the accused.
A family has ` been wiped off.
The death sentence was clearly called for in this case E firstly, as a threat or warning to deter potential murderers, and secondly as the guarantee against the brutalisation of human nature.
All facts and circumstances, constitute 'special reasons ' why the accused should be sentenced to death.
[167E Fl 3.
It cannot be said that imposition of death penalty, except in the classes of cases indicated in the majority Judgment would be violative of Articles 14,19 and 21 of the Constitution.
Such a question really does not arise forconsideration.
[136G] (a) The citizen 's right to life and personal liberty are guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution irrespective of his political beliefs, class, creed or religion.
The Constitution has, by Article 21 itself forged certain procedural safeguards for protection to the citizen of his life and personal liberty.
The idealistic considerations as to the inherent worth and dignity of man is a fundamental and prevasive theme of the Constitution, to guard against the execution of a citizen for his political beliefs.
[136C D] (b) A patriot cannot be equated with an ordinary criminal.
A humanistic approach should not obscure one 's sense of realities.
When a man commits a crime against the society by committing a diabolical, cold blooded, pre planned murder, of an innocent person the brutality of which shocks the conscience of the Court, he must face the consequences of his act.
Such a person forfeits his right to life.
[136E3] 85 Jagmohan Singh vs State of U.P. ; followed.
Furman vs Georgia, ; , 33 L. ed, 2nd 346 explained and differed from.
Michael de Freites vs Gaorgie Ramouter Benny, L.R. ; quoted with approval.
(c) If the Courts were to be guided by the classification for inflicting death penalty only in the case of three categories of criminals, namely, (i) for white collar offences (ii) for anti social offences, and (iii) for exterminating a person who is a menace to the society, that is, a 'hardened murderer ', the death sentence for an offence of murder punishable under section 302, for all practical purposes would be virtually non existent.
Unfortunately our penal laws do not provide for death sentence for either white collar crimes or anti social offences.
As regards 'hardened ' murderers, there are few to be found.
Many murders unfortunately go undetected and many a brutal murderer has to be acquitted for want of legal evidence bringing his guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
Nevertheless, when the guilt is proved, the Court should leave aside all humanitarian considerations if the extreme penalty is called for.
A 'professional ' murderer must, as matter of course, be sentenced to death because he is menace to the society.
Whatever sympathy the Court can have should be reserved for the victims of the crime rather than for the perpatrators.
In such cases, the law must take its course.
[162B E; 163C D] 4.
The criminality of a crime consists not only in the criminal act but in what that signifies.
Its immediately apparent features, the obvious damage to person or property or to public security, are symptoms of a deeper disorder.
It betokens, and it fosters, an attitude in man to man, of reckless selfishness, decit or malice, which is incompatible in the long run with any decent social life.
In any advanced society it is, in part at least, on account of this wider character, less easily discerned, that the graver offence are Punished.
[l43E F] (a) All punishment properly implies moral accountability.
It is related to injury and not only to damage or danger however greater.
Capital punishment does so in an eminent degree.
It is directed against one who is ex hypothesi an inhuman brute, i.e. it is imposed simply to eliminate who is held to have become irretrievably, a. Iiability or a menace to society.
[142E] (b) Punishment like crime has a dual character.
The penalty which the convicted murderer incurs is not simply death, but death in disgrace and death as a disgrace.
In so far as capital punishment is a threat, the threat consists not only in death but in infamy.
Any theory which ignores this characteristic is certainly defective.
[l43F] Sir Walter Moberly The Ethics of Punishment Ch.
Xl Capital Punishment pp.
271 81: referred to.
(c) Punishment inflicted by the State in response to a violation of criminal law has been justified in various ways namely, as society 's vengeance upon the criminal as atonement by the wrong doer, as a means of deterring other criminals, as protection for the law abiding and as a way of rehabilitating the criminal.
86 Theories of rehabilitation are largely speculative, since there is lack of scientific evidence to support them, though it has been influential in the development of modern penology.[144A B] 5.
(a) The capital punishment controversy falls within the strict limits of 'independent ' parliamentary law making, and is a typical or representative of the kind of problems that leaders of Parliament face every day.
In short, the case for abolition of the death sentence is political, not constitutional, The Government carries the responsibility of law and order.
That is the first` and fundamental duty of any Government.
The Executive has the duty of advising the Government of the laws it believes necessary for the national wellbeing.
It is the duty of the Court, including this Court, to administer the laws as they are.
[l57D E] (b) Analysing the substantive merits of the cases for and against the death penalty for murder is essentially a question for the Parliament to resolve and not for the Supreme Court to decide.
Therefore, it would not be proper for the Judges to attempt to project their personal views in a matter which lies in the realm of political decision making, by focussing on a single controversy, the question of the proper penalty for the crime of murder.
[157B] (c) Any justification for the capital sentence, as for other salient features of the penal system must be sought in the protection of the society and that alone.
[145E] Even where it has been legally retained, as in India, Capital Punishment is now seldom employed except in very grave cases where it is a crime against the society and the brutality of the crime shocks the judicial conscience.
Indeed the death penalty satisfies the society 's retributive goals and is still presumed to be a deterrent to potential offenders Of the three purposes commonly assigned to punishment retribution, deterrence and reformation deterrence is generally held to be the most important, although the continuing public demand for retribution cannot be ignored.
Prima facie, the death sentence is likely to have a stronger affect as a deterrent upon normal human beings than any other form of punishment.
People are believed to refrain from crime because they fear punishment.
Since people fear death more than anything else, the death penalty is the most effective deterrent.
[146C E] (d) If the appeal of capital punishment were merely to fear of death, it would be a very inefficient protector of society.
In civilised society and in peace time, government relies for obedience more on its moral prestige than on violent repression of crime.
Punishment only protects life effectively if it produces in possible murderers, not only fear of the consequences of committing murder, but a horrified recoil for the thing itself It can only achieve, this, more ambitious, task, if sentence of death is felt to embody society 's strongest condemnation of murder and keenest sense of its intolerable wickedness.
It is not by the fear of death but by exciting in the community a sentiment of horror against any particular act, that the offenders could be deterred from committing it.
[143B C] Royal Commission on Capital Punishment Para 59: referred to.
(e) The punishment of death should reflect adequately the revulsion felt for the gravest of crimes by the great majority of citizens.
Legislators and Judges: 87 share this revulsion themselves; otherwise indeed their action would be morally indefensible.
Their aim then should be, not only to strike terror nor even to awaken popular indignation in a direction convenient to Government.
It would be to arouse in all and sundry their Own indignant repudiation of a wicked act and at the same time, to deepen it in themselves.
In this vain sentence of death has been pronounced, carried out and acclaimed with stern satisfaction.
Otherwise the conscience of the community would be revolted if the criminals were allowed to live.[145F G] 6.(a) The theory that (i) the death penalty is per se cruel and unusual punishment and (ii) alternatively the inordinate delay in carrying it out makes it so has now been completely destroyed by two recent decisions of the Privy Council.[149F] Eaton Baker v The Queen, Freites vs George Ramouter Benny, ; discussed.
(b) ln the United States of America also the death penalty has practically existed more or less harmoniously with humane theories of criminal justice for over two hundred years (e.g).
[151E] (i) In Trop vs Dulles, ; , L. ed.
630, the Court refused to consider the death penalty as an indent of the constitutional limit of punishment; (ii) In McGouths vs California, ; , it was held that the absence of any guidelines was not a violation of "due process" and (iii) In Furman vs Georgia the multiple opinions did not rule out altogether re imposition of the death penalty in the future provided there was legislative structuring of a permissible system providing for sufficient procedural safeguards; (iv) Later on, the death penalty has been reimposed and this judicial approach stood reoriented.
The constitutionality of the death penalty was supported by four factors (1) the reference to capital punishment in the Constitution (ii) the past Supreme Court decisions on the death penalty (iii) the limitations of judicial restraints and (iv) the doctrine of separation of powers.
[151F; 152D; 154E] M. Cherif Bassi Owni; Substantive Criminal Law p. 120 128; referred to and (v) In Gregg vs Georgia, ; ; 49 L.ed.
859; Proffit vs Floride, [1976] 428 242; ; 913; Jurek Texas; , ; , 929 all concerned with discretionary sentencing procedures and in Woodson vs North Carolina, ; ; and Roberts vs Lonisiana ; [1976] 428 US 326; both concerned with mandatory death sentence it was held that (a) the punishment of death did not invariably violates the Constitution (b) history and precedent did not support the conclusion that the death sentence was per se violation of 8th and 14th Amendments (c) the evolving standards of decency arguments had been substantially under cut in the last four years because a large segment of the enlightened population regarded the death penalty as appropriate and necessary as seen in the new legislation passed in response to Furman (d) the death penalty was not inherently cruel and unusual.
It served two principal social purposes retribution and deterrence, and therefore the death sentence for the crime of murder was (1) not without justification (2) not unconstitutionally severe and (3) not invariably disproportionate to the crime and (e) that Furman mandated, where discretionary sentencing was used, there must be suitable direction and 88 limitation to minimise the risk of wholly and arbitrary and capricious action, the bifurcated trial with standards modelled after the Modern Penal Code juries gave just such guidance.
[155F G; 156A] Observation:
