Clause (2) of a works contract entered into by the plaintiff (respondent) with the defendant (appellant) stipulated that time was of the essence of the contract, that time (of one year) allowed for carrying out the work shall be strictly observed by the contractor, and that the contractor shall pay compensation at a certain percentage for every day when the work remained unfinished after the proper dates.
One of the three courses open to the defendant under cl.
(3) was to rescind the contract in case the contractor rendered himself liable to pay compensation or abandoned the work owing to serious illness or death of the contractor or any other cause and in that event security deposit of the contractor was to stand forfeited.
It was also provided in that clause that in the event of any of the above courses being adopted by the defendant the contractor shall have no claim to compensation for any loss sustained by him.
The work remained unfinished beyond the stipulated time.
The defendant rejected the contractor 's request for extension of time and eventually rescinded the contract under cl.
(3) and forfeited the security deposit.
In the plaintiff 's suit for refund of security deposit and payment of certain other sums, the trial court, holding that the forfeiture of security deposit was legal, granted a decree for its refund.
On appeal the High Court held that the right to rescind a contract being a right to put an end to it, it could not exist after the date for its performance had expired and that in this case the right of rescission having been exercised after the expiry of the date of contract, the impugned action of the defendant in rescinding the contract was unjustified.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The rescission of the contract was well founded and the forfeiture of the security deposit was justified.
[193 F] 2.
Although cl.
(2) specifically mentioned that time was of the essence of the contract, all that was meant was that in case the work was not completed within the originally specified time, the plaintiff would be liable to pay such compensation for delay in execution as was fixed within the limits of that clause.
This is clear not only from clause (2) but also from clause (3).
These two clauses must be read together.
So read, the contract was to continue to be in force till the completion of the work or its abandonment.
Time was of the essence only in the sense that if the plaintiff completed it within the original period of one year, he would not be liable to pay any compensation but in case he overstepped that limit he would have to compensate for every day of delay and that the right 189 to rescission would accrue only when compensation due exceeded the amount of the security deposit or the plaintiff abandoned the work.
Till the time it was rescined, the contract was in force.
[193 A C]
