In December 1973, the Madras Legislature passed an Act known as the Tamil Nadu Public Men (Criminal Misconduct) Act, 1973 after obtaining the assent of the President.
The State Act was amended by Act 16 of 1974 and the President 's assent was received on April 10, 1974.
The provisions of the State Act were brought into force with effect from May 8, 1974.
The State Act was repealed and the President 's assent to the repealing Act was given on September 6, 1977.
The Act provided for the investigation in respect of a complaint of criminal misconduct against any 'public man by a Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner of Inquiries appointed for this purpose.
The word 'public man ' had been given a specific connotation in section 2(c) of the Act and clearly excluded a Government servant.
The appellant was the former Chief Minister of the State of Tamilnadu.
On June 15, 1976 the Chief Secretary to the State Government requested the Central Bureau of Investigation to make a detailed investigation into certain allegations that the appellant and others were alleged to have abused their official position in the matter of purchase of wheat from Punjab.
With the State Governor 's sanction a charge sheet was filed after investigation for the prosecution of the appellant under sections 161, 468 and 471 IPC and section 5(2) read with section 5(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act for allegedly having derived pecuniary advantage to the extent of Rs. 4 to 5 lakhs for passing favourable orders in respect of some firms.
The appellant applied for discharge under section 239 Cr.
P.C. on the ground that the prosecution against him suffered from various legal and constitutional infirmities.
On the application being rejected, the appellant applied to the High Court for quashing the proceedings and for setting aside the order of the Special Judge refusing to discharge him.
The High Court rejected the applications.
255 In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (1) Even though the State Act was repealed, the provisions of the Central Acts having themselves been protanto repealed by the State Act when it was passed could not be pressed into service for the purpose of prosecuting the appellant unless these provisions were re enacted by the appropriate legislature.
(2) It was contended that even assuming that the State Act had ceased to exist and the Central Acts applied, the appellant cannot be prosecuted under any of the sections of the Penal Code or the Corruption Act, because by virtue of the position that the appellant enjoyed as Chief Minister, there was no relationship of master and servant between him and the Government and he was acting as a constitutional functionary, and therefore could not be described as a 'public servant ' as contemplated by section 21(12) of the Penal Code.
(3) The provisions contained in the State Act run counter to those of the Central Acts in respect of the following matters; (a) The procedure for investigation of the offences by a Central Agency as contemplated by the Corruption Act is dispensed with and is instead invested in a Commissioner appointed under the State Act.
(b) The provisions under the Prevention of Corruption Act regarding the grant of sanction under section 197 of the Code to the accused is given a complete go by and instead a Commissioner is appointed to hold a regular inquiry for himself and then to submit his report.
An accused who has to be tried under the State Act is thus deprived of the protection afforded to every Government servant regarding grant of a sanction by the appointing authority.
Therefore the protection if any, given by the State Act is purely illusory, and (4) By virtue of the fact that the State Act has obtained the assent of the President, it will be deemed to be a dominant legislation, and therefore it would over rule the Central Acts.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The scheme of the Constitution is a scientific and equitable distribution of legislative powers between Parliament and the State Legislatures.
First, regarding the matters contained in List I, i.e. the Union List to the Seventh Schedule, Parliament alone is empowered to legislate and the State Legislatures have no authority to make any law in respect of the Entries contained in List I. Secondly, so far as the Concurrent List is concerned, both Parliament and the State Legislatures are entitled to legislate in regard to any of the Entries appearing therein, but that is subject to the condition laid down by article 254(1).
Thirdly, so far as the matters in List II, i.e. the State List are concerned, the State Legislatures alone are competent to legislate on them and only under certain conditions Parliament can do so.
[263 D E] 2.
In such matters repugnancy may result from the following circumstances: (i) Where the provisions of a Central Act and a State Act in the Concurrent List are fully inconsistent and are absolutely irreconcilable, the Central Act will prevail and the State Act will become void in view of the repugnancy.
256 (ii) Where however a law passed by the State comes into collision with a law passed by Parliament on an Entry in the Concurrent List, the State Act shall prevail to the extent of the repugnancy and the provisions of the Central Act would become void provided the State Act has been passed in accordance with cl.
(2) of article 254.
(iii) Where a law passed by the State legislature while being substantially within the scope of the entries in the State List entrenches upon any of the Entries in the Central List the constitutionality of the lay may be upheld by invoking the doctrine of pith and substance if on an analysis of the provisions of the Act it appears that by and large the law falls within the four corners of the State List an entrenchment, if any, being purely incidental or inconsequential.
(iv) Where, however, a law made by the State Legislature on a subject covered by the Concurrent List is inconsistent with or repugnant to a previous law made by Parliament, then such a law can be protected by obtaining the assent of the President under Art 254(2) of the Constitution.
The result of obtaining the assent of the President would be that so far as the State Act is concerned, it will prevail in the State and over rule the provisions of the Central Act in their applicability to the State only.
Such a state of affairs will exist only until Parliament may at any time make a law adding to, or amending, varying or repealing the law made by the State Legislature under the proviso to article 254.
[263 F 264 D] 3.
A careful analysis, therefore, of the various provisions of the State Act leads to the irresistible inference that the State Act was passed with a view to afford sufficient protection to a public man by enjoining a summary inquiry or investigation by a high and independent Tribunal of the status of a High Court Judge or a Senior District Judge to instil confidence in the people and to prevent public men from being prosecuted on false, frivolous and vexatious allegations.
Although the ingredients of criminal misconduct as defined in section 5(1) (d) of the Corruption Act are substantially the same in the State Act as in the Central Acts but here also the punishment is much severer in the case of the State Act than the one contained in the Central Acts.
It is, therefore, manifest that the State Act does not contain any provision which is repugnant to the Central Acts, but is a sort of complementary Act which runs pari passu the Central Act.
[270 G 271 A] 4.
Prima facie, there does not appear to be any inconsistency between the State Act and the Central Acts.
Before any repugnancy can arise, the following conditions must be satisfied: (i) That there is a clear and direct inconsistency between the Central Act and the State Act; (ii) that such an inconsistency is absolutely irreconcilable; (iii) that the inconsistency between the provisions of the two Acts is of such a nature as to bring the two Acts into direct collision with each other and a situation is reached where it is impossible to obey the one without disobeying the other.
[272D E] 5.
(1) In order to decide the questions of repugnancy it must be shown that the two enactments contain inconsistent and irreconcilable provisions, 257 so that they cannot stand together or operate in the same field; (2) that there can be no repeal by implication unless the inconsistency appears on the face of the two statutes; (3) that where the two statutes occupy a particular field, but there is room or possibility of both the statutes operating in the same field without coming into collision with each other, no repugnancy results; (4) that where there is no inconsistency but a statute occupying the same field seeks to create distinct and separate offences, no question of repugnancy arises and both the statutes continue to operate in the same field.
[278 F H] Hume vs Palmer, ; ; Union Steamship Co. of New Zealand vs Commonwealth, ; ; Clyde Engineering Co. vs Cowburn, ; exhibit Parte McLean; , ; Zavarbhai Amaidas vs State of Bombay, [1955] 1 SCR 799; Ch.
Tika Ramji & Ors.
vs The State of U.P. & Ors. ; Shyamakant Lal vs Rambhajan Singh, ; Om Prakash Gupta vs State of U.P., ; ; Deep Chand vs State of UP & Ors.
[1959] 2 Supp.
SCR 8, Megh Raj & Ors.
vs Allah Rakhia & Ors.
AIR 1942 FC 27; State of Orissa vs M. A. Tulloch & Co. ; ; T. section Balliah vs T. section Rangachari; , ; referred to.
Colin Heward 's Australian Federal Constitution Law 2nd Edn.
Nicholas Australian Constitution 2nd Edn.
p. 303 referred to.
There can be no doubt that the State Act creates distinct and separate offences with different ingredients and different punishments and it does not in any way collide, with the Central Acts.
On the other hand, the State Act itself permits the Central Act, namely, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act to come to its aid after an investigation is completed and a report is submitted by the Commissioner or the Additional Commissioner.
[279 A B] 6.
Doubtless, the State Act is the dominant legislation but there are no provisions in the State Act which are irreconcilably or directly inconsistent with the Central Acts so as to over rule them.
[279 C] The original section 29 of the State Act underwent an amendment which was brought about by Tamil Nadu Act 16 of 1974 which substituted a new section 29 for the old one.
This amendment received the assent of the President on 10th April, 1974 and was published in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette Extra ordinary, dated 16 April, 1974.
Although the State Act was passed as far back as 30 December, 1973 it received the assent of the President on the 10 April, 1974 that is, on the same date as Act 16 of 1974.
The Act was however brought into force on the 8 May, 1974 when the new section 29 which had already replaced the old section and had become a part of the statute.
Therefore, for all intents and purposes the State Act cannot be read in isolation, but has to be interpreted in conjunction with the express language contained in section 29 of the State Act.
The legislature has in unequivocal terms expressed the intention that the State Act which was undoubtedly the dominant legislation would only be "in addition to and not in derogation with any other law for the time being in force" which manifestly includes the Central Acts, namely, the Indian Penal Code, the Corruption Act and the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act.
Thus, the Legislature about a month before the main Act came into force clearly declared its intention that there would be no question of the State Act colliding with the Central Acts referred to above.
The second part 258 of section 29 also provides that nothing contained in the State Act shall exempt any public man from being proceeded with by way of investigation or otherwise under a proceeding instituted against him under the Central Acts.
It is, therefore, clear that in view of this clear intention of the legislature there can be no room for any argument that the State Act was in any way repugnant to the Central Acts.
[279 D 280 D] 7.
The provisions of section 29 would be presumptive proof of the fact that there is no repugnancy between the State Act and the Central Acts nor did either the legislature or the President intend to create any repugnancy between these Acts as a result of which the criticism regarding the repugnancy is completely obliterated in the instant case and we, therefore, hold that the State legislature never intended to occupy the same field as covered by the Central Acts.
[281 B] 8.
So far as the first part of cl.
(12) (a) is concerned, namely 'in the service of the Government undoubtedly signifies a relationship of master and servant where the employer employs the employee on the basis of a salary or remuneration.
However, the second limb of the clause, 'in the pay of the Government ' is concerned, that appears to be of a much wider amplitude so as to include within its ambit even a public servant who may not be a regular employee receiving salary from his master.
A Minister or a Chief Minister will be clearly covered by the said expression.
[282 E F] A careful analysis of the meanings assigned to the word 'pay ' in the various dictionaries and the texts would clearly reveal that the expression 'in the pay of ' connotes that a person is getting salary, compensation, wages or any amount of money.
This by itself however does not lead to the inference that a relationship of master and servant must necessarily exist in all cases where a person is paid salary.
[283 G H] Shorter Oxford English Dictionary; Websters Third New International Dictionary: Websters New World Dictionary: Words and Phrases, Permanent Edition Vol.
31A p. 176.
Venkataramaya 's Law Lexicon Vol.
11 p. 1122.
Corpus Juris Secundum Vol.
70 p. 200; referred to.
By virtue of the provisions contained in article 167, the Chief Minister undoubtedly performs a public duty of the nature as enjoined by clauses (a) to (c) of article 167.
It is also clearly provided in the Constitution that the Chief Minister or the Ministers are entitled to salaries or allowances obviously in lieu of public duties that they perform.
The salaries given to the Chief Minister or the Ministers are given from the Government funds, and, therefore, there will be no difficulty in holding that the Ministers are in the pay of the Government inasmuch as they receive their salaries, remunerations or wages from the Government.
[285 E F] Once it is conceded that the Governor appoints the Chief Minister who is paid a salary according to a statute made by the legislature from the Government funds, the Chief Minister becomes a person in the pay of the Government so as to fall squarely within cl.
(12) of section 21 of the Penal Code.
[286 B] 259 10.
The use of the words 'other public servants ' following a Minister of the Union or of a State clearly show that a Minister would also be a public servant as other public servants contemplated by section 199(2) of the Code and the Code being a statute complementary and allied to the Penal Code can be looked into for the purpose of determining the real meaning and import of the words 'public servant ' as used in the aforesaid section [286 F] Dattatraya Narayan Patil vs State of Maharashtra, [1975], Supp.
SCR 145; Emperor vs Sibnath Banerji & Ors., AIR 1945 PC 156; Rao Shiv Bahadur Singh & Anr.
vs The State of Vindhya Pradesh, ; ; referred to.
section Tara Singh vs Director Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab, Jullundur & Ors.
AIR 1958 Pub. 302, Bakshi Ghulam Mohd. vs G. M. Sadiq & Ors., AIR 1968 J & K 98; approved.
Three facts that have been proved beyond doubt: (i) That a Minister is appointed or dismissed by the Governor and therefore, subordinate to him whatever be the nature and status of his constitutional function.
(ii) That a Chief Minister or a Minister gets salary for the public work done or the public duty performed by him.
(iii) That the said salary is paid to the Chief Minister or the Minister from the Government funds.
[290A B] 12.
It is thus incontrovertible, that the holder of a public office such as the Chief Minister is a public servant in respect of which the Constitution provides that he will get his salary from the Government Treasury so long he holds his office on account of the public service that he discharges.
The salary given to the Chief Minister is coterminus with his office and is not paid like other constitutional functionaries such as the President and the Speaker.
These fact, therefore, point to one and only one conclusion and that is that the Chief Minister is in the pay of the Government and is, therefore, a public servant within the meaning of section 21(12) of the Penal Code.
[290 C D]
