The plaintiffs appellants filed a suit against the defendants respondents claiming their title on an unregistered document to the suit property and premises purchased by the latter through a sale by the Receiver under the orders of the Court, on the ground that they were co owners thereof by virtue of the said document.
The trial court decreed the suit but the High Court, on appeal, accepted the appeal and dismissed the suit.
Allowing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
A pure question of law on the facts and circumstances of a case can be taken for the first time in the Supreme Court.
[351 B C] (a) In the instant case, the plea that "as the title has vested in the respondent by virtue of the confirmation of sale and the registered conveyance, the plaintiffs appellants cannot rely on an unregistered document" is a pure question of law not involving any investigation of the facts.
[351C E] Yaswant Deorao Deshmukh vs
Walchand Ramchand Kothari; , @ 861; Raja Sri Sailendra Narayan Bhanja Rao vs State of orissa ; ; Seth Badri Prasad and ors v Seth Nagarmal and ors.
, [1959] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 769 @ 773; State of U.P and Anr v Anand Swarup ; ; T. A A Appanda Mudaliar vs State of Madras ; ; applied.
In a suit against the purchaser on the ground that the purchase was made on behalf of plaintiff or on behalf of some one through whom the plaintiff claims, the plaintiff cannot succeed in displacing the title of the defendant on the basis of the unregistered agreement,[352 C] on the pleadings, in the instant case, the question of law raised cannot result in the suit being dismissed as not maintainable.
The claim of the appellant as a real owner was not based on the unregistered agreement alone.
341 The suit was based on the plea that the suit property and the premises were purchased in ownership (i.e.) on the claim that the appellants plaintiffs were the real owners of the property.[352 C D] G. H. C. Ariff vs Jadunath Mazumdar Bahadur, A.I.R. , Meritime Electric Co. Ltd. vs Genral Dairies Ltd., A.I.R. 1937 PC 114; referred to.
Section 66 of the Civil Procedure Code prohibits any person claiming that a purchase certified by the Court in such manner as may be prescribed in favour of a person was made on behalf of the plaintiff.
In order to invoke the prohibition it is necessary to establish that the person against whom the suit cannot be maintained is a person claiming title under a purchase certified by the Court in such manner as may be prescribed.
A certificate by the Court for the purchase in the manner prescribed is, therefor, essential.
[353 B C] The word "prescribed" is defined under section 2(16) of the Civil Procedure Code, as meaning prescribed by Rules.
The provision as to grant of a certificate by a court under a purchase is prescribed in Order 21.
Order 21, Rules 64 to 73 prescribe the procedure relating to sale generally while Rules 82 to 103 prescribe the procedure relating to sale of immovable property.
When the Court makes an order confirming the sale under Order 21, Rule 92, the sale becomes absolute.
After the sale becomes absolute under Rule 94 the Court shall grant a certificate specifying the properties sold and the name of the person who at the time of the sale is declared to be the purchaser.
Such certificate is required to bear the day and the date on which the sale became absolute.
[353 C E] The certificate by the Court referred to in Section 66 C.P.C. is a certificate under Order 21, Rule 94.
The procedure envisaged for sale generally and sale of immovable property under Order 21 is sale by a public auction.
Sale by a Court through the Receiver appointed by Court is not contemplated under these provisions.
In a sale by a Receiver a certificate to the purchaser under Order 21, Rule 94, is not given by the Court.
Therefore, the prohibition under Sec. 66 cannot be invoked in the case of a sale by the Receiver.
A Receiver is appointed under Order 40 Rule 1, and a property can be sold by the Receiver on the directions of the Court even by private negotiations.
The requirement of Sec. 66 of the C.P.C., is a certificate by the Court as prescribed.
Since Section 66 is not applicable to sales by Receiver it is not necessary to go into the question whether a sale by the Receiver under the Rules of the Calcutta High Court would come within the purview of section 66.
Section 66 refers to execution of sales only and has no application to a sale held by a Receiver.
In this case, the conveyance exhibit 5 was in accordance with the original side Rule of the High Court.
[353 E G]
