In exercise of the powers conferred by sub section (1) of section 5 of the Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948 the Government of Bombay requisitioned by an order dated 12th May 1952, the premises specified therein, for a public purpose, namely, for bousiing an officer of the State Road Transport Corporation which is a public utility service.
On a writ application under article 226 of the Constitution filed by the respondent the requisition order was set aside by the Bombay High Court on the ground that the requisition was not for a public purpose and therefore could not have been made under section 5 of the Requisition Act.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court.
19 Held (1) that in the circumstances of the present case the requisition was for a public purpose and the impugned order had been wrongly set aside by the High Court; (2) the phrase 'Public purpose ' includes a purpose, that is, an object or aim, in which the general interest of the community, as opposed to the particular interest of individuals is directly and vitally concerned.
It is impossible to define precisely the expression 'public purpose '.
In each case all the facts and circumstances will require to be closely examined to determine whether a public purpose has been established; (3) the Corporation has power to provide for its employees suitable conditions of service including. . . living accommodation, places for rest and recreation and other amenities vide section 19(1) (c) of the Road Transport Corporation Act, 1950; (4) the provisions of the Road Transport Corporation Act read as a whole lead to the conclusion that if the premises specified in the impugned order had been requisitioned for the Corporation, the requisition would have been for a public purpose; (5)in the present case the Corporation is a public utility concern and the general interest of the public is directly and vitally concerned with its activities and undertaking.
Providing living accommodation for its employees is a statutory activity of the Corporation and it is essential for it to provide such accommodation in order to ensure efficient working of the road transport system and therefore the impugned order was validly passed under the Requisition Act.
Hamabai Framjee.
Petit vs Secretary of State for India in Council ([1914] L.R. 42 I.A. 44), The State of Bombay vs Bhonji Munji and Another ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 777) and The State of Bombay vs Ali Gulshan ([1955] 2 S.C.R. 867), referred to.
