The appellant was a manufacturer of a preparation called Para Excellent and Para Asli The outer label of the package describe the contents as "as sweet as saccharin".
Under the directions for use it was mentioned on the label that the preparation was para saccharin.
The appellant was prosecuted under s.2(ix)(a) and (g) of the for misbranding the goods and for selling it as saccharin.
While the trial court convicted and sentenced the appellant to imprisonment and a fine on the ground that though a case of misbranding under section 2(ix) (a) and (g) had not been made out, it was a case of misbranding contemplated by section 2(ix) (k), the High Court, in revision, enhanced the sentence and fine under sections 7 and 16 read with section 2(ix)(a) and (g) of the Act.
On behalf of the prosecution it was contended in the appellant 's appeal to this Court that the use of the word saccharin gave the impression that the preparation was saccharin or something akin to it and it was, therefore, a case of misbranding punishable under the Act.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD :1.
There is nothing on the facts of the case to show that the appellant in any way tried to give an impression to the purchasers that either saccharin or some preparation of the type of saccharin was being sold so as to amount to misbranding as contemplated by section 2(iv)(a) and (g) of the Act.
Nor was there an attempt to sell the preparation as saccharin or some kind of saccharin.
When the label described that the preparation was as sweet as saccharin it merely laid emphasis on the sweetness of the preparation when compared to the sweetness of the saccharin.
Similarly when the label described the preparation was not as bitter as saccharin it was intended to convey that it was neither something like saccharin nor saccharin itself in any form or of any type.
[553 C D] 2.
Nor again was there any evidence of intention on the part of the appellant to sell a preparation which resembles saccharin in any respect.
The words "as sweet as saccarin" were merely meant to convey one of the qualities of the preparation itself and not the quality of saccharin.
That by itself would not attract the provisions of section 2(ix)(a) of the Act.
[554 B] 3.
The use of the word para saccharin appears to be a mistake.
In the Hindi portion of the directions contained in the label the words "para Saccharin" were not used.
Secondly the word "para saccharin" would not indicate that 552 the preparation sold was saccharin in any form or of any kind.
It was just a way of describing the contents because the preparation was "as sweet as saccharin. ' The manufacturer wanted to convey that the preparation wasa also much sweeter than sugar and could be used for preparing soda water.
[554 C D]
