The Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955 formulates the procedure for selecting persons from the State Civil Service Cadre for the purpose of bringing them on the select list of the Indian Administrative Service.
Regulation 5 which deals with the preparation of the list of suitable officers provides by cl.
(2) that the selection for inclusion in such list shall be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority, while cl.
(5) provides that if it is proposed to supersede any member of the State Civil Service, the Selection Committee shall record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
The "Government of India 's Decisions" under the regulations have been published by the Govt.
in the All India Services Manual, Part II.
Resolution 1.1 requires the Chief Secretary to the State Government who is the sponsoring authority to record a certificate in respect of every eligible officer whose case is placed before the Selection Committee, that the State Government certifies the integrity of the officer with reference to the entries in his annual confidential reports.
Resolution 1.2 provides that the Selection Committee should specifically record in its proceedings that it is satisfied from the remarks in the confidential reports of the officers selected by it for inclusion in the Select List that there was nothing against their integrity.
The appellant and respondents 8 to 15 were members of the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch), the respondents being junior to the appellant.
In 1966 67, an adverse entry was recorded in the confidential report of the appellant by the District and Sessions Judge.
No decision was taken by the Government as to whether the adverse entry was justified and whether the contentions raised by the appellant in his representation to the same were well founded.
After 1966 67, the appellant worked in various capacities, earned good reports and was allowed to cross the first and second efficiency bars.
However, respondents 8 to 15 were promoted to the selection grade of the service prior to the appellant.
His representation in this regard was rejected by the Government.
Respondents 2 to 7 who constituted the committee for selecting persons from the Punjab Civil Service cadre for the purpose of bringing them on the select list of the Indian Administrative Service, selected respondent No. 9.
The 519 Appellent 's name was not put on the select list, since respondent No. 2, the Chief Secretary to the State Govt.
had refused to give an 'integrity certificate ' to him.
His representation against the non inclusion having been rejected, he approached the High Court.
The High Court rejected the appellant 's contention that resolution 1.1 was ultra vires of regulations 4 and 5; but quashed the order of the State Government granting seniority to two junior officers over the appellant in the selection grade.
In appeal by the appellant, the High Court held that it is nowhere laid down that integrity certificate is the requirement for eligibility for promotion.
Integrity certificate is the requirement of resolution 1.1 which is only an executive instruction.
No criteria is mentioned, nor guidelines provided as to how the integrity certificate is to be issued.
The executive instruction, therefore, went beyond the scope of the statutory regulation, the provision requiring the production of the integrity certificate was unguided and was likely to lead to arbitrariness and unreasonableness and that therefore resolution 1.1 was ultra vires of regulations 4 and 5.
The High Court held further that the records of the Selection Committee reveal that the decision not to include the appellant 's name in the select list was not based solely on the ground of non availability of the integrity certificate and that the Committee had given another cogent reason, that the appellant was not suitable otherwise also Allowing the further appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The Letters Patent Bench of the High Court was in error in striking down, resolution 1.1 as being ultra vires of regulation 5.
Both resolutions 1.1 and 1.2 are within the regulations and are valid.
[527 C] (ii) Under cl.
(2) of Regulation 5 selection for inclusion in the select list has to be based on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to seniority.
Neither the 1954 Rules nor the 1951 Act furnish any guidelines for assessing merit and suitability.
The Government would therefore, have the power to prescribe the criteria for determining whether the requirements of merit and suitability are fulfilled by any particular candidate, The Executive decision which is contained in resolution 1.1 and 1.2 effectuates the purpose of that prescription.
[526 C, F, G] (iii) The Government in the exercise of its executive authority cannot supersede a statutory rule or regulation but it can certainly effectuate the purpose of a rule or regulation by supplementing it.
These resolutions of the Government of India do not transgress the requirement of the Regulations but are in furtherance thereof.
It, therefore, cannot be stated that the Chief Secretary had been conferred with an unguided or unfettered discretion to assess the integrity of the officers by granting or refusing the integrity certificate at his sweet will.
[526 H, 527 B] (iv) Every Executive Authority is charged with the obligation of organising its services so as to ensure maximum efficiency.
The idea of maximum efficiency cannot be achieved unless persons who are selected for public offices possess integrity in as high a measure as ability.
Integrity is, therefore, the sine qua non of merit and suitability.
No person can be considered as possessing merit and suitability if he lacks in character and integrity.
[526 E] 520 2.
One of the reasons which evidently weighed with the Selection Committee in not putting the appellant 's name on the select list was that the Chief Secretary had not issued the integrity certificate in his favour.
The non inclusion of appellant 's name in the select list and the non issuance of the integrity certificate are thus closely linked, whether or not there was another reason also for which the Selection Committee kept him out from the select list.
[527 G H] 3.
An adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the supeurior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
[528 H 529 B] In the instant case for one reson or another not arising out of any fault on the part of the appellant though the adverse report was communicated to him the Government has not been able to consider his explanation and decide whether the report was justified.
In such circumstances it is difficult to support the non issuance of the integrity certificate to him.
The chain of reaction began with the advese report and the infirmity in the link of causation is that no one has yet decided whether that report was justified.
[529 C] 4.
In the absence of a proper pleading it cannot be speculated that the appellant was not found suitable for reasons other than those connected with the non issuance of an integrity certificate to him.
[529 D] 5.
The High Court saw the file and discovered that the appellant was not brought on the select list because he was 'not found suitable otherwise '.
Regulation 5(7) provides that the Committee shall record its reasons if it is proposed to supersede any member of the State Civil Service.
That an officer was "not found suitable" is the conclusion and not a reason in support of the decision to supersede him.
In the absence of any reason, this Court cannot agree with the High Court that the Selection Committee had another "reason" for not bringing the appellant on the select list.
[529 E, G, 530 A] [Directed that the case of the appellant be considered afresh by the Selection Committee indicating the broad frame work within which the Committee should act and the preliminary steps the Government should take in order to facilitate the Committee 's task.] Union of India vs Mohan Lal Capoor & Ors., ; referred to.
