Held, by the Full Court (i) (overruling a preliminary objection) Under the Constitution the Supreme Court is constituted the protector and guarantor of fundamental rights, and it cannot, consistently with the responsibility so laid upon it, refuse to entertain applications seeking protection against infringement of such rights, although such applications are made to the Court in the first in stance without resort to a High Court having concurrent jurisdiction in the matter.
Urquhart vs Brown ; and Hooney vs Kolohan ; distinguished.
(ii) Freedom of speech and expression includes freedom propagation of ideas and that freedom is ensured by the freedom of circulation.
Ex parte Jackson ; and Lovell vs City of Griffin ; referred to.
Held per KANIA C.J., PATANJALI SASTRI, MEHR CHAND MAHAJAN, MUKHERJEA and DAS JJ. (FAZL ALI J. dissenting): (i) Apart from libel, slander etc.
unless a law restricting freedom of speech and expression is directed solely against the undermining of the security of the State or the over throw of it, such law cannot fall within the reservation under cl.
(2) of article 19 of the Constitution, although the restrictions which it seeks to impose may have been con ceived generally in the interests of public order.
Section 9 (1 A) of the Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, XXXIII of 1949, which authorises impositions of restrictions for the wider purpose of securing public safety or the mainte nance of public order falls outside the scope of authorised restrictions under cl.
(2) and is therefore void and uncon stitutional; (ii) Where a law purports to authorise the imposition of restrictions on a fundamental right in lan guage wide enough to cover restrictions both within and without the limits of constitutionally permissible legisla tive action affecting such right, it is not possible to uphold it even so far as it may be applied within the constitutional limits, as it is not severable.
So long as the possibilitY of its being applied for purposes not sanc tioned by the Constitution cannot be ruled out 595 must be held to be wholly unconstitutional and void.
Section 9 (1 A) is therefore wholly unconstitutional and void.
Per FAZL ALI J. Restrictions which section 9 (1 A) autho rised are within the provisions of cl.
(2) of article 19 of the Constitution and section 9 (1 A)is not therefore unconstitutional or void.(1) Brij Bhushan and Another vs The State ; referred to.
