The question as to which Court is competent to make a com plaint under section 476 A read with section 195(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure where none wag made by the Court in which the offence was committed or its successor Court, will depend on the nature of the proceeding in which the offence was committed, whether civil, criminal or revenue, and on the hierarchy of superior Courts to which an appeal from such proceeding will ordinarily lie as contemplated by section 195(3) of the Code, apart from such exceptions as may be made in respect of any particular matters by any special notifications or laws.
Where, however, appeals ordinarily lie to different courts, the one of the lowest grade will be the Court competent to make the complaint.
Wadero Abdul Bahman vs Sadhuram, ([1930] and M. section Sheriff vs Govindan (A.I.R. , 1061), not approved.
Under the Punjab Courts Act of 1918 and the hierarchy of civil Courts established thereby, appeals from the Courts of the various subordinate Judges who constitute distinct Courts do not ordinarily lie to the Senior Subordinate Judge but to the District Judge and the Court of the Additional Judge is not a Court of coordinate jurisdiction with that of the District Judge.
The Act neither mentions nor recognises an Additional District Judge as a Court of that hierarchy.
Consequently, in a case where offences under sections 193 and 471 of the Indian Penal Code were alleged to have been committed in a civil proceeding in the Court of a Subordinate Judge of the first class, exercising jurisdiction under the Punjab Courts Act of 1918, and neither he nor his successor made a complaint or rejected the application for the making of it, the Senior Subordinate Judge had no jurisdiction to entertain the matter and make the complaint either as a Court of appeal under section 476 B or of Its own authority under section 476 A of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Additional 17 126 Judge, by wrongly describing himself as an Additional District Judge, could not assume a jurisdiction which he did not possess under those sections.
The High Court has power to revise orders of subordinate Courts made without jurisdiction both under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, therefore, it was not necessary to decide under article 136 of the Constitution which of these two sections applied in the present case, but the High Court erred in upholding the complaint made by the Senior Subordinate Judge because that court had no jurisdiction to make the complaint.
The High Court is not a Court to which the Subordinate Judge of the first class is subordinate within the meaning of section 196(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure and could not, therefore, make the complaint of its own authority and should have remitted the application to the District Judge for disposal according to law.
