A part of the land allotted to the appellant on quasi permanent basis as a displaced person from West Pakistan was acquired by the Government.
When the question of payment of compensation in respect of the land acquired was pending, the was passed which enabled holders of quasi permanency rights to obtain permanent settlement pursuant to which permanent settlement in respect of acquired land was made in favour of the appellant.
Alleging that the land allotted to the appellant was not allottable on a permanent basis, the Chief Settlement Commissioner, by his order dated 17th March, 1961, cancelled the allotment.
The appellant 's petition questioning the correctness of this decision was dismissed by the High Court in limine.
Thereupon the appellant preferred a petition under s.33 of the Act to the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, Rehabilitation Department, challenging the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner.
By his order dated 29th September, 1964 the Joint Secretary rejected the petition pointing out that the cancellation of the appellant 's permanent settlement rights in the land was in accordance with law and that no interference was called for.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
In rejecting the appellant 's writ petition impugning the order dated 29th September, 1964 the High Court was of the view that it was barred by principles analogous to res judicata because if that petition were allowed, it would in effect, amount to cancellation of the order dated the 17th March, 1961 which became final as against the appellant on dismissal of his first petition.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1(a) Where a petition under article 226 is dismissed in limine without a speaking order, such a dismissal would not constitute a bar of res judicata to a subsequent petition on the same cause of action.
When a petition is dismissed on the ground that the petitioner has an alternative remedy by way of appeal or revision under a statute and on failure to get relief after pursuing the remedy by way of appeal or revision, he moved the High Court, it would be incorrect to dismiss the petition on the ground that the order made by the revisional authority had the effect of merging the original order with the order of the revisional authority, and that the challenge on the fresh cause of action to the order of the revisional authority would of necesity be a challenge to the original order also and that therefore the petition would be barred by principles analogous to res judicata as the first order had become final.
[407C E] 400 Daryao & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
; ; Virudhunagar Steel Rolling Mills Ltd. vs The Govt of Madras, ; ; Tilokchand Motichand & Ors.
vs H. B. Munshi & Anr., ; referred to.
In the instant case in the first writ petition the appellant questioned the correctness of the order of the Chief Settlement Commissioner dated 17th March, 1961 without claiming therein any compensation for the land acquired.
That having been dismissed in limine he invoked the revisional jurisdiction under section 33 of the Act.
When that petition was dismissed by the revisional authority he preferred the second writ petition.
What he prayed in the second petition was a direction quashing the order dated 29th September, 1964 of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
The High Court was, therefore, in error in rejecting the second petition on the sole ground that the order of 17th March, 1961 merged into the order of 29th September, 1964 and in substance the challenge was to the order dated 17th March, 1961 which had become final.
[408 A B] (b) Secondly, if the claim for compensation was not raised in the first petition but was specifically raised in the second, it would not be dismissed on the ground that it was barred by principles analogous to res judicata.
[408 D] 2(a) It has been well established by a long line of decisions of this Court that after July 22, 1952 the Custodian had no authority to cancel or modify quasi permanent allotment, that the allottes of these rights could not be dispossessed at the whim or caprice of the Custodian, that the quasi permanent rights were heritable and that the holders were entitled to permanent settlement by issuance of sanad.
Added to this was the fact that r. 14(6) of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Central) Rules, 1950 as amended from July 22, 1952 restricted the power of the Custodian to resume or cancel quasi permanent rights of the allottees except in the circumstances mentioned in the subrule and no material is placed on record to show that the Custodian had exercised his power under r. 14(6) of the Rules.
[411 D E] P. D. Sharma vs State Bank of India, ; ; Amar Singh vs Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab, [1957] SCR 801; State of Punjab vs Suraj Prakash Kapur, etc., ; Joginder Singh & Ors.
vs Deputy Custodian General of Evacuee Property, ; at 740; referred to.
(b) Nor again is there any material to show that the Custodian had the power to cancel the allotment under the State Rules.
It was not shown that the State Government had framed any re settlement scheme and that the allotment was cancelled for that purpose.
[412 H] 3 (a) Under the Evacuee Property Act, 1950 property which was declared us evacuee property vested in the Custodian and was allotted to displaced persons on a quasi permanent basis.
To obviate difficulties caused by continued unextinguished title of the evacuee, the 1954 Act was passed, under section 12(2) of which the right, title and interest of any evacuee in the evacuee property specified in the notification issued under the section stood extinguished and the evacuee property would vest absolutely in the Central Government.
Evacuee property acquired in this manner formed part of the compensation pool.
Therefore, the appellant 's property which was acquired in 1953, much before the coming into force of the 1954 Act, could not have become part of the compensation pool.
[413 G H] 401 (b) Even assuming that though the property was taken over by the Central Government in 1953 evacuee interest in it had not been extinguished till a notification under section 12 of the 1954 Act had been issued and that on the issue of the notification it became part of the compensation pool, the consequence envisaged by section 10 of the 1954 Act must ensue.
It is that so long as the property remained vested in the Central Government it shall continue in possession of the person to whom it was allotted on the same conditions on which he held the property immediately before the date of acquisition.
[914 C D] In the present case if the property had been taken over by the Central Government much before the 1954 Act came into force neither section 12 of the 1954 Act nor r. 49 would be attracted.
If on the other hand the evacuee interest in the property came to be extinguished on the issue of a notification under section 12, section 10 would be attracted and the appellant would be entitled to hold the property till it continued to vest in the Central Government under section 12.
In other words in either event he would be entitled to compensation.
[415 C D] (c) Nor again is it correct to say that it was a fresh allotment under section 10 of the 1954 Act.
The land was allotted in 1949 and section 10 does not purport to make a fresh allotment.
[415 A] 4(a) The whole of chapter VIII of the 1955 Rules (which includes rr.
49 to 69) would not apply because the land allotted was agricultural land and the allotment was made under the notification of the Government of Punjab dated 8th July, 1949.
[416 C] (b) Once chapter VIII of the 1955 Rules and especially r. 49 which provides for payment of compensation in the form of land is out of the way, there is nothing in the Act which would debar a quasi permanent allottee asking for compensation in cash and the Govenment paying it.
Moreover on the former occasion the appellant was paid compensation in cash for a part of the land acquired from him.
[417 D E]
