Toffees sold by a vender to a Food Inspector having been found to be adulterated, prosecution was launched against him.
The vendor produced a warranty in the Trial Court as a result of which he was acquitted by the Magistrate.
The Magistrate however directed notice to the respondents under section 20 A for being impleaded and prosecuted on the grounds that the articles manufactured and distributed the them were adulterated.
On revision, the Session Judge dismissed the same but on further revision to the High Court, it allowed the revision and set aside the order of the Magistrate, In the other two Criminal Appeals Nos. 166 & 167 of 1972, the appellants were impleaded under section 20A before the acquittal of the last seller and that order was upheld by the High Court.
On the question whether the magistrate was entitled to implead the distributors or manufacturers under section 20A even after acquitting the seller on the ground that he was protected by a warranty.
Dismissing the appeals ^ HELD :The opening lines of section 20A clearly contemplate a contingency where the discretionary jurisdiction under this Act can be exercised only during the trial of any offence, i.e. the stage at which the magistrate can exercise his jurisdiction under this section must be before the trial has concluded and ended in acquittal or conviction.
A combined reading of section 20A and 20 is that where a distributor or manufacturer or any other person is impleaded in the course of a trial, the obligation to get a fresh sanction for such a person is dispensed with and the sanction obtained for the last seller in the trial, will ensure for the benefit of the prosecution of the other person impleaded.
Therefore protection of section 20 is not available if the parties concerned are impleaded after the trial was over.
The special statutory concession is given to the prosecution only if the conditions mentioned in section 20A are fulfilled and not otherwise.
[627B C, F H] V. N. Kamdar vs Municipal Corpration of Delhi ; followed.
