A doctor and his brother riding a motor cycle were hit by a jeep driver and both were killed in November 1971, but the Motor Accident claims Tribunal delivered judgment on 5 9 1976 five years later awarding sums of Rs. 80,000/ and Rs. 73,500/ to the two sets of claimants.
The appeal in this case had to be filed on or before 19 1 77 but was actually filed 30 days later with an application for condonation under section 5 of the Limitation Act on the ground of Counsel 's mistake in the calculation of the period of limitation.
The High Court dismissed the appeal and the application.
Dismissing the special leave petitions, the Court ^ HELD: A company relies on its Legal Adviser and the Manager 's expertise is in company management and not in law.
There is no particular reason why when a company or other person retains a lawyer to advise it or him on legal affairs reliance should not be placed on such counsel.
Of course, if there is gross delay too patent even for layman or if there is in comprehensible indifference the shield of legal opinion may still be vulnerable.
If legal Adviser 's opinions are to be subjected by company managers to further legal scrutiny of their own, an impossible situation may arise.
Indeed Government, a large litigant in this country, may find itself in difficulty.
[697E F, 698 F G] This does not automatically secure a visa for the petitioner into this Court under article 136.
There must be manifest injustice or gross misappreciation or perversity in factual findings.
[698H] State of Kerala vs Krishna Kurup Madhava Kurup, A.I.R 1971 Kerala 211; approved.
State of West Bengal vs Howrah Municipal Corporation, ; ; referred to.
Observations 1.
The jurisprudence of compensation for motor accidents must develop in the direction of no fault liability and the determination of the quantum must be liberal, not niggardly since the law values life and limb in a free 695 country in generous scales.
Social justice, the command of the Constitution is being violated by the State itself by neglecting road repairs, ignoring deadly over loads and contesting liability after nationalising the bulk of bus transport and the whole of general insurance business.
[696C D] 2.
Medieval roads with treacherous dangers and total disrepair, explosive increase of heavy vehicles often terribly overloaded and without cautionary signals, reckless drivers crazy with speed and tipsy with spirituous potions, non enforcement of traffic regulations designed for safety but offering opportunities for systematised corruption and little else and, as a cumulative effect, mounting highway accidents, demand a new dimension to the law of torts through no fault liability and processual celerity and simplicity in compensation claims cases.
[696B C] 3.
If only no fault liability, automatic reporting by the police who investigate the accident in a statutory proforma signed by the claimants and forwarded to the tribunal as in Tamil Nadu and decentralised empowerment of such tribunals in every district coupled with informal procedures and liberation from court fees and the sophisticated rules of evidence and burden of proof were introduced easy and inexpensive, if the State has the will to help the poor who mostly die in such accidents law 's delays in this compassionate jurisdiction can be banished.
Social justice in action is the measure of the State 's constitutional sensitivity.
[696F G]
