The appellant assessee carried on money lending and other businesses and derived income from various sources such as investment in shares, properties and business.
Pursuant to her promise to donate a sum of Rs. 10 lacs for setting up an Engineering College to commemorate the memory of her late husband, she actually made over a sum of Rs. 5.5 lacs by depositing the same in a joint account opened in the name of the District Magistrate, Bulandshahr and Smt.
Indermani Jatia for the College.
The balance of Rs. 4.5 lacs was left with the assessee and was treated as a debt to the institution and interest thereon at 6% per annum with effect from October 21, 1955 was to be finally deposited in the technical institute account.
Though in the books of accounts, on November 21, 1955, a sum of Rs. 10 lacs was debited to her capital account and corresponding credit was given to the account of the institute, the assessee actually paid the sum of Rs. 5.5 lacs to the institution on January 7, 1956 from the overdraft account which she had with the Central Bank of India, Aligarh.
In the assessment proceedings for the assessment years 1957 58, 1958 59, 1959 60, the assessee claimed the deduction of these sums Rs.
20,107/ Rs. 25,470/ and Rs. 18,445/ being the respective items of interest paid by her to the bank on Rs. 5.5 lacs during the samvat years.
The assessee contended that she had preferred to draw on the overdraft account of the bank for the purpose of paying the institution in order to save her income earning assets, namely, the shares, which she would have otherwise been required to dispose of and therefore, the interest paid by her should be allowed.
As regards interest on the remaining sum of Rs. 4.5 lacs (which was left as a loan with the assessee) that was debited to her account, the assessee claimed that it was a permissible deduction.
The taxing authorities took the view that the claim for deduction was not admissible either against business income under section 10(2) or against income from investments under section 12(2) of the Income Tax Act, 1922.
The appeals preferred to the Appellate Tribunal failed.
The references made to the High Court went against the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Under section 10(2)(iii) of Income Tax Act, 1922, three conditions are required to be satisfied in order to enable the assessee to claim a deduction in respect of interest on borrowed capital, namely, (a) that money 746 (capital) must have been borrowed by the assessee, (b) that it must have been borrowed for the purpose of business and (c) that the assessee must paid interest on the said amount and claimed it as a deduction.
[755B C] 2.
As regards the claim for deduction in respect of expenditure under section 10(2) (xv), the assessee must also satisfy three conditions namely (a) it (the expenditure) must not be an allowance of the nature described in clauses (i) to (xiv); (b) it must not be in the nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee and (c) it must have been laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of his business.
[755C D] 3.
The expression "for the purpose of business" occurring in s.10(2)(iii) as also in 10(2)(xv) is wider in scope than the expression "for the purpose of earning income profits or gains" occurring in section 12(2) of the Act and, therefore, the scope for allowing a deduction under section 10(2)(iii) or 10(2)(xv) would be much wider than the one available under section 12(2) of the Act.
[755D E] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Malayalam Plantations Ltd., ; ; applied. 4.
Neither there had been any confusion of the issue nor any wrong approach had been adopted by the taxing authorities, the Tribunal or the High Court.
The case of the assessee had been considered both by the Tribunal as well as by the High Court under s.10(2) (iii) or 10(2) (xv) and not under s.12(2).
In fact, in Reference No. 775 of 1970 the questions framed by the Tribunal in terms referred to s.10(2)(iii) and 10(2)(xv) and proceeded to seek the High Court 's opinion as to whether the sums representing interest paid by the assessee to the Central Bank on the overdraft of Rs. 5.5 lacs for the concerned three years were allowable as deduction under either of the said provisions of the Act and the High Court after considering the matter and the authorities on the point had come to the conclusion that such interest was not allowable as a deduction under either of the said provisions.
[743D G] 5.
It is true that the High Court did refer to the decision of the Bombay High Court in Bhai Bhuriben 's case but that decision was referred to only for the purpose of emphasising one aspect which was propounded by that Court, namely, that the motive with which an assessee could be said to have made the borrowing would be irrelevant.
In fact the High Court found that there was no material to show that the assessee, in the instant case, would necessarily have had to employ the business assets for making payment to charity.
The High Court actually considered the assessee 's case under section 10(2) (iii) and 10(2) (xv) and disallowed the claim for deduction under these provisions principally on the ground that the said borrowing of Rs. 5.5 lacs was unrelated to the business of the assessee.
[745G H, 755A B] Bhai Bhuriben Lallubhai vs Commissioner of Income Tax, North Cutch and Saurashtra, ; explained.
(6) In the instant case: (a) The amount of Rs. 5.5 lacs having been actually parted with by the assessee on January 7, 1956, and having been accepted by the institute the same being deposited in the joint account of the assessee and the District 747 Magistrate, Bulandshahr for the Engineering College, the gift to that extent was undoubtedly complete with effect from the said date.
[756A C] (b) The said payment made by the assessee by drawing a cheque on the overdraft account was a borrowing which was made to meet her personal obligation and not the obligation of the business and as such expenditure incurred by the assessee by way of payment of interest thereon was not for carrying on the business nor in her capacity as a person carrying on that business.
Such expenditure could by no stretch of imagination be regarded as business expenditure.
[756C, F] (c) It is true that initially on November 21, 1955 the capital account of the assessee was debited and the college account was credited with the sum of Rs. 10 lacs in the books of the assessee but making of these entries in the assessee 's books would not alter the character of the borrowing nor would the said borrowing be impressed with the character of business expenditure for admittedly, the assessee maintained only one common set of books in which were incorporated entries pertaining to her capital, assets and income from all her difference sources.
The borrowing was completely unrelated to the purpose of the business and was actually used for making charity.
It is, therefore, clear that the interest that was paid on the sum of Rs. 5.5 lacs to the bank by the assessee for the three concerned years was rightly held to be not deductible either under section 10(2) (iii) or under section 10(2) (xv) of the Act.
[756F H, 757A] Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City II vs Bombay Samachar Ltd., Bombay, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City IV vs Kishinchand, ; distinguished.
(d) Both the Tribunal as well as the High Court were right in taking the view that the certificate dated October 17, 1958 was of no avail to the assessee inasmuch as it merely stated that the assessee had promised a donation of Rs. 10 lacs on October 21, 1955, out of which Rs. 5.5 lacs were deposited in the joint account maintained in the name of the assessee and the District Magistrate, Bulandshahr for the college and the remaining sum of Rs. 4.5 lacs was left as a loan with the assessee and interest thereon at 6% per annum was to be finally deposited in the technical institute account.
The Tribunal and the High Court were also right in taking two views that beyond making entries in the books of account of the assessee there was no material on record to show that the assessee had actually made over a sum of Rs. 4.5 lacs to the college or that the college had accepted the said donation with the result that the amount credited to the college account in her books represented her own funds and lay entirely within her power of disposition and that being so, the interest credited by the assessee on the said sum of Rs. 4.5 lacs and the accretion thereto continued to belong to the assessee, and, therefore she was not entitled to the deduction in respect of such interests, and [758C G] (e) If no trust in favour of the college in regard to the amount of Rs. 4.5 lacs could be said to have come into existence either on October 21, 1955 or November 21, 1955 or on any other subsequent date during the relevant years, no deduction in respect of interest credited by the assessee to the account of the college over the said sum can be allowed.
[759A B] 748
