At the time of granting licence to the company for the establishment of a new Aluminium factory the Government of India obtained the consent of the Government of U.P.
To make available to the company in bulk cheap electricity from the Rihand Hydro Electric Scheme.
An agreement was entered into between the Company and the State Government for the bulk supply of electricity on a firm, continuous and uninterrupted basis at 1.99 odd paise per unit for a period of 25 years.
The company set up and commissioned its aluminium plant at Renukoot in April, 1962.
It was granted a further licence for the expansion of its installed capacity.
As the State was unable to meet the extra requirement of energy, sanction under section 28 of the Electricity Act 1910 was granted to the Company, at its request, on November 12, 1964, to set up a generating station at Renusagar, near Renukoot.
It set up two generating units of 67.5 mw each.
The first unit started generating power in 1967 and the other in 1968.
In the meantime, permission was granted to increase the Company 's installed capacity from 40,000 metric tonnes to 60,000 metric tonnes.
The Company thought of setting up a plant for the production of 60,000 metric tonnes of aluminium in the State of Gujarat.
But the Government of U.P. entered into negotiations with the Company and in its letter dated November 20, 1968, it stated that there could be no difficulty in meeting the interim requirements of energy for 2 to 3 years from the U.P. State Electricity Board and also for arranging for parallel running of their new power stations.
The Company was granted sanction to expand the Renu Sagar Generation by 250 mw, and after negotiations with the State Government it was agreed that the U.P.S.E.B. would meet the additional energy under a phased programme.
The U.P.S.E.B. stated in its letter dated September 2, 1972, that the supply would be without prejudice to the power of the State Government to control the 710 distribution and consumption of energy under section 22B of the Act.
The additional energy was not made available to the Company during 1972 75 although the rate was substantially increased with retrospective effect.
An agreement was however entered into between the Company and the U.P.S.E.B. on November 30, 1976, in supersession of the earlier agreements, and it was stipulated that it would be read and construed in all respects in conformity with the provisions of the and its rules and the regulations and the amendments thereto.
The State Government took a decision in December 1976 to reconnect some agricultural pumping sets which had been disconnected and this placed an additional load on the grid system of the State.
On the note of the UPSEB that there was acute shortage of energy, and its suggestion for the imposition of some restrictions, the U.P. Electricity (Regulation of Distribution and Consumption) order 1977, was issued by the Government on April 7, 1977.
Under cl.
6(a)(i) of the Order, the Company could draw energy only to the extent of 50 per cent of its monthly consumption.
As the shortage of energy became more acute the Secretary of the Power Department sent a note to the Governor dated May 3, 1977 stating that there was a large gap between demand and availability of energy and that overriding public interest, particularly the need to maintain food supply, required that units which were heavy consumers of energy should be subjected to further cut in the consumption of energy.
It was particularly pointed out that as the Company was itself generating energy at Renusagar, it will have more than 50 per cent of energy even if the Board 's supply was completely withdrawn.
The Governor approved that proposal on June 1, 1977.
A proviso was inserted in cl. 6(a) (i) of the U.P. Electricity (Regulation of Distribution and Consumption) Order, 1977 in June 2, 1977 according to which an industrial consumer having its own source of generation of energy from which it obtained 50 per cent or more of its consumption would suffer a cut of 100 per cent in the energy supplied by the UPSEB.
The company was given time to bring about the total cut.
Fresh elections were held to the State Legislature Assembly, and the new Cabinet was sworn in on June 23, 1977.
It decided to reduce the supply of energy to the company to zero, in pursuance of the amendment dated June 2, 1977 and called for a fresh note on the position regarding the generation and distribution of energy.
The Chairman of the UPSEB prepared a note on August 26, 1977, in which he pointed out the shortage of energy, including substantial fall in the generation of thermal energy, and in the "import" of energy.
The State Government made an order on September 19, 1977 called the U.P. Electricity (Regulation of Supply Distribution, Consumption and Use) Order, 1977.
That order was made for maintaining the supply and securing equitable distribution of electrical energy, and to provide for regulating the supply, distribution, consumption and use thereof.
Clause 6 of the order which provided for compulsory cut in consumption of energy and demand, affected the company.
711 The clause provided as follows: "6(a)(i): In respect of electrical energy consumed by all large and heavy power industrial consumers receiving power at 33 kv.
and above excepting fertilizers, from the U.P.S.E.B. a cut of 50 per cent in their monthly consumption of electricity both in respect of energy and demand shall be exercised: Provided that where any such industrial consumer has his own source of generation of energy which alone enables him to obtain 50 per cent or more of his total consumption, then a cut of 100 per cent in the energy supplied by the UPSEB shall be exercised.
" Being aggrieved by the compulsory cut imposed by the Government the company filed its third writ petition against the order.
The company 's earlier writ petitions were dismissed as withdrawn.
The High Court took the view: (a) that it was the statutory obligation of the UPSEB to supply electrical energy to a consumer and held that the Pipri Bus Bar was a "distributing Main" under s.2(o) and was an electricity supply line as defined in s.2(f) of the Act; (b) section 22B of the Act did not confer power on the State Governments to cut off supply of energy to existing consumers or to issue an order that certain preferences will be followed in supplying energy, (c) though the company deserved the writ, it could not be said that UPSEB had deliberately under utilised its generation capacity, and held the first proviso to Clause 6(a)(i) of the order ultra vires, quashed it and directed the UPSEB to supply electrical energy to the company in accordance with law, without taking into consideration, the provisions of the said proviso.
Appeals were filed in this Court by the State and the Company, the State being aggrieved because the High Court had interfered with the U.P. Electricity (Regulation of Supply, Distribution, Consumption and Use) Order, 1977 dated September 19, 1977 made under section 22B of the Electricity Supply Act, 1910 and the Company felt aggrieved on the ground that the High Court had not granted all the reliefs which it had claimed in its petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
In the appeals it was contended: (a) Only the energy which was generated by the Board could be the subject matter of an order under section 22B of the Act and it was not permissible for the State to take into account the energy generated by the Company for its own use.
(b) Sub section
(1) of section 22B of the Act was confined to a licensee and would not be applicable to the energy supplied by a sanction holder under section 28.
(c) The only permissible preference was that under s.22A in favour of an establishment mentioned in it and the preference shown to individual consumers was illegal.
(d) The validity of the Order, which was by way of subordinate legislation, was open to judicial scrutiny; the subjective satisfaction of the State Government in making it was open to challenge in a court of law, the order suffered from the vice of malice in law; it had been made in the colourable exercise of 712 the power under section 22B of the Act simply to compel the company to agree to the payment of a higher rate for the supply of energy to it.
While making the order the State Government failed to take into consideration the facts that the production of aluminium was of considerable importance to the national economy and that the Board was capable of generating more energy but was not doing so.
The issue of the Order was really a colourable exercise of the State Government 's power under section 22B of the Act as power was supplied indiscriminately to new consumers after imposing a cut on the Company 's consumption of energy.
(e) The Board had deliberately reduced its thermal generation.
^ HELD: 1.
The High Court erred in taking the view that the Pipri Bus Bar, which was composed of a set of conductors which were made up of thick aluminium core steel reinforced cables, was a 'distributing main ' under section 2(e) of the Act and was an electric supply line as defined in section 2(f) and that cl.
VI of the Schedule to the Act would be fully applicable to the Board in so far as its obligation to the Company was concerned.
In view of the second proviso of section 26 of the Act of 1948, the provisions of cl.
VI of the Schedule to the Act could apply to the U.P.S.E.B. in respect of that area only where distribution mains had been laid by the Board and the supply of energy through any of them had commenced.
[724B F] The High Court, therefore, erred in taking the view that the Board was bound by the term of cl.
VI of the Schedule to the Act to supply energy to the Company within one month of the making of a requisition or within such longer period as the Electrical Inspector might allow.
But even if the Board was under an obligation to supply energy to every person, the fact nevertheless remained that the State Government had the over riding power to provide, by order made under section 22B of the Act, for regulating the supply, distribution, consumption or use thereof.
Sub section
(2) of that section categorically states that, without prejudice to the generality of the power under sub section
(1), the order may direct the Board not to comply with any contract, agreement or requisition for the supply of energy.
[725B D] 2.
Sub section
(1) of section 28 of the Act in terms refers to and deals with, engaging by a non licensee, in the business of supplying energy to the "public".
It was, therefore, futile to contend that what was generated by the Renusagar Power Company was not meant for supply to the public, but was the Company 's own energy.
It is true that generation became, in the circumstances, the "captive" generation for the use of the Company, but that was far from saying that, in the eye of law, it was not energy meant for supply to the public or that it was not amenable to control under section 22B.
It was therefore also liable to equitable distribution by an order under section 22B of the Act.
[725G 726A] 3.
The expression "energy" had been defined by cl.
(g) of section 2 of the Act to mean electrical energy, generated, transmitted or supplied for any purpose or used for any purpose except the transmission of a message.
It was therefore a pervading definition and there was no reason why energy generated and supplied under section 28 of the Act should not fall within its sweep.
[726B C] 4.
Though the use of the article "the" in sub section
(2) was not quite appropriate, there was no justification for the argument that section 22B was applicable only to licensees and not to a sanction holder under section 28.
[727C] 713 5.
What section 22B of the Act authorised the State Government to do, was to make an order providing for 'regulating" the supply, distribution, consumption or use of energy.
[727D] 6.
A distinction between 'regulation ' and 'restriction ' or 'prohibition ' had always been drawn. 'Regulation ' promotes the freedom or the facility which is required to be regulated in the interest of all concerned, whereas 'prohibition ' obstructs or shuts off, or denies it to those to whom it is applied.
The High Court went wrong in thinking that the order had the effect of prohibiting the supply of energy to the Company, which was an 'exciting consumer '.
[727G 728C] Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto vs Virgo, ; Attorney General for Ontario vs Attorney General for the Dominion and the Distillers and Brewers ' Association of Ontario, ; Birmingham and Midland Motor Omnibus Co. Ltd. vs Worcestershire County Council, Tarr vs Tarr. ; The Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1963] 1 SCR 491; State of Mysore vs H. Sanjeeviah, ; ; Fatehchand Himmatlal & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra etc.
; at p. 851. 7.
What had been ordered was no more than a cut of 50 per cent in the monthly consumption of electricity and not a total prohibition of consumption of energy.
That was a step in the direction of regulating the consumption of energy, and not a total prohibition as envisaged in the proviso to cl. 6(a) (i) of the Order.
[728E] 8.
The proviso operates in a special or particular field and for a particular purpose where it was considered necessary for regulating the supply etc., of the energy in the interest of the other consumers, for section 22B was mean to maintain the supply and secure the equitable distribution of energy to all concerned.
The High Court did not properly appreciate that aspect of the matter.
[728F] 9.
Large and heavy industrial consumers of the category in cl.
6(a)(i) are a class by themselves and it is hardly permissible for them to complain that the small preference shown to agriculturists in supplying energy for their water pumps or tube wells, or in energising State tube wells, supplying water to them, or the supply of energy to small scale industries had really created a privileged class of consumers or brought into existence any such concept of priorities as to run counter to or defeat the objective of bringing about the equitable distribution of energy by an order under section 22B. The High Court had no real justification for recording an adverse finding against the State on the question of the so called preference or priorities.
[729G H, 730B] 10.
There was no doubt that the State Government formed its opinion about the necessity and expediency of making the Order for the purpose of maintaining the supply and securing the equitable distribution of energy at a time when that was called for and this Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal to examine any and every argument in an attempt to show that the opinion of the State Government was vitiated for one fanciful reason or the other.
[731 G H] 11.
Although the U.P. Electricity (Regulation of Supply, Distribution, Consumption and Use) Order, 1977, had been made on the ground that the State Government was of the opinion that it was necessary and expedient for main 714 taining the supply and securing the equitable distribution of electrical energy, to provide for regulating the supply, distribution, consumption and use thereof, it did not deal with all those matters in detail.
In fact it may well be said to be an order relating essentially to compulsory cut in the consumption of energy.
But that cannot detract from the basic fact that the order had the sanction of section 22B of the Act and subserved the main purpose thereof.
Therefore its validity was not open to challenge as a piece of subordinate legislation.
[732G 733B] 12.
Malice in law is another aspect of the doctrine of ultra vires.
An offending Act can be condemned simply, for the reason that it is unauthorised.
Bad faith has often been treated as interchangeable with unreasonableness and taking a decision on extraneous considerations.
In that sense, it is not really a distinct ground of invalidity.
It is well settled that if a discretionary power has been exercised for an 'unauthorised purpose ' that is enough to invite the Court 's review.
[733 D] Roncarelli vs Duplessis, p. 141 (Canada Law Reports); referred to.
In the instant case, the Company had not been able to establish malice in law, merely because of what the Chief Secretary said in his press statement dated July 8, 1977, or what the Minister informed the Assemble.
It may well be that the new State Government was dissatisfied with the new agreement which had been entered into at the instance of the political party which was then in power, but it could not be said that the new Minister 's desire to examining the validity or propriety of that agreement arose out of any extraneous or improper consideration so as to amount to malice in law.
[734H 735A] 13.
Although the High Court arrived at the conclusion that the company deserved the writ which it granted, it did not find it possible to hold that the UPSEB, had deliberately under utilised its generation capacity.
That was a finding of fact which did not call for interference.
[736E] 14.
As long as the dominant motive was proper and reasonable, and was not sullied by a mere pretext, the Order based on it would be valid when it was well within the due scope and policy of the Act and was an honest attempt to deal with the situation for which the power to make the order had been granted by the Act.
There was thus no justification for the argument that there was malice in law on the part of the State Government in making the order.
[736G, F] 15.
That distribution can be said to be "equitable" which is "just and right under all the circumstances of the particular case".
The High Court had recorded a finding that there was shortage in the generation of energy when the order was made.
The fact remains that the demand for energy was far in excess of the supply from all sources available to the UPSEB.
It had also been well established that a situation had arisen when it became necessary to obtain an order from the State Government about the course of action to be adopted by the Board.
Self contained notes were therefore drawn up in March, 1977 and on May 24, 1977.
June 28, 1977 and August 26, 1977, which were quite detailed and objective and led to the making of the Order.
The Order was a genuine attempt to secure equitable distribution of energy.
It was true that the Company was the worst sufferer under cl. 6 (a)(i) of the Order, but then it was also the greatest consumer.
[737C F] 715 16.
From the Chief Secretary 's letter dated November 20, 1968 it appeared that the State Government had assured the Company that it would meet the interim requirement of the Company for 2 or 3 years from the UPSEB and facilitate the parallel running of the Company 's new power station in addition to the station which had been set up at Renusagar.
But the State was not a party to the agreement dated November 30, 1976 for the supply of additional 30mw.
because the agreement was made between the Company and the UPSEB.
It was expressly stated in that agreement that it would be subject to the provisions of the Electricity Acts of 1910 and 1948 and the rules and regulations thereunder, including the amendments thereto.
Care was also taken to provide that the UPSEB shall not be responsible for damages or diminutions in the supply of energy according to the orders issued by the State Government.
A similar provision was made in the earlier agreement of 1959.
In the Board 's letter to the Company dated September 2, 1972 reference was specifically made to the State Government 's power to "control the distribution and consumption of energy under section 22B of the ." [739A D] 17.
Decisions in the matter of restrictions to be imposed on the consumption of energy on account of acute shortage of energy in the State, were taken by the different State Governments, including the Governor 's Advisors, and it cannot be said that the cuts were imposed suddenly, or without due regard to the company 's difficulties in reducing its consumption of energy in the manner directed by the order.
It cannot therefore, be said that the State wantonly disregarded its contractual obligation to the company.
[739E F] 18.
Sub section (2) of section 22B of the Act specifically provided that it was permissible for the State Government to direct by the order that the UPSEB shall not comply with the provisions inter alia of any contract made by it.
A direction to that effect was expressly made in cl. 11 of the Order, and so it is not permissible for the company to complain on that account.
[739G] 19.
Craics on Statute Law (7th Edn.) pages 357 58 has mentioned six different classes of enactments which are considered as having ceased to be in force.
These six have been mentioned as the enactments which are selected for inclusion in the Statute Law Revision Acts of England as having ceased to be in force otherwise than by express repeal, or having by lapse of time or otherwise become unnecessary.
[740G, 741D] The question is whether the order could be said to have "spent" itself or become "obsolete".
Whether a piece of legislation has spent itself or exhausted in operation by the accomplishment of the purpose for which it was passed, or whether the state of things contemplated by the enactment has ceased to exist are essentially questions of fact for the legislature to examine, and no vested right exists in a citizen to ask for a declaration that the law has been impliedly repealed on any such ground.
[741E F] 20.
The power to legislate is both positive in the sense of making a law, and negative in the sense of repealing a law or making it imperative.
In either case it is the power of the legislature, and should lie where it belongs.
In an extreme and a clear case, no doubt, an antiquated law may be said to have become obsolete the more so if it is a penal law and has become incapable of user by a drastic change in the circumstances.
But the judge of the change should be the legislature, and courts are not expected to undertake 716 that duty unless that becomes unavoidable and the circumstances are so apparent as to lead to one and only one conclusion.
This is equally so in regard to the delegated or subordinate legislation.
[741G 742A] Elwood Hamilton vs Kentucky Distilleries & Warehouse Co., ; ; Chastleton Corporation vs A. Leftwich Sinclair, ; ; Nashville, Chattanooga & St. Louis Railway vs Herbert section Walters, ; ; The Union of India vs Ram Kanwar & Ors., ; ; referred to.
The Petition of the Earl of Antrim & 11 Other Irish Peers, ; distinguished.
The High Court found three facts (i) the shortage in the reservoirs for generation of hydel energy had ceased, (ii) further supply of energy was available from newly commissioned units, and (iii) fresh power connection had been given by the UPSEB, but lost sight of the important fact that it was all along the case of the State that hydel energy was only one third of the total generation, and that generation of thermal energy which met two third of the total requirement had declined for reasons beyond the control of U.P.S.E.B.
The High court did not therefore undertake a careful examination of the facts, and took some new connections into consideration without attempting to examine their magnitude and effect on the overall generation and availability of energy from all the sources.
The High Court therefore erred in taking the view that the continuance of the Order was no longer justified.
Even so, the High Court abstained from striking down the whole of the Order and merely declared that the provision of the first proviso to cl. 6(a) (i) was ultra vires, and quashed it.
[743C F] 22.
Even though the proviso is valid and has wrongly been quashed by the High Court, it is not necessary to restore it in view of the statement of the Solicitor General, so that it shall not be deemed to form part of cl. 6(a)(i) of the Order.
But it there is deterioration in the generation of energy again, or there are other sufficient reasons, within the purview of section 22B of the Act to reinsert the proviso, in the present or modified form, it would be permissible for the State Government to do so accordingly to the law.
[743G H, 744C]
