Three Petitioners between the ages of 10 & 14 came by an eleven year old girl, tending cattle in a village, near a neglected brick kiln which temptingly offered protective privacy for committing rape.
They advanced towards the victim and tied her up.
They forcibly went through the exercise of rape.
The courts below have held the three petitioners guilty of an offence under section 376 J.P.C. and sentenced each to two years ' rigorous imprisonment.
The offenders being children the dilemmatic issue is to fix the sentencing guide lines for juvenile delinquents.
It was argued that "Justice and the Child" is a distinct jurisprudential criminological branch of socio legal speciality which is still in its infant status in India and many other countries.
The children Act is a preliminary exercise, the Borstal School is an experiment in reformation and even Section 360 Criminal Procedure Code tends in the same direction.
In the absence of any report from the Reformation Officer nor any consideration of the social milieu, personal antecedents, parental influence, educational status and other material factors bearing on the three petitioners, the Court while accepting the appeal, ^ HELD: The appellants should be released on probation of good conduct and committed to the care of their respective parents and if no surviving parents, then their guardian, executing a bond each without sureties to be responsible for the good behaviour of the youthful offender for a period of two years from the date of release and for the observance of a condition namely that the child shall be put to school or continue its studies if it is already at school and attend any recreational or meditational centre, if any, of the parents ' choice regularly.
The Reformation Officer enjoying jurisdiction in the locality will have supervision over each of the appellants and shall make a report once every three months to the Trial Court.
The Reformation Officer will explain to the appellants and their parents the import of this order.
[776H, 777A C] Pathak, J. (concurring) On the question whether the youthful offender should be proceeded against under section 29 or Section 30 of the U.P. Children Act 1951, the court must apply its mind to certain considerations like the age of the child, his family background, his general past conduct and antecedents, the circumstances in which he committed the offence and which of the measures provided by section 29 or section 30 would more effectively and yet not harshly enable the child to develop into a responsible member of society.
The statute is concerned with a person whose personality, judgment and discretion had not yet attained maturity.
A "child" has been defined under Sec.
2(4) of the Act as a person under the age of sixteen years.
Therefore the primary object must be to place the child in an environment conducive to his rehabilita 769 tion and providing scope for corrective action which is the basic criteria for determining the choice between section 29 and section 30 of the Act.
Where a child has acted on an impulse in committing an offence and there is nothing to show the presence of any vicious streak of character, it would be more appropriate to leave him to the care and attention of parental authority under section 30(1) (b) of the Act rather than send him to an approved school.
On the facts of the present case, such an order would meet the ends of justice and serve the object of the statute.
[779E H, 780A B] William vs New York, ; , 249, Sentencing and probation National Collage of the State Judiciary Reno, Nevada, page 258 relied upon.
