The Kerala State Legislature felt the necessity of making comprehensive land reforms in the State.
The Kerala Agrarian Relations Act, 1960 (Act IV of 1961) was accordingly passed and received the assent of the President on January 21, 1961.
Some of its provisions were brought into force with effect from February 15, 1961.
That Act was struck down as unconstitutional by this Court.
The Kerala Ryotwari Tenants and Kudikidappukars Protection Act, 1962 was then passed for the temporary protection of tenants in those taluks.
The Kerala High Court declared it null and void in its application to the ryotwari lands of the Malabar area and most of the lands of Travancore area.
As an interim legislation, the Kerala Tenants and Kudikidappukars Protection Act 1963 was passed to provide some protection to the tenants.
But it repealed the Kerala Ryotwari Tenants and Kudikidappukars Protection Act, 1962, and suspended the operation of the Kerala Agrarian Relations Act, 1960.
After re examining the requirements in the field of land reforms as a whole, the Kerala Land Reforms Bill, 1963 was published in the State Gazette on Sept. 15, 1963.
It covered a wide field in the matter of land reforms and, inter alia, provided for the imposition of a ceiling on `holdings ' of lands, the surrender of excess of lands, grant of compensation thereof, and the assignment of the surrendered lands in accordance with the order of priority mentioned in the Bill, collection of purchase price, constitution of Land Tribunals etc.
The Land Reforms Act 1963 (Act 1 of 1964) received the assent of the President on Dec., 31, 1963.
It was amended extensively, and in several material particulars by Act, 35 of of 1971 and Act 17 of 1972.
The following three main points of controversy arose in the appeals : 1.
Whether lands converted into plantations between April 1, 1964 and January 1, 1970 qualified for exemption under section 81(1)(e) of the Act.
Whether a certificate of purchase issued by the Land Tribunal under section 72K of the Act was binding on the Taluk Land Board in proceedings under Chapter III of the Act.
Whether the validity or invalidity of transfers effected by persons owning or holding lands exceeding the ceiling limit could be determined with reference to the ceiling area in force on the date of the transfer or in accordance with the ceiling area prescribed by Act 35 of 1969 whether sub section (3) of section 84 was retrospective in operation.
^ HELD : Point No. 1.
The controversy is whether the restriction of sub.
section (4) of section 82 came into force on January 1, 1970, because section 12 of the amending Act of 1971 was brought into force on that date, or 840 whether it came into force on April 1, 1964, when section 82 as originally enacted came into force.
[853H, 854G] All the three Acts contain provisions about their "commencement".
Subsection (3) of section 1 of the Act provides that : (i) Section 1 of the Act shall come into force at once, (ii) the other provisions of the Act shall come into force on such dates as the Government may appoint, (iii) different dates may be appointed for different provisions of the Act, and (iv) any reference in any such provision to the "commencement of this Act" shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
The Act was published in the Gazette on January 14, 1964, and, by virtue of section 3 of the Kerala Interpretation and General Clauses Act, section 1 came into force on that date.
Sec. 82, as has been stated, came into force on April 1, 1964, and the reference in sub section (4) of that section to the "commencement of this Act" meant a reference to the coming into force of that provision with effect from April 1, 1964.
It may be that the first three rules or directions contained in sub section (3) were spent on the coming into force of sec.
1 of the Act or its other provisions on the dates appointed for them, but, for obvious reasons, rule (iv) continued to hold the field inasmuch as it laid down the rule of construction that any reference to the commencement of the Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that particular provision.
It was therefore applicable as a general rule of construction whenever it became necessary to ascertain the date of commencement of a particular provision of the Act other than section 1.
[854G, 855B F] Sub section (4) of section 82, as originally incorporated in the Act, came into force on April 1, 1964.
It was amended by section 66 of the Amending Act of 1969, which came into force on January 1, 1970, but that proved to be fortuitous and was supplanted by section 12 of the Amending Act of 1971 from the same date.
The sub section as amended by the Amending Act of 1971 also dealt with the conversion of land into any other class of land "after the commencement of this Act", but it added the words "or into a plantation" and provided that such conversion shall not be taken into consideration for determining the extent of the land to be surrendered.
[855F H] On the plain meaning of the proviso to sub section 3 of section 1, it follows that when the provision of sub section 4 of section 82 was brought into force on April 1, 1964, its amended version also came into force from that date.
[856B, E] No particular significance attaches to the use of the expression "provisions" or "provision" in section 1(3) of the Act.
A provision is a distinct rule or principle of law in a statute which governs the situation covered by it.
So an incomplete idea, even though stated in the form of a section of a statute, cannot be said to be a provision for, by its incompleteness, it cannot really be said to provide a whole rule or principle for observance by those concerned.
A provision of law cannot therefore be said to exist if it is incomplete, for then it provides nothing.
[856G, 857C D] The amended section 82 of the Act is a distinct rule or a clause for it provides the extent of the ceiling area in the cases mentioned in it, its effect on the lands owned or held individually by members of a family or jointly 841 by some or all the members of the family, the taking into account of the shares of the members of the family or an adult unmarried person, the effect of conversion of any class of land into any other class of land specified in the Schedule or into a plantation and the extent of land liable to be surrendered, lands covered by a private trust or a private institution and exemption of land covered by section 81(6).
The section is therefore a "provision" by any standard as it states the law relating to the imposition of ceiling on land.
It may well be stated that sub section (4) of section 82 is also a provision of the law by itself, for it lays down a distinct rule relating to conversion of land for observance by all concerned.
[857D F, H, 858A] The view taken by the High Court in Ramunni Nair vs State of Kerala, , in regard to the meaning to be attached to the words "the commencement of this Act" is substantially correct and does not call for interference.
[859B] There is no force in the other argument that a landholder is, in any event, entitled to the benefit of the exemption under section 81 as amended by the Act of 1969 in respect of the "extent of plantation within the ceiling area" even though it were converted into a plantation during the period April 1, 1964 to December 31, 1969.
The argument is untenable because while sub section (1) of section 81 provides that the provisions of Chapter III shall not apply to lands and plantations mentioned in it, that is overridden by, and is subject to the requirement of, sub section (4) of section 82.
[859D F] Reference made to Saidu Muhammed vs Bhanukuitan State of Kerala & Ors.
vs Philomina etc.
, , and State of Kerala & Ors.
vs K. A. Gangadharan, ; Point No. 2.
The question for consideration is whether the certificate of purchase issued by the Land Tribunal under section 72K of the Act is binding on the Taluk Land Board in proceedings under Chapter III of the Act for the purpose of taking a decision in regard to the ceiling area under sub section (5) of section 85.
Sub section (1) of that section shows that the question for examination by the Board is not that relating to the existence of the tenancy rights of the person who files the statement under sub section (2), but that relating to the bona fides of his belief that the land sought to be excluded by him is liable to be purchased by a cultivation tenant.
The Land Tribunal and the Taluk Land Board thus operate in their respective fields for the purpose of the Act.
[860 B, E G].
Sub section (2) of section 72K merely declares that the certificate of purchase shall be conclusive proof of the "assignment" of the right, title and interest of the landowner and the intermediary (if any) to the tenant in respect of the holding concerned.
There is nothing in the sub section to require that the finding recorded by the Tribunal in those proceedings would be conclusive proof of any other matter so as to bind the Taluk Land Board or any authority.
Sub section (2) of section 72K therefore does not impinge on the authority of the Taluk Land Board to discharge its own functions under section 85(5).
[860G H, 861A B] As such the Board is quite free to cause the particulars mentioned in the statement to be verified, and to ascertain whether the person filing it owns or holds any other land, and to determine the "extent" as well as the "identity" of the excess land which he is required to surrender.
In that sphere of work, 842 the certificate of purchase is not required by law to be conclusive proof in regard to the surplus or any other land held by its holder so as to foreclose the decision of the Taluk Land Board under sub section (5) of section 85.
[861B D] Moreover, although the certificate of purchase is conclusive proof in respect of the matters stated in section 72K(2), that only means that no contrary evidence shall be effective to displace it, unless the so called conclusive evidence is inaccurate on its face, or fraud can be shown (Halsbury 's Laws of England, fourth edition, vol.
17, page 22 paragraph 28).
"Inaccuracy on the face" of the certificate is not as wide in its connotation as an "error apparent on the face of the record".
It will therefore not be permissible for the Board to disregard the evidentiary value of the certificate of purchase merely on the ground that it has not been issued on a proper appreciation or consideration of the evidence on record, or that the Tribunal 's finding suffers from any procedural error.
What sub section (2) of section 72K provides is an irrebutable presumption of law, and it may well be regarded as a rule of substantive law.
But even so, it thereby does not take away the jurisdiction of the Taluk Land Board to make an order under section 85(5) after taking into consideration the "conclusive" evidentiary value of the certificate as far as it goes.
[861E H, 862A] The view taken in Kunianujan Thampuran & Ors.
vs Taluk Land Board, is thus not quite correct.
[862B] Point No. 3.
Some of the persons who owned or held lands exceeding the ceiling prescribed by the Act, had voluntarily transferred some of their lands after the publication of the Kerala Land Reforms Bill, 1963, in the State Gazette on September 15, 1963.
Section 84 of the Act therefore provides that, except for the transfers mentioned in the section, the transfers so made shall be deemed to be transfers calculated to defeat the provisions of the Act, and shall be invalid.
The section has thus been linked with section 82 which specifies the ceiling area, and has been so amended as to reduce that area considerably.
The question is whether the validity of a voluntary transfer is to be determined with reference to the ceiling area in force on the date of the transfer, or the reduced ceiling area prescribed by the Amending Act of 1969.
As has been observed by this Court in State of Kerala & Ors.
vs K. A. Gangadharan, ; , section 84 has been enacted with a view to making the provisions of sections 83 and 85 effective.
Section 15 of the Amending Act of 1972 (which inserted sub section (3) in section 84) does not state that it has been made with retrospective effect, and sub section (3) does not, in terms, state that it shall be deemed to have come into force from the date of the amendment which was made by the Amending Act of 1969.
Even so, it is necessary to examine the true effect of the insertion and to decide whether it is retroactive.
[862G H, 863A, D, G, H, 864A B] The primary rule of construction is that courts should be guided by the plain and clear language of the statute, for the legislature is intended to mean what it has expressed.
It is an equally important rule of interpretation that a statute is not to be read retrospectively except for necessity.
[864B] So construed, it is obvious that although the Act had not even come into force on September 15, 1963, it invalidated the transfers made after that date in excess of the ceiling area it prescribed.
It follows therefore that so long as September 15, 1963 continues to remain the date with reference to which 843 the transfers are to be invalidated, the variation in the extent of the ceiling has necessarily to work back to that date.
The legislature therefore inserted sub section (3) of section 84 to clarify that the expression "ceiling area" in the earlier sub sections would mean the ceiling area specified in section 82(1) as amended by the Amending Act of 1969, i.e. the reduced ceiling.
[864D F] In taking this view the Court made a reference to the notes on clauses to the Amending Bill of 1972 and observed that while it was true that the intention of the legislature cannot be ascertained from any statement by way of a note on the clauses of the Bill or, brevet, and the duty of the Court is to find the natural meaning of the words in a statute in the context in which they are used, it has always been considered permissible and even desirable to take note of the history of the statute and the circumstances in which it was passed or the mischief at which it was directed.
The reason is that the meaning which is to be given to a statute should be such as will carry out its object.
So viewed, it appears that, as has plainly been stated in it, the "ceiling area" referred to in sub sections (1) and (2) of section 84 is the reduced ceiling area specified by the Amending Act of 1969.
It is clearly retrospective, as it is meant to invalidate the transfers made after September 15, 1963 when the Bill of 1963 was published.
[864F, 865G H, 866A B, C] The Court then examined some of the appeals separately and recorded its finding thereon.
[866F 868 & 869, 879 877].
While examining civil appeal No. 1015 of 1976, the Court examined the question whether a child in the womb on January 1, 1970 was a member of the family for the purpose of section 82(1) (c) of the Act.
It referred to the definition of the expression "family" in clause (14) of sec.
2 and of the expression "minor" as defined in clause (36A) and held that two postulates were necessary for obtaining the benefit of the increase of one standard acre for each member of the family in excess of five, namely, that the member should be in existence, and it should be possible to ascertain that he had not attained the age of 18 years on the appointed date.
It was held that as both these conditions could not be said to exist in the case of a child en ventre sa mere, it would not be regarded as a member of the family for purposes of sec.
82 of the Act.
[868D F].
