The State Legislatures of eleven States, (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, orissa, Punjab, Tripura, U.P. and West Bengal) considered it desirable to have a uniform legislation enacted by Parliament for the imposition of a ceiling on urban property for the country as a whole and in compliance with cl.
(1) of article 252 of the Constitution passed a resolution to that effect.
Parliament accordingly, enacted the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976.
In the first instance, the Act came into force on the date of its introduction in the Lok Sabha i.e. January 28,1976 and covered the Union Territories and the eleven States which had already passed the requisite resolution under article 252(1) of the Constitution, including the State of Andhra Pradesh.
Subsequently, the Act was adopted, after passing resolutions under article 252(1) of the Constitution by the State Legislatures of Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Rajasthan.
The Act is in force in seventeen States and all the Union Territories in the country.
The primary object and the purpose of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 was to provide for the imposition of a ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomerations, for the acquisition of such land in excess of the ceiling limit, to regulate the construction of buildings on such land and for matters connected therewith, with a view to preventing the concentration of urban land in the hands of a few persons and speculation and profiteering therein, and with a view to bringing about an equitable distribution of land in urban agglomerations to subserve the common good, in furtherance of the Directive Principles of Articles 39(b) and (c).
803 The legislation falls under Entry 18, List II of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, which refers to 'Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, etc. ' The State Legislatures alone are competent to enact any legislation relating to land of every description including lands situate in urban areas.
The resolutions passed by the State Legislatures, vested in Parliament the power to regulate by law, the imposition of a ceiling on urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of this ceiling, as well as in respect of 'all matters connected therewith and ancillary or incidental thereto. ' In writ petitions filed by the respondents, the High Court being of the view that the term 'legislature ' in article 252(1) of the Constitution comprises both the Houses of Legislature, (the Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council) and the Governor of the State, struck down the Act on the ground that the Parliament was not competent to enact the impugned Act for the State of Andhra Pradesh inasmuch as the Governor of Andhra Pradesh did not participate in the process of authorisation for the passing of the Act by the Parliament.
The High Court observed that since two distinct terms 'legislature ' and 'Houses of Legislature ' were used in the same article they must, as a matter of construction, bear different meanings, and The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act 1976 is ultra vires the Parliament so far as the State of Andhra Pradesh is concerned.
It also held that even assuming the Act is in force in the State, it is not applicable to Warangal because there was no master plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of section 244(1) (c) of the Andhra Pradesh (Telengana Area) District Municipalities Act, 1956.
In the connected writ petition under article 32, the question raised was whether the inclusion of the State of Rajasthan in Schedule I to the Urban (Land Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 and the categorisation of the urban agglomeration of the cities and towns of Jaipur and Jodhpur in category 'C ' and Ajmer, Kota and Bikaner in category 'D ' therein is beyond the legislative competence of Parliament and, therefore, the Act is liable to be struck down to that extent.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that the term 'legislature ' in article 252(1) must, in the context, mean the House or the Houses of Legislature, as the case may be and it does not include the Governor.
The key to the interpretation of the first part of cl.
(1) of article 252 lies in the words 'to that effect ', and they obviously refer to the 'desirability ' of Parliament making a law on a State subject.
It was pointed out that though the Governor is the component part of the State Legislature under article 168, he is precluded by the terms of article 158(1) from being a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of Legislature of any State.
Not being a member of the House or Houses of Legislature of a State, as the case may be, the question of his participation, in the proceedings of the State Legislature in passing a resolution under article 252(1) does not at all arise.
To concede to the Governor the power to participate in the process of authorization for the passing of a law by the Parliament on a State subject under article 252(1), as the High Court had done, or to the process of ratification of a constitutional amendment by the State Legislature under proviso to article 368(2) to a constitutional amendment by the Parliament under article 368(1), would create a dangerous situation and would be destructive of the constitutional system which is based on the Westminster model under which the Governor is only the constitutional head of the state.
804 The Parliament being invested with the power by resolution passed under the first part of article 252(1) by as many as eleven states, to legislate on the subject i.e. to make a law for the imposition of a ceiling on immovable property, it had the competence to so structure the Act that it was capable of being adopted by other States under the second part of article 252(1).
A fortiori, the specification of the State of Rajasthan by which the Act may be adopted, as well as the categorisation of the urban agglomerations therein to which it may apply, had to be there.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the writ petition; ^ HELD: 1 (a) Declared that the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act 1976 a law enacted by the Parliament by virtue of its powers under Article 252(1) is and has always been in force in the State of Andhra Pradesh with effect from January 28, 1976.
[831D] (b) Declared that the Act extends to the Urban agglomerations of Warangal.
[831D] (c) The Act applies to the States of Rajasthan with effect from March 9, 1976.
[831D] 2. article 252 appears in Part XI headed 'Relations between the Union and the States ' and occurs in Chapter I relating to 'Legislative Relations ', i.e., dealing with the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States.
Our constitution though broadly federal in structure is modelled on the British Parliamentary system, with unitary features.
Parliament may assume legislative powers (though temporarily) over any subject under article 249, by a two third vote that such legislation is necessary in 'the national interest ', while a Proclamation of Emergency under article 352 is in operation, Parliament is also competent under article 250 to legislate with respect to any such matter in the State List.
article 251 makes it clear that the legislative power of the State legislatures to make any law which they have power under the Constitution to make, is restricted by the provisions of Articles 249 and 250, but, if any law made by the legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law enacted by the Parliament, the law made by Parliament shall prevail and the law made by the State legislature to the extent of repugnancy shall not be valid so long as the law enacted by Parliament is effective and operative.
[812H 813C] 3.
While article 263 provides for the creation of an Inter State Council for effecting administrative co ordination between the States in matters of common interest, article 252 provides the legislative means to attain that object.
[813F] 4.
The effect of the passing of a resolution under cl.(1) of article 252 is that Parliament, which has no power to legislate with respect to the matter which is the subject of the resolution, becomes entitled to legislate with respect to it, and the State legislature ceases to have a power to make a law relating to that matter.
After the enactment of a law by the Parliament under this Article, it is open to any of the other States to adopt the Act for such State by merely passing a resolution to that effect in its legislature, but the operation of the Act in such State cannot be from a date earlier than the date of the resolution passed in the Legislature adopting the Act.
The question as to whether or not there is surrender by the State Legislature of its power to legislate, and if so, to what extent, must depend on the language of the resolution passed under article 252(1).
[813G] M/S. R.M.D.C. (Mysore) Private Ltd. vs The State of Mysore referred to: 6.
Article 252(2) specifically lays down that after Parliament makes an Act in pursuance of the resolution, such Act cannot be amended or repealed by the State Legislature even though the matter to which the Act of Parliament relates was included in List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
[813H] 7. article 252(1) is in two parts.
The first part of the Article is only introductory the second is the operative part.
The first part merely recites about the "desirability" of the Parliament legislating on a subject in respect of which it has no power to make laws except as provided in Articles 249 and 250.
The words "to that effect" in the first part, therefore, refer to the 'desirability ' for effecting administrative control by the Parliament over two or more States in respect of matters of common interest.
Thus the word 'legislature ' in the first part of article 252(1), in the context in which it appears, cannot mean the three component parts of the State Legislature, contemplated by article 168, but only the House or Houses of Legislature, as the case may be, i.e. excluding the Governor.
[815D, 815H 816A] 8.
The High Court had completely overlooked the fact that there is a clear distinction between 'an Act of legislature, ' 'a legislative act ' and 'a resolution of the House.
[816B] 9.
It is quite clear from an enumeration of the powers, functions and duties of the Governor, that he cannot, in the very nature of things, participate in the proceedings of the House or Houses of Legislature, while the State Legislature passes a 'resolution ' in terms of article 252(1), he not being a member of the legislature under article 158.
[817C] 10.
The right of the Governor to send messages to the House or Houses of the Legislature under article 175 (2), with respect to a Bill pending in the legislature or otherwise, normally arises when the Governor withholds his assent to a Bill under article 200, or when the President, for whose consideration a Bill is reserved for assent, returns the Bill withholding his assent.
[817E] 12.
A 'Bill ' is something quite different from a 'resolution of the House ' and, therefore, there is no question of the Governor sending any message under article 175 (2) with regard to a resolution pending before the House or Houses of the Legislature.
[817F] 12.
The constitutional requirement under proviso to article 368 (2) of a ratification by the legislature of not less than one half of the States is that so far as the State legislatures are concerned, it requires that a resolution should be passed ratifying the amendment.
Such a resolution requires voting, and the Governor never votes upon any issue.
[818E] Jatin Chakravarty vs Shri H. K. Bose A.I.R. 1964 Cal.
500 approved.
What is true of a ratification by the State legislatures under proviso to article 368(2), is equally true of a resolution of the House or Houses of the 806 Legislature under article 252(1).
The Governor, nowhere comes in the picture at all in those matters.
[818F] 14.
The absence of the words 'unless the context otherwise requires ' in article 168, cannot control the meaning of the term 'legislature ' in article 252(1).
The term 'legislature ', in the context in which it appears, can only mean the House or Houses of Legislature, as the case may be.
[819C, D] 15.
The subject matter of Entry 18, List II of the Seventh Schedule i.e. 'land ' covers 'land and buildings ' and would, therefore, necessarily include 'vacant land. ' The expression 'urban immovable property ' may mean 'land and buildings ' or 'buildings ' or 'land '.
It would take in lands of every description i.e. agricultural land, urban land or any other kind and it necessarily includes vacant land.
[820G H] 16.
Before the Act was introduced in the Lok Sabha on January 28, 1976 it was preceded by State wise deep consideration and consultation by the respective States, including the State of Andhra Pradesh.
A working Group was constituted and in its report it proposed the imposition of a ceiling on urban immovable property and defined 'urban area ' to include the area within the territorial limits of municipalities or other local bodies and also the peripheral areas outside the said limits.
The Govt.
prepared a Model Bill in pursuance of the Report and a copy of each of the Report of the working Group and the Model Bill was placed on the table of Parliament.
The said documents were forwarded to the State Government of Andhra Pradesh, besides other State Governments for consideration by the State Legislatures before they passed a resolution under article 252(1).
[821A C] 17.
The State Legislatures were, therefore, aware of the position when they passed a resolution authorising the Parliament to make a law in respect of urban immovable property.
Their intention was to include the lands within the territorial area of a municipality or other local body of an urban area and also its peripheral area.
The concept of ceiling on urban immovable property and the nature and content of urban agglomeration ultimately defined by section 2(n) of the impugned Act, was, therefore, fully understood by the State Governments.
[821D E] 18.
It is but axiomatic that once the legislatures of two or more states, by a resolution in terms of article 252(1), abdicate or surrender the area i.e. their power of legislation on a State subject, the Parliament is competent to make a law relating to the subject.
It would indeed be contrary to the terms of article 252(1) to read the resolution passed by the State Legislature subject to any restriction.
The resolution, contemplated under article 252(1) is not hedged in with conditions.
In making such a law, the Parliament was not bound to exhaust the whole field of legislation.
It could make a law, like the present Act, with respect to ceiling on vacant land in an urban agglomeration, as a first step towards the eventual imposition of ceiling on immovable property of every other description.
[822B D] 19.
Under the scheme of the Act the imposition of a ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomeration does not depend on the existence of a master plan.
The definition of 'urban land ', as contained in section 2(o) of the Act is in two parts, namely (i) in a case where there is a master plan prepared under the 807 law, for the time being in force, any land within the limits of an urban agglomeration and referred to as such in the master plan, is treated to be urban land, and (2) in a case where there is no master plan, or the master plan does not refer to any land as urban land, any land within the limits of an urban agglomeration and situate in any area included within the local limits of a municipality or other local authorities is regarded as such.
The existence of a master plan within the meaning of section 2(h) is, therefore, not a sine qua non for the applicability of the Act to an urban agglomeration.
[824D F] 20.
A master plan prepared by a municipality may or may not contain a proposal for compulsory acquisition of land, or any descriptive matter or map to illustrate a scheme for development.
Mere absence of such proposal for compulsory acquisition or a map or descriptive matter would not be tantamount to there being no master plan.
A master plan may include proposals for development of areas required to be covered by section 244, sub s.(1), cl.(c) contiguous and adjacent to the municipal limits of a city or town, but may not designate the land to be compulsorily acquired, the absence of which would not invalidate the scheme.
This is because the municipality has always the power under section 250 of the Act to acquire the land required for implementation of such scheme.
[825E F] 21.
The revised master plan prepared for Warangal does, as it should provide for various development schemes, it also designates the lands subject to compulsory acquisition.
Even, if it were not so, the master plan prepared under section 244, sub s.(1), cl.(c) did not cease to be 'a master plan prepared in accordance with the law for the time being in force ', within the meaning of section 2(h) of the Act, in relation to the town of Warangal.
The Act is, therefore clearly applicable to the urban agglomerations of Warangal and it extends not only to all the lands included within the local limits of the Warangal Municipality but also includes the peripheral areas specified i.e. one kilometre around such limits.
[825G 826A] 22.
The Parliament having been invested with powers to legislate on a State subject, by resolutions passed by Legislatures of two or more States under article 252(1) has plenary powers to make suitable legislation.
It follows, as a necessary corollary, that the Act passed by the Parliament under article 252(1) can be so structured as to be capable of being effectively adopted by the other States.
Article 252(1) undoubtedly enables the Parliament to make a uniform law.
The Act so passed would automatically apply to the States, the legislatures of which have passed a resolution in terms of article 252(1), and at the same time it must be capable of being adopted by other States which have not sponsored a resolution, i.e. the non sponsoring States.
The second part of article 252(1) will be meaningful only if it were so interpreted otherwise, it would be rendered wholly redundant.
[830A C] 23.
The Act would automatically apply from the date of its application to those States which had passed the resolution in terms of the first part of article 252(1), and would extend to the adopting States from the date of the resolutions passed by the legislatures of such States.
The Parliament had, therefore, in fact and in law, competence to legislate on the subject of the imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property, and the Schedule to the Act cannot therefore, be struck down in relation to the State of Rajasthan.
[830F] 808 24.
In a law relating to the imposition of ceiling on vacant land in urban agglomerations throughout the territory of India, it was competent for the Parliament under Entry 18, List II of Seventh Schedule not only to have the States specified in the Schedule to the Act where the law will extend, but also include the categorisation of urban agglomerations in respect of the whole of the territory of India.
[830E]
