A suit (No. 1262/53) Challenging the notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act dated 10 10 1952 issued by the former Government of Bombay and later another notification under Section 6 of the Act dated 14 8 1953 (issued during the pendency of the suit), notifying that the final plots Nos. 41.
42 and 43 were required for public purpose viz. State Transport was dismissed by the Trial Court on 28 1 1959.
The first and the second appeals having failed, the respondents came up to this Court.
This Court in its decision inter partes, Valji Bhai 's case struck down Section 6 notification on the ground that the acquisition being for the benefit of a Corporation, though for a public purpose was bad beeause no part of the compensation was to come out of the public revenue and the provisions of Part VII of the Act had not been complied with.
After the bifurcation of the erstwhile State of Bombay, the land acquisition proceedings came within the cognizance of Gujarat State.
The State by its letter dated 22 8 1966 decided to contribute towards compensation a sum of Re. 1/ which was subsequently raised to Rs. 500/ .
The Government felt that as long time has elapsed since the earlier report under Section 5A was submitted by the Collector, a fresh enquiry should be made.
Accordingly the Additional Special Land Acquisition Officer issued a notice dated 1 8 1966 intimating to the respondents that if they so desired they might submit their further objections on or before 16 8 1966.
Complying with this notice, the respondents submitted further objections on 31 8 1966 and they were also given a personal hearing.
After examining the enquiry report submitted by the enquiry officer the Government of Gujarat issued a notification under Section 6 on 10 10 1967.
The respondents questioned the validity and legality of this notification in the writ petition filed by them on 14 2 1968 on the only ground that it was issued more than 15 years after the date of Section 4 notification.
The High Court was of the opinion that if the power to make a declaration under Section 906 6 is exercised after an unreasonable delay from the date on which notification under Section 4 is issued such exercise of power would be invalid and it accordingly struck down the notification under Section 6 of the Act.
Hence the two appeals one by the State of Gujarat and the other by the Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation.
Allowing the appeals by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The impugned section 6 notification was issued within the prescribed period introduced by the 1967 Amendment Act and, therefore could not be struck down on the only ground that the power to issue second section 6 notification was exercised after an unreasonable and unexplained delay.
Section 6 notification, dated 10th october 1967, therefore is valid and legal.[918G H, 919A] 2.
A combined reading of the provisions contained in sub section (2) of Section 4 with the one contained in the proviso to sub section (1) of Section 6 introduced by the Land Acquisition (Amendment and Validation) Act, (Central Act 13 of 1967) with effect from 20 1 1967 would make it clear that the Government would be precluded from making a declaration under section 6 after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of issue of a notification under Section 4 which may be issued after the Amendment Act came into force.
And in respect of those section 4 notifications which were issued prior to the commencement of the Ordinance i.e. 20 1 1967, any notification which is required to be issued under section 6 must be made within a period of two years whereafter as a necessary corollary all section 4 notifications issued prior to 20th January 1967 would stand exhausted and would not provide either a source of reservoir for issuing section 6 notification.
Consequently the mischief sought to be set at naught by the High Court by reading by necessary implication in the scheme of sections 4, 5A, and 6 the concept of exercise of statutory power within a reasonable time has been statutorily remedied.
The apprehensions of the High Court that if not checkmated by implying that such statutory power must be exercised within a reasonable time to curb arbitrary exercise of power to the detriment of a citizen have been taken note of by the legislature and fully met.
Absence of any decided case on the subject of which High Court took note could not permit an inference as has been done by the High Court that in the absence of a decided case the legislature would not remedy the possible mischief.
Legislature often does take note of a possible abuse of power by the executive and proceed to nip it in the bud by appropriate legislation and that has been done in this case.
There is now no more possibility of a gap of more than three years from the date on which section 4 notification is issued, otherwise it would be invalid as being beyond the prescribed period.
[916 G H, 917 A D] In the instant case, the notifications under section 4 was prior to the commeneement of the ordinance.
Therefore, the provision contained in sub section (2) of section 4 of the 1967 Amendment Act would be directly attracted.
The Government could, therefore, make a declaration within a period of two years from 20th January 1967.
The Government has in fact issued the impugned notification under section 6 on 10th October 1967 i.e. within the period prescribed by the Statute.
[917 E F] 907 3.When a period is prescuibed for exercise of power it manifests the legislative intention that the authority exercising the power within the prescribed time could not at least be accused of inaction or dithering and, therefore, such exercise of power could not be said to be bad or invalid on the only ground that there was unreasonable delay in the exercise of the power.
The very prescription of time inheres a belief that the nature and quantum of power and the manner in which it is to be exercised would consume at least that much time which the statute prescribes as reasonable and, therefore, exercise of power within the time could not be negatived on the only ground of unreasonable delay.
[917H, 918 A B] Therefore, in this case, there was no unreasonable delay in exercise of power and hence the exercise was neither bad nor invalid.
[918B] 4.
Once the legislature stepped in and prescribed a sort of limitation within which power to issue notification under section 6 could be exercised, it was not necessary to go in search of a further fetter on the power of the Government by raising the implication.
[918F G] In this case, the High Court by implication read a fetter on the power of the Government to issue section 6 notification within a reasonable time after the issue of section 4 notification after observing that there was no express provision that such power ought to be exercised within a reasonable time.
In raising this impliccation the High Court took into account the postulate that every statutory power must be exercised reasonably and a reasonable exercise of power implies its exercise within a reasonable time.
Coupled with it two other factors were taken into consideration such as the effect of issuing a section 4 notification on the rights and obligations of the owner of the land whose land is proposed to be acquured; the right of the Government to unilaterally cancel section 4 notification in the event of fall in prices; history of legislation; and delayed issue of section 6 notification would deny adequate compensation to the owner.
But by the time the High Court examined this matter the legislature had already introduced a provision by which the power to issue section 6 notification was to be exercised within the prescribed period of time.
At that stage there hardly arose a question of a search of the fetter on the power of the Government ignoring to some extent the express statutory provision.
[918C F] 5.
In the case of death of a party to a proceeding who is joined in his capacity as Karta of an undivided Hnndu family, if the undivided Hindu family continues to be in existence the succeeding Karta can be substituted for the deceased Karta of the family and that would be sufficient compliance with Order XXII Rule 4 of C.P.C. [911D E] In the insant case an application made under Order XXII Rules 10 C.P.C. made after the prescribed period of limitation and in order to avoid seeking condonation of delay for setting aside abatement is not correct.
[911E] [The Court, however, overruled the objection on this ground since the L.rs.
have already been substituted].
