The petitioners were owners of Stage Carriage Services holding permits under the Motor Vehicles Act of 1939.
The State Government of Orissa, in pursuance of its scheme of a Nationalised State 'Transport as contemplated by the Orissa Motor Vehicles (Regulation of Stage Carriage and Public Carrier 's Services) Act of 1947 (Orissa Act XXXVI of 1947) and Orissa Act I of 1949, which amended the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act of 1939, issued notifications under those Acts intimating the owners of different Stage Carriage Services operating different routes within the districts of Orissa that with effect from the 1st of January, 1955, either the Orissa Road Transport Co. Ltd., or the State Transport Service, formed under the two Acts, would exclusively operate the said routes.
The owners impugned the Acts as unconstitutional and violative of their funda mental rights.
It was contended that the two Acts, whose provisions were materially different, discriminated against them and in favour of the aforesaid transport services as also in their arbitrary application to different zones and territories of the State and contravened article 14 of the Constitution.
It was further contended that the provisions of the Acts and rules framed thereunder infringed articles 19(1)(f) and (g) by putting restrictions on the rights to hold property and to practise trade and business, that the Notifications 29 purporting to take away their transport business amounted to confiscation without compensation and infringed article 31(2) and lastly, that the impugned Acts violated freedom of inter state and intrastate trade guaranteed by article 301 of the Constitution.
Held, that the owners of Stage Carriage Services operating a particular route or in a particular area formed a separate group or class by themselves and so long as each one of such a group or class was governed by the same Act and treated the best judge as to which of the two impugned Acts, or the Act of 1939 which they sought to amend, should, in its administrative convenience, be applied to a particular locality or what mode it should follow for the implemen tation of its scheme and such zonal or territorial divisions it thought fib to make for that purpose according to different circumstances prevailing in different localities could not be held to be either discriminatory or violative of the equal protection of law.
That the position of the permit holders under the two Acts was not on a par, and was materially different and they fell into two distinct classes and, consequently payment of compensation under one and non payment under the other did not make for discrimination.
That the contention that the impugned Acts created a monopoly in favour of either the Joint Stock Company or the State by ousting the private Stage Carriage Services from the business and thereby infringed article 19(1)(f) was no longer tenable in view of article 19(6) of the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act of 1951.
Saghir Ahmad vs The State of U. P. ([1965] 1 S.C.R. 707), held inapplicable.
Bhikaji Narain Dhakras vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ([1955] 2 S.C.R. 589), applied.
That the provisions of the impugned Acts could not be held to contravene articles 19(1)(f) and 31(2) of the Constitution as the Act of 1947 did provide for compensation for premature termination and under the Act of 1949, renewal could not be claimed as a matter of right and any deprivation of proprietary right would be by authority of law.
That freedom of inter state or intrastate trade guaranteed by article 301 of the Constitution is not one of the fundamental rights that can be enforced under article 32 of the Constitution and article 305 as amended by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act of 1955 was a complete answer to that contention of the petitioners.
