A large sum of Rs. 30 lakhs in cash having been recovered from the respondent in pursuance to a search by the Income Tax officials his assessments for the years 1962 63 to 1972 73 were reopened by the Department.
The total tax burden on the respondent was over Rs. 30 lakhs and an additional sum of Rs. 35 lakhs was assessed for the year 1973 74.
The respondent was also prosecuted under s 277 of the Income Tax Act.
Appeals by the respondent to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner brought down the assessable income by about Rs. 10 lakhs.
The respondent and the department both appealed to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, the former filing 12 appeals and the latter 10 appeals.
The respondent moved the Settlement Commission for composition under section 245M.
The assessee withdrew his appeals and the revenue declared their assessments and appeals 'weak ' and withdrew them.
The Settlement Commission on receipt of the application under section 245C acted under section 24SD(l) and called for a report from the appellant.
The appellant reported that prosecution proceedings for concealment of income and also false verification in the return by the respondent were pending against the respondent in the Magistrate 's Court and that it was not a fit case to be proceeded with by the Commission.
The Settlement Commission after some correspondence with the respondent and without giving a hearing informed him that as the appellant had objected under section 245D ( I ), the Settlement Commission did not allow the application to be proceeded with.
The appellant thereupon moved the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal for restoration of its appeals although no specific provision enable such a restoration, the asssessee being entitled to apply for restoration under section 245M.
The respondent urged the Settlement Commission to review its order as no hearing as such was given to him.
The Settlement Commission yielded to his 1134 submission, reached the reverse conclusion that the appellant 's opposition to the composition notwithstanding, the application for settlement be considered on merits.
The core controversy in the appeals to this Court were whether in view of the withdrawal of the departmental appeals before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, the Commissioner is estopped from making a report under section 245D(1) proviso 2 to the Settlment Commission objecting to the application from being proceeded with.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that (a) there was no power of review for the Commission, since it had declined to proceed with the application for settlement and consequently the re opening of the Settlement proceedings was invalid, (b) even though the C.T.T. had withdrawn his appeals and thus facilitated the filing of an application under section 245C no bar of estoppel could be spelt out to forbid the Commissioner from exercising his statutory power of withholding consent to the settlement proceedings and (c) the C.l.
T 's veto was not subject to review or invalidation by the Settlement Commission Allowing the appeals: ^ HELD 1.
The Settlement Commission should be inhibited from proceeding with the application of the assessee and the appeals by the assessee before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal must be revived and disposed of expeditiously.
[1164F1 2.
The departmental appeals, having been admitted by the Commissioner of Income Tax himself to be very weak and frivolous, should not be revived as it will be only a waste of public time and money.
[iy] 3.
If the Department files an appeal which it drops to enable an application before the Commission, then the proviso to section 245M(1) does not debar the motion for settlement.
[1156C] 4.
Functionally speaking, Chapter XIXA in the Income Tax Act, 1961, enacted by the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975, engrafted in partial implementation of the Wanchoo Committee Report, provides for settlement of huge tax disputes and immunity from criminal proceeding by a Commission to be constituted by the Central Government when approached without objection from the Tax Department.
[1138E] 5.
Fiscal philosophy and interpretation technology must be on the same wavelength if legislative policy is to find fulfilment in the enacted text.
[1138 H] 6.
The mechanics of section 245D provides that the application for settlement, when filed, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner for a report and is only on the basis of the material contained in such report that the Settlement Commission may allow the application to be proceeded with or reject the application.
To reject an application is to refuse relief outright and affect the applicant adversely.
So it is provided "that an application shall not be rejected unless an opportunity has been given to the applicant of being heard.
" An applicant before the settlement Commission is therefore entitled to a hearing before his application for composition is rejected [1146G H] 1135 7.
The rule of fairplay incorporated in the first proviso to section 245D(l) A obligates the Commission to hear the applicant before rejection.
Even apart from any specific provision, it is legal fairplay not to hurt any party without hearing him unless the Act expressly excludes it.
Nothing is lost by hearing a petitioner whose application for settlement is being rejected and much may be gained by such hearing in properly processing the application in the spirit of Chapter XIXA.
S 245D ( 1 ) does.
not negate natural justice and in the absence of an express exclusion of the rule of audi alteram partem, it is fair, indeed fundamental, that no man is prejudiced by action without opportunity to show to the contrary.
Law leans in favour of natural justice where statutory interdict does not forbid it.
[1147A D, F] Mohinder Singh Gill v Chief Election Commissioner, ; ; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 1 SCC 248 referred to.
In the instant case, the Settlement Commission in the first instance rejected the application because the Commissioner of Income Tax objected to it.
The rule of fairplay incorporated in the first proviso to section 245(1) obligates the Commission to hear.
the applicant, before rejection.
The Settlement Commission 's decision to re hear and pass a de novo order cannot, therefore, be said to be illegal.
[1147E] 8.
The second proviso to section 245D ( 1 ) is compulsive in tune and import, for it mandates "that an application shall not be proceeded with under this sub section if the Commissioner objects to the application being proceeded with on the ground that concealment of particulars of income on the part of the applicant or perpetration of fraud by him for evading any tax. has been established or is likely to be established by any income tax authority, in ' relation to the case.
" There is little diffculty in holding that the application for settlement, having been rejected by the Commissioner, could not be proceeded with.
The veto of the Commissioner was the Waterloo of the application.
[1147G 1148A, D] 9.
Section 245H is of great moment from the angle of public interest and public morals at it immunises white collar offenders against criminal prosecutions and, in unscrupulous circumstances, becomes a suspect instrument of negotiable corruption.
More than the prospect of monetary liability and mounting penalty is the dread of traumatic prison tenancy that a tax dodging F tycoon is worried about.
And if he can purchase freedom from criminal prosecution and incarceratory sentence he may settle with the Commission, and towards this end, try to lay those who remotely control the departmental echelons whose veto or green signal, opens the prosecutions.
Thus, section 245H, which clothes the Commission with the power to grant immunity from prosecution for "any offence under this Act or under the Indian Penal Code or under any other Central Act. " is a magnet which attracts large tax dodgers and offers, indirectly an opportunity to the highest departmental and political authorities a suspect power to bargain.
[1150C E] 1O Section 245M enables certain persons who have filed appeals to the Appellate Tribunal to make applications to the Settlement Commission.
The section (a) enables withdrawal of appeals before tribunals by assessee as condition precedent to applications for composition by the Settlement Commission, (b) applies, by a legal fiction, Section 245C and to such applications, and (c) where the proceedings before the Commission is not entertained, allows revival of the withdrawn appeals thus restoring the Status quo ante.
1136 The proviso to section 245M(l) places an embargo on the right of the assessee to move the Commission where the income tax officer has preferred an appeal under sub s.(2) of section 253 against the order to which the assessee 's appeal relates.
The proviso interdicts entertainment of a settlement application if departmental appeals are filed.
[IISOF, 1151G, 1152C, 1153F] 11.
Purposefully interpreted preferring an appeal means.
more than formally filing it but effectively pursuing it.
If a party retreats before the contest begins it is as good as not having entered the fray.
After all, Chapter XIXA is geared to promotion of settlement and creation of road blocs in reasonable composition.
The teleological method of interpretation leads to the view that early withdrawal of the I.T.O 's appeal removed the bar of the proviso.
[1153C D] 12.
The purpose of substituting the method of investigative negotiation, just settlement and early exigibility by a high powered Commission for a tier upon tier of long protracted litigation, where victory may be phyrrhic and futile, is ill served by keeping out cases solely for the reasons that departmental appeals have been filed.
[1153H 1154A] 13.
The obvious object of the clause, "the assessee shall not be deemed to have withdrawn the appeal from the appellate tribunal," is to restore the parties to status quo ante, and in fairness, must apply to the Department as to the assessee.
This non discriminatory import can be reasonably read into the clause if we construe the expression "the assessee in wider way so as to include all parties affected by the subject matter of the assessment.
In that case, the clause may mean that no one who is aggrieved by the assessment shall be deemed to have withdrawn the appeal from the appellate tribunal.
" An equitable and purpose oriented construction of the clause means that the assessee will be put back in the same position vis a vis his appeals and if, to facilitate his moving the Commission the I.T.O. has withdrawn the depart mental appeals, the Commission 's rejection of the application shall not pre judice the Revenue.
Actus curie neminem gravabit is the principle of wider import and is a tool of construction too.
This perhaps may be making up for a lacuna by a restructuring of the clause so as to work out justice to the Department.
[1154E G] 14.
The scheme of section 253(4) contemplates filing of memorandum of cross objections by the ITO on receipt of notice of the appeal by the assessee.
So much so it is also possible, alternatively to read into section 245 (7) the right of the department to file an appeal de novo on receipt of notice of the revival of the assessee 's appeal, within the period specified in section 253 (4) .
This does not do violence to the language of section 245M(7) and affords equitable relief to the Department by enabling it to bring its appeal back to life notwithstanding the earlier withdrawal, when the assesses 's appeal reincarnates section 245M(7).
[1154H ll55B] 15.
The judicial process does not stand helpless.
with folded hands but engineers its way to discern meaning when a new construction with a view to rationlisation is needed.
[1155C] Seaford Court Estates Ltd. vs Asher, , referred to.
A casual perusal of Chapter XIXA convinces the discerning eye that the Settlement Commission exercises many powers which affect, for good or otherwise, the rights of the parties before it And vests in it power to grant 1137 immunity from prosecution and penalty, to investigate into any matters and to A enjoy conclusiveness regarding its orders or settlement.
Section 245L declares all proceedings before the Settlement Commission to be judicial proceedings.
Settlement Commission are therefore tribunals.
[ll57D E, ll56E] Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs P. N. Sharma and another ; referred to.
The Commissioner has a duty to the public Revenue and more importantly, a duty to object to any assessee who is prima facie guilty of grave criminal conduct in the shape of concealment of income or perpetration of fraud getting away with it by invoking chapter XIXA.
The gravity of this public policy cannot be undermined by interpretative softness of second puroviso to section 245D(l).
To whittle down the imperative nature of this veto power is to undo the expectations of the Wanchoo Committee and amounts to stultify the rule of law, an integral part of which is that the law shall not let the greater felon loose.
[1158E; 1158H 1159A] 18 Section 245D by the 2nd Proviso, casts a public duty on the Commissioner of Income Tax to consider in the light of the case made out in the assessee s application whether "concealment of particulars of income on the part of the applicant or prepetration of fraud by him for evading any tax or other sum chargeable or imposable under the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 (11 of 1922).
Or under this act, has been established or is likely to be established by any Income Tax authority, in relation to the case," and exercise his veto power to prevent escape of macro criminals prima facie guilty of grave economic crimes.
He cannot bargain over this interdict in advance or barter away a legal mandate in anticipation.
He may permit or even assist the filing of a. conciliation motion of the assesse 'e but when the Commission intimates him under section 245D(l) he shall, with statutory seriousness.
exercise his discretion.
He cannot enter into a 'deal ' over this power without betraying the statutory trust.
The plea that the Commissioner of Income Tax, by conduct and understanding has 'irredeemably mortgaged ' his statutory duty to object if the case deserves such objection has to be negatived.
Estoppel then is both odious and omnius and discretion the door to corruption [1160D G] 19.
In the instant case, the CIT withdrew the appeals but it is not correct that he made representations to the assessee to act in a particular manner with a provision of doing something to his advantage leading to the assessee in turn acting to his own prejudice by withdrawing his appeals His withdrawal of the appeals was independently decided upon by him so that he could move the Commission.
Thereafter he moved the department to withdraw its appeals so as to entitle him to make an application to the Commission.
The canons that govern the application of the principle of estoppel contradict its 'extension to a. situation like the present.
The plea of estoppel which has found favour with the Commission has therefore to be over ruled.
The objection raised by the CIT is a potent interdict on the jurisdiction of the Commission.
[1163H 1164A, C] 20.
The policy of the law as.
disclosed in Chapter XIXA is not to provide a rescue shelter for big tax dodgers who indulge in criminal activities by approaching the Settlement Commission The Settlement Commission will certainly take due note of the gravity of economic offences on the wealth of the nation which the Wanchoo Committee has emphasised and will exercise 1138 its power of immunisation against criminal prosecutions by using its power only sparingly and in deserving cases, otherwise such orders may become vulnerable if properly challenged.
[1164 E]
