The detenu under the COFEPOSA challenged the orders detaining him as violative of article 22(5) of the Constitution on the ground that his representation was neither considered nor disposed of by the Secretary to the Government of Maharashtra, though the latter intimated by his letter dated 22nd December 1978, that the issue of copies of relevant documents and statement to him was under consideration of the Government and after that issue was decided the petitioner 's representation would be considered and a suitable reply would be given.
The admitted fact was that the State Government confirmed the order of detention solely on the basis of the report of the Advisory Board.
ALLOWING the Writ Petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The power to preventively detain a person cannot be exercised except in accordance with the constitutional safeguards provided, in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22 AND if an order of detention is made in violation of such safeguards, it would be liable to be struck down as invalid.
It is immaterial whether these constitutional safeguards are incorporated in the law authorising preventive detention because even if they are not, they would be deemed to be part of law as a super imposition of the Constitution which is the supreme law of the land and they must be obeyed on pain of invalidation of the order of detention.
[IOlOB D].
The constitutional imperative enacted in clause (5) of Article 22 requiring the earliest opportunity to be afforded to the detenu to make a representation carries with it by necessary implication a constitutional obligation on the detaining authority to consider the representation as early as possible before making an order confirming the detention.
The detaining authority must consider the representation of the detenu and come to its own conclusion whether it is necessary to detain him.
If the detaining authority takes the view, on considering the representation of the detenu, that it is not necessary to detain him, it would be wholly unnecessary for it to place the case of the detenu before the Advisory Board.
The requirement of obtaining opinion of the Advisory Board is an additional safeguard over and above the safeguard afforded to the detenu of making a representation against the order of detention.
The opinion of the Advisory Board even if given after consideration of the representation of the detenu need not necessarily be binding on the detaining authority.
[1011C E] 1008 There are thus two distinct safeguards provided to a detenu: one is that his case must be referred to an Advisory Board for its opinion if it is sought to detain him for a longer period than three months and the other is that he should be afforded the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the ord of detention and such representation should be considered by the detaining authority as early as possible before any order is made confirming the detention.
Neither safeguard is dependent on the other and both have to be observed by the detaining authority.
The detaining authority is therefore, bound to consider The representation of the detenu on its own and keeping in view all the facts and circumstances relating to the case, come to its own decision whether to confirm the order of detention or to release the detenu.
The subsequent consideration and rejection of the representation could not cure the invalidity of the order of confirmation.
[1012C G, 10131E].
Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Khairul Haque vs The Slate of West Bengal, W.P. 246/69 decided on lO 9 69; referred to.
