The appellant was declared elected to the State Assembly in the General Election in 1978.
He secured 27785 votes.
The fifth respondent was given 27,604 votes and the third respondent 27,447 votes.
The election of the appellant was questioned by an election petition filed in the High Court by a voter, the first respondent.
Having regard to the allegations made in respect of a number of ballot papers, the High Court allowed fresh scrutiny and recount of the votes, and entrusted the task to a Special Officer of the High Court.
The Special Officer pointed out that in one envelope from the box of the 3rd respondent out of 278 ballot papers 28 were of the 3rd respondent while the balance of 250 were the votes cast in favour of the appellant.
Similarly in the envelope of the appellant out of 408 ballot papers found in this box only 158 were votes cast in his favour and 250 were in favour of the 3rd respondent and that by reason of this some mistake was committed by the Returning Officer while packing the ballot papers in the two envelopes of the appellant and the 3rd respondent.
On the report of the Special Officer, it was contended before the High Court on behalf of the fifth respondent that it was not permissible to take into account the 250 votes cast in favour of the appellant which were found in the packet of the third respondent because the order of the High Court directing a recount was limited to finding out whether any improper votes had been accepted in favour of the appellant and whether any proper votes of the fifth respondent had been rejected.
The High Court relying on P. Malaichami vs M. Ambalam, ; took the view that as the appellant had not filed a notice of recrimination under section 97 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, it was not open to him to allege that any of his votes had been improperly counted in favour of some other candidate.
On the basis of the report of the Special Officer the High Court held that the fifth respondent had received 191 votes more than the appellant and declared the appellant 's election to be void.
It declared the fifth respondent to be duly elected.
In the appellant 's appeal to this Court it was contended that the High Court had erred in holding that section 97 comes into play and that no notice of recrimination was necessary for the purpose of having the 250 votes, whose validity was 898 never in dispute and which had been cast in favour of the appellant, counted in the total number of votes secured by the appellant.
^ HELD: 1.
When the High Court directed the "physical" count of the votes cast in favour of the appellant, third respondent and others, what was intended was a mechanical recount of these votes and nothing more.
It did not envisage any inquiry into their validity, and whether any of them had been improperly received.
When the appellant requested that the 250 votes cast in his favour but included in the packet pertaining to the third respondent should be counted in his total, he was asking for nothing more than the application of a mechanical process.
These votes had never been regarded as cast in favour of the third respondent.
There was never any dispute that they were votes for the appellant.
Their validity was never doubted.
Plainly what had happened was that by an error, 250 ballot papers cast in favour of the appellant had been erroneously placed in the packet of the third respondent.
[901G 902A] 2.
The accident that they were not placed in his packet but in the third respondent 's packet did not render them any the less votes belonging to the appellant.
Their inclusion in calculating the appellant 's total was a necessary part of the process involved in deciding whether he had been duly elected or whether on the election petition his election should be declared void.
It was a process relevant to the first of the reliefs claimed by the election petition, that is to say, the election of the appellant be declared void.
The other relief claimed by the election petitioner was that the fifth respondent be declared duly elected.
[902C E] 3.
A notice of recrimination under section 97 of the Act is necessary only when the returned candidate or any other candidate disputes the grant of the further declaration that he or some other candidate should be declared duly elected.
[902F] In the instant case when the recount was taken, the High Court had not yet concluded that the election of the appellant was invalid.
It was in the process of determining that question, and the question could properly be determined only after giving to the appellant the benefit of all the votes cast for him.
These would include the 250 votes cast in his favour, even though they were found placed in the third respondent 's packet.
Once the benefit of his 250 votes is given to the appellant, he becomes the candidate with the highest number of votes.
His election cannot be declared void.
That being so, no question arises of the appellant wanting to give evidence to prove that the election of any other candidate would have been void if he had been the returned candidate.
Therefore, no notice for recrimination under section 97 was necessary.
[902G 903A] 4.
The appellant was concerned with his claim to his 250 votes.
The claim did not involve any reconsideration of the validity of any votes, whether cast in his favour or any other candidate.
What was called for was a mere mechanical process of counting.
Every order of recount does not bring section 97 into play.
[903D E] Jabar Singh vs Genda Lal ; , 60; Anirudh Prasad vs Rajeshwari Saroj Das & Ors., ; referred to.
P. Malaichami vs M. Ambalam ; ; distinguished.
The High Court should not have declined to include in the appellant 's total votes the 250 votes cast in favour of the appellant but included in the packet 899 of the third respondent.
If those votes are included in the appellant 's total the appellant secures the highest number of votes and is entitled to be declared elected.
[903F]
