In connection with the assessment for the assessment year 1949 1950 of Dulichand Lakshminarayan an unregistered firm, an application was made under section 26 A of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 before Income Tax Officer, Raigarh, for its registration as a firm constituted under a Deed of Partnership dated 17th February, 1947.
In the opening paragraph of the deed the names and descriptions of the five parties thereto were set out.
The signatures of five per sons were appended on behalf of five parties respectively at the foot of the deed.
It was common ground that out of the five constituent parties, D.L., J.H., and L.C., were separate firms constituted under three separate deeds of partnership.
The three different persons who signed the deed on behalf of those three firms respectively were partners in their respective firms.
The fourth party M.B. was the name of a business carried on by a Hindu undivided family of which the person who signed it was the karta.
The fifth party M.G. was an individual.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the application on the ground that Dulichand Lakshminarayan, constituted under the deed dated 17th February 1947, consisted of three firms, one Hindu undivided family business and one individual and that a firm or a Hindu undivided family could not as such enter into a partnership with other firms or individual, 155 The assessee 's appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was dismissed but it succeeded before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal who directed registration of the firm.
On the application of the Commissioner of Income Tax under section 66(1) of the Income Tax Act the High Court held that on the facts of the case the assessee was not entitled to registration under section 26 A of the Income Tax Act.
On appeal to the Supreme Court: Held that a perusal of the deed would indicate beyond any doubt that the intention of the parties quite clearly was that each of the three constituent firms and not the particular member of each of the said three firms who had signed the deed for his respective firm was to be the partner in the bigger firm constituted under this deed.
The contention that only the five individual executant of the deed were the partners of the newly created firm was against the tenor of the deed and was therefore without force.
Section 26 A of the Indian Income Tax Act postulates the existence of a firm.
The Act, however, does not indicate what a firm signifies or how it is to be constituted.
Section 2(6 B) of the Act clearly provides, inter alia, that "firm" and "partnership" have the same meaning respectively as they have in the .
Section 4 of the (which gives the definitions of "partnership", "partner", "firm" and "firm name") clearly requires the presence of three elements namely (1) that there must be an agreement entered into by two or more persons: (2) that the agreement must be to share the profits of a business; and (3) that the business must be carried on by all or any of those persons acting for all.
The general concept of partnership according to both systems of law, English as well as Indian, is that a firm is not an entity or "person" in law but is merely an association of individuals and a firm name is only a collective name of those individuals who constitute the firm.
In other words a firm name is merely an expression, only a compendious mode of designating the persons who have agreed to carry on business in partnership.
The word "persons" in section 4 of the , which has replaced section 239 of the Indian Contract Act, contemplates only natural or artificial, i.e., legal persons and therefore a firm is not a person and as such is not entitled to enter into a partnership with another firm or Hindu undivided family or individual and there is no question of registration of a partnership purporting to be one between three firms, a Hindu undivided family business and an individual as a firm unders.
26 A of the Act, as in the present case.
Jabalpur Ice Manufacturing Association vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madhya Pradesh and Bhopal ([1965] , Exparte Oorbett, In re Shad, ([1880] ; , 126), Bhag 156 wanji Morarji Goculdas vs Alembic Chemical Works Co. Ltd. and others , Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal vs A. W. Figgies & Co. and others ([1954] S.C.R. 171), and In re Jai Dayal Madan Gopal, ([1933] I.T.R. 186), referred to.
