The appellant was born on January 7, 1915.
He joined the Editorial Staff of the Civil and Military Gazette, Lahore, towards the end of 1938 and continued to serve the Civil and Military Gazette upto January 7, 1943, when he joined the Army.
During the Second World War he was granted an Emergency Commission in the Army w.e.f March 7, 1943 with the rank of Lieutenant w.e.f June 3, 1948 but with seniority in that rank w.e.f. September 1944.
Later, he, having been selected by the Special Recruitment Board as an Emergency Recruit from the "open market" was appointed to the Indian Administrative Service on August 7, 1950 and allocated to the Orissa Cadre.
As regards Emergency Recruits from the open market the year of allotment was to be determined according to the "open Market Emergency Recruitment Scheme" called also 'N ' formula.
The year of allotment in each case would be 1949 Y, where Y = N1 + 1/2 of N2.
N2 means the period of previous experience.
The previous experience is the number of completed years of actual experience of the officers after attaining the age of 25 and upto 31st December, 1948 as certified by the Special Recruitment Board.
N1 means the period of continuous employment on a pay or income of not less than of Rs. 800/ per month before 31st December, 1944 and the 31st December 1948, inclusive.
The larger the figure of "Y", the earlier the date of allotment and seniority.
The period of previous experience (N2) in the case of the appellant worked out to 8 years 11 months 25 days rounded off to 8 years (i.e. 7 1 40 to 31 12 48).
The figure of N1 was worked out taking the "protection pay" admissible to Army Officers as per F.R. 9(21)(b) i.e. excluding the Calcutta 25 compensatory allowance and lodging allowance.
Therefore, by its letter dated June 11, 1952, the Ministry of Home Affairs fixed the year of allotment of the petitioner to the Indian Administrative Service as 1944.
(1949 minus 5).
The appellant held various posts in the Indian Civil Administrative Service cadre of Orissa and was also on deputation to the Government of India from 1952 to April 7, 1964.
During this period, he was appointed as the Salt Commissioner and Managing Director, Hindustan Salt Ltd. with Head quarter at Jaipur.
He held both these posts from September 11, 1953 to December 23, 1963, and only as Salt Commissioner till April 7, 1964, whereafter he was reverted to the State of Orissa.
He was compulsorily retired by the Government on June 9, 1971.
By its order dated September 1, 1977, the State Government gave him pay and allowances in the super time scale from November 29, 1967 to April 24, 1968 and thereafter selection grade from April 15, 1968 to June 9, 1971.
Respondent 1 rejected his representation (a) for refixing his year of allotment by condoning the shortage of 6 days in determining N2 and by taking into consideration allowances for purposes of N1 (b) for granting the benefit of F.R. 49 and (c) for granting the benefit under F.R. 30.
The appellant, therefore, filed a writ petition to the High Court claiming three reliefs, namely, (a) Refixation of the year of allotment as 1942 instead of 1944 in the Indian Administrative Service, alleging that by refusing to treat the Calcutta compensatory allowance and lodging allowance as pay under FR 9(21)(b) and to condone the six days ' shortage in determining the number of completed years of editorial experience under 'N ' formula, Respondent 1, by its order dated June 11, 1952, denied him seniority, (b) pay as admissible under FR 49 i.e. full salary of one post and additional salary upto a maximum of 50% of the second post, for the period from September 11, 1961 to December 23, 1963 during which he held both the posts of Salt Commissioner and Managing Director, Hindustan Salt Ltd. and (c) Placement in the super time scale w.e.f.
July 24, 1962, i.e. the date when his junior Sri V.V. Ananta Krishnan was appointed to the super time scale, under the "Next Below Rule" implied in F.R. 30.
The High Court refused to grant the reliefs, prayed for, and dismissed the Writ Petition.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
In view of the categorical averment in his application for grant of special leave to this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution that "he was no longer interested in the relief for determination of the year of allotment, according to the 'N ' formula, since he was on the verge of retirement" the appellant cannot be heard to say that the Government of India had not arrived at a correct decision in assigning 1944 as the year of allotment to him.
[33H 34A, 34G] (2) Normally the decision of the Government of India assigning a year of allotment to a particular officer under Rule 3 of the Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954, or, in accordance with orders and instructions issued by the Central Government in that behalf before the commencement of these Rules, is final and cannot be interfered by the Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution unless such decision was capricious or arbitrary or in breach of the said Rules.
The same principle should apply to the assignment of a year of allotment under the 'N ' formula.
[36F] 26 Even according to the appellant, he was not entitled, under the 'N ' formula as it stands, to a credit of more than 8 years.
If that be so, the High Court quite properly declined to exercise its extra ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, inasmuch as no writ or direction could be issued, in a matter which was essentially in the discretion of the Government, to refix his seniority by giving credit for 9 years instead of 8 years as provided for, as admittedly the relevant instructions require "completed years of actual experience".
[36E] There is no question of condoning the short fall of six days by relaxation of the relevant Rules under the powers vested in the Government of India by the All India Services (Conditions of Service Residuary Matters) Rules, 1960, since these Rules were not in force when the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, by its letter dated July 19, 1951, issued a statement showing the years of allotment assigned to officers borne on the Indian Civil Administrative cadre of Orissa, wherein the year of allotment assigned to the petitioner was 1943 1/2, or even at the time when the Ministry of Home Affairs by its letter dated June 11, 1952 rejected his representation in that behalf, while revising his year of allotment to 1944.
Further, the Government of India adopted a uniform policy in this regard and short falls of even less than 6 days have not been condoned so that there could be uniformity of taking note of "completed years of service" irrespective of the short fall of number of days in calculating the year of allotment in every case under the 'N ' formula.
The Government of India have also held that the 'Recruitment Rules ' cannot be relaxed under Rule 3.
[36H 37C, 38D] Even assuming there was a power to condone the deficiency, the matter rested entirely in the discretion of the Government of India.
When a decision in a policy matter like relaxation is left to the absolute discretion of the Executive, courts cannot interfere and issue a direction to the Government of India to reconsider the matter afresh, after a lapse of more than 25 years.
It would not only disturb the combined gradation list of the Officers belonging to the Indian Administrative Service, but also affect the seniority of many officers who have not been impleaded in these proceedings.
[38G] (3) The definition of 'pay ' in the case of a military officer, introduced by F.R. 9(21)(b) is for 'protection pay ' when such officer is recruited in civil service under the employment of the Union of India, i.e., for fixation of his pay in such service, as is made clear by F. Rs. 2 and 3.
F.R. 2 provides that the Fundamental Rules shall apply, subject to the provisions of F.R. 3, to all Government servants whose pay is debitable to civil estimates and to any other class of Government servants to which the President may, by general or special order, declare them to be applicable.
F.R. 3 provides, that unless it be otherwise distinctly provided by or under the Rules, "Nothing in these Rules shall apply to Government servants whose conditions of service are governed by Army or Marine Regulations".
F.R. 9(21)(b) had, therefore, no relevance in the matter of fixing the seniority of Emergency Recruits from the "Open Market" to the Indian Administrative Service, like the petitioner, even when they were drawn from the Army, but was applicable only in regard to fixation of their initial pay.
[39E, D, G] The 'pay ' for purposes of determining the year of allotment under 'N ' formula of such recruits drawn from the Army was, as per the underlying principles set out in the Ministry of Home Affairs dated July 18, 1949, the 27 "basic pay" which necessarily exclude allowances.
This concept of "basic pay" for fixation of initial pay is reflected in the Indian Administrative Service (Pay) Rules, 1954, which takes into account only the "initial pay".
[40G] The rule which requires credit to be given for the period of continuous employment on pay or income not less than Rs. 800/ p.m., would apply uniformly to all recruits drawn from different sources, namely, persons who were previously lawyers, or employed in business houses or in Government service.
Uniformity in such a case can only be attained by excluding allowances in every case, because the allowances which persons drawn from those different sources would be getting, would be varied in character.
The Government of India, therefore, acted fully in consonance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[41A C] The concept of 'pay ' under F.R. 9(21)(b) cannot be introduced for purposes of regulating the year of allotment under 'N ' formula, as it relates to fixation of seniority and not of pay.
If the definition of 'pay ' in F.R. 9(21)(b) was to be taken note of, then Calcutta compensatory allowance and marriage allowance would also be included.
Then, a rule which makes seniority dependent upon marriage allowance, and therefore, on whether the officer was married or not will be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The inclusion of 'pay ' as defined in F.R. 9(21)(b) in the 'N ' formula to include lodging allowance is not permissible as it was essentially compensatory in character.
Any other construction will lead to manifest injustice as it would result in discrimination between persons similarly situated i.e., between an Army Officer in receipt of lodging allowance in lieu of rent free quarters and one in occupation of such rent free quarters, in the matter of seniority in the Indian Administrative Service.
[41G H, 42D E] (4) The conditions of service of members of the Indian Administrative Service are regulated by the provisions of All India Services Act, 1951 and the various Rules and Regulations framed thereunder, such as Indian Administrative Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954, Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, Indian Administrative Service (Pay) Rules, 1954, Indian Administrative Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954, Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulation, 1955, All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, and 1969, All India Services (Conditions of Service Residuary Matters) Rules, 1960 etc.
When there is specified provision made in regard to them on a particular subject regulating their conditions of service in the said Act and the Rules, the question of applicability of the Fundamental Rules does not arise.
[42G 43A] Even assuming that the Fundamental Rules were applicable on August 7, 1950 i.e. at the time when the petitioner was appointed to the Indian Administrative Service, these Fundamental Rules ceased to be applicable on the coming into force of the aforesaid rules and regulations framed under the Act, unless the President by an order under F.R. 2 declared them to be so applicable.
[43B] The provisions of F.R. 49 ceased to apply from the date on which the Indian Administrative Service (Pay) Rules 1954, were brought into force, as it makes no provision for 'additional pay '.
Even if they were F.R. 49, in terms, provides that when a civil servant holds two posts, he is disentitled to draw the salary of both the posts.
All that such a civil servant becomes 28 entitled to is the salary of the higher post, but no additional pay can be allowed for performing the duties of the lower post.
Thus, the pay of one of the posts can be allowed.
Even assuming that the provisions in the Fundamental Rules would continue to apply to a member of the Indian Administrative Service in regard to which no specific provision is made by framing a rule under the All India Services Act, 1951, and therefore, in the instant case, the appellant was still governed by F.R. 49, he had no claim to any additional salary, on the materials on record.
[44A] (5) The intention underlying the second proviso to F.R. 30(1) which is commonly known as the "Next Below Rule" is the principle that when an officer in a post (whether within the cadre of his service or not) is for any reason prevented from officiating in his turn in a post on higher scale or grade borne on the cadre of the service to which he belongs, he may be authorised by special order of the appropriate authority proforma officiating promotions into such scale of pay and thereupon be granted the pay of that scale of grade, if they be more advantageous to him on each occasion on which the officer immediately junior to him in the cadre of his service draws officiating pay in that scale or grade.
The principle behind the so called rule is evidently that an officer out of his regular line should not suffer by forfeiting acting promotion which he would otherwise have received had he remained in his regular line.
[44G 45A] The State of Mysore vs M. H. Bellary, ; , referred to.
The 'Next Below Rule ' is not a rule of any independent application.
It sets out only the guiding principles for application in any case in which the President or the Governor proposes to regulate an officiating pay by special order under the second proviso to F.R. 30 (1).
The condition precedent to the application of the 'Next Below Rule ' must, therefore, be fulfilled in each individual case before any action can be taken under this proviso.
[45F] (6) The promotion to a post in super time scale involves an element of selection and is not by mere seniority.
As a rule of universal application, the benefit of the "Next Below Rule" though available in the selection grade has never been extended when there is a promotion to a post in super time scale in the Indian Administrative Service for considerations of policy, namely, (1) the length of service which officers in States have to put in before they get promotion to super time scale is not uniform; (ii) Most of the States have got Divisional Commissioners, while some States do not have this post; (iii) The posts of Secretaries in some States carry pay in super time scale while in others these posts carry pay in the senior scale, and (iv) An officer might be good enough to be a Divisional Commissioner, but might not be good enough to be Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
[45G,46B D] The process of appointment to the super time scale is by selection.
When the element of selection comes in, this promotion must be subject only to the claims of exceptional merit and suitability, and is not a mater of right.
Promotion to the super time scale is, therefore, not a matter of course.
The Officer must stand the test of suitability and his integrity must be beyond doubt.
For this purpose there is a Senior Selection Committee which pre 29 pares a select list of suitable officers which must be approved by the Union Public Service Commission.
The Senior Selection Committee has to prepare a panel of names for each grade and submit the same for approval to the Union Public Service Commission as well as to the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs.
The select list has to be reviewed and revised every year, and the Senior Selection Committee meets annually.
The essence of holding Selection Committee meeting annually is that each annual proceeding is independent of the other.
That is why as soon as the proceedings of the new Selection Committee are approved by the Union Public Service Commission, the proceedings of the earlier Selection Committee becomes inoperative.
No manner of continuity can, therefore, be imputed to the proceedings of the various Selection Committees.
[48 D F] In the instant case, the appellant cannot claim as a right the super time scale merely on the basis of his seniority among the members of the Indian Administrative Service belonging to the Orissa cadre, if he was 'consciously ' passed over by the Senior Selection Committee or Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs.
[48 C, G] Union of India vs M.L. Capoor, ; , referred to.
