In a suit filed against the respondents (defendants), for recovery of possession of the suit lands, the appellants (plaintiffs) alleged that the suit lands were the proprietor 's private lands and were in their actual cultivating possession from time immemorial.
The trial court dismissed the suit.
Eventually, the High Court held that the defendants or their ancestors had not acquired any ryoti interest with right of occupancy; nor were they tenure holders but were mere tenants at will; and that the suit was not maintainable because even a tenant at will could not be ejected without being given notice to quit.
Thereupon the appellants gave notice to the defendants.
In the meantime, by virtue of a notification issued under section 3 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act 1950, the estate had vested in the State by reason of which the plaintiff was not entitled to evict the defendants.
On the question whether the plaintiff had a right to file a suit for possession after the vesting of the estate in the State, the trial court held that since the plaintiff had a right to take possession, the land could be deemed to be in his khas possession and, therefore, he would be entitled to evict the defendants notwithstanding the vesting of the estate in the State.
In appeal the High Court dismissed the plaintiff 's suit on the ground that the right to take possession did not constitute khas possession within the meaning of section 6(1)(b) of the Act.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that khas possession within the meaning of section 6 comprehends the right to take possession and so the appellant was entitled to evict the respondents.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (a) A combined reading of the definition of khas possession under section 2(k) and sections 3, 4 and 6 of the Act shows that the land in possession of a tenant at will cannot be said to be in khas possession of the intermediary for the purpose of section 6.
[19D] (b) A tenant at will is not holding possession on behalf of the landlord but he has a vestige of title to it and holds on his own behalf and can set up his possession against the landlord till the formality prescribed by law is undertaken 7 by the landlord and he is evicted by due process of law.
If a notice of a certain duration is necessary expiring with a certain event such as the end of the agricultural year, till the end of the agricultural year the tenant, notwithstanding the fact that he is a tenant at will and under a notice to quit will be able to hold on to his possession and keep the landlord at bay.
[17H] In the instant case, in the suit between the same parties to the present litigations, the High Court held that the defendants were tenants at will of agricultural land, that they were holding from year to year and that they could be evicted not only after termination of their tenancy by a notice to quit but such notice must expire with the agricultural year.
The notice to be issued to the tenant at will has to be a notice terminating the tenancy which must expire with the end of the agricultural year.
In Bihar the agricultural year expires in September.
Therefore, once it is concluded inter parties that even a tenant at will of an agricultural land is entitled to notice in consonance with justice and reason the tenant at will cannot be thrown out at any period during the year but the notice must expire with the end of the agricultural year.
Sudhir Kumar Majumdar & Ors.
vs Dhirendra Nath Biswas & Anr., , not approved.
(c) A tenanat at will is someone other than the landlord.
When he cultivates land used for agriculture, the agricultural operations cannot be said to be cultivation of the landlord himself.
When a tenant at will carries on agricultural operations, he does them on his own and merely pays rent to the landlord.
The landlord does not pay the tenant at will for the agricultural operations nor for the stock employed by the tenant at will.
Keeping in view the definition of 'khas possession ', cultivation of land by the tenant at will could not be said to be cultivation by the landlord, by himself or by his servants or by hired labourers.
In such a situation the landlord cannot be said to be in 'khas possession ' of the land in possession of the tenant at will.
[18A G] (d) The term 'possession ' used in section 6 is qualified by the adjective 'khas ' which means actual possession and is used in contra distinction to the word 'constructive ' possession.
The term 'khas ' possession, is used in a statute for ushering agrarian reforms and, therefore, the purpose and object behind the legislation must inform the interpretative process.
The interpretation must tilt in favour of the actual cultivator, the tiller of the soil.
[20 B C] 2.
When a notification under section 3 was issued the respondents tenant at will were under a notice to quit which was to expire on September 24, 1953.
Therefore, till September 24, 1953 the respondents tenants at will were in actual and physical possession of the land and till that date could hold against the intermediary landlord.
It may be that when the notice to quit dated January 5, 1953 was served the intermediary landlord might have the right to take possession but till September 24, 1953 when notice would expire, the respondents were in actual possession and till then they could thwart any attempt of intermediary landlord to take actual possession.
Therefore, on the date of the vesting i.e. April 12, 1953 the intermediary was not in 'khas possession ' within the meaning of section 6(1) and when on that day his estate vested in the State thereafter he was not entitled to recover possession.
After the vesting of the estate in the State, which event had occurred prior to the institution of the suit, he could not maintain an action for eviction as he had no more subsisting interest in the estate, his interest having vested in the State. 8 Surajnath Ahir & Ors.
vs Prithinath Singh & Ors. ; Ram Ran Bijai Singh & Ors.
vs Behari Singh alias Bagandha Singh ; Gurucharan Singh vs Kamla Singh & Ors.
; at 752 753; and Sonawati & Ors.
vs Sri Ram & Anr.
[1968] 1 SCR 617; referred to.
The contention of the appellant that if his application under Order 41 rule 27 C.P.C. to lead additional evidence were allowed it would establish that the land was already settled with the intermediary by the State and that there fore it was no more open to the respondents to contend that the intermediary was not entitled to the settlement of the land in his favour has no force.
The rejection of the application is justified because if the evidence was allowed to be admitted on record at this stage it might put the respondents at a disadvantage.
If the plaintiff (appellant) had obtained some settlement of land on the basis of a decree of the trial Court or the first appellate Court which became interlocutory in view of the appeal preferred to the High Court and then to this Court, it is not open to the plaintiff to take any advantage of such settlement.
[22C F] 4.
If a contention which was available to a party had been abandoned in the High Court, it cannot be reagitated before this Court.
Jayarama Reddy & Anr.
vs Revenue Divisional Officer & Land Acquisition Officer, Kurnool ; referred to.
If a court fixes time to do a certain thing, the Court always retains the power to extend the time.
