Section 271(1)(c)(iii) provided that where the Income Tax officer had reason to believe that the assessee had concealed particulars of his income or furnished inaccurate particulars of such income he may impose a penalty of a sum in addition to any tax payable by the assessee which shall not be less than twenty per cent but which shall not exceed one and a half times the amount of the tax.
The Finance Act 1968, which came into effect from April 1, 1968, enhanced the penalty to a sum which shall not be less than 7 but which shall not exceed twice.
the amount of income in respect of which the particulars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been furnished.
The assessee filed a return of his total income for the assessment year 1964 65 on 24th April, 1968.
In the course of assessment proceedings, the Income Tax officer found that the assessee had concealed the income earned from one of his two firms.
Having regard to the minimum penalty which he considered was leviable, he referred the case to the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner.
The Inspecting Assistant Commissioner imposed a penalty in respect of the concealed income in accordance with section 271 (1) (c) (iii) as amended by the Finance Act 1968.
It was argued on behalf of the assessee that (i) assessment proceeding for the determination of total income and computation of tax liability must ordinarily he made on the basis of the law prevailing during the assessment year, and inasmuch an concealment of income is concerned with the income relevant for assessment during the assessment year any penalty Imposed in respect of concealment of such income must also be governed by the law pertaining to that assessment year, (ii) under section 139 of the Act as it stood during the assessment year 1964 65, the return of income should have been filed by the end of September 1964 and as the return although filed on April 24, 1968 was accepted by the Income Tax officer and therefore should be deemed to have been filed within time i.e. by September 30, 1964 the penalty would be governed by the section as it originally stood then.
^ HELD: 1.
Clause (iii) substituted in sub section (1) of section 271 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 by the Finance Act, 1968, governs the case.
Therefore, the penalty imposed on the assessee in the instant case is covered by that provision [204B] 2.
The assessment of the total income and the computation of tax liability is a proceeding which for that purpose, is governed by entirely different considerations from a proceeding for penalty imposed for concealment of income.
And this is so notwithstanding that the income concealed is the income assessed 200 to tax.
In the case of the assessment of income and the determination of the consequent tax liability, the relevant law is the law which rules during the 1 assessment year in respect of which the total income is assessed and the tax liability determined.
The rate of tax is determined by the relevant Finance Act.
In the case of a penalty, however, it is imposed on account of the commission of a wrongful act.
It is the law operating on the date on which the wrongful act is committed which determines the penalty.
Where penalty is imposed for concealment of particulars of income, it is the law ruling on the date when the act of concealment takes place which is relevant.
It is wholly immaterial that the income concealed was to be assessed in relation to an assessment Year in the past.
[202G H, 203A C] 3.
Under section 139 of the Act, although the statute itself prescribes the date by which a return of income must be filed, power has been conferred on the Income Tax Officer to extend the date of furnishing the return.
A return filed within the extended period is a good return in the sense that the Income Tax officer is bound to take it into consideration.
But nowhere does section 139 declare that where a return is filed within the extended period it will be deemed to have been filed within the period originally prescribed by the statute.
On the contrary, the section contains a provision for payment of interest where the return filed beyond the prescribed date even though within the extended period.
That is evidence of the fact that the return filed during the extended period is not regarded by the statute as filed within the time originally prescribed.
[203 F H, 204A]
