Accepting the plea of self defence, the Sessions Judge held that the accused was entitled to the protection of Section 96 Penal Code and had therefore committed no offence.
However the ordered confiscation to Government of M.O. 1, the licensed gun surrendered by the accused.
A revision petition filed against the said direction having failed before the Kerala High Court, the appellant obtained special leave from this Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The impugned order of confiscation of the gun being arbitrary and unjust, cannot be sustained.
(a) The Sessions Judge did not give any reason, whatever, for directing confiscation of this licensed gun admittedly belonging to the appellant accused.
There was no material before him indicating the special circumstances which would warrant a departure from the general rule.
There was nothing on the record to show that the Sessions Judge had, before passing the order of confiscation, given an opportunity of being heard to the accused specifically with regard to this matter; (b) there was absolutely no material before the High Court to show that in the past twenty years during which the appellant had been in lawful possession of this gun under a licence, he had ever used or attempted to use this gun for commission of any offence from which, in the event of the gun being restored to the appellant, a likelihood of his misusing the gun "again" could be reasonably predicated or even suspected.
[232B D & E F] Pushkar Singh vs State of Madhya Bharat, A.I.R. 1953 SC 508, followed.
Lalluram Mohanlal vs State of Gujarat, A.I.R. 1967 Guj.
268, approved.
An analysis of the provision in Section 517 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 would show that it refers to property or document (a) which is produced before the Court, or (b! which is in the custody of the Court, or (c) regarding which any offence appears to have been committed, or (d) which has been used for the commission of any offence.
Then, at the conclusion of the enquiry or trial, the disposal of any] class of the property listed above, may be made by (i) destruction, (ii) confiscation, or (iii) delivery to any person entitled to be possession thereof.
[231D E] In the instant case, the gun in question does not fall either under class (c) or class (d) because it is neither property "regarding which any offence appears to have been committed", nor "which has been used for the commission of any 229 offence".
The acquittal of the accused on the ground that this gun was used in causing the fatal injury to the deceased, only in self defence, necessarily involved a finding that the gun was not used in the commission of any offence for which the accused was tried.
The gun was obviously property falling under class (b).
[231 E G] 3.
The words "may make such order as it thinks fit" in the section, vest the Court with a discretion to dispose of the property in any of the three modes specified in the Section.
But the exercise of such discretion is inherently judicial function.
The choice of the mode or manner of disposal is not to be made arbitrarily, but judicially in accordance with sound principles founded on reason and justice, keeping in view the class and nature of the property and the material before the Court.
One of such well recognised principles is that when after an inquiry or trial the accused is discharged or acquitted, the Court should normally restore the property of class (a) or (b) to the person from whose custody it was taken.
Departure from this salutary rule of practice is not to be lightly made when there is no dispute or doubt as in the instant case that the property in question was seized from the custody of such accused and belonged to him.
[231G H, 232 A B] Arjun Padhy and Ors.
vs State of Orissa & Anr.
A.I.R. 1965 Orissa 198; disapproved.
