The appellant and four others were placed on their trial before the Assistant Sessions Judge of Sambalpur for offences under sections 120 B, 409, 477 A and 109, I.P.C. with having committed the offences of criminal conspiracy, criminal breach of trust in respect of Government property and falsification of accounts with a view to defraud the Government.
The appellant was the District Food Production Officer and the other four accused persons were agricultural sub overseers under the appellant and another agricultural sub overseer namely P. was examined at the trial as an approver.
The Assistant Sessions Judge convicted the appellant under all the three charges but acquitted the four sub overseers giving them the benefit of doubt.
The High Court in appeal allowed the appeal of the appellant in respect of charges under sections 409 and 477 A, I.P.C. but upheld his conviction and sentence in respect of the charge of conspiracy under section 120 B, I.P.C. observing that in respect of that charge the evidence given by the approver got corroboration from other independent evidence.
On appeal by special leave to the Supreme Court the main question for consideration was whether the ruling of the Supreme Court in the case of Topan Das vs The State of Bombay ([1955] 2 S.C.R. 881), governed the present case in view of the fact that the appellant was the only person out of the accused persons on trial who had been convicted of the offence of conspiracy under section 120 B, I.P.C. Held (i) that the case of Topan Das vs State of Bombay was, clearly distinguishable from the present case as in that case the only persons alleged to have been guilty of the offence of conspiracy 'Were the persons placed on trial.
There was no allegation nor any 207 evidence forthcoming that any other persons though not placed on trial, were concerned with the crime.
On the findings in that case, only one person, after the acquittal of the rest of the accused, was concerned with the crime and stood convicted of the charge of conspiracy.
As a person cannot be convicted of conspiring with himself to commit an offence, the Supreme Court gave effect to the.
contention that on the findings and on the evidence, as also on the charge in that case, the conviction could not be sustained.
But in the instant case on the findings of the courts below, apart from the persons placed on the trial, there was the approver who implicated himself equally with the other accused persons and a number of other prosecution witnesses as having been privy to the conspiracy.
And therefore the present case was not on all fours with the case of Topan Das vs State of Bombay.
(ii) The provisions of section 225, Cr.
P.C. were clearly applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
It had not been shown how the omission to mention the name of the approver in the charge under section 120 B, I.P.C. had misled the appellant or had occasioned a failure of justice.
(iii) The provisions of section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure were equally applicable to the facts of the case.
As the appellant did not raise the point with reference to the alleged illegality or irregularity in the charge before the High Court it must be held, applying the Explanation to that section, that the omission in the charge bad not occasioned a failure of justice.
The contention that with the acquittal of the alleged conspirators no verdict of guilty against the appellant could be given, because the verdict would be regarded as repugnant in so far as it would amount to saying that there was a criminal agreement between the appellant and the others and none between them and him, the conviction of the appellant would amount to a similar repugnancy was without substance because the rule of English law as to the acquittal of an alleged conspirator when the conspiracy was said to be only between the two is based upon a rule of practice and procedure, namely that repugnancy or contradiction on the face of the record is a ground for annulling a conviction.
But such a repugnancy is not by itself a sufficient ground for quashing a conviction in India where the matter is governed by statutory law both as to the offence and the procedure for bringing the offender to justice.
In India there is no provision in the statutory law justifying an interference with a conviction on the ground of repugnancy in the record.
Topan Das vs State of Bombay ([1955] 2 S.C.R. 881), The Queen vs Manning ([1883] , The Queen vs Thompson ([1851] 16 Q.B. 832), The King vs Plummer ([1902] 2 K.B. 339), Kannangara Aratchige Dharmasena vs The King ([1951] A.C. 1), I. G. Singleton vs The King Emperor ([1924] , Dalip Singh vs State of Punjab ([1954] S.C.R. 145) and Kapildeo Singh v, The King ([1949 50] F.C.R. 834), referred to. 208
