In 1948 on the formation of Saurashtra State, Jaffrabad came within its territorial limits and the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901 as adapted and applied to the said State became applicable to Jaffrabad.
Jaffrabad Municipality the predecessor of the respondent was constituted under the Bombay District Municipal Act, 1901.
The State of Saurashtra, within the territorial limits of which the said Municipality was situate, promulgated ordinance No. 47 of 1949 on 31 X 49 called the Saurashtra Terminal octroi ordinance, 1949.
Section 2 cl.
(2) of the said ordinance defines "octroi" as including a terminal tax.
Section 3 empowered the Government to impose terminal tax and octroi duty, and provided that octroi may be imposed on "animals or goods, or both, within the octroi limits brought for consumption or use therein.
" Section 4 empowered the Government to make rules in exercise of which the State Government made the Saurashtra octroi and Terminal Tax Rules on 8th December, 1949.
Rule 3, the charging rule provided that octroi is payable in respect of goods set out in Schedule I of the Rules and prescribed that it shall be payable at the nakas at rates set out therein.
Item No. 23 is "Salt for Factory".
Schedule II enumerated a list of items which are exempt from octroi duty and contained in Item No. 6, a sub item in Gujarat which means "salt".
The appellant was running a salt manufacturing works at Jaffrabad.
The company had constructed salt works, grinding mills, trolly tracks and a jetty at the port site.
The major portion of the salt works is situated out of the municipal limits.
The salt is manufactured outside the municipal limits.
The grinding mills and the part of the trolly track leading to jetty came within the municipal limits of the respondent Jaffrabad Municipality.
The salt is prepared in the salt pans outside the octori limit and the salt which is crushed is taken to the crushing factory and the salt which is not to be crushed is taken in uncrushed form.
directly to the jetty over the trolly track part of which passes through the octroi limits of the municipality.
The salt that is crushed in the crushing factory is also after crushing taken by trolly to the jetty.
From the jetty the salt whether crushed or uncrushed, as the case may be is exported by steamers.
244 The Municipality demanded from the appellant octroi in respect of salt manufactured by it.
The appellant paid under protest and filed a suit against the respondent for declaration that the salt manufactured by the appellant at its salt works at Jaffrabad and exported uncrushed and/or crushed was not liable to octroi duty and the goods passing through municipal limits from the salt works are not liable to octroi duty and for an injunction restraining the respondent from recovering the amount claimed as octroi.
Another suit claiming refund of the octroi paid was also filed.
The two suits were decreed, the court declaring that the salt manufactured by the appellant company is not liable to octroi duty.
The Municipality being aggrieved preferred appeals and the appellate court while dismissing the appeals and confirming the decrees of the trial court held that the perpetual injunction granted by the trial court would not apply to the salt entering the octroi limits for consumption or use for the factory situated within the octroi limits of the Municipality.
The Municipality preferred second appeals to the High Court, which allowed them except to the extent of confirming the declaration that uncrushed salt of the appellant company which is directly sent from the stacking ground to the jetty is not liable to octroi provided the plaintiff company followed the prescribed rules and formalities.
The other claims in the suits were however dismissed.
On the question whether the salt manufactured by the appellant outside the octroi limits of the respondent and brought within those limits for the purpose of being crushed into powder in the appellant 's factory situated within those limits and then exported is liable to octroi.
^ HELD: 1.
Octroi is leviable on the uncrushed salt which is brought to the octroi area and crushed as the activity would amount to both consumption and use of the uncrushed salt.
[249 F] Burmah Shell oil Storage Distributing Co. India Ltd. vs The Belgaum Borough Municipality [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 216; M/s. Anwarklan Mahboob Co. vs The State of Bombay (now Maharashtra) [161] 1 SCR 709, State of Travancore Cochin & Ors.
vs Shanmugha Vilas Cashew Nut Factory & ors.
; , referred to.
In the Constitution of India, Entry 52 in List II in Seventh Schedule a right to impose tax "on entry of goods into the local area for consumption, use or sale" is conferred.
The precise meaning to be given to the words "consumption" and "use" will depend upon the context in which they are used.
These words are of wide import, the word "use" being of wider import than "consumption".
[248A. 247H, 249E].
While terminal tax is a kind of octroi which is concerned only with the entry of goods in a local area irrespective of whether they would be used there or not, octrois were taxes on goods brought into the area for consumption, use or sale.
They are leviable in respect of the goods put to some use or the other in the area but only if they were meant for such use.
[248B] 4.
The word "consumption" in its primary sense means the act of consuming and in ordinary parlance means the use of an article in a way which destroys, wastes or uses up that article.
But in some leal contents the word 245 "consumption" has a wider meaning.
It is not necessary that by the act of consumption the commodity must be destroyed or used up.
[248C D] In the instant case the uncrushed salt is crushed in the factory which is commercially a different article and the uncrushed salt must be held to have been consumed.
The uncrushed salt has been used and by the use a new product crushed salt has come into existence.
[249E]
