The lands in dispute, which were part of a former Princely State, were unalienated lands so long as the land revenue in respect of them was collected by the Princely State.
They became alienated lands when the Princely State granted proprietary jagir to the jagirdars.
The jagirdars made settlement of the lands in dispute with the appellants in 1949.
In the year 1936 survey settlement was made in the State and the land revenue payable by the jagirdars was assessed.
When the State territory was merged with the province of Bombay the Land Revenue Code was made applicable to the lands in dispute.
In 1953 Jagirs were abolished by the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagir Abolition) Act, 1953.
A proprietary jagir, as defined by this Act, is a jagir in respect of which the jagirdar was entitled to any right or interest in the soil.
Section 5(1)(b) of the Act made the jagirdar primarily liable to the State Government for the payment of land revenue due in respect of such land as an occupant under the Land Revenue Code or any other law for the time being in force.
The term "occupant" is defined in the Code to mean "a holder in actual possession of unalienated land other than a tenant".
As a result of these two provisions the appellant, having been in actual possession of unalienated land, became "occupant", (that is to say, holder in actual possession of the land under the State).
After the land was settled by the ffiagirdar upon the appellant, new survey numbers were given to the lands in place of the old.
With the coming into force of the Jagirs Abolition Act the appellant claimed that he became an "occupant" of the land together with the forest trees standing thereon.
Before the year 1965, he was allowed to cut and remove the forest trees in his land; but after the decision of this Court in U. R. Mavinkurve vs Thakor Madhav singhji Gambhirsingh & Ors. ; the authorities concerned took the stand that the forest trees had vested in the State and that the appellant was not entitled to cut or remove them.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
Purporting to follow the decision of this Court in Mavinkrve the High Court held that there being no survey settlement of any of the lands, the former Jagirdars or their settles did not acquire any right or interest in the forest trees.
The High Court also took the view that under section 5(1)(b) of the Jagirs Abolition Act a person who became an occupant of the land was entitled to all the rights and liable to all the obligations in respect of such land under the Land Revenue Code and since there was no settlement, the appellant could not fall back upon any provision of the Land Revenue Code for claiming a right in the trees.
291 In appeal to this Court it was contended that if a survey settlement was carried out by some authority, though not under the provisions of the Land Revenue Code and was accepted and acted upon by the State Government, it became a survey settlement under the Code itself.
No reservation of any trees having been made at the survey settlement or at any time thereafter the trees belonged to the former jagirdars or their settles.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: (a) The appellant became occupant of the land in question together with the forest trees standing thereon and the governmental authorities had no right to interfere with the appellants dealing with the forest trees, at any rate, before the passing of the Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972.
(b) The High Court has taken too narrow a view of the procedure for survey settlement In the writ petitions there was not only a specific averment that there was a survey settlement but documents had been filed to show that there was a survey settlement in the State in 1936.
There being no reservation of the trees in favour of the State the occupant became entitled to the same on the abolition of the jagirs.
[296C D] (c) By legal fiction as introduced in section 216(2) of the Code the survey settlement should be deemed to have been completed in 1936 which was after the passing of the Land Revenue Code in 1879.
The alienated lands became unalienated on the abolition of the jagirs.
Therefore, the right to own the trees must be deemed to have been conceded to the occupant of such land as there was no reservation made by the Government or the Survey Authority.
[297 F G] State of Gujarat and another vs Ibrahim Akabarali and others AIR 1974 Gujarat, 54 approved.
(d) The case of Mavinkurve is distinguishable.
In that case the dispute related to cutting of teak and other trees standing in the forest land, that is to say, a special kind of trees in respect of which a notification under the Indian Forest Act had been issued.
The view of the High Court that the occupants, on the abolition of the jagirs, became entitled to trees standing on the forest lands was rejected by this Court.
In the instant case there was survey settlement and the occupants were entitled to the benefit of para 2 of section 40 of the Land Revenue Code.
[297H] The State of Gujarat vs Kumar Shri Ranjit Singhji Bhavansinghji and others 3 S.C.C. 891 referred to. 2.
There is no force in the contention that on the abolition of the jagirs the occupant was given permission to occupy the land and such permission shall be deemed to include the concession of the right of the Government to all trees growing on that land.
Permission means factual permission and not giving a right to a person as an occupant under section 5(1)(b) of the Abolition Act.
[299 D E]
