The appellant and respondent No. 2 along with others applied for stage carriage permits for two routes and the Regional Transport Authority granted a permit for one route to the appellant and for the other route to the respondent No. 2.
Both appealed to the Central Road Traffic Board but the appeals were dismissed.
Neither the Regional Authority nor the Board recorded any finding as to which of them had the better facilities for transport operation or that they were of equal merit.
They applied to the State Government under section 64 A of the Motor Vehicles Act of 1939 as amended by the Motor Vehicles (Madras Amendment) Act of 1948 and the State Government set aside the orders passed by the said subordi nate authorities and issued permits for both the routes to the respondent No. 2 on the ground that he had better facilities for operation and would serve the public better.
Against this order of the State Government the appellant moved the High Court for a writ of certiorari and a single Judge issued the writ.
On a Letters Patent appeal that decision was set aside.
The appellant contended that the State Government had acted in excess of its powers under section 64 A of the Act in setting aside the orders of the subordinate authorities and that the section itself was invalid.
Held, that the State Government was within its powers in passing the order it did and the appeal must be dismissed.
That it was within the competence of the State Legislature to insert section 64 A into the Act and its legality could not be questioned and the clear intention of the legislation was to empower the State Government to decide the legality, regularity or propriety of any orders passed by the subordinate authorities in the interest of the general public.
That the State Government was the final authority to decide which of the rival applicants had the better facilities for operation of the bus service and where it bad come to a decision in favour of an applicant, its decision could not be interfered with under article 226 of the Constitution merely because its view might be erroneous.
