The petitioner challenged his detention under the Jammu were sent to him by way of an annexure to the District Magistrate 's order of detention.
The petitioner was informed that, if he so desired, he could make a representation to the Government against the alleged order of detention.
It was argued on behalf of the petitioner that some of the grounds of detention were so vague that he did not find it possible to exercise his fundamental right of making a representation under article 22(5) of the Constitution and that some of the grounds were irrelevant for the purposes of making an order under section 8. ^ HELD: The argument that only the "preamble" of the order of detention was vague but not the grounds is not tenable.
[264B] "Preamble" has been defined "as an introductory paragraph or part in a statute deed, or other document setting forth the grounds and intention of it".
The preamble thus betokens that which follows.
The respondents ' counsel did not, however, find it possible to point out where the preamble could be said to begin, or to finish, and which of the paragraphs could be said to constitute the grounds of detention as such.
[262 G H, 263A] This Court has disapproved of vagueness in the grounds of detention because that impinges on the fundamental right of the detenu under article 22(5) of the Constitution to make a representation against the order of detention when the grounds on which the order has been made or communicated to him.
The purpose of the requirement is to afford him the earliest opportunity of seeking redress against the order of detention.
But, as is obvious, that opportunity cannot be said to be afforded when it is established that a ground of detention is so vague that he cannot possibly make an effective representation.
Reference made to paragraphs which were held to be vague.
[263E, H, 264 B D] State of Bombay vs Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya ; , Tarapada De and Ors.
vs The State of West Bengal, ; , Dr. Ram Krishan Bhardwaj vs State of Delhi and Ors. ; , Shibban Lal Saxena vs State oj Uttar Pradesh ; , Rameshwar Lal Patwari vs State of Bihar and Ors., ; , and Pushkar Mukherjee and Ors.
vs State of West Bengal, ; 259 It is equally well settled that a ground is said to be irrelevant when it has no connection with the satisfaction of the authority making the order of detention under the appropriate law and taking any such ground into consideration vitiates the order of detention.
It was held that irrelevant grounds were, nevertheless, taken into consideration for making the impugned order, and that was quite sufficient to vitiate it.
[267A B] Keshav Talpade vs The King Emperor, , Satya Brata Ghose vs Mr. Arif Ali, District Magistrate Shibsagar, Jorhat and Ors, , and K. Yadava Reddy and Ors.
vs The Commissioner of Police, Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and Anr., I.L.R. 1972 Andhra Pradesh 1025, affirmed.
Chinnappa Reddy, J. (Concurring) ^ HELD: A law providing for preventive detention and action taken under such a law, to pass muster, have to satisfy the requirements of both Articles 19 and 22 of the Constitution.
[268D E] The interpretation of Article 22(5) consistently adopted by this Court is, perhaps, one of the outstanding contributions of the Court in the cause of Human Rights.
The law is now well settled that a detenu has two rights under Article 22(5) of the Constitution (1) to be informed as soon as may be, of the grounds on which the order of detention is based, that is, the grounds which led to the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority and (2) to be afforded the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order of detention, that is, to be furnished with sufficient particulars to enable him to make a representation which on being considered may obtain relief to him.
The inclusion of an irrelevant or non existent ground among other relevant grounds is as infringement of the first of the rights and the inclusion of an obscure or vague ground among other clear and definite grounds is an infringement of the second of the rights.
In either case there is an invasion of the Constitutional rights of the detenu entitling him to approach the Court for relief.
The reason for saying that the inclusion of even a single irrelevant or obscure ground among several relevant and clear grounds is an invasion of the detenu 's constitutional right is that the Court is precluded from adjudicating upon the sufficiency of the grounds and it cannot substitute its objective decision for the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority.
[269A D] The argument that only that allegation which was the immediate cause of the order of detention was to be treated as the ground of detention and all other allegations recited in the order of detention were to be treated as introductory and background facts cannot be accepted.
The factual allegations contained in the document supplied to the detenu as furnishing the ground of detention cannot be so dissected.
The last straw which broke the camel 's back does not make weightless the other loads on the camel 's back.
[269 G H, 270E] The expression 'Naxalite ' conveys different meanings to different persons depending on the class to which one belongs, his political hues and ideological perceptions.
It is as vague or as definite as all words describing ideologies such as "democracy" etc.
It is a label which may be as misleading as any other.
[270F G, 271A] Expressions like 'revolt ' and 'revolution ' are flung by all and sundry in all manner of context and it is impossible to attach any particular significance to 260 the use of such expressions.
Every turn against the establishment is called 'revolt ' and every new idea is labelled as 'revolutionary '.
Without specification of the particular form of revolt and revolution which was advocated, the ground of detention must be held to be irrelevant and vague.
[271 C D] A. K. Gopalan vs State of Madras, ; R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; distinguished.
