The prosecution alleged that the police officers of the appellant state while investigating a case discovered a workshop run by a mechanic who was then actually working on a revolver.
Several other guns, revolvers and rifles were found in the workshop and all these fire arms were seized.
The mechanic claimed to have received one of the guns so seized from a gun licensee and the rest from respondents 1 to 4 for repairs.
The mechanic had no valid licence under the to keep or repair these fire arms but respondent No. 4 however possessed licences under the Act to run the business of repairing and dealing in fire arms.
The police charge sheeted the mechanic, the gun licensee and respondents 1 to 4, for having committed offences under Sections 25(1)(a) and 27 of the Act.
The Magistrate held that there were materials to make out a prima facie case under section 25(1)(c) of the Act against the gun licensee and under section 29(b) of the Act against the mechanic and charged them accordingly.
As regards Respondents 1 to 4 taking the view that giving of the arms to the mechanic by the respondents for the limited purpose of repairs, did not amount to delivery of 'possession ' of those arms within the meaning of section 29(b) of the Act, he discharged the said respondents.
The appellant 's criminal revision against the said order, was dismissed, the High Court holding that Respondents 1 to 4 could not be said to have delivered the fire arms into the 'possession ' of the mechanic within the meaning of section 29(b) of the Act, because the respondents possessed valid licences for repairs as well as for sale of fire arms and had given only 'temporary ' custody of those arms to the mechanic for the limited purpose of carrying out the repair job, while the effective control over those arms all the time remained with the respondents.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant State that the question whether a person is in possession of a fire arm or had transferred and delivered it to another, is largely one of fact; that in the instant case, the mechanic was not a servant or employee of the respondents but was independently running his own business of repairing fire arms; that the fire arms were handed over by the respondents to the mechanic to be repaired at the latter 's residence cum workshop which was not the respondent 's licensed place 324 of business; that the mechanic had no licence for repairing or keeping fire arms and the respondents were either aware of this fact or did not ascertain it before delivering the fire arms to him, that 'possession ' within the purview of section 29(b) means immediate possession and consequently, delivery of even temporary possession and control to an unauthorised person falls within the mischief of the section; that in the circumstances of the instant case there was a clear prima facie case not only under section 29(b) but also under section 30 read with section 5 of the Act, against the Respondents and consequently the Magistrate was not justified in discharging them.
On behalf of the Respondents it was contended that the mechanic was only in temporary custody of the fire arms for the limited purpose of repairing them, as an agent of the owners, who being licencees in Form IX entitled to repair and keep these fire arms, throughout remained in their lawful possession and control.
The delivery of possession contemplated by section 29(b) is something more than entrusting the arms to an 'agent ' for the limited purpose of repairs.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
"Possession" is a polymorphous term which may have different meanings in different contexts.
It is impossible to work out a completely logical and precise definition of "possession" uniformly applicable to all situations in the contexts of all statutes.
"Possession" implies a right and a fact; the right to enjoy annexed to the right of property and the fact of the real intention.
It involves power of control and intent to control.
[328D E] "Possession" is not a purely legal concept but also a matter of fact, and the broad test for determining whether a person is in possession of anything is whether he is in general control of it.
[328H 329A] Salmond 's Jurisprudence 11th Edn.
p. 52 referred to.
In the instant case although the respondents held licences in Form IX for repairing and dealing in fire arms at the place of business, factory or shop which was specified in Column 3 of their licences, they handed over the fire arms to the mechanic who had no such licence to be repaired at the latters own workshop.
Since that workshop and the repairing business being run therein, was in the exclusive control and occupation of the mechanic, the inference would be that by handing over the fire arms to the mechanic for repair the respondents had divested themselves for the time being not only of physical possession but also of effective control over those fire arms.
The respondents had not done anything to ascertain whether the mechanic was legally authorised to retain those fire arms even for the limited purpose of repairing them.
Prima facie the materials before the Magistrate showed that the respondents had delivered the fire arms in question into the possession of the mechanic without previously ascertaining that he was legally authorised to have the same in his possession, and as such, they appeared to have committed an offence under section 29(b) of the Act.
[330B C, 330G 331A] 3.
By allowing the fire arms to be removed to a place other than the place of business or factory specified in Column 3 of the licences in Form IX, the respondents contravened condition (1)(c) of the licence, amounting to an offence punishable under section 30 of the Act.
[331 B C] 325 The materials before the Magistrate, prima facie disclosed the commission of offences under Sections 29(b) and 30 of the Act by Respondents 1 to 4.
The Magistrate was thus clearly in error in discharging these respondents.
[331D] 4.
The ratio of cases decided under the Old (Act 11 of 1878) should not be blindly applied to cases under the Act of 1959 which has in several aspects modified or changed the law relating to the regulation of arms.
[331H] 5.
Trial of summons case as a warrant case does not amount to an illegality but is a mere irregularity that does not vitiate the trial unless there is a prejudice.
[333 B] 6.
Case remitted to trial Magistrate with direction to frame charges in respect of offences under Sections 29(b) and 30 of the Act against Respondents 1 to 4 and to proceed further with the trial.
[333C] Manzur Hussain vs Emperor, AIR 1928 All.
55(1); Sadh Ram vs State, AIR 1953 HP 121; Emperor vs Harpal Raj, ILR XXIV All. 454; A. Malcom vs Emperor, AIR 1933 Cal.
218; Emperor vs Koya Hansji, ; Parmeshwar Singh vs Emperor, AIR 1933 Pat.
600; Murli vs Crown, AIR 1929 All. 720; Tola Ram vs Crown, ILR 16 All.
276; held inapplicable.
