The late H.E.H. Nawab Mir Sir Osman Ali, the Nizam of Hyderabad by an indenture dated March 29, 1951 created the trust called H.E.H. the Nizam 's Jewellery Trust in respect of 107 items of extremely valuable, rare and priceless jewellery for the benefit of his two sons, two grand sons, two grand daughters, daughter and step son.
The nominee of the Government of India .
N. Malhotra, Addl.
Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs was made the Chairman of the Board of Trustees.
In addition to the Chairman, there were four trustees and a Secretary for the Trust.
Clause 13 of the trust deed provided that after a period of three years from the date of the death of the settlor and his eldest son the trustees may sell the trust property in their absolute discretion either, in India or in any foreign country without their being liable or accountable to any person whomsoever for the propriety of or justification for such sale, or for reasonableness or otherwise of the price or consideration or other terms in respect of the sale.
Prince Azam Shah the eldest son of the Nizam died in October, 1970 and the trustees on July 1, 1972 submitted a memorial to the Prime Minister to acquire the jewellery as they were of great historical and cultural value and 'keep the same intact as part of the national heritage.
The Government of India appointed an Expert Committee to advise whether any part of the jewellery should be acquired as antiques under the Antiquity and Art Treasures Act 1972 and in pursuance to its report acquired eighteen selected pieces of jewellery at a mutually negotiated price of Rs. 1.17 crores.
It appears that the beneficiaries of the trust were in very straitened circumstances due to abolition of privy purse, heavy incidence of income tax and wealth tax and being thus heavily indebted, pressed upon the Board of Trustees to effect an immediate sale of 37 items of jewellery.
On January 9, 1978 the Chairman conveyed to the trustees that the Government of India were not likely to acquire any of the 37 pieces of jewellery with regard to which tho negotiations were being made.
The Board of Trustees 460 accordingly passed a resolution to sell the jewellery immediately.
Pursuant to the resolution of the Board, the Secretary of the Board decided upon the procedure to be adopted for the sale of the 37 items of jewellery and eventually on March 9, 1978 the tenders that were submitted in respect of the sale of those items were opened by the four trustees, in Bombay, the Chairman R. N. Malhotra being absent due to official pre occupation at New Delhi.
On March 10, 1978 the first respondent in the appeal who was one of the beneficiaries of the Trust and a grand daughter of the Nizam instituted proceedings under section 74 of the Trust Act for removal of the trustees alleging dereliction of duty, negligence and mismanagement on their part in respect of the 37 items of jewellery belonging to the Trust which were brought to sale.
An application for injunction under order 39, Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure was filed for restraining the trustees from taking any further steps towards the finalisation of the sale of the jewellery.
The City Civil Court granted an ad interim injunction restraining the trustees from taking any steps towards the finalisation of the sale of the jewellery, which was got vacated by one of the trustees.
On March 28, 1978, the first respondent filed an appeal in the High Court which directed that status quo ante be maintained.
In the meanwhile, the 8th respondent made an offer to purchase the 37 items of jewellery in one lot for Rs. 20.25 crores and also applied to be impleaded as a party in the appeal.
On April 18, 1978 the appellant, who was one of the successful bidders also, applied to be impleaded as a party respondent.
The High Court impleaded the appellant as a party to the appeal, and in order to test the bona fides of the 8th respondent directed that he should deposit the offered amount within one week.
On such deposit being made, the 8th respondent was allowed to inspect all the items of jewellery.
The first respondent filed an application to withdraw the appeal which was heard but before any orders could be passed, her sister, the second respondent applied for permission to be impleaded as appellant No. 2, as there was a danger of the entire body of the beneficiaries being deprived of an amount of Rs. 5.78 crores.
The first respondent was permitted to withdraw and the second appellant was brought on record.
The High Court set aside the alleged sale of 37 items of jewellery by the Board of Trustees in favour of the appellant and other successful tenderers on the ground that there was no concluded contract between the parties and instead accepted the offer of the eighth respondent.
On appeal to this Court the matter was remitted to the High Court for impleading all the tenderers and affording an opportunity to the appellants to substantiate their claim that there was a concluded contract for the sale of the jewellery to them for Rs. 14.43 crores.
The High Court impleaded the other tenderers, respondents Nos. 7 to 17 and after giving opportunity to substantiate their claims held that no binding contract came into existence.
In appeals to this Court on the questions (1) Whether there was a concluded contract effected between the appellants and the other successful bidders on the one part and the Board of Trustees on the other, for the sale of the 37 items of jewellery for Rs. 14.43 crores by the alleged acceptance of their bids by the four trustees on March 19, 1978.
461 (2) Whether there was frustration of the contract in that the ad interim injunction of the City Civil Court on March 14, 1978 made further performance of the alleged contracts impossible; and (3) Whether the exercise of the discretionary power of sale exercised by the trustees conferred on them by cl. 13 of the trust deed, ought not to be set aside under section 49 of the Trusts Act as an improvident sale because of the fact that an amount of Rs. 20.25 crores for the 37 items of jewellery had been offered by the eighth respondent.
^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was justified in setting aside the alleged sale of 37 items of jewellery belonging to H.E.H. the Nizam 's Jewellery Trust affected by the Board of Trustees in favour of the appellants and other tenderers for Rs. 14.43 crores on the ground that there was no concluded con tract between the parties.
[480D] 2.
The contract was frustrated by the grant of an ad interim injunction by the Court of the Chief Judge, City Civil Court, Hyderabad on March 14, 1978.
The grant of such injunction prevented the performance of the alleged contacts.
The appellants could not have tendered 90 percent of the tender amount, i.e., the balance of the price, by the stipulated date or taken delivery 1 of the jewellery so long as the injunction lasted.
[481C] 3.
The High Court had come to a definite conclusion that the improvident sale of the jewellery at such a low price without due public notice was not a bonafide exercise of power, conducive of beneficial management.
There is no reason to come to a different conclusion.
When one deals with another 's property, it matters little to him what price the property fetches.
But in the case of a trust there arises the duty of the trustees to act with prudence and as a body of reasonable men.
[485E, D] 4(a).
In the case of a private trust, where there are more trustees than one, all must join in the execution of the trust.
The concurrence of all is in ' general necessary in a transaction affecting the trust property, and a majority cannot bind the trust estate.
In order to bind the trust estate the act must be the act of all.
They constitute one body in the eye of law, and all must act together.
This is, subject to any express direction given by the settlor.
[473 E] Lala Mohan Das vs Janki Prasad, LR (1944) 72 IA 39, L. Jankiranza Iyer & ors vs Neelakanta lyer & Ors., [1962] Supp.
I SCR 206; Lewin 's Law of Trusts, 15th Ed. 198 referred to.
Where there are several trustees they must act unanimously in making a sale or a contract of sale, unless it is provided otherwise by the terms of the deed.
In exercising the power of sale, as in the exercise of the other powers, a trustee cannot, therefore, properly delegate the performance of the acts which he ought personally perform.
Although a trustee may listen to the opinion and wishes of others, he must exercise his own judgment.
A trustee for sale of property, cannot leave the whole conduct of the sale 11 531SCI/79 462 to his co trustees.
The reason for this is that the settler has entrusted the trust property and its management to all the trustees, and the beneficiaries are entitled to the benefit of their collective wisdom and experience.
[474C D] Underhill 's Law of Trusts and Trustees, 12th Ed., pp. 434, 442 443, Scot on Trusts, Vol.
p. 1033, 5.
All acts which the trustees intend to take for executing the trust must be taken by all of them acting together, as provided by section 48 of the Trusts Act, 1882.
Where there are more trustees than one, all must join in the execution of the trust, except where the instrument of trust otherwise provides.
If the validity of an alienation affected by the trustees falls to be considered only in the light of section 48, the fact that out of the three trustees only two have executed the sale deed would by itself make the transaction invalid and would not convey a valid title to the transferee.
[474E G] 6.
The High Court rightly observed, there is no clause in the trust deed authorising the execution of the trusts to be carried out not by all but by one or more or majority of the trustees.
In the absence of such a specific provision, the general law envisaged in section 48 of the Act would govern the rights of the parties.
The alleged contracts of sale entered into by the four trustees were not binding and of no legal effect, and could not be enforced.
It must necessarily follow that the alleged contracts for sale entered into by them could not ripen into concluded contracts so as to bind the entire body of beneficiaries.
[474H 475B] 7.
Section 48 is a corollary of section 47.
If the trustees cannot delegate their duties, it follows that they must all personally perform those duties, and not , appoint one of themselves to manage the business of the trust; for the settlor has trusted all his trustees, and it behoves each and every one of them to exercise his individual judgment and discretion on every matter, and not bindly to leave any questions to his co trustees or co trustee.
The view taken by the High Court of the resolution of the Board of Trustees dated March 8, 1978 was right.
The language used in the resolution is perhaps not of a trained draftsman, but it clearly does not, in terms, confer 'authorisation ' upon the remaining four trustees to accept the bids, or any of them.
[475D F] 8.
The statement of Malhotra that it was decided at the meeting on March 8, 1978 that 'the trustees were free to accept the highest tenders, if they did not see any reason to reject the same ' and also that 'if the trustees felt that a higher amount could be obtained they could negotiate with the tenderer and obtain a higher price ' is of little consequence.
Perhaps that is what the trustees meant, i.e., the remaining four trustees, were fully authorised to deal with the matter in all its aspects.
But that intention of the trustees is not at all manifested in the said resolution, the terms of which are clear and explicit.
[476B C] 9.
In this case of a trust, the 'authorisation ' must be express, specific and in the clearest of terms.
The words "be examined and decided" in the first part of the resolution may mean anything, and are not necessarily susceptible of the only construction as contended for, namely that of 'acceptance '.
The expression "to negotiate for sale" in relation to the authority of an estate agent, has a definite legal connotation.
He gets an authority to find a purchaser, 463 but he cannot bind the principal by entering into a contact of sale.
There is a substantial difference between 'to sell ' and 'to find a purchaser '.
[476D E] , Chadburn vs Moore, ; Rosenbaum vs Abdul Ahmed vs Animendra Kissen Mitter, ; referred to 10.
If the second part of the resolution has to be construed with reference to the first, as is contended for, then their authority was limited to find purchasers for the jewellery, and then place the matter before a meeting of the Board of Trustees, for acceptance of their bids.
When the trustees took care in drafting the second part which relates to rejection of bids, there was no reason for their leaving any ambiguity in the first part.
It is not permissible to spell out something which is not explicit, by merely saying that it is implicit, when the language is clear and it does not bear out any such construction.
A view which would be prejudicial to the entire body of beneficiaries is not to be taken.
There is no reason why the words 'be examined and decided ' in the first part, should not have their plain meaning that the tenders were to be opened and examined by the remaining four trustees to see if they were valid tenders.
The first part did not, give any 'authorisation to the remaining trustees to accept any of the tenders.
If they did not find a satisfactory offer or offers for any of the items offered for sale they could only under the second part reject the tenders submitted.
Delegation must be express.
The trend of cross examination of Malhotra, also shows that his concurrence was necessary.
[476F, 477B] 11.
The Secretary drew up the note, dated March 14, in undue haste despite the Court 's order granting the injunction.
[478D] 12.
The minutes of the meetings held on March 5, 1978 and of March 8, 1978 are there.
Thereafter appears the minutes of a meeting held on May 15, 1978, Ext.
B. 125.
But there are no minutes of a meeting held on March 9, 1978.
It is thus clear that no meeting of the Board of Trustees was held at all on March 9, 1978.
The absence of any minutes of the alleged meeting held on March 9, 1978 must, as it should, clearly excite suspicion about the genuineness of the sale.
exhibit 123 is the tabular statement prepared by the Secretary containing acceptance of bids by the four trustees.
The authenticity of this document is not beyond question.
It is a tabular chart running into 34 large sheets with minute details.
On each of the sheets there is a letter 'A ' encircled against the highest tender, and at the foot appear the alleged initials of three trustees bearing the date March 9, 1978.
None of the remaining trustees except M. A. Abbasi have entered the witness box and none of the trustees has proved the initials at the foot of the document, exhibit 123, Nothing is known as to when the initials were put and by whom.
Though the other three trustees are alleged to have put their initials at the foot of the statement on March 9, 1978, there is nothing on record to show that all this was done that day, at one sitting, at the same time.
[478F, 478H 479D] 13.
If the four trustees with the assistance of the Secretary, could prepare these large tabular charts there was no reason why they could not record the 464 minutes of the meeting, if any held on that day showing that there was acceptance of the bids by them.
The Minutes Book is the primary evidence, and the chart cannot form the basis for a finding that there was any acceptance of the tenders on March 9. 1978.
[479E F] In the instant case, cls.
11 and 12 of the conditions of sale embodied the terms of the contract.
By cl. 11, time is made the essence of contact.
Clause 11 cannot be read in isolation, but both cls.
11 and 12 must be read together because they form an integral part of the contract.
These clauses in addition to making time the essence of contract, clearly provided that in the event there was a failure to pay 90 percent of the tender amount, the balance of the price "the contract would be deemed to have been cancelled. ' on a reading of both cls.
11 and 12 together there can be no doubt that the passing of the property was dependent upon the tender of the balance of the price and the taking delivery of the goods upon payment.
[480H 481B] 14.
It was certainly open to the Board of Trustees to effect a sale of the 37 items of jewellery under cl. 13 of the deed.
But the power, although discretionary, must be exercised reasonably and in good faith.
The power conferred on the Board of Trustees is no doubt discretionary, but the principle embodied in section 49 is that when such discretionary power is not exercised reasonably and in good faith, such power may be controlled by a court.
There was no warrant for the suggestion made by the Board of Trustees before the High Court that the power is absolute.
[482E G] Underhill 's Law of Trusts & Trustees, 12th Ed. 472 p. 472, referred to 15.
On the totality of the evidence, the High Court rightly came to the conclusion that though there were no mala fides corrupt motives, fraud or mis representation on the part of the trustees and they acted honestly, the trustees in the facts and circumstances of the case, did not act reasonably and in good faith i.e. with due care and attention.
[485F] 16.
Upon the finding that there was no concluded contract between the parties within the meaning of section 2(h) of the Contract Act, the High Court accepted the offer of the eighth respondent for Rs. 20.25 crores for the purchase of the 37 items of jewellery, but this part of the order is set aside as acceptance of his bid without calling for fresh tenders would be subject to the same infirmity.
From the evidence on record that no body knows the actual value of the jewellery and it may be well worth more than Rs. 20.25 crores, and therefore reauction ordered.
[485G, 486E, G]
