The appellant who was 22 committed rape on the wife of his cousin who was a next door neighbour in broad day light.
The Sessions Judge found the appellant guilty of the offence of rape and sentenced him to four years R.I.
On appeal, the High Court affirmed it.
It was urged that the appellant was in his early twenties and that there were signs of repentance.
The fact remains that the two families being close cousins are ready to take a lenient view of the situation which of course does not bind the court in any manner.
Partly accepting the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: The appellant is not a 'habitual ' and has no vicious antecedents except this fugitive, randy molestation which is bad enough in a society where women are often socially weak and sexually victimized.
It may be marginally extenuatory to mention that modern Indian conditions are drifting into societal permissiveness on the carnal front promoting proneness to pornos in life, what with libidinous 'brahmacharis ', womanizing public men, lascivious dating and mating by unwed students, sex explosion in celluloid and book stalls and corrupt morals teaching a new 'high ' in high places.
[591 F H] The appellant is a youth barely 22 with no criminal antecedents save this offence.
He has a young wife and a farm to look after.
Given correctional courses through meditational therapy and other measures, his erotic aberration may wither away.
A man like the appellant has a reasonable prospect of shaping into a balanced person, given propitious social environs, curative and congenial work and techniques of internal stress release or of reformatory self expression.
In this background the court regarded a four year term of rigorous imprisonment more hardening than habilitative, even though the court deplored the sex violence the young appellant had inflicted on his cousin 's wife snatching a tricky opportunity.
[592 B D] A hyper sexed homo sapiens cannot be habilitated by humiliating or harsh treatment.
In prison treatment must, therefore, be geared to psychic healing, release of stresses, restoration of self respect and cultural normalisation, apart from training to adapt oneself to the life outside.
The functional failure of our pachydermic prison projects, exacerbated by its tension and trauma on the one hand and the reverse ethos inside on the other, deserves judicial cognisance.
[591 A, D E] The current efforts of Governments, Central and State, to reform jail regimen, it was hoped, will give a better deal to the caged community.
For these reasons, in this case, it is desirable to superadd to the sentence of imprisonment a few directives to ensure that the carceral period reforms the convict.
A set of positive prescriptions will ensure appellant turning a new leaf.
One major method in securing this goal is to keep alive the family ties of the person in 590 prison so that the appellant may not deteriorate into a non person.
Within the limits of the Prison Act and Rules thereunder, the State Government or the Inspector General of Prisons will ensure that on parole, furlough or orders, the young appellant turns a new leaf of normal life.
[591 E F, 592 F]
