On a vast area of agricultural land owned by the assessee there were about 772 trees some of which were of spontaneous growth.
Clauses 12 and 13 of the agreement by which the assessee sold some trees provided that the trees should be cut without pulling the stumps.
The Income Tax Officer, held that the trees were of spontaneous growth and assessed the whole of the income from the sale of trees to income tax.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the assessee 's appeal in part holding that only the amount actually received during the accounting year, was assessable to income tax.
Appeals preferred by the assessee as well as the department to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal were dismissed but references were made to the High Court on the question whether the receipts from the sale of trees of spontaneous growth were assessable to tax and if so, whether assessable under the head 'other sources '.
The High Court held that the receipts from the sale of the trees were of a capital nature, and decided the references in favour of the assessee and against the department.
Dismissing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: (per Untwalia, J.) (1) The High Court rightly distinguished the decision in V. Venugopala Varma Rajah vs Commissioner of Income tax, Kerala, and applied the ratio of that in A. K. T. K. M. Vishnudatta Antharjanam vs Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax, Trivandrum, [549F] (2) In Venugopala Varma Rajah vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala, , this Court held that if a person sells merely leaves or fruit of the trees or even branches of the trees it would be difficult to hold that the realization is not of the nature of income.
Where the trunks are cut so that the stumps remain intact and capable of regeneration, receipts from sale of the trunks would be in the nature on income.
By selling a part of the trunk, the assessee does not necessarily realise a part of his capital.
[546A, D E] 540 (3) In A. K. T. K. M. Vishnudatta Antharjanam vs Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax, Trivandrum, , a case of sale of trees with roots, this Court applied the test laid down by the Privy Council in the Commissioner of Income Tax, Bengal vs M/s. Shaw, Wallace and Co., and held that, "the source is not necessarily one which is expected to be continuously productive, but it must be one whose object is the production of a definite return excluding anything in the nature of a mere windfall.
Once the teak trees were removed together with their roots and there was no prospect of regeneration or of any production of a return therefrom, it could well be said that the source ceased to be one which could produce any income." Although the test laid down by the Privy Council has been whittled down by subsequent pronouncements, yet in the matter of sale of trees when this Court applied the same test in Vishnudatta 's case it was for the purpose of laying stress on the object of the felling of trees.
[546G, 547A C] (4) If the object of felling the trees leaving the roots and stumps intact is for regeneration of income, then whether income is regenerated or not is immaterial.
But in a case, where the trees are sold by uprooting the roots nobody can say that there could be any object of regeneration of income from the trees growing again as there was no question of a second growth at all.
Similarly when the trees are sold and allowed to be felled by leaving the roots and stumps intact then in case of trees of spontaneous growth there is a likelihood of fresh sprouting and further growth of trees on the left out roots and stumps.
The presumption in such cases would be that the owner did it with the object of regenerating the income.
There can be cases like the instant one, where the roots and stumps were not allowed to be uprooted and cut by the licensee or the lessee, yet the object was not the regeneration of the trees, but a protection of the land eventually to be used for the purpose of cultivation.
[547D F] In the instant case, the agreement dated 28 11 1960 indicates that the transaction was not a sale of trees with roots and stumps, for clauses 12 and 13 of the agreement impose a prohibition that after the cutting, sprouts were not to be cut.
The object of the assessee was to protect the land falling vacant after the cutting of the trees from being damaged by the licensee by at random cutting of the stumps and uprooting of the roots.
[547G, 548B C] (5) In order to net the receipt as a revenue receipt it is for the department to reject the assessee 's stand and to hold that the object of the assessee in not allowing the licensee to cut the stumps and uproot the roots was a regeneration of the income.
By the time the assessment was completed by the Income Tax Officer an area of ten acres had been converted into cultivable land.
[549 E F] (per Pathak, J. concurring) 1.
The instant case does not fall either within V. Venugopala Varma Rajah vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala, or A. K. T. K. M. Vishnudatta Antharjanam vs Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax, Trivandrum, It is a case where although the stumps and roots remained after the trees were felled and removed by the purchaser, the regeneration of the trees was not to be allowed and, therefore, a profit making activity could not be spelled out.
[550G] 2.
Where trees are felled and removed, the stumps and roots are allowed to remain on the land with a view to regeneration of the trees, the intention of the 541 owner would be to indulge in a profit making activity.
The receipt from the sale of the trunks would be revenue receipts.
[550B] 3.
There was no intention in this case to reserve the stumps and roots for the purpose of allowing regeneration of the trees, and the intention and subsequent conduct of the assessee established that the stipulation against removal of the stumps and roots was intended to protect the surface of the land from indiscriminate injury because the land was to be applied to cultivation.
Intention is a material factor in such cases, and each case has to be decided on its particular facts.
Without evidence of the intention or object behind such a stipulation the mere fact that the trees were sold without stumps and roots cannot lead to the necessary inference that a profit making activity was involved.
[550C D] 4.
Where the evidence shows that the land has been acquired for the purpose of cultivation, and that the prohibition on the purchaser against removing the stumps and roots was intended to prevent undue interference with the soil, and the assessee did not intend to permit regeneration of the trees, and that he had in fact later put the land to cultivation, the payments received on sale of the trunks cannot be regarded as taxable income.
[550E]
