A survey carried out by the Port Trust suggested that the canal connecting two rivers required urgent deepening and widening to make it navigable for barges during the monsoon season when the sea turned rough and navigation became hazardous across the mouth of the river.
The appellant (A 1) who at that time was the Captain of Ports invited tenders through press advertisement and the appellant in the Second Appeal (A 2) was the only person who submitted a tender.
Since the tender was the only one received, the Lt. Governor forwarded it to the Central Government for approval.
He did not accept the suggestion that in view of the urgency, the work might be taken up immediately in anticipation of approval.
Even so A 1 entrusted the work to A 2 who started the work.
In the meantime the Government of India directed that the work should be carried out departmentally.
A 1 obtained concurrence of the public works department for payment of daily wages to workers.
According to the prosecution, the modus operandi adopted by the appellants was that A 2 actually submitted hand written statements without his signature on the work done each day specifying the quantity of cubic meters of mud and salt excavated, the number (without names) of male and female labourers employed, the wages paid to labour at the approved rates and so on.
A 1 got the required statements typed in his office and sent them for the concurrence of the Finance Department through the concerned department.
Thereafter A 1 drew the amounts and paid cash to A 2 against a regular receipt.
In course of time the Directorate of Accounts asked for muster rolls of labourers employed in the work.
A 1 prepared a register and muster rolls.
On a suspicion regarding the genuineness of the muster rolls, the case was entrusted to the Central Bureau of Investigation which reported that against a total sum of Rs. 4.73 odd lacs paid by the Government to A 1 the work done was not worth more than Rs. 76,247/43.
The Special Judge convicted and sentenced both the appellants on the ground that they had entered into a conspiracy to cheat the Government in the matter of execution of the work by presenting inflated bills and receiving against them far greater amounts than had actually been spent and that the muster rolls produced were false documents.
The Judicial Commissioner up held the findings of the Special Judge.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
There is no evidence on record that the tender submitted by A 2 was actually accepted by the Government and that it was on that basis that the entire work was executed.
[612 B] 605 2.
Although it may be correct to say that even a work which is required to be carried out departmentally can be entrusted to a contractor, in the instant case no bills were drawn nor was sanction accorded to any payment on the basis of any part of the work having been executed through A 2 working as a contractor.
The bills contained the number of labourers engaged and the amount pertaining to their wages at the sanctioned rates.
No mention was made in the bills that the work was being carried out through a contractor.
A 2 did not sign any of the bills and his name as well as his connection with the execution of the work remained conspicuous by its absence therefrom.
[612 C E] 3.
The onus of proof of the existence of every ingredient of the charge always rests on the prosecution and never shifts.
It was incumbent on the State to bring out beyond all reasonable doubt that the number of labourers actually employed in carrying out the work was less than that stated in the summaries appended to the bills paid for by the Government.
[614 D E] 4.
Although there was a difference between the number of labourers engaged on each day as deposed to by the prosecution witnesses and that shown in the bills it is not safe to rely on mere impression of the prosecution witnesses long after the work had been executed.
[614 F] 5.
The irregularities committed by the appellant in the execution of the work do furnish a circumstance giving rise to a strong suspicion in regard to the bonafides of the appellants in relation to execution of the work, but mere suspicion, however strong, cannot be a substitute for proof.
It is not possible to place the burden of proof of innocence on the person accused of a criminal charge [614 H] 6.
In regard to the value of work actually done there was sharp disparity in the figures arrived at by the courts below.
The view of the Courts below that it was for the accused to show that the number of labourers employed conformed to that shown each day in the summaries attached to bills, is an approach not sanctioned by law.
[616 H 617 A] 7.
The prosecution has not established that the bills or the summaries were false in material particulars.
Although the appellants proceeded to execute the work in flagrant disregard of the relevant rules and ordinary norms of procedural behaviour of Government officials and contractors in the matter of execution of works undertaken by the Government, such disregard has not been shown to amount to any of the offences of which the appellants have been convicted.
The findings of the lower courts no doubt make the suspicion still stronger but it cannot be said that any of the ingredients of the charge had been made out.
[618 C, E F] 8.
Although some of the documents were prepared at the instance of the appellants when a demand for them was made by the Accounts Department, the charge cannot be sustained in relation to any of its heads, their being no proof of falsity of any of the entries made in those documents.
[618 H]
