Against their conviction and sentence passed by the Sessions Judge, Gurdaspur, the appellants preferred an appeal to the High Court.
The State filed an appeal for their conviction and sentence under section 302 I.P.C. A revision petition was also filed under Section 401 Crl.
P.C. for enhancement of the sentence of imprisonment and fine "to meet the ends of justice".
Though the High Court made an express order on December 9, 1974 that the revision petition would be heard along with the criminal appeal, the High Court by its impugned judgment dated January 3, 1978, dismissed the appeal filed by the accused, but enhanced the sentence of Bachan Singh, Gurnam Singh and Chanan Singh accused under Section 304 Part I read with Section 149 I.P.C. to rigorous imprisonment for life and of accused Ravail Singh and Vir Singh under the same section to rigorous imprisonment for 10 years.
While making that order, the High Court observed that the State appeal "for enhancement of punishment" was partly accepted, without reference to the revision petition.
Hence the petition for special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution on the ground that the High Court committed an error of law in enhancing the sentence of the accused without giving them a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement and without allowing them to plead for their acquittal or for reduction of the sentence as contemplated by sub section (3) of section 377 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Dismissing the petition the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The revision petition under section 401 Crl.
P.C. for enhancement of the sentence was maintainable as it was not permissible for the revision petitioner to file an appeal under section 377.
The High Court effectively disposed of both the appeals and the revision petition even though there was an inadvertent mistake in not making a reference to the revision petition in the judgment.
[647 F G, 648 B] 2.
The opportunity for pleading for acquittal was amply furnished to the accused at the hearing of their own appeal against their conviction, and the same appeal furnished them the necessary opportunity for pleading for their acquittal or the reduction of the sentence.
That, in fact, was the subject matter of their appeal.
The fact that the appeal filed by the State 5 625SCI/79 646 against the acquittal of the accused under section 302 I.P.C. was heard along with their appeal against conviction and sentence, itself furnished an opportunity to show cause against the enhancement of the sentence.
[648 C D] 3.
(a) In the petition filed under section 401 Crl.
P.C. for the exercise of the High Court 's power of revision, it was permissible for it to exercise the power of a Court of appeal under section 386 for enhancement of the sentence.
[648 E F] (b) It was also permissible for the High Court under Section 397 Crl.
P.C., to call for and examine the record of the proceedings before the trial court for purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or "propriety" of any finding, "sentence" or order recorded or passed by that inferior Court.
The High Court 's power of revision under section 401 Crl.
P.C. in the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by it or which otherwise comes to its knowledge includes the power conferred on a court of appeal under section 386 to enhance or reduce the sentence.
So when the record of the case was before the High Court in connection with the two appeals and the revision petition there was nothing to prevent the High Court from invoking its power under section 397 read with 401 Crl.
P.C. and to make an order for the enhancement of the sentence.
[648 F H]
