The third respondent took on lease the demised premises from respondents 1 and 2 under a registered lease deed dated September 11, 1948, the lease being for five years at monthly rent of Rs. 2000/ with an option for renewal to be exercised by a notice two months before the expiry of the lease.
Respondent 3 was the managing director of the appellant company.
During the period of the aforesaid lease, the appellant company was accepted as tenant of the demised premises and the Company paid the rent reserved under the lease being Rs. 2000/ per mensem.
The period reserved under the lease expired on August 31, 1953.
But before the expiry of the period an application was made by the appellant for fixation of standard rent of the demised premises under the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950.
In October 1953, respondent 1 and 2 as lessors commenced an ejectment action against the appellant and the third respondent on the ground that the lease had expired and the lessee had failed to exercise the option for renewal.
During the pendency of the aforementioned actions, the parties compromised and the consent decree inter alia provided that the company would be the tenant on a monthly rent of Rs. 1000/ from 1st March, 1955 for a period of 5 years and that, after the period of five years there shall be no renewal of the lease, the lessee shall be treated as trespasser.
An indenture of lease was also to be drawn up and executed by both the parties in terms of the consent decree.
On the expiry of the aforesaid term of five years on 29th February, 1960, respondents 1 and 2, lessors having entered and locked up a portion of the demised premises, the company filed a suit on March 14, 1960 against respondents 1 and 2, lessors and the proforma respondent 3 for a declaration that the company was the tenant of the premises and for an injunction restraining respondents 1 and 2 from interfering with its tenancy rights.
651 The suit was contested on the contention that as the consent decree provided for a fresh lease of 5 years, it can only be brought about by a registered instrument and as the consent decree or the document incorporating the terms of the companies was not registered, the Company continued in possession under a void lease and therefore, on the expiry of the period of 5 years the Company was a trespasser and respondents 1 and 2 were entitled to take over possession from such a trespasser.
The trial court held that as the consent decree provided for a lease for a period of 5 years in the absence of registration the lease for a period of 5 years did not come into existence, but if the tenant entered into possession under an invalid lease and the landlord accepted rent, a tenancy from month to month came into existence between the lessors and the lessee and that such a lessee cannot be evicted except after terminating the tenancy by a valid notice to quit and in the absence of such determination the lessee would be a lessee from month to month and can protect its possession and decreed the appellant plaintiff 's suit.
In appeal by Respondents 1 and 2, the District Judge held that the lease being void, yet the lessors would not be entitled to disturb the possession of the tenant for a period of 5 years in view of the provisions contained in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, but after the expiry of the period of 5 years the appellant became a rank trespasser and respondents 1 and 2 were entitled to take possession of the property, and accordingly allowed the appeal and dismissed the company 's suit.
The appellant company 's second appeal to the High Court was dismissed.
In the further appeal to this Court on the questions as to: (a) The status and nature of possession of a person who was admittedly a tenant of premises covered by the local rent restriction Act till the date of commencement of a fresh lease which turns out to be void for want of registration, during and at the expiry of the period purporting to be reserved by such a void lease; (b) Would such a person be a tenant who could only be removed by proper legal proceedings or a licensee without any interest in the premises and could be forcibly evicted by the landlord of the premises entering the premises and locking the same; (c) Could such a person defend its possession by a suit seeking declaration and mandatory injunction; and (d) whether the appeal was liable to be dismissed on the sole ground that the certificate which the High Court granted was defective.
^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was in error in holding that if on the expiry of the agreed period of lease there was a covenant for not getting any renewal of the lease the tenant would be a trespasser, wholly over looking the legal position that on the expiry of the contractual tenancy the tenant continues as a statutory tenant except where he surrenders possession or is evicted under the enabling provisions of the relevant Rent Restriction Act.
[666 B] 652 2.
The appellant was a tenant and continued to be a tenant and was entitled to protect its possession by appropriate proceeding unless evicted in due course of law.
[666 C] 3.
The appellant as tenant would be entitled to protect its possession unless evicted in due course of law and in order to protect its possession it can legitimately sue, there being no bar in law, for a declaration of its status as tenant and for an injunction either prohibitory or mandatory.
[665 F] 4.
The indenture of first lease granted an option to the lessee which would be none other than the appellant company, to claim renewal of lease.
This option was not exercised.
Notwithstanding the non exercise of the option on the date of expiry of the lease the contractual tenancy having come to an end, the tenant would be a tenant holding over if requirements of section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act are satisfied.
However, on the date of expiry of contractual tenancy, the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act, 1950, was in force and was applicable to the premises and, therefore, on the determination of contractual tenancy by efflux of time right of re entry would be subject to the over riding provision of the Rent Act and the rights of such a person remaining in possession are governed by the statute alone.
He is loosely described as statutory tenant which is another name for status of irremovability.
[658 C D] Anand Nivas P. Ltd. vs Anandji Kalyanji Pedhi and Ors., ; ; referred to.
There is no bar in law to a statutory tenant entering into a fresh contract of tenancy with the landlord.
In the instant case this was attempted by the consent decree but the lease was void for want of requisition.
However from this undisputed position an inference of tenancy can be reasonably made.
[658 G] 6.
If the lease is void for want of registration neither party to the indenture can take advantage of any of the terms of the lease.
At best the provision contained in section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act which incorporated the English equitable doctrine of part performance can, if the terms thereof are satisfied, be relied upon to protect possession for the period reserved under such a void lease.
But no other terms of such an indenture inadmissible for want of registration can be the basis for a relief.
[659 B] 7.
Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act is not at all attracted in the facts of this case.
The suit was filed by the appellant who sought to protect its possession.
The equitable doctrine of part performance can be used as a shield and not as a sword.
It can be used to defend and protect one 's possession.
[659 G] Probodh Kumar Das & Ors.
vs Dantmara Tea Co. Ltd. and Ors., 66 I.A. 293; referred to.
In the instant case the appellant had come to the court for a declaration of its tenancy rights seeking to protect its possession not under the doctrine of part performance as incorporated in section 53A, but with specific allegation 653 that the appellant is a tenant and it be so declared, and for an injunction restraining respondents 1 and 2 from interfering or disturbing the appellants possession of the premises as a tenant.
[660 B C] 8.
If the appellant was already in possession as a tenant of the premises, an unsuccessful attempt to create a fresh lease would not change the nature of his possession as from a tenant to one in part performance under a void lease.
The appellant continues to be in possession as tenant and no cloud is created over its title to remain in possession as tenant merely because the appellant and respondents 1 and 2 attempted to enter into a fresh lease which did not become effective.
[661 B C] Ram Kumar Das vs Jagdish Chandra Deb Dhabal Deb & Anr., ; at 280; referred to.
Technicians Studio P. Ltd. vs Lila Ghosh & Anr., ; ; explained and distinguished.
An incomplete and ineffective attempt at creating a fresh lease would have no impact on a tenant who was in possession as tenant at the commencement of such a void lease and he would continue to be the tenant because section 53A would not be attracted as he is not put in possession in part performance of an agreement of lease not registered and it would be unwise to hold that the payment of the standard rent fixed by the Rent Controller having jurisdiction as payment under such an agreement of lease.
[664 F G] 10.
A person remaining in occupation of premises let to him after the determination of or expiry of the period of the tenancy is commonly, though in law not accurately, called a statutory tenant.
He acquires the status of irremovability.
Statutory tenant being a person who enjoys the status of irremovability, would enjoy the protection of the statute until he is evicted from the premises under the enabling provisions of the statute.
A statutory tenancy would, therefore, come to an end on either the surrender of premises by such a tenant or if a decree of eviction is passed against him.
[664 H 665 B] Hiralal Vallabhram vs Kastorbhai Lalbhai & Ors. ; referred to.
A still born attempt not clothed with legal formality cannot destroy the existing status.
The second lease never came into existence for want of registration and more particularly the appellant was not put in possession under the purported second lease which turns out to be void.
The paradoxical approach manifested is that if a valid lease had come into existence on the expiry of it the appellant tenant would have continued in possession under the protection of the relevant Rent Restriction Act.
However, if such an attempt at creating a fresh lease was ineffective or infructuous, how can such an inchoate exercise destroy the existing rights.
The High Court was therefore in error when it held the existing rights to have been destroyed ignoring the very existence of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 654 12.
A. certificate that it is a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court which the High Court grants must be supported by adequate reasons.
It is obligatory upon the High Court to set out the questions of public or private importance which in its opinion falls to be determined in the proposed appeal.
A certificate will be defective if it does not set out the substantial question of law which in the view of the High Court falls to be determined by the Supreme Court.
An appeal is liable to be dismissed if the certificate is defective.
[666 G 667 B] Sohanlal Naraindas vs Laxmidas Raghunath Gadit, , Railway Board, Govt.
of India vs M/s. Observer Publication (P) Ltd., ; ; Nund & Samont Co. P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa, India Machinery Stores P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa, ; referred to.
In the instant case, the certificate granted by the High Court leaves much to be desired.
It merely states that it is a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court, without specifying whether the certificate was under Article 133 (a), (b) or (c) as it stood at the relevant time.
As a very substantial question of law of general public importance is raised, it would be a travesty of justice if the appeal is dismissed on the sole ground that the certificate is defective.
It would have been open to grant special leave on the question raised.
The preliminary objection that the certificate granted by the High Court being invalid, the appeal must fail on that account alone over ruled.
[666 E F, 667 C]
