The petitioner, who was an Advocate, was authorised by the Government to represent it in all the civil cases in a district court.
Considering the pendency of a large number of Government cases before courts and tribunals the Government appointed nine Assistant Government Pleaders during the term of office of the petitioner as Government Pleader and asked him to make over all the land acquisition cases to one of the Assistant Government Pleaders.
The petitioner refused to comply with the Government 's instructions and stated That he would himself conduct all the cases.
The Government, however, stuck to its stand.
His writ petition impugning the Government 's decision was dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the petition under article 136.
^ HELD: 1.
The definition of Government Pleader contained in section 2(7) of the Code of Civil Procedure is an inclusive definition which, read along with O. 21, rr. 4 and 8(c) clearly yields the inference that Government may have as many Government Pleaders as it likes to conduct its cases.
The section vests no sole control on one Government Pleader over others and the Government is perfectly free to put a particular Government Pleader in charge of particular cases.
Government Pleaders and Assistant Government Pleaders who had been appointed according to administrative rules of the State are Government Pleaders within the meaning of the definition in section 2(7) of the Code.
Each one of them may depute other lawyers and exercise control over such surrogates.
[763 G; 764 C] 2.
The Bihar Rules regarding Government Pleaders, which are purely administrative prescriptions and which serve as guidelines and on which no legal right can be founded do not help the petitioner.
The allocation of work or control inter se is an internal arrangement and there is no error in the behaviour of the Government.
[764F G] 3.
When there were several thousand cases in the courts in the State and hundreds of cases before Tribunals it was but right that Government did not sacrifice the speedy conduct of cases by not appointing a number of pleaders.
It is inconceivable how the petitioner would have discharged his duties to the court and to the client of this crowd of land acquisition cases was posted in several courts more or less at the same time.
[765D E] Ramachandran vs Alagiriswami, A.I.R. 1961 Madras 450, approved.
Despite the national litigation policy evolved by the All India Law Ministers ' Conference in 1957 and the recommendation of the Law Commission there is still a proliferation of government cases in courts uninformed 760 by such policy.
It is important that the State should be a model litigant with accent on settlement.
Time has come for State Governments to have a second look, not only at the litigation policy but lawyers ' fees rules especially in mass litigation involving ad valorem calculations in fixing fees in land acquisition cases.
[762 B; 763 CI 2.
The politicisation of Government Pleadership which is a public office is an issue of moment in a developing society controlled by the politics of skill and enjoying a legal monopoly.
It is a healthy practice that the Government appoints these lawyers after consultation with the District Judge.
Governments under our Constitution shall not play with law offices on political or other impertinent considerations as it may affect the legality of the action and subvert the rule of law itself [765 C]
