The proviso to clause (1) of sub section (2) of section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, states that "if the tenant on the first hearing of the application for ejectment after due service pays or tenders the arrears of rent and interest @ 65% per annum or such arrears together with the cost of application assessed by the Controller, the tenant shall be deemed to have duly paid or tendered the rent within the time showed in clause (i) of sub section (2) of section 13 of the Act, 1949".
In such circumstances, an order for eviction against the tenant cannot be passed.
The appellant was a tenant under the respondent landlord Sher Singh.
On 21 3 67, Sher Singh tiled an application under Section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restrictions Act, 1949 for ejectment of the appellant tenant from the tenanted shop situate in Gurgaon Cantonment, on the ground of arrears of rent for the period from 9 11 65 to 8 3 67 at the agreed rate @ Rs. 15/ pm.
The notice of the application for ejectment with the first date of hearing as 11 5 67 was served on the appellant tenant on 22 4 67.
On 29 4 1967 the appellant tenant made an application before the very same Rent Controller praying for payment of arrears of rent i.e. Rs. 178.48 for the above period computed @ Rs. 10.62 p.m., being the fair rent fixed by that Court on 20 4 67 in an earlier application for fixation of fair rent.
The said amount was actually deposited on the court of the Rent Controller on 4 5 67.
On 11 5 67 the appellant tenant tendered in the court to the landlord a further sum of Rs. 25/ being the costs and Rs. 2/ being the interest.
This was not accepted on the ground that the lender was not a valid one within the meaning of section 13(2)(i) of the Act.
This objection was accepted by the Rent Controller and an ejectment order was passed.
On first appeal the District Judge reversed the said order.
In the Revision before the High Court, the High Court remanded the matter to the first Appellate Court for fresh orders in view of this Court 's ruling in Vidya Prachar Trust vs Basant Ram [1970] 1 S.C.R. 66.
The First Appellate Court affirmed the ejectment order.
In the further revision to the High Court, the learned single Judge referred it to the Division Bench which in turn referred it to a third Judge.
The third Judge agreed with the single Judge that the payment of fair rent fixed on 4 5 67 was not a valid tender within the meaning of section 13(2)(i) of the Act.
The single Judge, therefore, dismissed the revision petition and confirmed the orders of ejectment of the courts below.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court.
837 ^ HELD : 1.
Proviso to section 13(2)(i) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restrictions Act, 1949 requires three essential conditions: (1) that there must be an application for ejectment before the Court, (2) that even after due service the tenant does not pay or tender the arrears of rent and interest at 6 per cent per annum together with costs assessed by the Controller, (3 ) that if the payment as required by the aforesaid two conditions is made then the tenant shall be deemed to have paid rent within the time required by law.
The last part of section 13 enjoins that where the conditions of the proviso are not fulfilled the Controller shall make an order directing the tenant to put the landlord in possession and where he is satisfied that the rent has been paid, the application of the Landlord must be rejected.
[841 A C] 2.
There is no magical formula or any prescribed manner in which rent can be deposited by the tenant with the landlord.
The rent can be deposited by placing the money in the hands of the landlord which could amount to actual tender.
The second mode of payment is to deposit the amount in the court where a case is pending in such a manner so as to make the amount available to the landlord without any hitch or hindrance whenever he wants it.
Even the Act does not prescribe any particular mode of deposit.
In fact, the use of the words "tender or deposit" in the proviso clearly postulate that the rent can be given to the landlord in either of the two modes.
(I) It may be tendered to the landlord personally or to his authorised agent or it may be deposited in Court which is dealing with the case of the landlord to his Knowledge so that the landlord may withdraw the deposit whenever he likes.
In the instant case the appellant tenant chose the second course.
[842 A C] 3.
A deposit before the Rent Controller where the case of the landlord was subjudice would be a valid deposit, if it was in fact in.
existence on the date of the first hearing to the knowledge of the landlord.
In fact, if the tenant deposits the rent even before the first date of hearing it is a solid proof of his bonafides in the matter and the legal position would be that if the lent is deposited before the first date of hearing, it will be deemed to have been deposited on the date of the hearing also because the deposit continues to remain in the court on that date and the position would be as if the tenant had deposited the rent in court for payment to the landlord.
[842 D E] In the instant case, all the conditions necessary for the application of the proviso have been completely fulfilled.
This is more particularly so when the Controller gave notice to the counsel for the respondent on the first date of hearing that the amount had been deposited with the Controller.
[842 E F] Vidya Prachar Trust vs Pandit Basant Ram, [1970] 1 S.C.R. explained and distinguished.
Dulichand vs Maman Chand, C.A. 1744/69 dated 27 3 79 followed Mehnga Singh & Ors.
vs Dewan Dilbagh Rai & Ors., overruled.
Observation: The Rent Control Act is a piece of social legislation designed to project the tenant from eviction by landlords on frivolous, insufficient or purely technical ground.
Even as the Act allows eviction of the tenant on the ground of 838 non payment of arrears of rent the proviso affords sufficient protection to the tenant against eviction if the tenant deposits the rent in accordance with the proviso.
[844 B C]
