The assessee was incorporated for the purpose of taking over cf certain zamindari properties.
By an indenture the assessee took a lease of extensive zamindari properties for a term of 999 years and also took an assignment OF moveables.
In consideration of the lease and assignment, fully paid shares worth Rs. 4.08 lakhs were issued in the new company to the lessors.
The quit rent receivable by the lessors was a nominal amount of Rs. 100 per annum.
Clause (3) (a) of the Memorandum of Association showed that the assessee was primarily incorporated for the purpose of taking over the assets of the lessor 's family, while cl.
(b) empowered the assessee to purchase, take on lease or otherwise acquire and to traffic in land and generally deal in or traffic by way of sub lease with land and house property.
The assessee thereafter started giving out on sub lease various parcels of land to colliery companies for various terms of long duration.
Rejecting the assessee 's contention that the total amount of salami premia and compensation received by the assessee in three assessment years were of a capital nature, the Income Tax officer treated the amounts as income from business and taxed them.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner as well as the Appellate Tribunal held in favour of the assessee on the ground that She transactions of granting sub leases were by way of management of the property by the assessee and receipts on account of salami premia and compensation on acquisition of land were of capital nature not liable to be taxed as income.
On reference the High Court was of the view that the assessee could not be regarded as a purely family concern incorporated for the preservation and management of the family assets but was a trading concern which dealt with the lease hold rights in the lands as trading assets by using them to earn income and, therefore, salami, premia and compensation were trading receipts.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Having regard to the nature of the various transactions it is clear that the receipts on account of salami etc., must be regarded as receipts of a capital nature.
Similarly the amounts of compensation received by the assessee for compulsory acquisitions of portions of land partake the character of capital receipt in as much as compulsory acquisition could not be said to be a voluntary transaction, and compensation received would be a substitute for the capital asset lost by the assessee.
[722D] 712 2. Ownership of property and leasing it out may be done as part of a business or it may be done as land owner.
Whether it is the one or the other must necessarily depend upon the object with which the act is done.
Where a company is formed with the specific object of acquiring properties not with the view to leasing them as property but to selling them or turning them to account even by way of leasing them out as an integral part of its business, it can be said that the company has treated them as trader and not as land owner.
In deciding whether a company dealt with its properties as owner one must see not to the form which it gave to the transactions but to the substance of the matter.
[717 H] 3.
On the other hand incidental sale of uneconomic or inconvenient plots of land could not convert what was essentially an investment into a business transaction in real estate.
The purposes or objects for which a limited company was incorporated has no decisive bearing on the question whether the income is of capital nature or a revenue receipt.
The circumstance that a single plot of land was acquired and was thereafter sold as a whole or in plots is not decisive either.
Nor is profit motive in entering into a transaction decisive.
The question whether in purchasing and selling land the tax payer entered into a business activity has to be determined in the light of the facts and circumstances of each case.
[719 C D] P.K.N. Company vs Commissioner of Income Tax, 60 R 65.
Karapura Development Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal.
, discussed.
In the instant case the High Court had erroneously treated the assessee as a trading concern qua its lease hold interest in the zamindari estate without actually examining the real nature and object of the transactions of sub leases entered into by the assessee with several colliery companies.
In coming to this conclusion the High Court was influenced by three factors: (a) existence of power in the memorandum of association enabling the company to indulge in trafficking in land by way of sub leases of land; (b) declaration of dividend at a high rate and (c) creation of reserve fund by the assessee pursuant to certain articles of association.
The special features of declaration of dividend and creation of a reserve fund are not features peculiar to a trading concern because a non trading incorporated entity like an investment company can declare dividends and create a reserve fund.
These special features are not decisive of the question whether the incorporated entity is a trading concern or not.
What is of importance is how it has dealt with its assets or properties.
The assessee, which had been incorporated for the purpose of preservation and management of the family estate of the lessors had dealt with Its leasehold interest as a land owner and not as a trader.
This was clear from the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the draft agreement in accordance with which the indenture was executed.
Nominal rent of Rs. 100 p.a. and the assignment of moveables in favour of the assessee also point to the same conclusion.
Secondly, since its inception the assessee had not taken lease of any other property from anyone else.
Thirdly, the transaction of granting subleases of coal bearing and other lands were by way of management of the estate as land owner.
Fourthly, though the memorandum of association authorised the assessee to do business in collieries it did not work any colliery of its own not did it do any business as miners or coal dealers.
[720 F H] 713
