The third respondent made an application for the grant of a licence for a temporary cinema and the District Magistrate issued a no objection certificate for a period of six months.
This licence was renewed twice but a subsequent application for renewal was turned down by the District Magistrate on the ground that the 'Paras Talkies ' with a permanent cinema Licence in the locality which was hitherto closed had started functioning and, therefore, a renewal of the licence for a temporary cinema in the same locality would not be proper.
In appeal, the State Government granted respondent 3 a licence for a quasi permanent cinema.
The appellants in their writ petition questioned the validity of the State Government 's order on the ground that they were the residents of the locality and that they had objected to the grant/renewal of licence on the ground that there was a mosque, a madrasa and a temple in the vicinity of the place, where the cinema house was to be constructed and even though their objections were upheld by the licensing authority, the District Magistrate, they were not heard in the appeal preferred by the third respondent and therefore, the order of the first respondent, State of M.P. suffers from the vice of violation of the principles of natural justice.
The High Court held that since the matter was left to the subjective satisfaction of the State Government, the State Government on being satisfied that there was no impediment to the grant of such a licence, was perfectly justified in granting the same, and that this was not a fit case for interference by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants, that as objectors they should have been heard and the decision arrived at by the State Government in appeal at their back was violative of the principles of natural justice and the order granting licence for a quasi permanent cinema by the State Government was invalid.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: ( per Desai, J.) 1.
There is nothing in M.P. Cinema (Regulation) Act, 1952 or the M.P. Cinema (Regulation) Rules 1972 which require the licensing authority 793 to invite objections before grant of a quasi permanent cinema licence.
The right to object is at the initial stage when a no objection certificate is applied for by the intending applicant for such a certificate.
But there is no provision for inviting objections when the application is for a permanent or quasi permanent cinema licence or a touring cinema licence.
[800 G] 2.
There is no provision in the Act or Rules which requires advertisement of such an application inviting objections and consideration of the objections before grant of a cinema licence.
[800 H] 3.
When an application for no objection certificate is made, objections have to be invited in the prescribed manner.
There can conceivably be hundred of objections.
There is no question of giving a personal hearing to each objector.
If after taking into consideration the objections a no objection certificate is granted, there ends the matter subject, of course, to any properly constituted legal proceedings, conceivably a writ petition under Article 226.
[800 Cl 4.
Sub section
(3) of section 5 of the Act is unambiguous when it provides for an appeal only at the instance of a person aggrieved by the decision of the licensing authority refusing licence.
A fortiori every objector to grant of a no objection certificate is not entitled to file an appeal if such certificate is granted rejecting his objections.
Nor in an appeal by the aggrieved person within the meaning of section 5(3) every objector to the grant of a no objection certificate is entitled to be joined as a party respondent or that each objector is entitled to notice of hearing of the appeal.
[800 D E] 5.
The grievance of the appellants is without merits because initially when no objection certificate was applied for they did not object and one who has not objected cannot subsequently make a grievance.
[800 F] Jasbhai Motibhai Desai vs Roshan Kumar, Haji Bashir Ahmed & others ; referred to.
A right to notice by reason of any rule of natural justice, which a party may establish, must depend for its existence upon proof of an.
interest which is bound to be injured by not hearing the party claiming to be entitled to a notice and to be heard before an order is passed.
If the duty to give notice and to hear the party is not mandatory, the actual order passed on a matter must be shown to have injuriously affected the interest of the party which was given no notice of the matter.
[1801 C D] Cosmosteels Private Ltd. vs Jairam Das Gupta & Ors.
; at 431, referred to 7.
There is no substance in the grievance that before granting renewal of quasi permanent cinema licence the State Government in the appeal filed by the third respondent had not heard them and that such a decision was rendered in violation of the principles of natural justice.
[801 E] In the instance case, the application for a no objection certificate and granting of the same had passed muster long before, and appellants had not raised any objection to the grant of no objection certificate.
When the present appellants objected to the renewal of a quasi permanent cinema licence it was not the 794 stage for grant of a no objection certificate but it was the stage of renewal of quasi permanent licence subsequent to the stage of granting of a no objection certificate, when there was no statutory obligation in the licensing authority to invite objections nor were the appellants entitled to file objections and nor were they entitled to be heard.
[801 A B] (per Pathak J. concurring) 1.
Rules 3 to 6 of the M.P. Cinema (Regulation) Rules 1972, relate to the grant of a "No objection" certificate.
The Rules contemplate the filing of objections by local residents.
That is the stage at which opposition to the establishment of a cinema at the proposed side is specifically provide for.
Any person opposing the establishment of a cinema at the proposed location must do so before a 'No objection ' certificate is granted.
[802 B C] In the instant case, the appellants did not file any objections opposing the establishment of a cinema A "No objection certificate" was granted to the third respondent.
When the third respondent applied for a cinema licence, the appellants for the first time opposed the application on the grounds that there was a mosque, a madras and a temple in the vicinity.
Inasmuch as these grounds were available to them during the proceedings for considering the grant of a 'No objection ' certificate, and they did not file any objection, they cannot now be permitted to plead a right to oppose the grant of a cinema licence.
Had they, opposed the grant of the 'no objection ' certificate and their objection had make out a good case, it is possible that the 'no objection ' certificate would have been refused, and in that event the applicant would not have applied for a cinema licence.
[802 D F] 2.
The question whether a person who has objected to the grant of a "NO objection certificate" certificate when that grant was under consideration can subsequently oppose the grant of a cinema licence on the same grounds which he took against a 'no objection ' certificate left open.
[802 H 803 A]
