Respondent, assessee (M/s. Alagappa Textiles (Cochin) Limited company was carrying on business of manufacture and sale of yarn.
It entered into an Agreement dated November 10, 1955 with Kamala Mills Ltd., Coimbatore for financing and managing the assessee Mills at Alagappa Nagar for a period of five years.
Clause 8 of the Agreement provided that Kamala Mills Ltd. shall be paid for the services, rendered by it by way of purchases, sales and management remuneration at the rate of 1% on all purchases made by it for the assessee Mills and at half a percent on all sales of yarn, yarn waste and cotton waste and other products of the Mill.
Clause 13 of the agreement was to the effect that "the company (assessee) either represented by its managing Agent or Board of Directors shall not exercise the powers delegated to the Managers (Kamala Mills Ltd. under the foregoing clauses, except by way of general supervision and advice nor interfere with discretion of the managers in the exercise of their functions and powers vested in them by virtue of this Agreement." Clause 14, provided that the Managers (Kamala Mills Ltd.) powers were limited in the manner aforesaid and shall not be deemed to be manager in charge of the whole affairs of the company within the meaning of section 2(9) of the companies Act, 1913.
Clause 16 provided that the agreement shall be in force for a period of five years commencing from the date thereof and that "this Agreement for management being an Agency coupled with interest" could be revoked before the expiry of the said period of five years by 12 months ' notice in writing being given by one party to the other, but if the assessee were to revoke it the assessee shall be liable to compensate Kamala Mills for the loss of remuneration for, the unexpired period of the Agreement at the average rate at which Kamala Mills Ltd. had been earning by way of remuneration under the Agreement fill the date of such notice of termination Pursuant to the aforesaid terms, Kamala Mills Ltd. drew remuneration to the tune of Rs. 1,03,547/ and Rs. 18,249/ respectively for the calendar years 1957 and 1958 corresponding to the assessment years 1958 59 and 1959 60.
The amounts were assessed to tax in the hands of Kamala Mills Ltd. Respondent, Assessee in its assessment proceedings for the said two assessment years claimed deduction in respect of the said two Amounts as business expenditure under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act.
The claim was disallowed by the Income Tax officer on the ground that under section 384 of the companies Act.
1956 which had come into force on April 2, 1956 the continuation of a 724 body corporate as manager was prohibited for the period beyond six months from the coming into force of the Act, that the remuneration paid to Kamala Mills Ltd. subsequent to October 1, 1956 was illegal being in violation of section 381.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected the Appeal mainly on the ground that the assessee by its own conduct had disputed its liability to pay any remuneration to Kamala Mills Ltd. as after October 1, 1956 and in that behalf he relied on an admitted fact that the assessee had filed a suit against Kamala Mills to recover such remuneration which had been paid to it in contravention of section 384 of the on the basis that since the payment was illegal Kamala Mills was holding such amounts of remuneration in trust for and on behalf of the assessee.
Respondent carried the matter in further appeals to the Tribunal, but the Tribunal confirmed the view of the taxing authorities.
On a reference, the High Court answered the question in the negative in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
The High Court held that Kamala Mills could not be said to be "subject to the superintendence, control and directions of the Board of Directors" of the respondent and therefore was not a "manager" of the assessee within the meaning of section 2(14) of the , so as to attract the illegality under section 384 ibid.
and (b) that in view of the provisions of section 41(1) of the Income tax Act, the pendency of an appeal against the Judgment the suit for recovery could not be a valid ground for disallowing the deduction permissible under ) section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act.
Dismissing the appeal by Revenue by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Section 384 of the in express terms prohibits, after the commencement of the Act, the appointment of a firm or a body corporate or an association of persons as manager as also the continuation of such employment after expiry of six months from such commencement.
To attract the prohibition or disqualification, under this section, a firm, body corporate or association must be a "manager" within the meaning of section 2(24), that is to say, it should be in management of the whole or substantially the whole of the affairs of a company and should be under superintendence, control and direction of the Board of Directors of the company [730 C D, E F] 2.
Section 2(24) of the requires three conditions to be satisfied: (a) the Manager must be an individual, which means that a firm or body corporate or an association is excluded and cannot be a Manager (a fact which is expressly made clear in section 384).
(b) he should have the management of the whole or substantially the whole affairs of the company and (c) he should be subject to the superintendence, control and directions of the Board of Directors in the matter of managing the affairs of the company.
Subject to the changes made in the aspect covered by (a) and (b), in both the definitions [section .2(9) of 1913 Act and section 2(24) of the 1956 Act], the aspect that a Manager has to work or exercise his powers under the control and directions of the Board of Directors is common and essential.
In fact, it is this aspect which distinguishes 'Manager ' from "Managing Agent".
A comparison of the definition of "Manager" as given in s; 2(24) of the 1956 Act with that of "Managing Agent" in section 2(25) makes it clear that though there is an overlapping of the functions of the Manager as well as the Managing Agent of the company the essential distinction is that whereas the 725 Manager has to be subject to the superintendence, control and direction of the Board of Directors, the managing Agent is not so subject.
[729 G H, 730 A C] 3.
On a perusal of the clauses and in particular clauses 8, 13, 11 and 16 of the Agreement dated November 10, 1955 in the instant case, two or three things stand out very clearly.
It is true that at the commencement of the deed Kamala Mills Ltd. has been described and referred to as the "Managers" of the asses see throughout the document but mere label or nomenclature given to a party in the document will not be decisive.
It is also true that the several powers and functions were entrusted to Kamala Mills Ltd. under clause 1 of the Agreement to enable it "to manage or run the Mill" of the assessee.
But simply because powers and functions were given to Kamala Mills Ltd. for the purpose of "managing and running the Mills" of the assessee, it could not follow that Kamala Mills Ltd. was in truth and substance a 'manager ' of the assessee within the meaning of section 2(24) of the 1956 Act.
For this purpose the Agreement will have to be read as a whole and the Court w ill have to decide what was the true intention of the parties in entering into such Agreement.
[733 E G] 4.
The dominant object with which the Agreement was entered into was that Kamala Mills Ltd. should really act is a financier so that the assessee Mill could run and since heavy finances were to be procured by Kamala Mills Ltd. large powers and functions connected with the working of the mill were entrusted to it.
This aspect become abundantly clear from cl. 16 of the Agreement wherein the parties expressly provided that this Agreement for management was by way of and amounted to an Agency coupled with interest so far as Kamala Mills Ltd. was concerned and, therefore, revocation of the Agreement before the expiry of five years ' period was made dependent upon 12 months ' notice in writing being given by one party to the other and further if such revocation was done by the assessee suitable compensation was made payable to Kamala Mills Ltd. In other words, managerial functions were incidental and had to be entrusted to Kamala Mills because of the financier 's role undertaken by it.
The large powers and functions entrusted to Kamala Mills Ltd. under the several sub clauses of cl. 1 of the Agreement do show that management of substantially the whole, if not the whole, of the affairs of the assessee company had been made over to Kamala Mills Ltd. [734 B E] 5.
Clause 13 of the Agreement which is very eloquent.
provided that so far as the powers conferred and the functions entrusted to Kamala Mills Ltd. were concerned, the Board of directors shall not exercise or perform the same except by way of general supervision and advice and it was further made clear that the Board of Directors shall not interfere with the discretion of Kamala Mills Ltd in the exercise of their functions and powers vested in it by virtue of the Agreement.
In other words, the general supervision or advice of the Board of directors was of such character that the Board had no way whatsoever nor could it interfere with the discretion of Kamala Mills Ltd. in the matter of the exercise of the powers and the discharge of the functions entrusted to Kamala Mills Ltd. under the Agreement.
It is thus clear that the dominant object of the Agreement was that Kamala Mills Ltd. should act as financiers of the assessee Mill and in the matter of the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions Kamala Mills Ltd. was never "subject to the superintendence control or direction" of the Board of 726 directors of the assessee.
This is the position which clearly emerges on true construction of the Agreement.
[734 F H, 735A] 6.
Therefore, Kamala Mills Ltd. was not acting or working as the "Manager" of the assessee within the meaning of section 2(24) of the and as such the illegality of section 384 of the Act was not attracted.
In this view of the matter, the remuneration paid by the assessee to Kamala Mills Ltd. for the two calendar years 1957 & 1958 relevant to the assessment years 1958 59 and 1959 60 could not be regarded as being in violation of section 384 of the companies Act, 1956 and as such the expenditure incurred by way of paying such remuneration would be deductible as "Business Expenditure" under section 10(2)(xv) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
[735A D]
