The Kerala Building Tax Act, 1975 passed by the State Legislature under Entry 49 of List II (Taxes on lands and buildings) is imposed as a non recurring tax on buildings, constructed on or after April 1, 1973, the "capital value" of which exceeds Rs. 20,000/ .
The term "capital value" is defined to mean the value arrived at by multiplying the 'annual value" of a building by sixteen.
"Annual value" means the gross annual rent on which the building may, at the time of completion, be expected to let from month to month or from year to year.
Section 6 provides that the annual value of a building shall be the annual value fixed for that building in the assessment books of the local authority (which includes a Municipal Corporation or a municipality and so on) within whose area the building is situate.
Section 6(4) provides that in determining the annual value of a building regard must be had to the location of the building, the nature and quality of the structure of the building, the capability of the building and so on.
An assessee objecting to the assessment of building tax assessed or denying the liability may appeal to the Appellate Authority under section 11.
But no appeal lies unless the building tax due has been paid.
Although no appeal lies from the decision of the Appellate Authority, provision is made for reference to the District Court on a question of law and the District Collector is given power to revise the order of the Appellate Authority and the Government has the power of revision against the order of the District Collector.
Jurisdiction of Civil Court is barred by, section 27 of the Act.
The High Court, having upheld the validity of the Act, the appellants in their appeals impugned the view of the High Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) the tax levied on buildings being a tax on the capital value of the assets falls within the scope of entry 86 of List I of the Seventh Schedule and, therefore, is beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature; (2) the Act was unconstitutional in that it imposed a tax on buildings retrospectively (over a period of 2 years of its enactment); (3) it was not merely a tax on buildings but a tax on the buildings, and lands of those buildings; (4) the method of determining the capital value of a building on the basis of its annual value is hypothetical and arbitrary and is, therefore, unconstitutional.
^ HELD: 1 There is no force in the argument that the State Legislature was not competent to impose a tax on the buildings under entry 49 of List II.
[818 B] (a) Article 366(28) defines tax to include imposition of any tax whether general, local or special.
The word "tax" in its widest sense includes all money 805 raised by taxation and includes tax levied both by the Central and State Legislatures as well as rates and charges levied by local authorities [815 D E] (b) The term "assets" referred to in entry 86 of List I means "Property in general, all that one owns.
" If a tax is levied on "all that one owns" or his total assets, it would fall within the purview of entry 86 and therefore would be outside the legislative competence of the State Legislature.
On the other hand, if a tax is directly imposed on "buildings" it will bear direct relation to the buildings owned by the assessee.
Though the building owned by an assessee is a component of his total assets, the tax under entry 86 will not bear any direct or definable relation to his building.
A tax on "buildings" is, therefore, a direct tax on buildings as such.
It is not a personal tax without reference to any particular property.
[815 H, 816 A B] (c) A tax has two elements: the person, thing or activity on which it is imposed and the amount of the tax.
The amount of tax may be measured in many ways.
There is a distinction between the subject matter of a tax and the standard by which the amount of tax is measured.
Thus a building may be the subject matter of a tax like wealth tax (entry 86 List I) or it may also be the subject of a direct tax under entry 49 of List II.
The two taxes being separate and distinct, the do not over lap each other.
Therefore the tax imposed in the instant case is well within the competence of the legislature.
[816 E Fl Sudhir Chandra Nawn vs Wealth Tax officer Calcutta & Ors., ; ; Assistant Commissioner of Urban Land Tax and ors.
vs The Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd., Etc., ; referred to.
(d) It is settled law that the quantum of tax levied by the taxing statute and the conditions subject to which it is levied are matters within the competence of the legislature and so long as the tax is not confiscatory or extortionate the reasonableness of the tax cannot be questioned in a court of law.
[828 D E] Rai Ramkrishan & Ors.
vs The State of Bihar, ; ; Kunnathat Thathunni Moopil Nair vs The State of Kerala & Anr., ; referred 2(a).
The Act is not retrospective in the strictly technical sense of the term.
A statute is deemed to be retrospective, when it takes away or impairs any vested right acquired under existing laws or creates a new obligation in respect F ' of the transactions or considerations already past.
The Act, though passed in April 1975, had imposed a tax on buildings with retrospective effect from April 1973.
By so doing it has not taken away or impaired any vested right of the owner of the building acquired under any existing law.
Absence of an earlier taxing statute cannot be said to create a "vested right" under any existing law.
Nor has any new obligation or disability been attached in respect of any earlier tax transaction.
If the language of the enactment shows that the legislature thought it expedient to authorise the making of retrospective rates, it can fix the period as to which the rate may be retrospectively made.
[828 D H] Bradford Union vs Wilts, ; The Tata Iron & Steel Co Ltd. vs The State of Bihar, ; referred to.
(b) The choice of the legislature to impose a tax on buildings with effect from April 1, 1973 cannot be said to be discriminatory.
The choice of a date as a basis for classification cannot be dubbed as arbitrary even if no particular reason is forthcoming unless it is shown that it was capricious or whimsical 15 625SCI/79 806 Similarly unless it is shown that the fixing of the date is very wide of the reasonable mark the decision of the legislature must be accepted.
[819 C D] In the instant case, after the 1961 Act was struck down by this Court in 1968 the Government declared its intention to introduce a fresh Bill so as to bring a new Act into force from April 1970.
After its introduction in the Assembly it was referred to a Select Committee which recommended that the Act should be brought into force from April 1, 1973.
Two ordinances giving effect to the provisions of the draft Bill were promulgated and eventually the Bill became an Act in April, 1975.
These facts would not show that the choice of the date of April 1, 1973 was unreasonable or that it was wide of the reasonable mark.
[819 E G] 3(a).
What entry 49 of List II permits is the levy of "taxes on lands and buildings.
" It is permissible Under this entry to levy a tax either on lands as well as buildings, or on lands, or on buildings, if the legislature decides to impose a tax only on buildings, the tax would be imposed on all that goes to make or constitute a building.
[820 B C] (b) The word "building" means "that which is built; a structure.
edifice;" The natural and ordinary meaning of a "building" is, a "a fabric of which it is composed, the ground upon which its walls stand and the ground embraced within those walls.
" Entry 49 includes the side of the building as its component part.
[820 C D] (c) The definition of the term "building" in the Act makes it clear that a house, outhouse, garage or any other structure cannot be erected without the ground on which it is to stand.
The expression "building" includes the fabric of which it is composed, the ground upon which its walls stand and the ground within those walls because the ground would not have a separate existence, apart from the building.
The ground referred to in Entry 49 List II would not be the subject matter of a separate tax, apart from the tax on the building standing on it.
That being so there is no occasion to tax the site separately or to ascertain its value and add it to the value of the fabric.
[820 F G] (d) This is also the position in the case of appurtenances.
An appurtenance belongs to the building concerned and has no existence of its own.
An appurtenance, it its true sense, is an integrated part of the building to which it belongs.
[826 F G] (e) In the matter of fixing the annual value of the building under section 6 regard must be had to the "location of the building" and the "value of the land on which the building constructed", but it does not bear on the annual value of the ground of the building which does not have an existence of its own apart from the building.
It is therefore futile to contend that as factors (a) and (f) of sub section 4 of section 6 refer to the location of the building and the value of the land, the law recognises the separate existence or entity of the ground on which the buildings stands, so that the tax imposed under it is a tax both on lands and buildings and both entities should be separately recognised and determined, and taxed as such [821 C E] 4(a) When the State Legislature had decided to impose a tax, it was open to it to decide how best to levy it.
One of the usual modes of levying tax is to make provision for determining the "rate", or annual value of the building.
Rateable value is the same as the net annual value of the building.
But 807 if the Legislature decides to levy a tax on buildings once for all or, as a "non recurring tax on buildings, it has to go beyond the annual value, and work out the capital value which could be done on the basis of capital cost of construction of the building or its market value or on the basis of rent arrived at by what is known as "higgling of the market" multiplying it by a number which would best serve the purpose of determining the value of the building and then to specify the rate of tax on it.
[822 C F] (b) If the Legislature chose to adopt the annual value as the basis for working out the capital value it cannot be blamed for it because besides other advantages it is readily available from the records of local authorities and is a quite simple and reliable basis to work upon.
[828 B C] (c) The various methods of properly valuation are the various facets to a difficult problem and no one method is perfect or final or above criticism.
The multiple of sixteen adopted cannot be said to suffer from any constitutional or legal infirmity.
[830 G H] (d) The capital value of a building is not merely the cost of its bricks and mortar.
It may be difficult to provide a ready or convenient basis of taxation.
There can be no objection if the Legislature decides to levy the annual value of a building and prescribes a uniform formula for determining its capital value.
The four well accepted methods for arriving at the annual value of the building, are: (I) The "competitive or comparative method ' '; (2) the 'profits basis"; (3) the "contractor 's method"; and (4) the "unit method".
These four methods can be applied either singly or in combination.
[823 B E] (e) The fundamental object of each of these methods is to find out the rent which the tenant might reasonably be expected to pay for a building.
It is the expectation which is to be reasonable and not necessarily the rent tor the reasonable expectation would exclude any so called black market rent.
But there is no rule of law as to the method of valuation to be adopted for determining the annual value of a building.
If the Legislature selects the method of determining the annual value on the basis of rent, that is the best evidence of value.
If it has been fixed by the higgling of the market there is neither reason nor authority for holding that it is hypothetical or arbitrary.
[823 G H, 824 A B] (f) The provisions of the Act, taken together, contain the entire scheme for the levy and collection of the building tax on the capital value of building.
The expression "capital value" is not the cost of construction of the building or its market value as wealth but is only a working expression which, roughly stated, is the taxable value of the building.
The State Legislature was quite competent to select that as the basis for assessing the building tax.
[824 D E] (g) There is no inherent illegality if the gross income of the property were to be capitalised for the purpose of determining the value of the property.
firstly, because there is nothing to prevent the Legislature from making the expected gross annual rent and thereby the annual value of a building from being the unit for multiplication by sixteen for arriving at its capital value for charging tax under section 5.
Secondly, by virtue of section 6 the annual value forms the basis for determining the capital value of the building for the purposes of the Act.
However what is really taken as the annual value under the determining in section 2(a) is not the gross annual rent but the net rent after allowing for the 808 cost of its repairs etc.
It is not therefore factually correct to say that the annual value of the buildings in the State is determined on the basis of their gross annual rent without any deduction on account of repairs.
Nor is it correct to say that the determination of the capital value was arbitrary as it was arrived at by multiplying the gross annual rent by sixteen.
The gross value of a building is often made the datum point by statute and there is nothing unusual or illegal about it particularly when there are statutable deductions from it.
[825 C H] (h) Section 6(1) accepts the annual value of a building in the books of the local authorities as correct.
But that would not justify the argument that doing so is illegal or unreasonable as long as it can be shown that what is entered in the assessment books of the local authorities has been arrived at in accordance with a satisfactory procedure laid down for it in the statutes concerned.
If the procedure prescribed in that Act is unexceptionable, there is nothing illegal or unconstitutional if another taxing statute provides that the annual value fixed by it shall be accepted as correct and would From the basis for the calculation of any other tax permissible under another statute.
such cases there is no necessity for providing another machinery in the other Act and Rules.
Moreover sections 9 to 16 of the Act contain the procedure and the machinery for the assessment of the building tax on the returns filed under sections 7 and 8.
These provisions are adequate in all respects and are not open to challenge.
[831 F H, 832 A B] 5.
(a) The argument that the capital value of a building is bound to differ according to its location, amenities and appurtenances etc.
and that ascertainment of the capital value by multiplying the annual value by sixteen is discriminatory and violative of article 14, loses sight of the fact that the Legislature has defined the annual value to mean the annual rent at which a building may be expected to let.
[833 H, 834 A B] (b) A building in an important locality with attractive appurtenance is expected to fetch a higher rent than a building without those advantages.
The definition capital value provides for the levy of a higher building tax on buildings on which such levy would be justified, because the incidence of the levy would depend on the capacity of the building to fetch the rent.
[834 B C] 6.
There is no force in the argument that when section 29 says that in fixing the fair rent of a building under section S of the Rent Control Act, the rent control court would not take into consideration the building tax payable under the Act and that this makes the provision extortionate because it prevents the owner from passing on the liability to the tenant.
The tax being a non recurring tax, the question of passing it on to the tenant by splitting it up in proportion to the number of years of the tenancy cannot arise.
There is no provision in the Rent Control Act under which a building tax could be taken into consideration in fixing the fair rent.
[834 D F] 7.
Section 18 which provides that tax may be paid in certain prescribed number of instalments and the proviso to section 11(1) which deals with appeals should be read harmoniously.
If an assessee is entitled to pay the building tax in instalments, he would not be disentitled to file an appeal if he has paid those instalments as and when they fell due.
[834 G Hl 809
