The respondents were convicted and sentenced on a charge of contravention of section 16(1)(a)(i) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.
Purporting to follow the decision of this Court in Rajlal Das Pamnani 's case the High Court held that since the quantity of the sample sent to the Public Analyst was below 500 gms.
the respondents were entitled to acquittal and allowed their revision petitions.
The appellant, the Food Inspector who prosecuted the respondents, came in appeal to this Court under article 136 of the Constitution.
It was contended on behalf of the respondents that (1) this was not a fit case for exercise of discretionary powers under article 136 and (2) since at the relevant time the decision of this Court in Pamnani 's case was the law declared by this Court it was that decision which should be Applied to this case.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: Acquittal of the respondent by the High Court was erroneous.
[853 D] 1.
In Alassary Mohammed the cases which this Court was considering were really test cases which only invited a final decision of this Court on the interpretation of r. 22.
Most of the counsel appearing for the prosecution did not challenge the order of Acquittal passed by the High Court.
While laying down the law on test cases this Court refused to set aside the order on the ground that the acquittal was not challenged by the prosecution.
[851 G] The present case is not a test case.
Since Alassary Mohammed has decided the point of law against the view of the High Court, the acquittal of the respondents by the High Court was wrong on a point of law.
The question of exercising discretion particularly against economic offenders does not arise.
[851 D] 2.
In Alassary Mohammed 's case this Court, overruling its earlier decision in Rajlal Pamnani 's Case held that the amendment made to r. 22, by introducing r. 22B, was not really an amendment in the strict sense of the term but merely a clarification of what was intended by the original r. 22, that r. 22 was directory and that it was for the Public Analyst to say whether the quantity of sample sent to him was sufficient or not for making necessary analysis.
[850 E] State of Kerala vs Alassary Mohammed, explained.
Whenever a previous decision of this Court is overruled by a larger bench the previous decision is completely wiped out and the court would have to decide all subsequent cases according to the law laid down by the later decision.
