The respondent assessee is a private limited company carrying on business as sole selling agents for a certain brand of Welding Electrodes.
It charged the catalogue price less trade discount from retailers for the goods supplied.
The catalogue price is the price which the retailer is entitled to charge the consumer.
The returns field under the , showed a taxable turnover of inter state sales amounting to Rs. 8,71,624/ for the assessment year 1971 72.
This figure was derived by deducting Rs. 1,06,708/ from the catalogue price paid as trade discount by the assessee to the retailers.
The Sales Tax officer, refused to allow the deduction and computed the taxable turnover at Rs. 9,78,332/ .
On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld the assessee 's claim that trade discount did not form part of the turn over and could not, therefore, attract sales tax.
A second appeal was dismissed by the Appellate Tribunal.
A revision application by the Revenue to the High Court was also dismissed.
It was contended (i) that the High Court erred in affirming that an amount paid by way of trade discount, could not be included in the taxable turnover for the purpose of assessment, (ii) that in effect the assessee entered into two distinct contracts with the retailer, the first contract related to the sale of goods at the catalogue price and the second contract stipulated that the retailer could actually pay the sale price less trade discount and that since the sale was effected under the first contract the entire amount treated as consideration for the sale under that contract had to be included in the taxable turn over.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is true that a deduction on account of cash discount is alone specifically contemplated from the sale consideration in the definition of "Sale price" by section 2(h) and that cash discount cannot be confused with trade discount.
They are two separate and distinct concepts.
Cash discount is allowed when the purchaser makes payment promptly or within the period of credit allowed.
It is a discount granted in consideration of expeditious payment.
A trade discount is a deduction from the catalogue price of goods allowed by wholesalers to retailers engaged in the trade.
The allowance enables the retailer to sell the goods at the catalogue price and yet make a reasonable margin of profit after taking into account his business expense.
The outward invoice sent by a wholesale dealer to a retailer shows the catalogue price and against that a deduction of the trade discount is shown.
The net amount is the sale price, and it is that net amount which is entered in the book 's of the respective parties as the amount realisable.
[933 G H,934A C] 932 Orient Paper Mills Ltd. vs State of Orissa (1975) 35 S.T.C. 34 referred to.
Under the Sales Tax Act.
the sale price which enters into the computation of the turnover is the consideration for which the goods are sold by the assessee Where trade discount if allowed on the catalogue price, the sale price is the amount determined after deducting the trade discount.
It is immaterial that the definition of "Sale Price" in section 2(h) of the Act does not expressly provide for the deduction of trade discount from the sale price.
Having regard to the circumstance that the sale price is arrived at after deducting the trade discount, no question arises of deducting from the sale price any sum by way of trade discount.
Nor is there any question here of two successive agreements between the parties, one providing for sale of the goods at the catalogue price and the other providing for an allowance by way of trade discount.
Having regard to the nature of trade discount, there is only one sale price between the dealer and the retailer and that is the price payable by the retailer calculated at the difference between the catalogue price and the trade Discount.
There is only one contract between the parties, the contract being that the goods will be sold by the dealer to the retailer at the aforesaid sale price.
The sale price which enters into the computation of the assessee 's turnover for the purpose of assessment under the Sales Tax Act, is obtained after deducting the trade discount from the catalogue price.
The trade discount allowed by the assessee cannot be included in the turnover.
[934 C E, F, 935] Orient Paper Mills Ltd. vs State of Orissa (1975) 35 STC 84, Ambica Mills Ltd. vs The State of Gujarat and another (1964) 15 STC 367, affirmed.
India Pistons Ltd. vs State of Tamil Nadu (1974) 33 STC 472, distinguished.
