The appellant was the tenant of respondent in Quarter No. IV H/46 Lajpat Nagar from 1 7 1967.
On 2 6 1976, the respondent filed an application under sections 14A(1), 14(1)(e) and 14(1)(f) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, for eviction of the appellant firstly on the ground that as her husband was required by the Government to vacate the Government quarters or pay the penal rent, the husband of the respondent had to shift to the house of his wife which was in the tenancy of the defendant.
A prayer was also made that even otherwise the premises were required for a bonafide necessity of the landlord and also as the premises had become unfit for human habitation the respondent required the same for carrying out repairs which could not be done unless the premises were vacated.
On 3 6 76 the respondent filed an application withdrawing the cause of action mentioned by her regarding bonafide necessity and repairs as contemplated by Section 14(1)(e) and 14(1)(f) of the Act.
The Rent Controller accordingly allowed the plaintiff to withdraw the two causes of action mentioned in the application since no notice was served at this time on the appellant.
Thereafter notice was served on the appellant.
On 4 6 1976, the plaintiff again sought to amend her petition by deleting the cause of action mentioned under section 14A(1) of the Act i.e. requirement of the respondent because her husband had been directed to vacate the Government Quarter.
On 13 8 1976 the appellant appeared before the Rent Controller and filed an application under section 25B, sub sections 4 and 5 requesting the Rent Controller to give him permission to defend the suit, on the ground that as the landlady was not a Government servant she was not entitled to maintain the eviction petition under Section 14A(1) of the Act.
On 6 10 76 the husband of the respondent filed an application for being impleaded as a party, but this application was rejected on 22 11 76.
The respondent thereafter again filed another application on 27 1 77 praying for amendment of her eviction application by re inserting the cause of action contained in section 14(1)(e) of the Act and sought to claim eviction on the ground of bonafide requirement.
This application was contested by the appellant but was allowed by the Rent Controller by his order dated 19 2 77 leaving open to the appellant to file his objection by a fresh application if he wanted to defend the suit.
The appellant accordingly filed an application on 9 3 77 for permission to defend the suit on the ground that the amendment sought for by the plaintiff was uncalled for and illegal and could not be allowed.
Ultimately, the Rent 855 controller by his order dated 27 7 77 rejected the application for leave to appear and defend the suit and passed an order evicting the appellant from the premises.
The revision petition filed by the appellant under Section 25B(8) in the Delhi High Court was dismissed on 6 4 1978 and hence the appeal by special leave of the Court.
It was contended: (a) that the second application given by the respondent for re amending her plaint by inserting the relief under section 14(1)(e) which she had given up at a prior occasion when she had based her suit under section 14A(1) was barred by the principles of Order II Rule 2 C.P.C. (b) that even if order II Rule 2 C.P.C., had no application, the second application filed by the respondent was barred by the doctrine of constructive res judicata and (c) Section 25B which lays down the procedure for disposing of the applications filed by the landlord under the provisions of Section 14A and 14(1)(e) are violative of Article 14 of the Constitution in as much as the provisions are arbitrary and discriminatory in nature, and seek to provide two different procedures for tenants similarly situated.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
A perusal of order II Rule 2 C.P.C. would clearly reveal that this provision applies to cases where a plaintiff omits to sue a portion of the cause of action on which the suit is based either by relinquishing, the cause of action or by omitting a part of it.
The provision has, therefore, no application to cases where the plaintiff has based his suit on separate and distinct causes of action and chooses to relinquish one or the other of them.
In such cases, it is always open to the plaintiff to file a fresh suit on the basis of a distinct cause of action [860 E F] In the instant case, the second amendment application was rot barred by the principles of order II, Rule 2 C.P.C.
The respondent had first based her suit on three distinct causes of action, but later confined the suit only to the first cause of action, namely the one mentioned in Section 14A(1) of the Act and gave up the cause of action relating to section 14(1) (e) and (f).
Subsequently by virtue of an amendment she relinquished the first cause of action arising out of section 14A(1) and sought to revive her cause of action based on section 14(1)(e).
At the time when the respondent relinquished the cause of action arising out of Section 14(1)(e), the applicant was not in the picture at all.
Therefore it was not open to the appellant to raise any objection to the amount sought by the respondent.
1861 G H. 862 A C] Mohammed Khalil Khan and Ors.
vs Mahbub Alikhan and Ors.
75 I.A 121 P.C.; applied.
One of the essential conditions of res judicata is that there must be a normal adjudication between the parties after full hearing.
In other words, the matter must be finally decided between the parties.
[862 C] In the instant case, the doctrine of constructive res judicata has no application whatsoever, since at the time when the respondent relinquished her first cause of action, the appellant was no where in the picture and there was no adjudication between the parties.
The second amendment application was made in the same proceedings on a case of action that she was allowed to insert with the permission of the Court.
Although both the parties went to the Court on the basis of 856 these facts, neither the bar of res judicata nor that of Order II Rule 2 C.P.C. was raised before the Rent Controller.
[862 C, E] 3.
It is well settled that what Article 14 forbids is hostile discrimination and not reasonable classification.
Discrimination may take place in many ways and what Article 14 requires is that equals must be treated alike.
If equals and unequals one also treated alike then also Article 14 is clearly attracted and discrimination results.
[862 F G] (b) A reasonable classification based on grounds having a clear nexus with the objective to be achieved and grouping certain persons in a separate category in view of their special peculiarities is undoubtedly permissible.
Of course, classification should not be purely a class legislation.
[862 G H] (c) It is also well settled that there is always a presumption in favour of tho constitutionality of a statute and any party who seeks to challenge the legislation on the ground of applicability of Article 14 must plead and prove tho necessary facts.
In making a classification, the Court must presume matters of common knowledge, common report, history of the time and every other relevant fact.
[862 H, 863 A] Chiranjit Lal Chowdhari vs Union of India and Ors.
; , State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar ; ; Sri Ramkrishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tandolkar and Ors.
; Mahant Moti Das vs section P. Sahi the Special Officer in charoe of Hindu Religious Trust and Ors., [1959] 2 Supp.
S.C.R. 563, A. C. Aggarwal Sub Divisional Magistrate Delhi and Anr.
vs Mst.
Ram Kali etc.
[1968] 1 S.C.R. 205; referred to. 4.
The Rent Control Act is a piece of social legislation and is meant mainly to protect the tenants from frivolous evictions.
At the same time, in order to do justice to the landlords and to avoid such restrictions on their right to evict the tenant so as to destroy their legal right to property certain salutary provisions have been made by the legislature which give relief to the landlord.
In the absence of such a legislation a landlord has a common law right to evict the tenant either on the determination of the tenancy by efflux of time or for default in payment cf rent or other grounds after giving notice under the Transfer of Property Act.
Their broad right has been curtailed by the Rent Control Legislation with a view to give protection to the tenants having regard to their genuine and dire needs.
[864 C E] While the rent control legislation has given a number of facilities to the tenants, it should not be construed so as to destroy the limited relief which it seeks to give to the landlord also, like the question of landlord 's bonafide personal necessity.
The concept of bonafide necessity should be meaningfully construed so as to make the relief granted to the landlord real and practical.
[864 E G] Bega Begum and Ors.
vs Abdul Ahmed Khan (dead) by 1. rs and Ors. ; ; referred to.
Section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act was inserted in the statute by Act 18 of 5976 and was given retrospective effect from 1 12 75, with the sole object of simplifying the procedure for eviction of tenants in case the landlord requires the premises bonafide for his personal occupation.
The Legislature in its wisdom thought that a short and simple procedure should be provided 857 for those landlords who generally want the premises for their bonafide necessity so that they may be able to get quick and expeditious relief.
[865 G H, 866 A B] Section 25B does not govern all grounds open to a landlord for evicting the tenant but it is confined only to the ground in section 14A and proviso to section 14(1)(e).
In other words, the bonafide necessity of the landlord has been put in a separate class or category having regard to the peculiar incidents of his right.
Section 14A also relates to a special situation where the landlord under the Government Rules is asked to shift to his own house, if he has one or in a house that belongs to his spouse, failing which he has to pay a penal rent which almost takes away a major part of his salary.
Thus, such a landlord becomes a class by himself.
The statute thus puts personal necessity of the landlord as a special class requiring special treatment for quick eviction of the tenant and cuts out delays and plugs all the loopholes, which may cause delay in getting the relief by the landlord.
The classification made by the legislature is in public interest and is in complete consonance with the objectives sought to be achieved.
The landlords having personal necessity have been brought together as a separate class because of their special needs and such a classification cannot be said to be unreasonable particularly where the legislature in its obvious wisdom feels that the Landlords should get this relief as quickly as possible.
[868 A E] Even though a summary procedure has been evolved the tenant has been afforded full opportunity to defend the application provided he can disclose good grounds for negating the case of the landlord.
No litigant has a right to protract the legal proceedings by taking frivolous, irrelevant, irrational or uncalled for pleas.
This is what Section 25B seeks to prevent.
[869 E F] An appeal is purely a creature of the statute and this right has not been given in order to cut out unnecessary delay.
Indeed the highest Court of the state has been given a wide power of revision where the said Court can examine the case of the tenant and the landlord and the validity of the order passed by the Controller.
The right of the tenant, therefore, is sufficiently safeguarded by the proviso to sub section 8 of Section 25B of the Act.
In order to give the relief to the tenant against any apparent error of law or fact where no revision has been filed in the High Court, the statute confers power of review on the Controller.
[869 G H, 870 A] Thus, taking an overall picture of the situation, the circumstances under which the landlord 's needs have been classified and the safeguards given by the statute it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that Section 25B and its sub sections are violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In fact, Section 25B contains valuable and sufficient guidelines which completely exclude the exercise of uncanalised or arbitrary powers of the Rent Controller.
[870 A B] Section 25B is constitutionally valid.
The legislature has not taken, away the right of the tenant at all but has merely simplified the procedure for eviction of the tenant in cases falling within the ambit of sections 14A and 14(1)(e) of the Act.
A tenant cannot challenge the validity of such a provision enacted by the legislature from which the tenant itself derive such rights.
If the legislature considered in its wisdom to confer certain rights or facilities on that tenants, it could due to changed circumstances curtail, modify, alter or even take away such rights or the procedure enacted for the purpose of eviction and leave the tenants to seek their remedy under the common law.
[870 G H, 871 A, B C] 858
