On August 31, 1976, the Food Inspector lifted a sample of 'Postman ' brand refined ground nut oil from M/s. Amar Provision & General Stores, which was sold/supplied to it by M/s. Gainda Mull Hem Raj on August 20, 1976 and the same was found, as per the Public Analyst 's report dated September 9, 1976, to be adulterated due to the presence of Castoroil (not an edible oil).
This adulterated article of food was supplied/sold to Gainda Mull Hemraj by M/s. Ahmad Oomer Bhoy through its sales managers at Delhi, T. K. Nangia and Y. P. Bhasin.
On June 23, 1977, the Delhi Administration filed a complaint under section 7(1) read with Section 16(1)(a) and Section 17 against (i) M/s. Ahmed Oomer Bhoy Ahmed Mills, Bombay manufacturers of well known brand Postman groundnut oil (ii) their distributors M/s. Gainda Mull Hemraj, New Delhi, a partnership firm, and its managing Partner Meher Chand Jain (iii) M/s. Amar Provision and General Stores, Netajinagar Market, New Delhi and its owner Amrik Lal, the retailer (iv) Y. A. Khan, Manager, Quality Control, Ahmed Mills appointed by the manufacturers as the person responsible under section 17(2) of the Act, and (v) The two sales managers, Delhi Branch of M/s. Ahmed Oomer Bhoy, manufacturers, I.K. Nangia and Y. P. Bhasin.
The Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi by his order dated April 1, 1978 found that there was a prima facie case against all except the two sales managers and issued process accordingly.
He dismissed the complaint against the respondents on the ground "that they were not concerned with the manufacturer of the article in question, but had only effected the sale thereof".
The Delhi Administration moved the High Court in revision against dismissal, but it declined to interfere.
1017 Allowing the appeal by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
At the initial stage, if there is strong suspicion which leads the Court to think that there is a ground for presuming that the accused had committed an offence, then it is not open to the Court to say that there was no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
[1020 C D] In the instant case, the allegations in the complaint constitute a prima facie, case against the respondents of having committed an offence under section 7(1) read with section 16(1)(a) of the .
The words "were in charge of" and "responsible to it for the conduct of its business" are wide enough to include all the business activities of M/s. Ahmed Oomer Bhoy at Delhi who have their office at Delhi and the two respondents are the sales Managers.
[1020 E, G H, 1021 A] State of Bihar vs Ramesh Singh, ; ; applied.
The person actually effecting the sale of an adulterated article of food is directly liable under section 7(i) of the Act.
The manufacturers M/s. Ahmed Oomer Bhoy, Bombay became liable because they were directly selling the adulterated article through their branch office at Delhi.
The respondents I. K. Nangia and Y. P. Bhasin also became liable because of the words "by any person on his behalf" in Section 7 which includes their agents and servants.
In view of this, the learned Metropolitan Magistrate should not have dismissed the complaint against the respondents.
[1021 C F] 3.
On the plain meaning of the new section 17, introduced by Act 34 of 1976, when an offence has been committed by a company, where there is no nomination under s 17(2), every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business, is deemed to be guilty of the offence and is liable to be proceeded against and punished.
Notwithstanding the nomination of a person under section 17(2), any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company [not being a person nominated under sub section
(2)] can also be vicariously made liable if it is proved that the offence has been committed "with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of such person".
[1023 B D] 4.
To construe section 17(2) of the Act to mean that the only person liable to be proceeded is the named/nominated person under section 17(2) would render the Explanation to Section 17(2) wholly illusory.
[1023 E F] 5.
Where there is a large business organisation, with a widespread network of sales organisation throughout the country, it ought to nominate different persons for different places or face the consequences set forth in section 17(1)(a)(ii).
The Explanation appended to section 17(2) does, in terms, contemplate that where a company has different establishments or branches or different units in any establishment or branch, it may nominate different persons in relation to different establishments or branches or units and the person so nominated in relation to any establishment or branch or unit shall be deemed to be the person responsible in respect of such establishment or branch or unit.
The language of the Explanation shows a purpose and, therefore, a construction consistent with that purpose must reasonably be placed upon it.
[1024 F H, 1025 A] 1018 The Explanation to section 17(2), although in terms permissive imposes a duty upon such a company to nominate a person in relation to different establishments or branches or units.
There can be no doubt that this implies the performance of a public duty, as otherwise, the scheme underlying the section would be unworkable.
[1024 A D] The Explanation lays down the mode in which the requirements of section 17(2) should be complied with.
Normally, the word 'may implies what is optional, but for the reasons stated, it should in the context in which it appears.
mean 'must '.
There is an element of compulsion.
It is a power coupled with a duty.
Though the company is not a body or authority, there is no reason why the same principle should not apply.
It is thus wrong to suggest that the Explanation is only an enabling provision, when its breach entails in the consequences indicated above.
It is not left to one 's choice, but the law makes it imperative.
Admittedly, M/s. Anand Oomer Bhoy had not at the material time nominated any person, in relation to their Delhi branch.
The matter is, therefore, squarely conversed by section 17(1)(a)(ii).
[1024D E, H, 1025 A] Julias vs Lord Bishop of Oxford, ; quoted with approval.
The individual liability of the sales manager is distinct and separate from the corporate liability of the manufacturer.
In case of a 'company prosecution ', the company alongwith its agent, that is, the person nominated under section 17(2) as well as the sales manager can both be prosecuted under section 7(i) read with section 16(1) (a).
Notwithstanding the nomination of a person responsible under section 17(2), there can also be prosecution of any director, manager, secretary, or other officer of the company under section 17(4).
But in such a case it is necessary for the prosecution to prove that the offence has been committed 'with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of such person '.
[1025 B D]
