Rule 5 of the Survey of India (Recruitment from Corps of Engineer Officers) Rules 1950 provided that on first appointment an officer would be in the grade of Deputy Superintending Surveyor in Class I Service of the Survey of India and that seniority of military officers inter se will remain the same as in the Army.
Sub rule 5 of this rule provided that among those allotted to the same year, military officers would rank senior to directly recruited civilian officers.
Rule 11 of the Rules which dealt with the method of recruitment to Survey of India Class I Service provided that all recruitments to the Cadre would be 50% from the Corps of Engineer Officers, 25% from promoted Class II civilian officers and 25% from direct recruits by competitive examination through the Union Public Service Commission.
These Rules were amended in 1960 and 1970 but the provision relating to military engineers remained the same as in the 1950 Rules.
In a writ petition filed in the High Court, the civilian officers of the service consisting of direct recruits and Class II promotees impugned the validity of the 1950 Rules on the ground that seniority prescriptions were based on irrelevant criteria and that discrimination was writ large in the impugned provisions.
The High Court, accepting the contentions of the civilian officers, struck down certain rules of the 1950 Rules as violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The High Court did not accept the contention of the Government that the nature and character of the work done by the Survey of India was essentially connected with defence purposes because the work done by the Department for the Army was done along with several other services carried on by it, namely, with the development projects, preparation of maps for various Ministries of the Central and State Governments, public sector undertakings and other agencies; assuming that the work was related to defence purposes, civilian officers were employed by the Department to do the same work and during emergencies, civilian officers were called upon to serve in border areas.
The Department had civilian budget.
For these reasons the High Court came to the conclusion that there was no ground to justify classification made under the impugned Rules between the Army officers and civilian officers because the recruits from the army could not be said to be better qualified than the civilian direct recruits and that there was no justification for adopting any discrimination in favour of the Army officers.
The impugned rules were struck down on the ground that there was no reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
1037 In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State that the constitutional mandate of equal treatment applies only to equals and in the case of recruitment to the service the sources of recruitment of Army personnel and civilian entrants are different and remain different; weightage is given only at the time of entry and thereafter officers are treated as equals for all purposes of promotion and the advantage gained by the militarymen is a consequence of the initial advantage of the commissioned service for the purposes of seniority.
Assuming that there is a unified cadre, since there exists a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved Article 16 cannot be said to have been violated.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: The 1950 Rules are valid in that they have a prominent feature which is basic namely the military nominees do not shed their army service and merge into a new service to undergo partial absorption but preserve a substantial separateness.
[1054 B C] 1.
Without the military engineers the Survey of India would become a functional failure in discharging its paramount duties in times of war and peace.
The work done by the army wing of the Survey of India is far too important to be played with and such work is best done by that wing.
The military recruits are commissioned officers with three to six years of service with certain salary scales and period of service.
Giving due weight to these factors rule 5 lays down the criteria for seniority as between the military sector and the civilian sector.
For the very efficiency of the Survey of India a substantial Army element is essential.
Army engineers are invited into this service not because this department historically belonged to the defence forces but because in hours of crises it cannot minister to one of the major objectives of its creation if it does not have engineers with military training, courage and so on.
It is fairly intelligible and basically equitable to allow military engineers credit for commissioned service and protection of already earned higher salaries.
[1059 E H 1060 A B] 2.
To attract engineers into the Survey of India by assuring them all that they were enjoying in their existing service, namely, credit for the years under commission in reckoning seniority and fitment of their salary and other benefits is not discrimination or favoured treatment but justice to those whom, of necessity, the service wants.
[1060 C D] 3.
Once it is agreed that at the entrance point the Army engineers are justly given credit for the commissioned service which they carry with them there is no further discrimination while in service on the score that they come from the Corps of Engineer Officers.
All that happens thereafter is merely the manifestation of initial advantage of credit for commissioned service.
[1061 D E] Mohammad Shujat Ali & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors. ; at 481; Ram Lal Wadwa & Anr.
vs The State of Haryana & Ors. ; at 635; State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh [1963] Supp.
2 SCR 169 at 189; section G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors. ; ; Ganga Ram & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; at 488 referred to.
The 1950 Rules bring out certain incidents of service boldly.
Notwithstanding the fact that they entered the Survey of India service.
the Army 1038 officers continue to wear Army uniforms, they get notional promotions in the Army provided they pass the requisite Army tests when they earn corresponding promotions in the Survey of India.
They can be recalled by the Army and they continue to be under the control of the Commander in Chief.
When inefficiency is noticed they can be called back to the Army for being dealt with appropriately.
A conspectus of the facts and circumstances governing the service makes it clear that there is no integration of the Army personnel into the Survey Service.
Without such complete integration Articles 14 and 16 cannot be invoked.
[1064 E G, 1065 A B] 5.
Whether 25% or 50% induction from military engineers is enough is a matter of policy for which the judiciary has no genius and the administration has a reach of materials and range of expertise, so that Courts must keep out except where rational criteria, or irrelevant factors mala fide motives or gross folly enter the verdict.
In the instant case reservation of 50% of Class I service for Army Officers cannot be called irrational, impertinent or improvident.
[1065 F H]
