The petitioner 's son (the detenu) was detained under section 8(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 by an order of the District Magistrate, Anantnag, Sections 8(1)(a)(1) and 8(2)2 of the Act state that the Government or the District Magistrate may, if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or the maintenance of the public order, make an order directing that such person be detained.
The detenu was informed that the order of detention had been passed with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to "the maintenance of public order".
The grounds of detention amongst others stated that the detenu had (i) indulged in subversive activities (ii) organised the burning of religious places to create chaos in the State (iii) disturbed the public order (iv) tried to elicit public opinion in favour of a person sentenced to death and that his remaining at large was prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and also the "security of the State".
The petitioner challenged the grounds of detention as vague.
Allowing the petition under Article 32 of the Constitution and directing the release of the detenu forthwith.
^ HELD: An attempt on the part of any citizen to elicit public opinion in favour of a person who has been sentenced to death and to save him from the gallows cannot be considered as acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State because it cannot be considered as an attempt to overthrow or overawe the Government established by law in the State.
The fact that the detenu had sent hand bills and booklets to arouse the sentiments of the people against the proposed execution of Z. A. Bhutto cannot be considered as an act prejudicial to the security of the State because the State of Jammu and Kashmir had nothing to do with the proposed execution.
The other grounds are also vague in so far as the question of security of the State is concerned.
[1111 B E] A combined reading of the order of detention and the grounds furnished to the detenu shows that at the time when the order was made, the District Magistrate either had no material relevant to the security of the State on which he could act or even if he had information of those grounds, he did not propose to act on it.
He, however, tried to support the order of detention by stating in the course of the grounds that by the detenu remaining at large, the security of the State was likely to be prejudiced.
[1111 G H] 1105 The expressions "law and order", "public order" and "security of the State" are distinct concepts though now always separate.
Whereas every breach of peace may amount to disturbance of law and order, every such breach does not amount to disturbance of public order and every public disorder may not prejudicially affect the "security of the State." [1112 A B] Romesh Thapper vs The State of Madras, [1950] S.C.R. 594 at p. 600 applied.
An act may affect law and order but not public order just as an act may affect public order but not security of State.
It is for this reason that the Act defines the expressions "acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State" and "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order ' separately.
An order of detention made either on the basis that the detaining authority is satisfied that the person against whom the order is being made is acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or on the basis that he is satisfied that such person is acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order but which is attempted to be supported by placing reliance on both the bases in the grounds furnished to the detenu has to be held to an illegal one.
[1113 C D] Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & Others, ; Bhupal Chandra Ghosh vs Arif Ali & Others ; and Satya Brata Ghose vs Arif Ali
