In respect of arrears of rent the respondent landlord and the appellant who was his tenant entered into an agreement on June 13, 1960 that the tenant would pay every month Rs. 50/ representing Rs. 25/ as arrears of rent and Rs. 25/ towards the current rent.
For sometime the appellant made the payments in accordance with the agreement but thereafter fell in arrears.
The respondent served a notice of demand upon the appellant on August 21, 1961.
Eventually the respondent instituted a suit for damages and eviction of the appellant from the premises.
The appellant pleaded that the arrears of rent due at the date of notice were Rs. 75/ only which did not exceed three months rent and that the balance of the amount demanded represented only past arrears covered by the agreement in respect of which the landlord had waived his right of ejectment.
Dismissing the suit the trial court held that only three months rent was in arrears and no ground for eviction had been made out under section 3(1)(a) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947.
On appeal the Civil Judge was of the view that the rent in arrears on the date of agreement did not lose its character as "arrears of rent" merely because there was an agreement to pay it in instalments.
The High Court affirmed the finding of the Civil Judge.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that out of Rs. 150/ due to the respondent on the date of his notice only Rs. 75/ was due towards the arrears of rent for three months preceding the notice while the balance of Rs 75/ was a distinct liability under the agreement and therefore, could not be treated and tacked on as arrears of rent to the rent due for the three months preceding the date of notice, for the purpose of section 3(1) (a) of the Act.
Allowing the appeal and accepting the appellant 's contention, ^ HELD: 1.
The appellant was not in "arrears of rent for more than three months" within the meaning of section 3(1)(a) of the Act and therefore was not liable to be evicted under the clause.
[71 F] 2.
As a result of the agreement dated June 13, 1960 the pre agreement arrears lost their original character of "arrears of rent" and assumed the character of a consolidated debt, which under the terms of the agreement, was payable by the debtor (appellant) in monthly instalments.
The agreement 68 brought into being a new cause of action and created a liability against the tenant, independent and distinct from that founded on the rent note or the lease of the premises.
The arrears of three instalments due under the agreement had ceased to be "arrears of rent" and could not be tacked on to the rent due for three months preceding the date of notice, for the purpose of the section.[71 A B]
