Section 60 of the Madras Cooperative Societies Act, 1932, empowers the State Government to exempt a registered society from any of the provisions of the Act or to direct that such provision shall apply to such society with specified modifications.
In the appeal to this Court on the question whether Section 60 of the Act is void on the ground of unconstitutional delegation of legislative power.
^ HELD: 1.
Section 60 is not void on the ground of excessive delegation of legislative power.
[267 C] 2.
The power given to the Government under section 60 of the Act is to be exercised so as to advance the policy and objects of the Act, according to the guidelines enunciated in the preamble and the other provisions of the Act.[267 B] 3.
The Act, a welfare legislation, to facilitate the formation and working of cooperative societies consists of numerous provisions, dealing with registration of societies, rights and liabilities of members, duties of registered societies, privileges of registered societies, property and funds of registered societies, inquiry and inspection, supersession of committees of societies, dissolution of societies, surcharge and attachment, arbitration etc.
The too rigorous application of some of the provisions of the Act may itself occasionally result in frustrating the very objects of the Act instead of advancing them.
To provide for such situations, the Government was invested by section 60 with a power to relax the occasional rigour of the provisions of the Act and to advance the objects of the Act.[266 D, G; H 277 A] 4.
(i) Parliament and the State Legislatures are endowed with plenary power to legislate upon any of the subjects entrusted to them by the Constitution, subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution itself.
The power to legislate carries with it the power to delegate.
While excessive delegation may amount to abdication, delegation unlimited may invite despotism uninhibited.
The theory has therefore been evolved that the legislature cannot delegate its essential function.
[262 H 263 A] (ii) The Parliament and the State Legislatures are not bodies of experts or specialists.
They are skilled in the art of discovering the aspirations, the expectations and the needs, the limits to the patience and the acquiescence and the articulation of the views of the people whom they represent.
They function best when they concern themselves with general principles, broad objectives and 261 fundamental issues instead of technical and situational intricacies which are better left to better equipped full time expert executive bodies and specialist public servants.
Parliament and the State Legislatures have neither the time nor the expertise to be involved in detail and circumstance.
Nor can Parliament and the State Legislatures visualise and provide for new, strange, unforeseen and unpredictable situations arising from the complexity of modern life and the ingenuity of modern man.
That is the raison d 'etre for delegated legislation.
[262 E G] (iii) The Legislature may guide the delegate by speaking through the express provision empowering delegation or the other provisions of the statute, the preamble, the scheme or even the very subject matter of the statute.
If guidance there is, wherever it may be found the delegation is valid.
A generous degree of latitude must be held permissible in the case of welfare legislation, particularly these statutes which are designed to further the Directive Principles of State Policy.
[263 B] ; , M. K. Papiah & Sons vs Excise Commissioner ; Harishankar Bagla and Anr.
vs The State of Madhya Pradesh [1955] 1 S.C.R., p. 380 @ 388: The Edward Mills Co. Ltd., Beawar vs The State of Ajmer ; Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot vs The State of Madhya Pradesh ; Sardar Inder Singh vs The State of Rajasthan, Vasantlal Maganbhai Sanjanwala vs The State of Bombay, ; Jyoti Prasad vs The Administrator for the Union Territory of Delhi ; Mohammad Hussain Gulam Mohammad vs The State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
