In 1967 the respondent agreed to sell his house to the appellant for a sum of Rs. 4 lakhs which then was subject to an equitable mortgage in favour of a bank.
The trial court decreed the suit for specific performance directing the plaintiff to deposit the mortgage amount within a specified time with interest at 11 per cent till the date of payment and that failure to pay the amount would result in the suit being dismissed.
At the time of the agreement the plaintiff paid the whole consideration except the mortgage amount and obtained possession of the house.
The plaintiff did not deposit the mortgage amount within the prescribed time.
She paid the mortgage money to the bank some months afterwards and took an assignment of its rights.
In the suit filed by the bank against the defendant she got herself impleaded as second plaintiff.
Eventually the mortgage suit resulted in a decree in favour of the appellant.
By this time the amount had swollen to Rs. 11 lakhs.
On appeal a division bench of the High Court vacated the default clause.
The plaintiff 's application for giving credit to the amount paid by her to the mortgage bank and to pass a final decree in her favour was not granted by the High Court.
The High Court ultimately passed a decree for recession of the contract for sale and for delivery of the possession with mesne profits.
^ HELD: The High Court should pass a decree that the plaintiff appellant should deposit within six months the entire consideration together with interest due upto date at the rate of 11 per cent together with an undertaking that she would give up all her rights under the mortgage decree passed by the High Court, except to the extent of the amount actually paid to the bank for taking the assignment.
[297 E] It is open to the court in control of a suit for specific performance to extend the time for deposit and this Court may do so even now to enable the plaintiff to get the advantage of the agreement to sell in her favour.
The disentitling circumstances relied upon by the defendant are offset by the false pleas raised in the course of the suit by him and rightly negatived.
Specific performance is an equitable relief and he who seeks equity can be put on terms to ensure that equity is done to the opposite party even while granting the relief.
[295 H] In the instant case the assignment of the mortgage is not a guileless discharge of the vendor 's debt as implied in the agreement to sell but a disingenuous disguise to arm herself with a mortgage decree to swallow up the property in case the specific performance litigation fails.
The appellant acted contrary to the agreement because instead of paying the mortgage money and extinguishing the mortgage she took an assignment of the equitable mortgage with a view 294 to use it against the respondent.
This was not consistent with the understanding assumed under the contract.
[296 C]
