The assessee which was an incorporated company, carried on various activities for promotion of commerce and trade in art silk yarn, art silk cloth and silk cloth.
Its other objects were to obtain licences for import of raw material needed by its members, to obtain licences for export of cloth manufactured by its members and to do all other lawful things as are incidental or conducive to the attainment of the objects.
Its income and property were to be applied solely for the promotion of its objects and no portion of the income or property was to be paid or transferred directly or indirectly by way of dividend, bonus or profits to its members.
In the event of its winding up or dissolution, surplus of assets over liabilities, if any, could not be distributed amongst the members but was liable to be given or transferred to some other company having the same objects as the assessee, to be determined by the members of the assessee or by the High Court which has jurisdiction in the matter.
The assessee received income by way of annual subscription from its members (the revenue conceded that this amount was exempt from tax) and commission on the basis of certain percentage of the value of licences for import of foreign yarn and quotas for the purchase of indigenous yarn.
The assessee constructed a building out of the amounts received and the rent received from the tenants was an additional source of its income.
The assessee 's claim for exemption under section 11(1) of the Income Tax Act was rejected by the Income Tax Officer on the ground that its objects were not charitable within the meaning of section 2(15) of the Act.
On the other hand the Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that the assessee 's income was entitled to exemption under section 11 (1) because the activities carried on by the assessee were in fulfillment of the primary purposes which did not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
This view of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner was affirmed by the Appellate Tribunal in appeal by the revenue.
In view of the conflicting decisions amongst different High Courts on the interpretation of the words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" in the definition of charitable purpose in section 2(15) of the 1961 Act the Appellate Tribunal referred to this Court, under section 257 of the Act.
78 the question whether the assessee was entitled to exemption under section 11(1) of the Act.
It was contended on behalf of the revenue that if the means to achieve or carry out the object of general public utility involve the carrying on of any activity for profit, the purpose of the trust, though falling within the description "any other object of general public utility", would not be a charitable purpose and the income from business would not be exempt from tax.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (Per majority Bhagwati, Untwalia and Tulzapurkar, JJ) 1.
The contention that the objects of the assessee did not fall within the category of "advancement of any other object of general public utility" and were not charitable within the meaning of section 2(15) in that its members were merely specified individuals who did not constitute a section of the public cannot be allowed to be raised in this reference.
In a reference under section 257 of the Income Tax, Act, 1961 the Tribunal is not competent to refer to this Court a question in respect of which there is no conflict of decisions amongst different High Courts nor can this Court travel beyond the particular question of law referred to it by the Tribunal on account of conflict in the decisions of the High Courts.
[92 A B] 2.
(a) It is well settled that where the main or primary objects are distributive, each and every one of the objects must be charitable in order that the trust of institution may be upheld as a valid charity.
But if the primary or dominant purpose of a trust is charitable another object which by itself may not be charitable but which is merely ancillary or incidental to the primary or dominant purpose would not prevent it from being valid charity.
[92 D E] (b) The test which has to be applied is whether the object which is said to be non charitable is the main or primary object of the trust or institution or it is ancillary or incidental to the dominant or primary object which is charitable.[92 F] Mohd. Ibrahim vs Commissioner of Income tax 57 Indian Appeal 260; East India Industries (Madras) Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax, [1967]3 SCR 356; Commissioner of Income tax, Madras vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce, 65 ITR 722=[1965] 1 SCR 565, Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Yorkshire Agricultural Society ; 13 Tax Case.
58; Institution of Civil Engineers vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue ; referred to.
In the instant case the income and property of the assessee are held under a legal obligation for the purpose of advancement of an object of general public utility within the meaning of section 2(15) of the Act.
The dominant or primary purpose of the assessee is to promote commerce and trade in art silk yarn etc., which is charitable and the other objects are in the nature of powers conferred upon the assessee for the purpose of securing fulfillment of the dominant or primary purpose.
They would no doubt benefit the members of the assessee but this benefit would be incidental in carrying out the main or primary purpose of the assessee.
If therefore the dominant or primary purpose of the assessee.
79 was charitable the subsidiary objects would not militate against its charitable character and the purpose of the assessee would not be any the less charitable.
[93 E G] 3.
It is settled law that the words "advancement of any other object of general public utility" would exclude objects of private gain; but this requirement is also satisfied in the present case because the object of private profit is eliminated by the recognition of the assessee under section 25 of the and the objects set out in clauses 5 and 10 of its Memorandum of Association [94 C D] 4.
Where the purpose of a trust or institution is relief of the poor, education or medical relief, the requirement of the definition of "charitable purpose" would be fully satisfied even if an activity for profit is carried on in the course of the actual carrying out of the primary purpose of the trust or institution.
But if the purpose of the trust or institution is such That it cannot be regarded as covered by the heads of "relief of the poor, education and medical relief" but its claim to be a charitable purpose rests only on the last head "advancement of any other object of general public utility" then it requires, for its applicability, fulfillment of two conditions, namely, (i) the purpose of the trust or institution must be advancement of an object of general public utility; and (ii) the purpose must not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
[94 G H] M/s.
Dharamdipti vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; , referred to.
The words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" qualify or govern only the last head of charitable purpose and not the earlier three heads.
[94 G] 6.
The meaning of the words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" added in section 2(15) of the 1961 Act is that when the purpose of a trust or institution is the advancement of an object of general public utility it is that object of general public utility and not its accomplishment which must not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
[94 H] 7.
If the argument of the Revenue that if the means to achieve the object of general public utility involve the carrying on of any activity for profit, the purpose of the trust though falling within the description "any other object of general public utility" would not be a charitable purpose and the income from business would not be exempt from tax it right it would not be possible for a charitable trust whose purpose is promotion of an object of general public utility to carry on any activity for profit at all.
[97 F H] 8.
The consequence would be that even if a business is carried on by a trust or institution for the purpose of accomplishing or carrying out an object of general public utility and the income from such business is applicable only for achieving that object, the purpose of the trust would cease to be charitable and not only income from such business but also income derived from other sources would lose the exemption.
Such a far reaching consequence was not intended to be brought about by the legislature when it introduced the words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" in section 2(15).
[98 B C] 80 9.
What is inhibited by the words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" is the linking of an activity for profit with the object of general public utility and not its linking with the accomplishment or carrying out of the object.
It is not necessary that the accomplishment of the object or the means to carry out the object should not involve an activity for profit.
That is not the mandate of the newly added words.
What these words require is that the object should not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
The emphasis is on the object of general public utility and not on its accomplishment or attainment.
[98 E G] Commissioner of Income tax vs Cochin Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation vs Commissioner of Income tax, approved.
If the intention of the legislature were to prohibit trusts of this nature from carrying on any activity for profit it would have made such a provision in the clearest terms that no such trust or institution shall carry on any activity for profit.
[99 E F] 11.
Section 13(1)(bb) introduced in the Act with effect from April 1, 1977 provides that in the case of a charitable trust for the relief of the poor, education or medical relief which carries on any business, income derived from such business would not be exempt from tax unless the business is carried on in the course of the actual carrying out of a primary purpose of the trust or institution.
Where, therefore, a charitable trust falling within any of the first three categories of charitable purpose set out in section 2(15) carries on business which is held in trust for the charitable purpose, income from such business would not be exempt by reason of section 13(1)(bb) and section 11(4) would, therefore, have no application in the case of a charitable trust falling within any of the first three heads of charitable purpose.
Similarly, on the construction contended for by the Revenue it would have no applicability in the case of a charitable trust falling under the last head of charitable purpose, because in such a case income from business would not be exempt since the purpose would cease to be charitable.
The construction contended for by Revenue would have the effect of rendering section 11(4) totally redundant after the enactment of section 13(1) (bb).
A construction which renders a provision of the Act superfluous and reduces it to silence cannot be accepted.
[100 C F] 12.
If the language of a statutory provision is ambiguous and is capable of two constructions that construction must be adopted which will give meaning and effect to the other Provisions of the enactment rather than that which will none.
[100 G] 13.
If a business is held under trust or legal obligation to apply its income for promotion of an object of general public utility or it is carried on for the purpose of earning profit to be utilised exclusively for carrying out such charitable purpose, the last concluding words in section 2(15) would have no application and they would not deprive the trust or institution of its charitable character.
What these last concluding words require is not that the trust or institution whose purpose is advancement of an object of general public utility should not carry on any activity for profit at all but that the purpose of the trust or institution should not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
So long as the purpose does not involve the carrying on of any activity for 81 profit, the requirement of the definition would be met and it is immaterial how the monies for achieving or implementing such purpose are found, whether by carrying on an activity for profit or not.
[104 D G] Commissioner of Income tax vs Dharmodayan Company, followed.
Indian Chamber of Commerce vs Commissioner of Income tax wrongly decided.
The Trustees of the Tribune, ; Commissioner of Income tax vs Krishna Warrier; 53 I.T.R. 176, J.K. Trust vs Commissioner of Income tax and Sole Trustees Lokshikshana Trust vs Commissioner of Income tax referred to.
It has therefore to be seen whether the purpose of the trust or institution in fact involves the carrying on of an activity for profit or in other words whether an activity for profit is actually carried on as an integral part of the purpose "as a matter of advancement of the purpose".
There e Must be an activity for profit and it must be involved in carrying out the purpose of the trust or institution that is, it must be carrying on in order to advance the purpose or in the course of carrying out the purpose of the trust or institution.
It is then that the inhibition of the ex.
Exclusionary clause would be attracted.
[105 G H] 15.
Every trust or institution must have a purpose for which it is established and every purpose must for its accomplishment involve the carrying on of an activity.
The activity must be for profit in order to attract the exclusionary clause.
[106 D] 16.
The preposition "for" in the phrase "activity for profit" has many shades of meaning but when used with the active principle of a verb it means "for the purpose of" and connotes the end with reference to which something is done.
[106 E] 17.
Where an activity is not pervaded by profit motive but is carried on primarily for serving the charitable purpose, it would not be collect to describe it as an activity for profit.
But where an activity is carried on with the predominant object of earning profit, it would be an activity for profit, though it may be carried on in advancement of the charitable purpose of the trust or institution.
Where an activity is carried on as a matter of advancement of the charitable purpose, it would not be incorrect to say as a matter of plain English grammar that the charitable purpose involves the carrying on such activity, but the predominant object of such activity must be to subserve the charitable purpose and not to earn profit.
[106 F H] Dharamdipti vs Commissioner of Income tax, Kerala, ; referred to.
The test to be applied is whether the predominant object of the activity involved in carrying out the object of general public utility is to subserve the charitable purpose or to earn profit.
Where the predominant object of the activity is to carry out the charitable purpose and not to earn profit, it would not lose its character of a charitable purpose m rely because some profit arises 82 from the activity.
The exclusionary clause does not require that the activity must be carried on in such a manner that it does not result in any profit.
The restrictive condition that the purpose should not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit would he satisfied if profit making is not the real object.[107 G H] 19.
(a) The observations in Lok Shikshana Trust and Indian Chamber of Commerce that activity involved in carrying out the charitable purpose must not be motivated by a profit objective but it must be undertaken for the purpose of advancement or carrying out of the charitable purpose are correct.
But the further observation that whenever an activity is carried on which yields profit, the inference must necessarily be drawn.
in the absence of some indication to the contrary, that the activity is for profit and the charitable purpose involves the carrying on of an activity for profit is not correct.
[109 H; li) A Bl (b) It is not necessary that there must be a provision in the constitution of the trust or institution that the activity shall be carried on a "no profit no loss" basis or that the profit shall proscribed.
Even if there is no such express provision.
the nature of the charitable purpose, the manner in which the activity for advancing the charitable purpose is being carried on, and the surrounding circumstances may clearly indicate that the activity is not propelled by a dominant profit motive.
What is necessary to be considered is whether having regard to all the facts and circumstances of the case, the dominant object of the activity is profit making or carrying out a charitable purpose.
If it is the former the purpose would not he a charitable purpose but if it is the latter the charitable character of the purpose would not be lost.
[110 C D] In the instant case, the activity of obtaining licences for import of foreign yarn and quotas for purchase of indigenous yarn was not an activity for profit.
The predominant object of the activity was the promotion of commerce and trade in those commodities which was clearly an object of general public utility and profit was merely a by product which resulted incidentally in the process of carrying out charitable purpose.
The assessee 's profit could he utilized only for feeding this charitable purpose.
The dominant and real object of the activity being the advancement of the charitable purpose the mere fact that the activity yielded profit did not alter the charitable character of the assessee .
Per Pathak J. (concurring) In the scheme under the Income tax Act.
1961 for exemption from income tax of income derived from property held under trust for charitable purposes, two safeguards have been provided.
One arises from the limited definition of "charitable purpose" by section 2(15), Income tax Act, 1961.
and the other is provided by the controls imposed on the utilisation of accumulated income derived from the charitable trust or institution.
The first relates to the very purpose of the trust or institution, the second to the application of the resulting income.
In construing what is a "charitable purpose" under section 2(15) of purpose Act, considerations pertinent to the application of the accumulated income should not ordinarily be taken into account.
[114 F G] The first three heads of "charitable purpose" in section 2(15) of the Act arc defined in specific terms.
namely, relief of the poor, education and medical relief.
The fourth head is described generally as a residuary head.
The 83 definition of "charitable purpose" with reference to the fourth head shows that the purpose is the "advancement of any other object of general public utility. ".
The charitable purpose is not the "object of general public utility", it is the advancement of the object.
The definition defines "charitable purpose" in terms of an activity.
An object by itself cannot connote an activity.
It represents a goal towards which, or in relation to which.
an activity is propelled.
The element of the activity is embodied in the word "advancement".
If "charitable purpose" is defined in terms of an activity, the restrictive clause "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" must necessarily relate to "the advancement" of the object contemplated.
[115 B C] The words "activity for profit" should be taken as descriptive of the nature of the activity.
It is an activity of a kind intended of yield profit.
Conversely if profit has resulted from an activity, that has does not, without anything more, classify it as an "activity for profit".
[116 B C] The requirement of section 2(15) is satisfied where there is either a total absence of the purpose of profit making or it is so insignificant compared to the purpose of advancement of the object of general public utility that the dominating role of the latter renders the former unworthy of account.
If the profit making purpose holds a dominating role or even constitutes an equal component with the purpose of advancement of the object of general public utility, then the definition in section 2(15) is not satisfied.
[116 G H] If the purpose is charitable in reality, the mode adopted must be one which is directed to carrying out the charitable purpose.
The carrying on of such a business does not detract act from the purpose which permeates it, the end result of the business activity being the effectuation of the charitable purpose.
A business activity carried on not with a view to carrying out the charitable purpose of the trust but which is related to a non charitable purpose falls outside the scope of the trust.
If it is a business entered into for working out be purpose of the trust or institution with a view to realisation of the charitable purpose, the income therefrom would be entitled to exemption under section 11.
Section 11(4) and section 13(1)(bb) represent the mode of finding finance for working out the purpose of the trust or institution by deriving income from the corpus of the trust property and also from an activity carried on in the course of actual carrying out of the purpose or the trust or institution.
[117 B E] A distinction must be maintained between what is merely a definition of "charitable purpose" and the powers conferred for working out or fulfilling that purpose.
While the purpose and the powers must correlate they cannot be identified with each other.
[118 B] In the instant case the purpose of the assessee falls within the definition of section 2(15).
The objects of the assessee were to promote commerce and trade, which have been held to be an object of general public utility and, there is nothing to show that the relevant sub clause of the Memorandum of Association involves the carrying on of any activity for profit.
The remaining sub clauses enumerate powers for which the company was constituted.
[118 G H] The Trustees of the Tribune, , Commissioner of Income tax vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce , referred 84 Sale Trustees, Loka Shikshana Trust vs Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore ; Indian Chamber of Commerce vs Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal II not approved.
Per Sen, J. (dissenting) The two decisions in Sole Trustees Lok Shikshana Trust vs C.I.T. and Indian Chamber of Commerce vs C.I.T. lay down the law correctly and are still good law.
[119 D] 1.
The words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" occurring in section 2(15) of the Act quality only the fourth head of charitable purpose namely "any other object of general utility" and not the first three heads.
[119 E] 2.
It is the vagueness of the expression "any other object of general public utility" occurring in section 4(3)(i) of the 1922 Act which impelled Parliament to insert the restrictive word "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit. ' It is not permissible for the court to whittle down the plain language of the section.
It would be contrary to all rules of construction to ignore the impact of the newly added words and to construe the definition as it the newly added words were either not there or were intended to be otiose and redundant.
Such a construction would frustrate the very object of the legislation.
The relative simplicity of the language brings out the necessary legislative intent to counteract tax advantages resulting from the 'so called charities in camouflage.
[119 H; 120 A C] 3 .
The restriction introduced by the definition of the term "charitable purpose" in section 2(15) is that the advancement of objects of general public utility should not involve the carrying on of any activity for profit.
If it involved any such activity the charity would fall outside the definition.
[120 D E] 4.
There is no statutory bar to earn exemption in respect of income derived from a business undertaking if such business undertaking is held under a trust for a charitable purpose.
The first essential condition for exemption under section 11(1) is that the property from which the income is derived must be held under trust or other legal obligation.
Section 11(4) gives a statutory recognition to the principle that the business is property and if a business is held in trust wholly for a charitable purpose, the income therefrom would be exempt under section 11(1) [121 B D] In re.
The Trustees of the Tribune ; All India Spinner 's Association vs C.I.T. ; C.I.T. vs P. Krishna Warriar C.I.T. vs Andhra Chamber of Commerce ; J.K. Trust vs C.I.T. referred to.
The restrictive words "not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit" were deliberately introduced in the definition to cut down the wide ambit of the fourth head as a measure to check avoidance of tax.
Engagement in an activity for profit by religious or charitable trusts provides scope for manipulation for tax evasion.
[121 F G] 6 Even assuming that the dominant object of a trust is the promotion or 'advancement of any other object of general public utility, if it involves any activity for profit i.e. any business or commercial activity, then it ceases to be a charitable purpose within the meaning of section 2(15).
In that event the profits derived from such business are not liable to exemption under section 11(1) 85 read with section 2(15).
The concept of profits to feed the charity is also of no avail.
That is because the concept of 'profits to feed the charity ' can only arise under the first three heads of 'charitable purpose ' as defined in section 2(15) of the Act, that is, "relief of the poor" "education" and "medical relief" but they are not germane in so far as the fourth head is concerned.
If the fulfillment of an object of general public utility is dependant upon any activity for profit, it ceases to be a charitable purpose.
A reading of section 2(15) and section 11 together shows that what is frowned upon is an activity for profit by a charity established for advancement of an object of general public utility in the course of accomplishing its objects.
[126 H; 127 A B] 7.
It would be clearly inconsistent to hold that if the dominant or primary purpose was 'charity ' it would be permissible for such an object of general public utility to augment its income by engaging in trading or commercial activity.
[131 F] 8.
If the object of the trust is advancement of an object of general public utility and it carried on an activity for profit, it is excluded from the ambit of charitable purpose defined in section 2(15).
The distinction is clearly brought out by the provision contained in section 13(1)(bb) which provides that in case of a charitable trust or institution for the relief of the poor, education or medical relief which carries on any business, any income derived from such business, unless the business is carried on in the course of the actual carrying out of a primary purpose of the trust or institution, shall not be excluded from the total income of the previous year.
[132 G H] 9.
If the advancement of an object of general public utility involves the carrying on of an activity for profit, it ceases to be a charitable purpose and, therefore, the income is not exempt under section ll(l)(a).
In case of a trust falling under any of the first three heads of charity, namely, 'relief of the poor ' 'education ' and 'medical relief ' it may engage in any activity for profit and the profits would not taxable if they were utilized for the primary object of the trust.
In other words the business carried on by them is incidental or ancillary to the primary object namely relief of the poor, education and medical relief.
The concept of 'profits to feed the charity ' therefore is applicable only to the first three heads of charity and not the fourth.
It would be illogical to apply the same consideration to institutions which are established for charitable purposes of any object of general public utility.
Any profit making activity linked with an object of general public utility would be taxable.
The theory of the dominant or primary object of the trust cannot.
therefore, be projected into the fourth head of charity, namely,, 'advancement of any other object of general public utility ' so as to make the carrying on of any business activity merely ancillary or incidental to the main object.
[134 A E] 10.
The restrictive words 'not involving the carrying on of any activity for profit ' in the definition of "charitable purpose" in section 2(15) must be given their due weight.
Otherwise, it would have the effect of admitting to the benefits of ' exemption the fourth in determinate class, namely, objects of general public utility engaged in activity for profit contrary to the plain words of section 2(15).
[134 G]
