The plaintiffs, appellants filed a suit for partition and separate possession of their individual share as per law and paid a court fee at the rates prescribed under section 37 (ii) of the Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suit Valuation Act.
There was a specific allegation that they were in joint possession.
The Trial Court decreed the suit but directed the plaintiffs appellants to pay the court fec under Section 37 (ii) of the Act.
As the difference in court fee was not paid the trial Court dismissed the suit.
Two appeals were filed by the appellants in the High Court, one against the decision that they were liable to pay court fee (m the market value of the property under section 37 (1) and another against the order dismissing the suit.
The High Court heard the two appeals together and disposed of the appeals accepting the contention of the respondents/defendants that the Court fees are payable both on the plaint and on the memorandum of appeals under Section 37 (I ) of the Act.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It is settled law that the question of Court fee must be considered in the light of the allegation made in the plaint and its decision cannot be influenced either by the pleas in the written statement or by the final decision of the suit on merits.
All the material allegations contained in the plaint should be construed and taken as a whole.
[311 D E] In the instant case: (a) on reading of the plaint as a whole, it is clear that throughout the plaint, the plaintiffs/appellants have asserted that they were in joint possession and therefore the observation of the High Court that recite in all the paragraphs is merely a formal statement repeating the statutory language is not correct.
(b) the plea that they were not given their due share would not amount to dispossession.
Reading the plaint at its worst against the plaintiffs, all that could be discerned is that as the plaintiffs were not given their share of the income, they could not remain in joint possession.
The statement that they are not being paid their income.
would not amount to having been excluded from possession.
The averment in the plaint cannot be understood as stating that the plaintiffs were not in possession.
In fact, the defendants understood the plaint as stating that the plaintiffs are in joint possession of the suit properties.
In paragraph 18 of the written statement the defendants pleaded 308 that the plaintiffs have framed the suit as though they are in joint possession and enjoyment of the suit properties.
Asserting that the plaintiffs were out of possession, the defendants stated: "while it is so, the allegation that they arc in joint possession of the suit properties, is not correct." The mere fact that the plaintiffs were not paid their share of the income or were not in actual possession would not amount to the plaintiffs having been excluded from joint possession to which they are in law entitled.[1311D, 312 B F] section Rm.
section Sri Cathanna Chettiar vs section RM.
Ramanathen Chettiar, @ PP 1031 32; followed.
Under section 37(1) of the Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suit Valuation Act, relating to partition suits, the Court fee is payable, if the plaintiff is "excluded" from possession of the property.
The general principle of law is that in the case of co owners, the possession of one is in law possession of all, unless ouster or exclusion is proved.
To continue to be in joint possession in law it is not necessary that the plaintiff should be in actual possession of the whole or part of the property.
Equally it is not necessary that he should be getting a share or some income from the property.
So long as his right to a share and the nature of the property as joint is not disputed the law presumes that he is in joint possession unless he is excluded from such possession Before the plaintiffs could be Called upon to pay court fee under section 37 (1) of the Act on the ground that they had been excluded from possession it is necessary that there should be a clear and specific averment in the plaint that they had been "excluded" from joint possession to which they are entitled in law [1313 B. D F] In the instant case: (a) The averments in the plaint that the plaintiff could not remain in joint possession as he was not given any income from the joint family property would not amount to his exclusion from possession.
[313 F G] (b) The plaintiffs who are sisters of the defendants claimed to be members of the joint family and prayed for partition alleging that they are in joint possession.
Under the proviso to section 6 of the (Act 30 of 1956), the plaintiffs being the daughters of the male Hindu who died after the commencement of the Act, having at the time of the death an interest in the Mitakshara coparcenary property, acquired interest by devolution under the Act.
The property to which the plaintiffs are entitled is undivided 'joint family property ', though not in the strict sense of the term.
[313 C D]
