In respect of the accounting years ending March 31, 1957 and March 1958 respectively on the voluntary returns submitted by the respondent, the Income Tax Officer 'E ' Ward District II (1) Calcutta completed the assessment for these years (1957 58 and 1958 59) on total incomes of Rs. 7000/ and Rs. 7500/ respectively, the same having been made in the status of unregistered firm consisting of three partners, namely Asha Devi Vaid, Santosh Devi Vaid and Sugni Devi Vaid with equal shares.
On August 2, 1962, the Commissioner of Income Tax issued notice to show cause why the said assessments should not be cancelled under section 33B of the Act as he felt that the completed assessments were erroneous as being prejudicial to the interests of the Revenue and the Income Tax Officer 'E ' Ward District II(1) Calcutta had no territorial jurisdiction over the case of the assessee.
The notice was served on the assessee on August 3, 1962 and the hearing was fixed by the Commissioner for August 6, 1962.
On the ground that none appeared and there was no application for adjournment, the Commissioner passed his order under section 33B ex parte on that date.
By his said order the Commissioner cancelled the assessments made by the Income Tax Officer on three grounds (a) that some of the partners were minors and were not competent to enter into any partnership agreement with the result that the status of unregistered firm assigned to the assessee by the Income Tax Officer was clearly wrong and as such the assessments deserved to be cancelled; (b) that the books of accounts were unreliable and they were not properly examined by the Income Tax Officer with the result that the assessments made were prejudicial to the interests of the revenue and (c) that the Income Tax Officer has no territorial jurisdiction over the case which fell in the jurisdiction of Income Tax Officer, District III Calcutta and directed the Income Tax Officer having proper jurisdiction to make fresh assessments after examining the records of the assessee in accordance with law.
The appeals preferred to the Appellate Tribunal under section 33B(3) were accepted.
Finding that the Commissioner 's order passed at 11.30 A.M. ex parte was bad in as much as the notice served upon the assessee permitted filing of objections at any time during the course of August 6, 1962 and the objections were in fact filed later in the day, the Tribunal remanded the case with the direction to dispose it of afresh after giving due opportunity to the respondent assessee.
On a reference to the High Court at the instance of the appellant, the 269 High Court held: (a) the assumption of jurisdiction by the Commissioner under section 33B of the Income Tax Act was valid in law; (b) the Tribunal acted properly in vacating or cancelling the Commissioner 's order, but, (c) the Tribunal did not act properly in directing the Commissioner to act under section 33B(1) because the period of limitation of two years prescribed under section 33(2)(b) for him to act under section 33B(1) had expired.
In doing so, the High Court held that the provision of sub section 2(b) was absolute and covered even a revisional order of the Commissioner passed in pursuance of a direction given by any appellate authority.
Allowing the appeal by Certificate, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Under sub section (1) of section 33B of the Income Tax Act, power has been conferred upon the Commissioner to revise Income Tax Officer 's orders but the exercise of such power is regulated by the two conditions mentioned therein namely, (a) he must consider the order sought to be revised to be erroneous as being prejudicial to the interests of the revenue and (b) he must give an opportunity to the assessee of being heard before revising it.
Sub section
(2)(b) prescribes a period of limitation in negative words by providing that "no order shall be made under sub s(1) after the expiry of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised".
Sub s.(3) confers on the assessee a right to prefer an appeal to the Appellate.
Tribunal against the Commissioners ' order made under sub s.(1) while sub section
(4) indicates the power of the Appellate Tribunal in dealing with such appeal by providing that "such appeal shall be dealt with in the same manner as if it were an appeal under sub s.(1) of section 33".
Two things stand out clearly on a fair reading of the two concerned provisions, namely, sub s.(2)(b) and sub s.(4).
The bar of limitation contained in sub section
(2)(b) is on the Commissioner 's power to pass revisional orders under sub section
(1) and the same appears to be absolute in the sense that it applies to every order to be made under sub s.(1).
At the same time sub s.(4) confers on the Appellate Tribunal very wide powers which it has while dealing with an appeal under section 33(1).
In other words, the Appellate Tribunal has power "to pass such orders thereon (i.e. on the appeal) as thinks fit.
" The word "thereon" restricts the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal to the subject matter of the appeal which merely means that the Tribunal cannot adjudicate or give a finding on a question which is not in dispute and which does not form the subject matter of the appeal but the words "pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit" include all the powers (except possibly the power of enhancement) which are conferred on the Assistant Appellate Commissioner by section 31 and consequently the Tribunal has authority in exercise of its appellate powers to set aside the order appealed against and direct fresh assessment in the light of the observations made by it in its judgment.
In other words, similar power is possessed by the Appellate Tribunal while dealing with the appeal under sub s.(4) of section 33B. [275 A H, 276 A] Hukamchand Mills 's case, ; applied.
Two principles of construction are relating to casus omissus and the other in regard to reading the statute as a whole are well settled.
Under the first principle, a casus omissus cannot be supplied by the Court except in the case of clear necessity and when reason for it is found in the four corners of the statute itself but at the same time a casus omissus should not be readily inferred and 270 for that purpose all the parts of a statute or section must be construed together and every clause of a section should be construed with reference to the context and other clauses thereof so that the construction to be put on a particular provision makes a consistent enactment of the whole statute.
This would be more so if literal construction of a particular clause leads to manifestly absurd or anomalous results which could not have been intended by the Legislature.
[277 B, 278 A B] Artemiou vs Procopiou, , Luke vs Inland Revenue Commissioner and 577 Quoted with approval.
The object of introducing Section 33B with effect from March 30, 1948 was to confer revisional powers upon the Commissioner to correct the erroneous orders of an Income Tax Officer in so far as they were prejudicial to the interests of the revenue.
The language of the sub sec.(1) clearly suggests that the said power was contemplated to be exercised suo motu by the Commissioner inasmuch as the opening words show that it was upto the Commissioner to call for and examine the record of any proceedings under the Act and on examination of the record if he were satisfied that any order passed by an Income Tax Officer was erroneous as being prejudicial to the interests of the revenue he could revise the same after giving an opportunity to the assessee of being heard.
It is true that sub s.(2)(b) thereof prescribed a period of limitation on his power by providing that no order shall be made under sub s.(1) after the expiry of the two years from the date of the order sought to be revised by the Commissioner and a literal construction of sub s.(2)(b) also suggests that the bar of limitation imposed thereby was absolute in the sense that it applied to every kind of order to be made under sub s.(1) and no distinction was made between a suo motu order and an order that might be made by him pursuant to a direction given by any appellate or other higher authority.
Sub s.(3) conferred on an assessee a right to prefer an appeal to the appellate Tribunal against the Commissioner 's order made under sub section (1) and under sub s.(4) the Tribunal had authority to deal with the impugned order of the Commissioner in such manner as it deemed fit in exercise of its appellate powers; for instance, it could confirm the impugned order, it could annul that order, or it could after vacating it remand the case back to the Commissioner for making a fresh assessment in the light of the observations made by it in its judgment or it could after calling for a remand report, rectify the erroneous order of the Income Tax Officer.
Further there was no period prescribed within which an appeal against the impugned order of the Commissioner had to be disposed of by the Tribunal and in the normal course on rare occasions such appeals would have been heard and disposed of before the expiry of two years from the date of the Income Tax Officer 's order which was regard as erroneous by the Commissioner.
More often than not such appeals would come up for hearing after the expiry of the said period of two years a fact fully known and within the contemplation of the Legislature when it introduced the section in the Act in 1948.
[278 E H, 279 A D] 4.
The Legislature did not intend to attenuate or curtail the appellate powers which it conferred on the appellate Tribunal in very wide terms under sub s.(4) by enacting sub section 2(b) prescribing a time limit on the Commissioner 's power to reverse an erroneous order of the Income Tax Officer when the Commissioner was seeking the exercise the same not suo motu but in pursuance of or obedience to a direction from the appellate authority.
Any contrary and literal construction would lead to manifestly absurd result, because in a given 271 case, like the present one where the appellate authority (Tribunal) has found (a) the Income Tax Officer 's order to be clearly erroneous as being prejudicial to the interests of the revenue and (b) the Commissioner 's order unsustainable as being in violation of principles of natural justice; it would be difficult for the appellate authority to exercise its powers.
Obviously it could not withhold its hands and refuse to interfere with Commissioner 's order altogether, for, that would amount to perpetuating the Commissioner 's erroneous order, nor could it merely cancel or set aside the Commissioner 's wrong order without doing anything about the Income Tax Officer 's order, for that, would result in perpetuating the Income Tax Officer 's order which had been found to be manifestly erroneous as being prejudicial to the revenue.
Moreover, in exercise of its appellate powers it was open to the Tribunal itself to call for a remand report from either the Commissioner or the Income Tax Officer and rectify the Income Tax Officer 's erroneous order after giving opportunity to the assessee and in doing so no question of limitation would arise.
It was equally open to the Tribunal to set aside the Commissioner 's order and remand the case directly to the Income Tax Officer giving requisite direction to rectify his erroneous order and thereupon the Income Tax Officer would carry out the Tribunal 's direction for, admittedly, the bar of limitation under sub s.(2)(b) was only on the Commissioner 's power to make an assessment afresh and not on the Income Tax Officer.
If this be the correct position then it is gravely anomalous that the Tribunal should not be in a position to set aside the Commissioner 's order and remand the case back to the Commissioner for making a fresh assessment because in the meantime two years ' period of limitation has expired, for, it would mean that the Tribunal was prevented from achieving the desired effect directly through the Commissioner but it could do so indirectly through the Income Tax Officer.
A literal construction placed on sub s.(2) (b) would lead to such manifestly absurd and anomalous results, which, were not intended by the Legislature.
Therefore, the words of sub section 2(b) should be construed as being applicable to suo motu orders of the Commissioner in revision and not to orders made by him pursuant to a direction or order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under sub s.(4) or by any other higher authority.
Such construction will be in consonance with the principle that all parts of the section should be construed together and every clause thereof should be construed with reference to the context and other clauses thereof so that the construction put on that particular provision makes a consistent enactment of the whole statute.
[279 D H, 280 A G] Commissioner of Income Tax vs Kishoresingh Kalyan Singh Solanki, ; approved.
It is well settled that the principle that the fiscal statute should be construed strictly is applicable only to taxing provisions such as a charging provision or a provision imposing penalty and not to those parts of the statute which contain machinery provisions and by no stretch could section 33B be regarded as charging provision.
[281 C D] 6.
A casus omissus has not to be readily inferred and it could not be inferred from the mere fact that both sections 33B and 34(3) together with the second proviso were inserted simultaneously in the Act by the same Amending Act of 1948 and that in the case of former a relaxing provision was not made as was made in the case of the latter provision, firstly because the two provisions operated in distinct fields and secondly it would be improper to do so without compar 272 ing the various stages of amendments through which each set of these Provisions had undergone since inception.
The further aspect the Legislature has in the 1961 Act made the requisite provision removing or relaxing the bar of limitation, in section 263(3), is, not of much importance.
Irrespective of the question whether the second proviso to section 34(3) was enacted ex majore cautella or not (over which conflicting views obtain) it is clear that section 263(3) of the 1961 Act must be regarded as an ex majore cautella provision.
Admittedly, at the time when the said provision was enacted in the 1961 Act, the Bombay view held the field and there was no decision to the contrary of any other High Court.
Obviously, therefore, the enactment of section 263(3) must be regarded as declaratory of the law which was already prevailing and this position has been clarified in the Notes on Clauses of the Income Tax Bill 1961 where it has been stated that sub cl.
(3) of section 263 was new and had been added to get over the difficulty experienced in (wrongly stated 'caused by ') the Bombay High Court 's decision in Solanki 's case.
The enactment of an ex majore cautella provision in the 1961 Act would, therefore, be a legislative recognition of the legal position that obtained as a result of judicial pronouncement qua the 1922 Act.
[281 E H, 282 A] C.I.T. vs Sabitri Devi Agarwalla, over ruled.
Pooran Mall 's case, ; relied on.
