The appellants who were the assignees of a decree for specific performance of an agreement to reconvey property, filed an application for execution of the decree under Order XXI, rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Notice of the application was issued to the respondent judgment debtor as well as the original decree holder.
The judgment debtor filed objections contending that the execution application was not maintainable.
The application was adjourned from time to time.
In the meanwhile the original decree holder and the judgement debtor moved the executing court to record full satisfaction of the decree, stating that they had entered into a compromise and that the decree was proposed to be satisfied by payment of a fixed sum of money in cash.
The money was paid in cash by the judgment debtor to the original decree holder in open court and satisfaction of the decree was recorded by the Executing Court which also observed that the compromise would not have any effect whatsoever on the rights, if any, of the transferee decree holder who had already filed the execution application pursuant to the deed of assignment.
The execution application filed by the appellants was thereafter taken up and dismissed on the ground that the assignees had no right to execute the decree after the judgment debtor had satisfied the original decree holder by entering into a compromise with him.
In the appeal, the District Court held that the appellants had the right to execute the decree and that their right could not be defeated by the collusive compromise entered into between the judgment debtor and the original decree holder subsequent to the date of assignment and with notice of assignment.
In the further appeal to the High Court by the judgment debtor, it was held that the assignee of the decree had no right to execute the decree until the assignment was recognised by the Court and until that was done, it was open to the original decree holder to put the decree in execution and it was also open to the judgment debtor to satisfy the decree fully by payment to the decree holder or by other adjustment.
In the appeal to this Court by the assignees of the decree on the question whether the adjustment of the decree between the judgment debtor and the transferor decree holder barred execution of the decree by the transferee: ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was wrong in holding that the adjustment between the judgment debtor and the transferor decree holder even after notice 470 of the application under Order XXI, rule 16 had been served on the transferor and the judgment debtor barred execution of the decree by the transferee.
[475 D] 2.
Property in a decree must pass to the transferee under a deed of assignment when the parties to the deed of assignment intend such property to pass.
It does not depend on the Court 's recognition of the transfer.
Order XXI rule 16 neither expressly nor by implication provides that assignment of a decree does not take effect until rcognized by the Court.
[473 D] 3.
While Order XXI rule 16 enables the transferee to apply for execution of the decree, the first proviso to Order XXI rule 16 enjoins that notice of such application shall be given to the transferor and the judgment debtor and that the decree shall not be executed until the court has heard their objections, if any, to its execution.
[473 E] 4.
The transfer as between the original decree holder and the transferee is effected by the deed of assignment.
If the judgment debtor has notice of the transfer, he cannot be permitted to defeat the rights of the transferee by entering into an adjustment with the transferor.
If the judgment debtor has no notice of the transfer and enters into an adjustment with the transferor before the transferee serves him with notice under Order XXI Rule 16 the judgment debtor is protected.
[473 G] In the instant case, the original decree holder and the judgment debtor had colluded to deprive the appellants of their rights under the deed of assignment and the Executing Court tacitly gave its seal of approval by permitting satisfaction of the decree to be entered despite the fact that the decree had already been assigned to the knowledge of the judgment debtor.
The process of the Court cannot be reduced to a mockery and the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure does not permit this to be done.
[472 C] Dwar Buksh Sirkar vs Fatik Jali I.L.R. 26 Calcutta 250 @ 253, 254; Avrapalli Ramrao vs Kanumarlapudi Ranganayakulu and others AIR 1964 A.P. 1; Sadagopa Chariar vs Raghunatha Chariar ILR , approved.
Puthiandi Mammed vs Avalil Moidin ILR , disapproved.
