Section 79 I.P.C. provides that nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law in doing it, or, who by reason of a mistake of fact in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in doing it.
The respondent complainant alleged that the film Satyam Shivam Sundaram was by its fascinating title misleadingly foul and beguiled the guideless into degeneracy and that obscenity, indecency and vice were writ large on the picture, constituting an offence under section 292 I.P.C.
The Magistrate after examining some witnesses, took cognizance of the offence and issued notice to the appellant producer of the film.
Thereupon the appellant moved the High Court under section 482 Cr.
P.C. on the score that the criminal proceeding was an abuse of the judicial process and that no prosecution could be legally sustained as the film had been duly certified for public show by the Central Board of Film Censors.
The High Court, however dismissed the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that once a certificate sanctioning public exhibition of a film had been granted by the competent authority under the , there was a justification for its display thereafter, and by virtue of the antidotal provisions in section 79 I.P.C., the public exhibition, circulation or distribution of the film, even if it be obscene, lascivious or tending to deprave or corrupt public morals, could not be an offence, section 292 I.P.C. notwithstanding.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The prosecution is unsustainable because section 79 I.P.C. is exculpatory when read with section 5 A of the and the certificate issued thereunder, and is therefore quashed.
[517 G] 2.
It is an antinomy to say that under section 5A(1A) of the Act, the Board certifies a film as suitable for public exhibition and for section 292 I.P.C. to punish such exhibition unless the ground covered by the two laws be different.
[516 B] 3.
The Penal Code is general, the is special.
The scheme of the latter is deliberately drawn up to meet the explosively expanding cinema menace if it were not strictly policed.
The cinema is a great instrument for public good if geared to social ends and can be a public curse if directed to 513 anti social objectives.
So the Act sets up a Board of Censors of high calibre and expertise, provides hearings, appeals and ultimate judicial review, the precensorship and conditional exhibitions and other policing strategies to protect state and society.
[516D; G H] 4.
Neither the Penal Code nor the can go beyond the restrictions sanctioned by of the Constitution and once the special law polices the area it is pro tanto out of bounds for the general law.
Section 79 I.P.C. resolves the apparent conflict between section 292 I.P.C. and part II of the Act relating to certification of films.
If the Board blunders, the Act provides remedies.
[517 B C] 5.
Jurisprudentially viewed, an act may be an offence, definitionally speaking; but a forbidden act may not spell inevitable guilt if the law itself declares that in certain special circumstances, it is not to be regarded as an offence.
The chapter on General Exceptions operates in this province.
Section 79 makes an offence, a non offence, only when the offending act is actually justified by law or is bona fide believed by mistake of fact to be so justified.
[517 E] 6.
Once the Board of Censors, acting within their jurisdiction and on an application made and pursued in good faith, sanctions the public exhibition of a film, the producer and connected agencies enter the statutory harbour and are protected because section 79 exonerates them in view of the bona fide belief that the certificate is justificatory.
[517 F] 7.
Freedom of expression is fundamental.
The Censor is not the moral tailor setting his own fashions but a statutory gendarme policing films under Article 19(2) from the angle of public order, decency or morality concepts themselves dynamic, and which cannot be whittled down to strifle expression nor licentiously enlarged to promote a riot of sexual display.
[518 E] K. A. Abbas vs The Union of India & Anr. ; ; referred to
