The assessee one of the sons of Subramania was born and brought up in Ceylon and had his own business and properties in Ceylon.
After the death of his father and his paternal uncle Arumugha, the assessee 's two other brothers Ganapathi and Velayadham and his cousin Ganesa son of Arumugha formed a Hindu Undivided Family.
That family owned an ancestral house at Orthanad in Tanjore district, which was used as dwelling by the step mother of assessee, his full brothers and his cousin Ganesa.
The family also owned shops and agricultural lands.
The family properties were managed by Ganesa and were maintained by him out of the agricultural and rental income.
The assessee never enjoyed any portion of the family income.
In July 1958 the assessee on the one hand and other members of the family on the other executed a mutual deed of release relinquishing each party 's rights in favour of the other; inter alia the assessee released all his rights, title and interest in the family properties in favour of his brothers, reciting therein that the family properties were never enjoyed by him but only by others.
This deed or release was found to be an instrument bona fide entered into by the parties.
It appears that he started constructing a theatre in Orthanad in 1953 which was completed in 1957 and during the said construction he paid occasional visits and stayed sometime in the family house, sometimes in a chatram in Tanjore and at times in a hotel.
Thus from 1 4 52 to 31 3 53 he stayed for 8 days in India, from 1 4 53 to 31 3 54 he did not come to India at all; from 1 4 54 to 31 3 55 he stayed for 28 days in India; from 1 4 55 to 31 3 56 he stayed for 47 days in India and from 1 4 56 to 31 3 57 he stayed for 23 days in India.
In the above circumstances for the assessment years 1952 53, 1953 54, 1956 57 and 1957 58, the assessee filed returns, but for the first two years after proceedings were initiated under section 34(i)(a) of the Act and for the latter two years on his own offering his income in Ceylon for assessment.
The status declared in all the returns was "he was a resident and ordinarily resident person".
The Income Tax Officer completed the assessment on the basis of the returns filed.
He also initiated penalty proceedings against the assessee under section 28(1)(a) for not filing the returns in time and levied penalties against him.
In the appeals preferred by the assessee which were principally directed against the rejection of the claim made by him in respect of the double taxation relief, an additional ground was taken that the assessee should have been treated as a 'non resident ' in all the years.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld this additional ground taking the view that since during his sojourn in India.
520 the assessee was staying in the family house more as a guest, he neither maintained nor had maintained a dwelling place in the taxable territories and, therefore, section 4A(a)(ii) of the Act was inapplicable.
Having lost their appeals before the Tribunal and on references to the High Court, the Revenue came up in appeal by certificates to this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1. Section 4A(a)(ii) of the Income Tax Act, 1922 raises a statutory fiction since it is prefaced by the phrase "for the purposes of this Act".
Further the language of the provision makes it clear that it lays down a technical test of territorial connection amounting to residence applicable to all individuals foreigners as well as Indians, including Hindus, Christians, Muslims, Parsis and others irrespective of the personal law governing them.
[524 D E] 2.
Section 4A(a)(ii) makes it clear that before any individual can be said to be a resident in the taxable territories in any previous year two conditions are required to be fulfilled; (a) there must be a dwelling place maintained in the taxable territories either by the assessee himself or by some one else for him for the requisite period and (b) the assessee must live in the taxable territories (though not necessarily therein) for sometime, however short, in the previous years.
In the instant case, the second condition was satisfied in regard to the assessee.
[524E G] 3.
Section 4(A)(a) uses the expression 'dwelling place ' a flexible expression which should be construed according to the object and intent of the particular legislation in which it has been used.
Primarily the expression means 'residence ', "abode", or "home" where an individual is supposed usually to live and sleep and since the expression has been used in a taxing statute, in the context of a provision which lays down a technical test of territorial connection amounting to residence, the concept of an abode or home would be implicit in it.
In other words, it must be a house or a portion thereof which could be regarded as an abode or home of the assessee in taxable territories.
In other words, when you go to a house you should be really going home, then you are going to a dwelling house whether maintained by you or by some one else and a house may be your home whether it belongs to you or belongs to some one else.
In other words, with regard to the house where he goes and lives, he must be able to say that it is his abode or home.
Therefore, there is no error in introducing the concept of home or abode into the section.
[526 C E, 527 E F] C.I.T. Bombay North etc.
vs Foolabhai Khodabhai Patel ; approved.
Pickles vs Foulsham, (1925) 9 Tax Cases 261; quoted with approval.
Section 4(A)(a) uses two expressions: "he maintains a dwelling place" and "he has maintained for him a dwelling place".
The latter expression, obviously means he causes to be maintained for him a dwelling place.
In either of these expressions the volition on the part of the assessee in the maintenance of the dwelling place emerges very clearly: whether he maintains it or he causes it to be maintained; the maintenance of the dwelling place must be at his instance behest or request and when it is maintained by someone else other than the assessee, it must be for the assessee or for his benefit.
[527 G H, 528 A] 521 Mere ownership of a fractional share or interest in the family house with the consequent right to occupy it without anything more would not be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of section 4A(a)(ii), for the requirements thereof are: not only there must be a dwelling place in which the assessee has a right to live but he must maintain it as his home or he must have it maintained for him as his home.
[530 A B; 528 H] In the instant case, (i) on the material on record, the family house in which the assessee stayed was neither his abode or home nor was it maintained by Ganesa at the instance of the assessee or for his benefit, even though it was true that the assessee as a coparcener had a share and interest in the family house and also a consequent right to occupy it without any let or hindrance.
[528 A, 529 A, 530 F] (ii) his stay in the family house was found to be as a guest enjoying the hospitality of his kith and kin, rather than as an inhabitant of his abode or home; and (iii) therefore, he was rightly regarded as non resident.
[530 F G] C.I.T., Madras vs Janab A. P. Mohamed Noohu and Ors., ; approved.
section M. Zackariah Sahib vs C.I.T., Madras Mad., Ramjibhai Hansibhai Patel vs Income Tax Officer, Special Circle, Ahmedabad, ; distinguished.
