The Delhi Development Authority Act was enacted to provide for the development of Delhi through Master and Zonal Plans.
The authority undertakes constructions of dwelling units for people belonging to different income groups styled as Middle Income, Low Income, Janata and Community Personnel Service.
In 1971, the authority commenced registration of intending applicants desirous of having dwelling units in different Income Groups.
Some of the petitioners got themselves registered with the authority in accordance with the terms and conditions laid down by it, for allotment of flats in deposits as required by the terms and conditions for MIG Scheme at Lawrence Road, Prasad Nagar and Rajouri Garden and made the initial deposit.
The number of available flats being less in each scheme compared to the number of applicants registered, lots were drawn and the petitioners were informed that each of them should deposit the amount mentioned in the letter of allotment.
The Petitioners paid the amount as intimated and consequently a flat was allotted to each of them and they entered into possession.
In their writ petitions under Article 32, the petitioners assailed the levy and collection of surcharge in addition to the cost price of the flats.
It was con tended on their behalf that; (i) The treatment meted by the Authority is discriminatory inasmuch as no surcharge was levied on flats in MIG schemes constructed and allotted prior to November, 1976 and after January, 1977; (ii) As the authority formulates income wise, area wise schemes for constructing flats, there should be only income wise classification wholly ignoring area and time factor for classification; (iii) Levying of surcharge runs counter to the object for which the authority was set up namely to make available housing accommodation on "no profit no loss" basis; (iv) Surcharge is arbitrary inasmuch as how the surcharge is worked out in each case does not conform to any rational, tangible, scientific or understandable formula; (v) The Vice Chairman had no authority to levy surcharge and that even if he has authorised the same, it runs counter to the principle of fixing disposal price incorporated in resolution No. 209 dated November 26, 1974; (vi) Even if the Vice Chairman had such power there is nothing to show that he has exercised this power and given direction for adding the surcharge to the disposal price and that therefore, the levy of surcharge is unauthorised; and (vii) that the authority has made a, huge profit by levy of surcharge.
The respondents raised a preliminary objection that the petitions were not maintainable under Article 32 of the Constitution inasmuch as the petitioners have not come to the Court.
fol enforcement of a fundamental right conferred upon.
705 them under Part III of the Constitution but that the petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of the Court for the relief of reopening concluded contracts, and that if the court accepts the contentions, the petitioners would derive an unfair advantage over others who may not have applied for flats because of the price set out in the brochure and if surcharge is excluded they may have applied for Flats at a lower price.
The Court should not therefore entertain the petitions.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
As the Court has heard the petitions on merits it is not inclined to reject them on the preliminary objections.
It is undeniable that camouflage of article 14 cannot conceal the real purpose motivating the petitions, namely to get back a part of the purchase price of flats paid by the petitioners with wide open eyes after flats have been securely obtained.
Petition to this Court under article 32 is not a proper remedy nor is the Supreme Court a proper forum for re opening concluded contracts with a view to getting back a part of the purchase price paid after the benefit is taken.
[712 D E] In the instant case it is difficult to appreciate how article 14 can be attracted.
Cost price of a property offered for Sale is determined according to the volition of the owner who has constructed the property unless it is shown that he is under any statutory obligation to determine cost price according to certain statutory formula.
The authority is under no obligation to fix price of different flats in different schemes albeit in the same income group at the same level or by any particular statutory or binding formula.
Those who opt to take flats in a particular income wise, area wise scheme in which all flats came up together as one project, may form a class and any discriminatory treatment In the same class may attract article 14.
But to say that the Authority would be bound to offer flats income group wise according to the same price formula is to expect the Authority to ignore time, situation, location and other relevant factors which all enter the price structure.
[713 E, 715 A F] Radhakrishna Agarwal & Ors.
vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; at 255; Har Shankar & Ors. etc.
vs The Dy.
Excise & Taxation Commr.
& Ors. ; , referred to.
In price fixation executive has a wide discretion and is only answerable provided there is any statutory control over its policy of price fixation and it is not the function of the Court to sit in judgment over such matters of economic policy as must be necessarily left to the Government of the day to decide.
The experts alone can work out the mechanics of price determination, Court can certainly not be expected to decide without the assistance of the experts.
[715 F G] Prag Ice & Oil Mills and Anr. etc.
vs Union of India; , at 330; Avinder Singh vs State of Punjab ; ; State of Gujarat & another vs Shri Ambica Mills Ltd. Ahmedabad, etc.
[974] 3 S.C.R 760 at 782; referred to.
Price of land, building, material, labour charges and cost of transport, quality and availability of land, supervision and management charges are all variable factors that enter into price fixation.
Their cost varies time wise, place wise and availability wise.
All these uncertain factors cannot be overlooked for the purpose of classification.
It is not possible therefore to hold that allottees of 706 flats in MIG scheme at any place and executed at any time will form one class for the purpose of pricing policy.
The only valid basis for classification would be income wise, area wise, time wise, scheme wise, meaning all flats constructed at or about the same time in same area in one project for particular income group will form a class, and there is no discrimination amongst them.
[716 G H. 717 A B] 4.
Pricing policy is an executive policy.
If the Authority was set up for making available dwelling units at reasonable prices to persons belonging to different groups it would not be precluded from devising its own price formula for different income groups.
If in so doing it uniformally collects something more than cost price from those with cushion to benefit those who are less fortunate it cannot be accused of discrimination.
In this country where weaker and poorer sections are unable to enjoy the basic necessities, namely, food, shelter and clothing, a body like the Authority undertaking, a comprehensive policy of providing shelter to those who cannot afford to have the same in the competitive albeit harsh market of demand and supply nor can afford on their own meagre emoluments or income, a little more from those who can afford for the benefit of those who need succour, can by no stretch of imagination attract article 14.
[717 B D] 5.
It is a well recognised policy underlying tax law that the State has a wide discretion in selecting the persons or objects it will tax and that the statute is not open to attack on the ground that it taxes some persons or objects and not others.
It is only when within the range of its selection the law operates unequally, and this cannot be justified on the basis of a valid classification, that there would be a. violation of article 14.
[717 E F] East India Tobacco Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; 6.
The principle of "no profit no loss" cannot apply either to every flat or to every scheme or to every piece of land developed by the Authority.
It would be impossible for the Authority lo function on such fragmented basis and such a policy statement has not been made by the Authority.
[718 D E] 7.
There is not the slightest or even a remote reference to "no profit no loss" formula for determining the cost price.
A survey of the Regulations do not spell out any formula for price determination on the basis of "no profit no loss".
Project wise price fixation cannot be dubbed as arbitrary or discriminatory by comparing it with other projects at different places or at different times.
[719 A B In the instant case after the work commenced and the actual cost estimate started coming in the revised estimate for 304 flats was of the order of Rs. 2,07,33,000/ which was approved by the Vice Chairman on September 18, 1976.
According to the revised estimate the approximate disposal cost for each flat.
came tc Rs. 68.202/ and the cost of land per dwelling; unit was Rs. 7008/ .
The revised estimate showed the disposal price of each flat as Rs. 75.200/ .
The Commissioner of Income Tax who wanted to acquire 40 MIG flats in Prasad Nagar area offered the price of Rs. 75,000/ per flat which price was accepted.
The difference between the cost price and the disposal price of Rs. 75,000/ per flat was treated as surcharge and the purpose was to use the extra money for extending price reduction benefit to The allottees of flats in LIG, Janata and CPS schemes.
It is therefore difficult to entertain the contention that even if surcharge could be justified its actual computation is arbitrary and irrational.
[720 B E, E F] 707 8 .
The Vice Chairman is appointed by the Central Government as per Section.
3(3)(b) of the Act.
He is a whole time officer and the Chief Executive of the Authority.
The composition of the Authority as set out in section 3 would include such persons as Finance and Accounts Member, Engineering Member, representatives of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and representatives of Metropolitan Council.
Three other persons, were to be nominated by Central Government of whom one shall be person with experience of planning.
It is a high power body.
Yet it completely abdicated its power and authority in favour of Housing Committee.
The Housing Committee will practically supplant the Authority.
By a process of elimination the Housing Committee would supplant the Authority and the Chairman could constitute the Housing Committee.
Therefore, the Chairman enjoyed a very wide discretionary power.
However once the power to delegate is given by the Regulations, the challenge to validity on the ground of delegation must fail.
[720 G H; 721 E H, 722 A] 9.
Resolution No. 209 is the one adopted by the Housing Committee.
It takes note of the delegation of powers to fix disposal and hire purchase price of flats to the Vice Chairman and further provides that if there is a marginal saving in any scheme the amount be diverted to subsidies cost of Janata and CPS houses.
The Resolution No. 200 of the Authority read with Resolution No. 709 of the Housing Committee sets out clearly that the power to fix the disposal price was delegated to the Vice Chairman and ordinarily such excessive delegation to one man may be galling to a judicial body yet the scheme of regulations and the provisions contained in Regulation 3 read with Section 59 clearly envisages such delegation of powers.
[722 C E] 10.
The note of Accounts Officer (Housing) dated September 8, 1976, submitted to the Financial Advisor (Housing) shows that the flats have been offered at the rate of Rs. 75,000/ to the Commissioner of Income Tax for the Income Tax Department and that should be the disposal price.
This note was approved by the Financial Advisor (Housing) and ultimately countersigned by the Vice Chairman Even if it includes surcharge it cannot be said with confidence that the Vice Chairman has not approved has not approved the surcharge as a component of disposal price.
[722 G H]
