The petitioner, a convict under death sentence, through a letter to one of the Judges of this Court alleged that torture was practised upon another prisoner by a jail warder, to extract money from the victim through his visiting relations.
The letter was converted into a habeas corpus proceeding.
The Court issued notice to the State and the concerned officials.
It also appointed amicus curiae and authorised them to visit the prison, meet the prisoner, see relevant documents and interview necessary witnesses so as to enable them to inform them selves about the surrounding circumstances and the scenario of events.
The amicus curiae after visiting the jail and examining witnesses reported that the prisoner sustained serious anal injury because a rod was driven into that aperture to inflict inhuman torture and that as the bleeding had not stopped, he was removed to the jail hospital and later to the Irvin Hospital.
It was also reported that the prisoner 's explanation for the anal rupture was an unfulfilled demand of the warder for money, and that attempts were made by the departmental officers to hush up the crime by overawing the prisoner and the jail doctor and offering a story that the injury was either due to a fall of self inflication or due to piles.
Allowing the writ petition. ^ HELD:(Per Krishna Iyer and Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.) 1.
(a) Prem Chand the prisoner, has been tortured illegally and the Superintendent cannot absolve himself from responsibility even though he may not be directly a party.
Lack of vigilance is limited guilt.
The primary guilt cannot be fixed because a criminal case is pending or is in the offing.
The State shall take action against the investigating police for collusive dilatoriness and deviousness.[599 F] 558 (b) The Superintendent is directed to ensure that no corporal punishment or personal violence on Prem Chand shall be inflicted.
No irons shall be forced on the person in vindictive spirit.
[599 H] (c) Lawyers nominated by the District Magistrate, Sessions Judge, High Court or the Supreme Court will be given all facilities for interviews, visits and confidential communication with prisoners subject to discipline and security considerations.
The lawyers so designated shall be bound to make periodical visits and record and report to the concerned courts, results which have relevance to legal grievances.
[600 A B] (d) Within the next three months, Grievance Deposit Boxes shall be maintained by or under the orders of the District Magistrate and the Sessions Judge which will be opened as frequently as is deemed fit and suitable action taken on complaints made.
Access to such boxes shall be afforded to all prisoners.
[600 C] (e) District Magistrates and Sessions Judges shall, personally or through surrogates, visit prisons in their jurisdiction and afford effective opportunities for ventilating legal grievances, shall make expeditious enquiries there into and take suitable remedial action.
In appropriate cases reports shall be made to the High Court for the latter to initiate, if found necessary, habeas action.
[600 D] (f) No solitary or punitive cell, no hard labour or dietary change as painful additive, no other punishment or denial of privileges and amenities, no transfer to other prisons with penal consequences, shall be imposed without judicial appraisal of the Sessions Judge and where such intimation, an account of emergency is difficult such information shall be given within two days of the action.
[601 B C] 2.
In our era of human rights ' consciousness the habeas writ has functional plurality and the constitutional regard for human decency and dignity is tested by this capability.
[563 E] 3.
Protection of the prisoner within his rights is part of the office of Article 32.
[564 C] 4.
It behoves the court to insist that, in the eye of law, prisoners are persons not animals, and to punish the deviant 'guardians ' of the prison system where they go berserk and defile the dignity of the human inmate.
Prison houses are part of Indian earth and the Indian Constitution cannot be held at bay by jail officials 'dressed in a little, brief authority '.
when Part III is invoked by a convict.
When a prisoner is traumatized, the Constitution suffers a shock.
[564 D E] 5.
The courts in America have, through the decisional process, brought the rule of law into the prison system pushing back, pro tanto, the 'hands off ' doctrine.
The content of our constitutional liberties being no less, the dynamics of habeas writs there developed help the judicial process here.
The full potential of articles 21, 19 & 14 after Maneka Gandhi has been unfolded by this Court in Hoskot and Batra.
Today, human rights jurisprudence in India has a constitutional status and sweep.
[573 A, 574 D] 6.
Rulings of this Court have highlighted the fact that the framers of the Constitution have freed the powers under article 32 from the rigid restraints of 559 the traditional English writs.
Flexible directives, even affirmative action moulded to grant relief, may realistically be issued and fall within its fertile width.
[575 F] Dwarkanath vs income Tax officer ; referred to.
Where injustice, verging on inhumanity, emerges from hacking human rights guaranteed in Part III and the victim beseeches the Court to intervene and relieve, the Court will be a functional futility as a constitutional instrumentality if it does not go into action until the wrong is righted.
The Court is not a distant abstraction omnipotent in the books but an activist institution which is the cynosure of public hope.
The court can issue writs to meet the new challenges.
[576 D] 8.
Affirmed in unmistakables terms that the court has jurisdiction under article 32 and so too under article 226, a clear power and, therefore, a public duty to give relief to sentence in prison setting.
[576 F] 9.
In Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration this Court rejected the 'hands off ' doctrine and ruled that fundamental rights do not flee the person as he enters the prison although they may suffer shrinkage necessitated by incarceration.
Our Constitutional culture has now crystallised in favour of prison justice and judicial jurisdiction.
[576 H 577 A] 10.
Where the rights of a prisoner, either under the Constitution or under other law, are violated the writ power of the court can and should run to his rescue.
There is a warrant for this vigil.
The court process casts the convict into the prison system and the deprivation of his freedom is not a blind penitentiary affliction but a belighted institutionalisation geared to a social good.
The court has a continuing responsibility to ensure that the constitutional purpose of the deprivation is not defeated by the prison administration.
[577 E F] 11.
Whether inside prison or outside, a person shall not be deprived of his guaranteed freedom save by methods 'right, just and fair '.
[578 E] 12.
A prisoner wears the armour of basic freedom even behind bars and that on breach thereof by lawless officials the law will respond to his distress signals through 'writ ' aid.
The Indian human has a constant companion the court armed with the Constitution.
[578 H] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India ; N. H. Hoskot vs Maharashtra, ; , referred to. 13.
Implicit in the power to deprive the sentence of his personal liberty, the Court has to ensure that no more and no less than is warranted by the sentence happens.
If the prisoner breaks down because of mental torture, psychic pressure or physical infliction beyond the licit limits of lawful imprisonment the Prison Administration shall be liable for the excess.
On the contrary, if an influential convict is able to buy advantages and liberties to avoid or water down the deprivation implied in the sentence the Prison Establishment will be called to order for such adulteration or dilution of court sentences by executive palliation, if unwarranted by law.
[579 B C] 14.
The court has power and responsibility to intervene and protect the prisoner against mayhem, crude or subtle, and may use habeas corpus for 560 enforcing in prison humanism and forbiddance of harsher restraints and heavier severities than the sentence carries.
[579 E] 15.
Law in the books and in the courts is of no help unless it reaches the prisoner in understandable language and available form.
There is therefore need to get ready a Prisoners ' Handbook in the regional language and make them freely available to the inmates.
To know the law is the first step to be free from fear of unlaw.
[582 C] 16(i) The most important right of a prisoner is to integrity of his physical person and mental personality.
No prisoner can be personally subjected to deprivations not necessitated by the fact of incarceration and the sentence of court.
[584 D, 583 C] (ii) Inflictions may take many protean forms, apart from physical assaults.
Pushing the prisoner into a solitary cell, denial of a necessary amenity, and more dreadful sometimes, transfer to a distant prison where visits or society of friends or relatives may be snapped, allotment of degrading labour, assignment to a desperate or tough gang and the like, may be punitive in effect.
Every such affliction or abridgement is an infraction of liberty or life in its wider sense and cannot be sustained unless article 21 is satisfied.
There must be a corrective legal procedure, fair and reasonable and effective.
Such infraction will be arbitrary under Article 14, if it is dependent on unguided discretion, unreasonable under article 19 if it is irremediable and unappealable and unfair under article 21 if it violates natural justice.
Some prisoners, for their own safety, may desire segregation.
In such cases, written consent and immediate report to higher authority are the least, if abuse is to be tabooed.
[584 F H, 586 G] (iii) Visit to prisoners by family and friends are a solace in insulation: and only a dehumanised system can derive vicarious delight in depriving prison inmates of this humane amenity.
Subject, of course, to search and discipline and other security criteria, the right to society of fellow men, parents and other family members cannot be denied in the light of article 19 and its sweep.
, [586 H] 17.
Prison power, absent judicial watch tower, may tend towards torture.
The judges are guardians of prisoners ' rights because they have a duty to secure the execution of the sentences without excesses and to sustain the personal liberties of prisoners without violence on or violation of the inmates ' personality.
[588 D, 590 C] 18.
In a democracy, a wrong to some one is a wrong to every one and an unpunished criminal makes society vicariously guilty.
[596 D] 19.
When offences are alleged to have taken place within the prison, there should be no tinge or trace of departmental collusion or league between the police and the prison staff.
[605 A] [Directives for which no specific time limit fixed except the urgency of their implementation: 1(i) The State shall take early steps to prepare in Hindi, a Prisoner 's Handbook and circulate copies to bring legal awareness home to the inmates.
Periodical jail bulletins stating how improvements and habilitative programmes are brought into the prison may create a fellowship which will ease tensions.
561 A prisoners ' wall paper, which will freely ventilate grievances will also reduce stress.
All these are implementary of section 61 of the .
[601 D,E] (ii) The State shall take steps to keep up to the Standard Minimum Rules for Treatment of Prisoners recommended by the United Nations, especially those relating to work and wages, treatment with dignity, community contact and correctional strategies.
[601 F] (iii) The needs rehabilitation and the Prison Manual total over haul.
A correctional cum orientation course is necessitous for the prison staff inculcating the constitutional values, therapeutic approaches and tension free management.
[601 H] (iv) The prisoners ' rights shall be protected by the court by its writ jurisdiction plus contempt power.
To make this jurisdiction viable, free legal services to the prisoner programmes shall be promoted by professional organisations recognised by the court such as for e.g. Free Legal Aid (Supreme Court) Society.
The District Bar shall, we recommend, keep 2 cell for prisoner relief.
[602 A] (Per Pathak J. concurring) 1.
The prisoner Prem Chand has been tortured while in custody in the Tihar Jail.
[605 D] 2.
The Superintendent of the jail to ensure that no punishment or personal violence is inflicted on Prem Chand by reason of the complaint made in regard to the torture.
[605 F] 3.
Pressing need for prison reform and provision for adequate facilities to prisoners, to enable them not only to be acquainted with their legal riots but also to record their complaints and grievances and to have confidential interviews periodically with lawyers nominated for the purpose by the District Magistrate or the court having jurisdiction.
[605 G] 4.
Imperative that District Magistrates and Sessions Judges should visit the prisons in their jurisdiction and afford effective opportunity to the prisoners for ventilating their grievances and where the matter lies within their powers, make expeditious enquiry and take suitable remedial action.
[605 H] 5.
Sessions Judge should be informed by the jail authorities of any punitive action taken against a prisoner within two days of such action.
[606 A] 6.
A statement by the Sessions Judge in regard to his visits, enquiries made and action then thereon shall be submitted periodically to the High Court to acquaint it with the conditions prevailing in the prisons within its jurisdiction.
[606 B]
