The appellant, a banking company incorporated in the United Kingdom, carries on banking business in India and is assessed under the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The appellant filed a return of its income for the assessment year 1972 73.
During the assessment proceedings the Income Tax Officer issued a notice under section 142(1) of the Income Tax Act requiring the appellant to produce certain account books and documents.
The appellant applied against the notice to the High Court of Calcutta under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court construing the notice in specifically limited terms directed the appellant to comply with it.
The appellant preferred an appeal in the High Court.
Meanwhile, pursuant to the direction by the learned single judge, the Income Tax Officer made an assessment order on March 31, 1977.
Thereafter the appeal was allowed by a Division Bench of the High Court by its judgment dated May 8 and 12, 1978, and the impugned notice under section 142(1) and the consequent assessment order were quashed.
But while doing so, the Division Bench also directed the Income Tax Officer to make a fresh assessment.
Aggrieved by that direction, the appellant applied for, and obtained special leave to appeal to this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was competent to make the order directing a fresh assessment since the limitation for making the assessment had not expired and no valuable right to be assessed had thereby accrued to the appellant.
[769 D E] The facts of the case make it clear that the assessment proceedings remained pending during the entire period from March 17, 1975 to March 31, 1977 by virtue of successive stay orders of the Court.
If regard be had to clause (ii) of Explanation 1 to section 153 which provides that in computing the period of limitation for the purposes of section 153 the period during which the assessment is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be excluded, it is abundantly clear that the assessment order dated March 31, 1977 is not barred by limitation.
In computing the period for making the assessment, the Income Tax Officer would be entitled to exclude the entire period from March 17, 1975, on which date there were fourteen days still left within the normal 766 operation of the rule of limitation.
The assessment order was made on the very first day after the period of stay expired; it could not be faulted on the ground of limitation.
[769 B D] 2.
The character of an assessment proceeding of which the impugned notice and the assessment order formed part, being quasi judicial, the "certiorari" jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 was attracted.
Ordinarily, where the High Court exercises such jurisdiction it merely quashes the offending order, and the consequential legal effect is that but for the offending order the remaining part of the proceeding stands automatically reviewed before the inferior court or tribunal with the need for fresh consideration and disposal by a fresh order.
Ordinarily the High Court does not substitute its own order for the order quashed by it.
It is, of course, a different case where the adjudication by the High Court establishes a complete want of jurisdiction in the inferior court or tribunal to entertain or to take the proceeding at all.
In that event on the quashing of the proceeding by the High Court there is no revival at all.
But although in the former kind of case the High Court, after quashing the offending order, does not substitute its own order it has power nonetheless to pass such further orders as the justice of the case requires.
[769 F H, 770 A] 3.
When passing such orders the High Court draws on its inherent power to make all such orders as are necessary for doing complete justice between the parties.
The interests of justice require that any undeserved or unfair advantage gained by a party invoking the jurisdiction of the court, by the mere circumstance that it has initiated a proceeding in the court, must be neutralised.
The simple fact of the institution of litigation by itself should not be permitted to confer an advantage on the party responsible for it.
[770 A C] In the present case, the appellant would not have enjoyed the advantage of the bar of limitation if, notwithstanding his immediate grievance against the notice under section 142(1) of the Income Tax Act, he had permitted the assessment proceeding to go on after registering his protest before the Income Tax Officer, and allowed an assessment order to be made in the normal course.
In an application under section 146 against the assessment order, it would have been open to him to urge that the notice was unreasonable and invalid and he was prevented by sufficient cause from complying with it and therefore the assessment order should be cancelled.
In that event, the fresh assessment made under section 146 would not be fettered by the bar of limitation.
Section 153(3)(i) removes the bar.
But the appellant preferred the constitutional jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226.
If no order was made by the High Court directing a fresh assessment, he could contend that a fresh assessment proceeding is barred by limitation.
That is an advantage which the appellant seeks to derive by the mere circumstance of his filing a writ petition.
It will be noted that the defect complained of by the appellant in the notice was a procedural lapse at best and one that could be readily corrected by serving an appropriate notice.
It was not a defect affecting the fundamental jurisdiction of the Income Tax Officer to make the assessment.
The High Court was plainly right in making the direction which it did.
[770 C G] Director of Inspection of Income Tax (Investigation) New Delhi and Anr.
vs Pooran Mall and Sons and Anr.
@ 395; followed.
767 Cachar Plywood Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer, 'A ' Ward, Karimganj Dist.
Cachar and Anr., (1978) 114 ITR (Cal.); approved.
Rajinder Nath etc.
vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi, ; distinguished.
Pickles vs Falsham, 9 Tax Cases, 261, 288; Anisminic Ltd. vs The Foreign Compensation Commission & Anr.
[1969] 1 All E.L.R. 208; Bath and West Countries Property Trust Ltd. vs Thomas (Inspector of Taxes) ; distinguished.
