The appellants along with other accused persons were tried under section 302/149 I.P.C. for causing murder of two persons.
While one of the deceased died on the spot the other who was removed to hospital, gave a dying declaration to the doctor before dying.
The Sessions Judge finding that none of the eye witnesses examined was reliable and as the accused could not be convicted on the basis of their testimony acquitted all the accused.
He further held that the evidence of the eye witnesses was rendered improbable and was in fact falsified by the dying declaration exhibit 9.
On appeal by the State, the High Court held that the dying declaration exhibit 9 was absolutely true and reliable and was sufficient to establish the prosecution case.
It accordingly convicted and sentenced the appellants to imprisonment for life.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) as the deceased was in a state of shock, it was unsafe to rely on the dying declaration, (2) as the dying declaration was incomplete it could not be acted upon, and (3) as the deceased had implicated some persons other than the accused, the dying declaration could not be said to be true.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that even excluding the evidence of the eye witnesses the dying declaration is true and reliable and sufficient to found the conviction of the appellants.
[808 F] 2.
The Sessions Judge committed an error in law in rejecting the dying declaration because if the evidence of the eye witnesses was to be rejected on the ground that it was inconsistent with the dying declaration, it would not necessarily follow that the dying declaration was also unreliable and unworthy of credence.
[804 C] 802 3.
(a) This Court has held that whenever a particular view taken by authors of Medical Jurisprudence, is adumbrated, the same must be put to the doctor to assess how far the view taken by the experts apply to the facts of the particular case.
[805 G] In the instant case though the doctor who had recorded the dying declaration had stated that the deceased was in a state of shock because he had received a serious injury in the abdomen which had to be stitched, he was however not crossed examined as to the fact whether or not despite the shock, the deceased had retained his mental faculties.
On the other hand, the last certificate given by the doctor towards the end of the dying declaration that the patient became semi conscious clearly shows that the deceased was fully conscious when he started making the dying declaration before the doctor.
[804 H, 805 G] (b) A perusal of the entire dying declaration clearly shows that the doctor had asked all the necessary questions that could be asked from the deceased and the last question "what more you want to say" was merely in the nature of a formality.
Having narrated the full story, there was nothing more that the deceased could add.
The dying declaration was therefore not incomplete one.
[806 B] Cyril Waugh vs The King, , distinguished.
(c) Merely because some other persons named in the dying declaration were not challaned would not by itself prove the falsity of the dying declaration.
It may be that these, persons were left out from the category of accused in the F.I.R. or the challan due to ulterior motives.
[806 E, 805 C] 4.
A person on the verge of death is most unlikely to make an untrue statement unless prompted or tutored by his friends or relatives.
The shadow of immediate death is the best guarantee of the truth of the statement by a dying person regarding the causes or circumstances leading to his death which are absolutely fresh in his mind and is untainted or discoloured by any other consideration except speaking the truth.
It is for these reasons that the Statute (The Evidence Act) attaches a special sanctity to a dying declaration.
[808 B C] 5.
It is well established that although a dying declaration should be carefully scrutinised if after perusal the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true and is free from any effort to prompt the deceased to make a statement and is coherent and consistent, there is no legal impediment in founding the conviction on such a dying declaration even if there is no corroboration.
[808 D E] Khushal Rao vs The State of Bombay ; ,; Tarachand Damu Sutar vs The State of Maharashtra ; ; Mannu Raja & Anr.
vs State of M.P. ; referred to.
Ram Nath Madhoprasad & Ors.
vs State of M.P. AIR 1953 SC 420, overruled.
