The respondent assessee carried on business in coal as the owner of various collieries.
One of the collieries, was occupied by the military from 1942 until it was derequisitioned in 1955.
During that period the assessee did not work the said colliery: although the business in coal and working of the other collieries were carried on.
While the colliery remained under military occupation the assessee incurred expenditure in respect of the colliery on account of payment of surface rent, minimum royalty and salary for the watch and ward staff, which expenditure was claimed and allowed as business expenditure of the assessee.
After the colliery was handed over to the assessee upon derequisition the assessee incurred an expenditure of about Rs. 1.6 lakhs in renovating the building, reconditioning the machinery and clearing the land of all debris accumulated over a number of years.
In the assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1959 60 the assessee claimed deduction of the aforesaid amount under section 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Income Tax Act.
The deduction was disallowed by the Income Tax officer on the ground that the expenditure was capital in nature.
The appeals by the assessee to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal were dismissed.
In the reference to the High Court at the instance of the assessee the High Court observed that the business of the assessee had to be considered as a whole and not on the basis of its different sources of supply or units of production, and held that on the facts admitted and found it could not be said that any fresh asset had been acquired by the assessee by spending Rs. 1.6 lakhs and that the expenditure was incurred by the assessee for the purpose of carrying on an existing concern.
The expenditure was, therefore, in the nature of a revenue expenditure.
In the appeal by the Revenue to this Court, it was contended: (a) where repairs are effected to buildings and machinery a deduction under section 10(2) is permissible only in respect of "current repairs" and repairs which are not "current repairs" are not intended to be the subject of relief, (b) the repairs made by the assessee cannot be described as "current repairs", and (c) if section 10(2) (v) is the relevant clause, being the specific provision in respect of expendi 759 ture on "current repairs" to buildings and machinery, there is no justification for relying on section 10(2)(xv) a residuary clause.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that the expenditure was not of a capital nature.
[764 E] 2.
The expenditure of Rs. 1.6 lakhs was expenditure laid out as part of the process of profit earning.
The nature of the expenditure was clearly revenue in character.
[764 D] 3.
There can be little doubt that the expenditure incurred was incidental to the business of the assessee.
It was involved in renovating the buildings, reconditioning the machinery and clearing the debris, from the land, for the purpose of resuming the operation of the colliery.
The expenditure was laid out wholly for the purpose of the business.
[763 D] 4.
There must be strong evidence that in the case of repairs which are not "current repairs", the Legislature intended a departure from the principle that an expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business, and which expenditure is not capital in nature, should not be allowed in computing the income from business.
There is nothing in the language of section 10(2) (v) which declares or necessarily implies that repairs, other than, "current repairs", will not qualify for the benefit of that principle.
On accepted commercial practice and trading principles an item of business expenditure must be deducted in order to arrive at the true figure of profits and gains for tax purposes.
[762 G 763 A] C.I.T. vs Chitnis 50 I.A. 292; Motipur Sugar Factory Ltd. vs C.I.T. Bihar and Orissa, ; Devi Films Ltd. vs C.I.T. Madras, ; Badridas Daga vs C.I.T. , 15; Calcutta Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T. West Bengal, , 9; the Law Shipping Co. Ltd. vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue 12 Tax Cases 621,625 referred to.
The scope of Section 10(2)(xv) should be construed liberally.
[763 B] In the instant case even if the expenditure made by the assessee cannot be described as "current repairs" he is entitled to invoke the benefit of section 10(2)(xv).
[763 C] 5.
Whether an expenditure can be described as capital or revenue falls to be decided by serial tests, each one of which approaches the question from one perspective or another, conditioned by the particular facts of each case.
[763 F] Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs C.I.T. West Bengal referred to.
In the instant case the business of the assessee was coal mining and it was carried on by the operation of a network of collieries.
Each colliery was a unit of production.
While the several units of production continued to be employed and the business continued to be carried on, one alone of all the units, was compelled to suspend production.
The suspension was due to the property being requisitioned for military use.
As soon as it was derequisitioned the assessee 760 took measures to resume production of coal.
The buildings were renovated, the machinery reconditioned and the accumulated debris removed from the land No new asset was brought into existence, no advantage for the enduring benefit of the business was acquired.
The activity which was continuously in operation but had been temporary suspended was resumed.
[763 G 764 C]
