Clause (e) of the proviso to section 14(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act provides that a landlord can evict a tenant of premises let for residential purposes on the ground that the same were required by him bona fide for occupation as a residence for himself and that he has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation.
An appeal from the order of the Controller lies to the tribunal and a further appeal to the High Court.
In September, 1975, the Government of India took a decision that Government employees owning houses in Delhi shall be required to vacate accommodation allotted to them by the Government within a period of three months from 1st October, 1975.
To avoid procedural delays in the matter of eviction of tenants from houses let out by Government servants who were required to shift to their own houses, Chapter III A was introduced by an Amending Act.
Section 14A which was added in Chapter III provided a right to a person in occupation of any residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government to recover immediate possession of the premises let out by him in case he was required by the Government to vacate the residential premises allotted to him.
The non obstante clause contained in section 25A provides that "the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained elsewhere in this Act or any other law for the time being in force.
" Section 25B(8) provides that when "an order for the recovery of possession of any premises" has been made by the Controller on an application covered by section 25B no appeal or second appeal shall lie therefrom.
The respondent 's application under clause (e) of the proviso to section 14(1) of the Act was rejected by the Rent Controller on the ground that it was not legally permissible for her to obtain possession of the premises under the section because she had sought eviction only in respect of a part of the premises.
In the respondent 's revision petition before the High Court the tenant contended that the petition was incompetent because in view of the provisions of section 25b(8) the only remedy available to the respondent was by way of appeal under section 38.
Rejecting this contention the High Court held that a, petition for revision as envisaged by section 25B(8) lay against the order accepting or rejecting an eviction application and against such an order alone.
Dismissing the tenant 's appeal.
^ HELD: The remedy of the land lady against the order of the Controller in the present case was by way of revision (and revision only) of that order by the High Court under the proviso to section 25B(8), even though it was 747 an order not directing but by refusing recovery of possession of the premises in dispute.
[756 G H] The non obstante clause in section 25A provides that whenever there is a conflict between the provisions of Chapter IIIA and those of the rest of the Act or of any other law in force the former shall prevail.
If an application is made under clause (e) of the proviso to section 14(1) it has to be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified in section 25B and not under the provisions contained in Chapters other than Chapter IIIA.
Therefore, the procedure laid down in section 25A read with section 25B(1) envisages a shortcut to the conclusion of the proceedings before the Controller.
Section 25B(8) further provides that when an order for the recovery of possession of any premises has been made no appeal under section 38 or second appeal under section 39 shall lie.
The combined effect of section 25A and section 25B(1) and (10) is that in whatever respect section 25B makes a departure from the procedure prescribed in other chapters of the Act, the provisions of Chapter IIIA shall prevail.
[753 B D; 754 D] The expression "order for the recovery of possession of any premises" has to be construed, in the context in which it appears, as an order deciding an application for the recovery of possession of any premises; because, firstly, if an order in favour of the landlord alone was meant to be covered by sub section (8) an order refusing such relief would be liable to be called in question by way of an appeal or second appeal under section 38 so that there would be two procedures for the end product of the Controller 's proceedings being called in question, one when the same is in favour of the landlord and another when it goes against him, which would obviously entail discrimination and make the sub section invalid.
But if a provision can be construed in a manner which upholds its legal or constitutional validity it should, if possible, be so construed rather than the other way round.
[755 B E] All that sub section (10) of section 25B states is that the procedure for the disposal of an application for eviction covered by sub section (1) shall be the same as the procedure for disposal of other applications by Controllers except as provided in Chapter IIIA.
Sub section (8) expressly takes away the right of appeal or second appeal while providing the remedy of revision instead.
[747 E F] Section 14(7) does not require that an order for the recovery of possession of any premises should contain a direction that the landlord would not be entitled to obtain possession of the premises in dispute before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of the order.
The sub section itself declares that such an order would not be executable before a certain period has expired.
The declaration is part of the law of the land and would be operative as such so that the landlady would not be entitled to execute the order before the expiry of six months from the date thereof notwithstanding the fact that the terms of sub section (7) have not been made part of the order.
[757 C D] Devi Singh vs Chaman Lal (1977) Rajdhani Law Reporter 566; R. K. Parikh vs Uma Verma I.L.R. (1978) II Delhi 78; Bhagwati Pershad vs Om Perkhash (1979) Rajdhani Law Reporter 26; Mahavir Singh vs Kamal Narain (1979) Rajdhani Law Reporter 159 approved.
