The appellants were the judgment debtors while the respondent bank was the decree holder.
In execution of the decree a warrant for arrest and detention in civil prison was issued to the appellants under section 51 and order 21, rule 37 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
On an earlier occasion there had been a similar warrant for arrest in execution of the same decree.
The decree holders also proceeded against the properties of the judgment debtors and in consequence all their immovable properties had been attached for the purpose of sale in discharge of the decree debts.
A receiver was appointed by the execution court to manage the properties under attachment.
Even so, the court had issued a warrant for the arrest of the judgment debtors because on an earlier occasion a similar warrant had already been issued without any investigation as regards the current ability of the judgment debtors to clear off the debts or their mala fide refusal, if any, to discharge the debts.
On the question whether under such circumstances personal freedom of the judgment debtors can be held to ransom until repayment of the debt.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The words in section 51 which hurt are "or has had since the date of the decree the means to pay the amount of the decree.
" Superficially read this implies that if at any time after the passing of an old decree the judgment debtor had come by some resources and had not discharged the decree he could be detained in prison even though at that later point of time he was found to be penniless.
This is not a sound position, apart from being inhuman going by the standards of Article 11 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Article 21.
A simple default to discharge is not enough.
There must be some element of bad faith beyond mere indifference to pay, some deliberate or recusant disposition in the past or alternatively current means to pay the decree or a substantial part of it.
The provision emphasises the need to establish not mere omission to pay but an attitude of refusal on demand verging on dishonest disowning of the obligation under the decree.
Considerations of the debtor 's other pressing needs and straitened circumstances will play prominently.
[922E G] 2.
Unless there be some other vice or mens rea apart from failure to foot the decree, international law frowns on holding the debtor 's person in civil prison, as hostage by the court.
India is now a signatory to this Covenant and Article 51(c) of the Constitution obligates the State to "foster respect for 914 international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one another".
Even so, until the Municipal Law is changed to accommodate the Covenant what binds the courts is the former not the latter.
[918A B] 3.
Quondom affluence and current indigence without intervening dishonesty or bad faith in liquidating his liability can be consistent with Article 11 of the Covenant because then no detention is permissible under section 51 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[921G] 4.
The high value of human dignity and the worth of the human person enshrined in Article 21, read with Articles 14 and 19, obligates the State not to incarcerate except under law which is fair, just and reasonable in its procedural essence.
To cast a person in prison because of his poverty and consequent inability to meet his contractual liability is appalling.
To be poor is no crime and to "recover" debts by the procedure of putting one in prison is flagrantly violative of Article 21 unless there is proof of the minimal fairness of his wilful failure to pay in spite of his sufficient means and absence of more terribly pressing claims on his means such as medical bills to treat cancer or other grave illness.
Unreasonableness and unfairness in such a procedure is inferable from Article 11 of the Covenant.
But this is precisely the interpretation put on the proviso to section 51 C.P.C. and the lethal blow of Article 21 cannot strike down the provision as interpreted.
[922A D]
