The petitioner was acquitted by the High Court in appeal, of charges under sections 302 and 148 I.P.C., but the brother of the deceased not the State nor even the first informant, petitioned this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution for special leave to appeal against acquittal, got leave, had his appeal heard, which was ultimately allowed the court setting aside the judgment of the High Court, and restoring the conviction and sentence imposed by the trial court under section 302 I.P.C. (Arunachalam vs section R. Sadhananthan ; The petitioner filed the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution, contending: (1) that Article 136 did not empower the grant of special leave to the brother of the deceased and the grant of special leave by the Court and its entertaining the appeal violated Article 21 of the Constitution, and (2) before the Court may grant special leave under Article 136 there must be an antecedent right of appeal absent which the question of leave by the Court does not arise.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: (per Krishna Iyer, Murtaza Fazal Ali and Desai, JJ).
Justice is functionally outraged not only when an innocent person is punished but also when a guilty criminal gets away with it stultifying the legal system.
[877H, 878A] 2.
An insightful understanding of the sweep, scope and character of article 136 will easily dispel the dichotomy between an antecedent right of appeal and a subsequent grant of leave.
[878D] 3.
The jural reach and plural range of the judicial process to remove injustice in a given society is a sure index of the versatile genius of law in action as a delivery system of social justice.
Our constitutional order vests in the summit court a jurisdiction to do justice, at once omnipresent and omnipotent but controlled and guided by that refined yet flexible censor called judicial discretion.
This nidus of power and process, which master minds the broad observance throughout the Republic of justice according to law, is article 136.
[878E F] 874 4.
In express terms, article 136 does not confer a right of appeal on a party as such but it confers a wide discretionary power on the Supreme Court to interfere in suitable cases.
Article 136 is a special jurisdiction.
It is residuary power; it is extra ordinary in its amplitude, its limit, when it chases injustice, is the sky itself.
This Court functionally fulfils itself by reaching out to injustice wherever it is and this power is largely derived in the common run of cases from article 136.
[878G H, 879A] 5.
There is a procedure necessarily implicit in the power vested in the summit court.
It must be remembered that article 136 confers jurisdiction on the highest court.
The founding fathers unarguably intended in the very terms of article 136 that it shall be exercised by the highest judges of the land with scrupulous adherence to judicial principles well established by precedents in our jurisprudence.
Judicial discretion is canalised authority, not arbitrary eccentricity.
[879A C] 6.
It is manifest that article 136 is of composite structure, is power cum procedure power in that it vests jurisdiction in the Supreme Court, and procedure in that it spells a mode of hearing.
It obligates the exercise of judicial discretion and the mode of hearing so characteristic of the court process.
In short, there is an in built prescription of power and procedure in terms of article 136 which meets the demand of article 21.
[879E F] 7.
If article 21 is telescoped into article 136, it follows that fair procedure is imprinted on the special leave that the court may grant or refuse.
With a motion is made for leave to appeal against an acquittal, this Court appreciates the gravity of the peril to personal liberty involved in that proceeding.
While considering the petition under article 136 the court will pay attention to the question of liberty, the person who seeks such leave from the court, his motive and his locus standi and the weighty factors which persuade the court to grant special leave.
[879F G] 8. 'The wider the discretionary power the more sparing its exercise.
The Court may not, save in special situations, grant leave to one who is not eo nomine a party on the record.
[880C D] 9.
Sometimes indifference of bureaucratic officials, at other times politicisation of higher functionaries may result in refusal to take a case to this Court under article 136 even though the justice of the lis may well justify it.
In the absence of an independent prosecution authority easily accessible to every citizen, a wider connotation of the expression 'standing ' is necessary for article 136 to further its mission.
There are jurisdictions in which private individuals not the State alone may institute criminal proceedings.
[880G H, 881A] 10.
The narrow limits set, into the concept of 'person aggrieved ' and 'standing ' needs liberalisation.
[881E] Baker vs Carr ; , Attorney General of the Gambia vs Pierra Sarr N 'Jie, , Bar Council of Maharashtra vs M. V. Dabholkar, [1975] 2 SCC 702 referred to.
(Per Pathak and Koshal, JJ concurring).
Article 136 seeks to confer on the Supreme Court the widest conceivable range of judicial power, making it perhaps among the most powerful courts in the world.
The judicial power reaches out to every judgment, decree, determi 875 nation, sentence or order affecting the rights and obligations of persons in civil matters, of life and liberty in criminal matters as well as matters touching the Revenues of the State.
It is an attempt to ensure that the foundations of the Indian Republic, which have been laid on the bed rock of justice, are not undermined by justice anywhere in the land.
[884CE] Bharat Bank Ltd. vs Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd. ; , 474, Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh and Others, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 267, 272, referred to.
Article 136 vests in the Supreme Court, a plenary jurisdiction in the matter of entertaining and hearing appeals by grant of special leave.
However, a limitation is inbuilt into the jurisdiction of the Court and it flows from the nature and character of the case intended to be brought before the Court, and it requires compliance despite the apparent plenitude of power vested in the Court.
When a petition is presented to the Court under Article 136, the Court will have due regard to the nature and character of the cause sought to be brought before it when entertaining and disposing of the petition.
[884E G] 3.
A crime is an act deemed by law to be harmful to society in general, even though its immediate victim is an individual.
Murder injures primarily the particular victim, but its blatant disregard of human life puts it beyond a matter of mere compensation between the murderer and the victim 's family.
Those who commit such acts are proceeded against by the State in order that, if convicted, they may be punished.
No private person has a direct interest in a criminal proceeding although exception may be made by the Statute in certain cases.
[885C F] Kenny 's Outlines of Criminal Law, 16th Edn., p. 2 para 3 Blackstones Commentaries, III p. 2, Mogul Steamship Co. vs Mc Greger Gew & Co. ; referred to.
The notion of crime as a threat to the whole community is the material counter part of the formal rule that the State alone is master of a criminal prosecution.
In a criminal proceeding, the State stands forward as prosecutor on public grounds.
No private person has a direct interest in a criminal proceeding, although exception may be made by the statute in certain cases.
A criminal prosecution is not intended for the private satisfaction of a personal vendetta or revenge.
In India, the criminal law envisages the State as the prosecutor.
[885E F] Salmond on Jurisprudence, 12th Edn.
p. 92 para 14 and Current Legal Problems, 1955; Glanville Williams, "The Definition of Crime", p. 107 at p. 122; referred to.
Under the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, section 378, the right of appeal vested in the State has now been made subject to leave being granted to the State by the High Court.
The complainant continues to be subject to the prerequisite condition that he must obtain special leave to appeal.
The fetters so imposed on the right to appeal are prompted by the reluctance to expose a person, who has been acquitted by a competent court of a criminal charge, to the anxiety and tension of a further examination of the case, even though it is held by a superior court.
[886B C] 876 Law Commission of India 48th Report 1972 pp.
17 21 referred to.
What follows from the grant of special leave is an appeal, and the jurisdiction must, therefore, be invoked by a petitioner possessing a locus standi recognised in law.
[887F G] 7.
Access to the jurisdiction under Article 136 cannot be permitted to a private party who seeks to employ the judicial process for the satisfaction of private revenge or personal vendetta.
Nor can it be permitted as an instrument of coercion where a civil action would lie.
In every case, the Court is bound to consider what is the interest which brings the petitioner to court and whether the interest of the public community will benefit by the grant of special leave.
[887B C] 8.
The Court should entertain a special leave petition filed by a private party, other than the complainant, in those cases only where it is convinced that the public interest justifies an appeal against the acquittal and that the State has refrained from petitioning for special leave for reasons which do not bear on the public interest but are prompted by private influence, want of bona fide and other extraneous considerations.
[887E F] 9.
The procedure followed by this Court in disposing of a petition under Article 136 is consistent with the procedure contemplated by Article 21 for the Court in exercising its jurisdiction will do so as a court of law following the well known norms of procedure which have been recognised for long as governing and informing the proceedings of all courts.
Article 21 is, therefore, not violated.
[887G H, 888A]
