Respondent Mathura Ahir alias Swami Harswanand, the Mahant of Garwaghat Math filed a suit for declaration of title to and possession of house No. C/27/33 situate in Mohalla Jagatgunj, Varanasi, for arrears of rent and mesne profits in respect thereof.
The said property was purchased by his Guru Atma Vivekanand Paramahans (ne Baikunth Singh) from out of the income of the Math i.e. the offerings (Bhent) made by the devotees.
The appellant who was impleaded as defendant 5 to avoid further litigation claimed that this property acquired by his late father Baikunth Singh alias Swami Atma Vivekanand, after he became a Guru and out of Math funds devolved upon him the natural son and disciple.
Since the claim went in favour of the respondent Mahant the appellant came in appeal by special leave to this Court.
The original plaintiff died during the pendency of the appeal.
The contentions of the appellant were: (i) the plaintiff Mathura Ahir being a Sudra could not be ordained to a religious order and become a Sanyast or yati and therefore installed a mahant of the Garwaghat Math, according to the tenets of the Sant Math Sampradaya, (ii) In the absence of proof of the performance of Atma Sradh and the recitation of Pravesh Mantram, neither the plaintiff nor his two predecessors Swami Sarupanand and Swami Atma Vivekanand could be regarded as Hindu Sanyasi; and (iii) the first respondent Harsawanand the original plaintiff having died during the pendency of the appeal, the appeal abated in its entirety.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
A math is an institutional sanctum presided over by a superior who combines in himself the dual office of being the religious or spiritual head of the particular cult or religious fraternity and of the manager of the secular properties of the institution of the Math.
[671 D E] The property belonging to a Math is in fact attached to the office of the mahant, and passed by inheritance to no one who does not fill the office.
The 661 Head of a Math, as such, is not a trustee in the sense in which that term is generally understood, but in legal contemplation he has an estate for life in its permanent endowments and an absolute property in the income derived from the offerings of his followers, subject only to the burden of maintaining the institution.
[671 A B] In the instant case, the evidence on record sufficiently establishes that a Math came to be established at Garwaghat and the building known as "Bangla Kuti" and certain other buildings including the house in suit constituted the endowment of the math itself.
[671 E F] Sammantha Pandara vs Sellappa Chetti Mad. 175; Gyanasambhandan Pandara Sannadhi vs Kandaswami Tambiram Mad. 375; Vidya Purna Thirthaswami vs Vidyanidhi Thirtha Swami Mad.
435; Ram Prakash Das vs Anand Das (1915 16) 43 I.A. 73 (PC); Vidya Vanthi Thirtha vs Baluswami Iyer (1920 21) 48 I.A. 302; referred to.
The math at Garwaghat belongs to the 'Sant Mat ' Sampradaya, which is a religious order and the suit property is Math property.
Though the Math at Garwaghat established by Swami Sarupanand was of recent origin, the religious order denominated as 'Sant Math ' has had large following in Punjab and some other parts of India since more than a century.
In a sense, therefore, Swami Sarupanand himself did not for the first time evolve any new religious order.
[672 E, 673 F G] The institution was really built up by Swami Atma Vivekanand, who was held in great veneration by the followers of the sect.
He preached the tenets of 'Sant Mat ' and had a large following.
His 'Sant Mat ' fraternity comprised of thousands of Girhastha and Virakta disciples who made large Offerings.
Such offerings in cash or kind or in the shape of immovable property which were endowed to the Math.
Swami Atma Vivekanand was the Mahant of the Garwaghat Math.
The two houses at Varanasi including the suit house were purchased by Swami Atma Vivekanand from out of the offering (Bhent) made by his disciples.
[675A D] 3.
Succession to Mahantship of a Math or religious institution is regulated by custom or usage of the particular institution, except where a rule of succession is laid down by the founder himself who created the endowment.
[675 G H] Genda Puri vs Chatar Puri, [1886] 13 I.A.100 @ 105; Sital Das vs Sant Ram, A.I.R. 1954 SC 606; Mahalinga Thambiran vs La Sri Kasivasi, ; ; followed.
The succession to the office of the Mahant according to Sant Sampradaya is by nomination, i.e. from Guru to Chela, the Guru initiates the chela after performing the necessary ceremonies.
The person initiated as a Chela adopts the life of a sanyasi and is pledged to lead a life of celibacy and religious mendicancy.
The sitting Mahant hands over the management of the Math to one of his virtuous Chelas fittest to succeed when he nominates and when he wishes to install as Mahant after him in his place.
He makes clear this desire to the members of his Sampradaya, and also authorises the nominated chela to give Bhesh Dikshwa.
After the death of the Mahant, the Bhesh and Sampradaya give Chadar Mahanti of the math to the said disciple at the time of the Bhandara.
[672 A C] 662 5.
Asceticism in India has been under the definite and strong sanction of religion.
In the doctrine of the four asramas, asceticism was made an integral part of the orthodox Hindu life, and it became the duty of every Hindu, as advanced age overtook him, homeless and a wanderer to chasten himself from earthly ties, and of realizing union with Brahman.
And a religious motive was thus supplied for that which in itself was a welcome release from responsibility, care and the minute requirements of an elaborate social code.
In due course, with the advancement of knowledge, the shackles of the caste system were broken through and the privileges and powers of the ascetic life were extended to Sudras and in due recognition of their status, they were treated as Hindu Sanyasis.
At the present time, there is no distinction or barrier; any one may become an ascetic, and the vows are not necessarily life long.
Some sects, however, still restrict membership to Brahmans, or at least to men of the three higher castes.
[681 E H, 682 G H] 6.
One who enters into a religious order severs his connection with the members of his natural family.
He is accordingly excluded from inheritance.
Entrance to a religious order is tantamount to civil death so as to cause a complete severance of his connection with his relations, as well as with his property.
Neither he nor his natural relatives can succeed to each other 's properties.
[676 A B] Any property which may be subsequently acquired by persons adopting religious orders passes to their religious relations.
The persons who are excluded on this ground came under three heads; the Vanaprastha or hermit; the Sanyasi or Yati, or ascetic and the Brahmachari or perpetual religious student.
In order to bring a person under these heads, it is necessary to show an absolute abandonment by him of all secular property, and a complete and final withdrawal from earthly affairs.
The mere fact that a person calls himself a Byragi or religious mendicant, or indeed that he is such, does not of itself disentitle him to succeed to property.
Nor does any Sudra come under this disqualification, unless by usage.
This civil death does not prevent the person who enters into an order from acquiring and holding private property which will devolve, not of course upon his natural relations, but according to special rules of inheritance.
But it would be otherwise if there is no civil death in the eye of the law, but only the holding by a man of certain religious opinions or professions.
The after acquired property passes on his death not to his natural but to his spiritual heirs.
[676 A E, 683 A B] Dharmapuram vs Vivapandiyan, Mad. 202, Harish Chandra vs Alia Mahamed, Cal. 545, explained.
The 'Sant Mat ' sampradaya is a religious denomination i.e. a sub sect of one of the Dasnami sects founded by the Great Sankracharya.
Sankara was an ascetic and founded schools of ascetics.
Sankara established four Maths or seats of religion at four ends of India the Sringeri Math on the Sringeri Hills in the South, the Sharda Math at Dwarka in the West, the Jyotir Math at Badrikashram in the North, and the Govardhan Math at Puri in the east.
The monks ordained by Sankara and his disciples were called Sanyasis.
Each Math has a sanyasi at its head who bears the title of Sankaracharya in general.
Sankara is said to have four disciples who were all brahmans, from whom the 663 ten divisions of the order hence named as the ten named or 'dasnami Dandis ' originated.
They are: Thirtha, shrine; Ashrama, order; Vana, wood; Aranya, Forest or desert; Saraswati and Bharati, the goddesses of learning and speech; Puri, City; Giri and Parvata, a hill; and Sagara, the ocean.
[683 C G] Dandis or staff bearers occupy a place of pre eminence.
They worship Lord Siva in his form Bhairava; the 'Terrible ' and profess to adhere Nirguna and Niranjana, the deity devoid of attribute or passion.
A sub section of this order are the Dandi, Dasnamis or Dandi of ten names, so called from their assuming one of the names of Sankara 's four disciples and six of their pupils.
[658 B C] The Dandis keep themselves very distinct from the rest of the community.
They are Brahmans, and receive disciples only from the Brahmans.
They lead a very austere life.
They do not touch fire or metal or vessels made of any sort of metal.
It is equally impossible also for them to handle money.
They shave their hair and beard.
They wear one long unsewn reddish cloth, thrown about the person.
[686 A B] There are but three and part of a further ascetic class, or those called Tirtha, Asrama, Saraswati and Bharati who are still really regarded as Sankara 's disciples.
The rest i.e. the remaining six and a half of the Dasnamis who are considered as having fallen from the purity of practice necessary to the Dandis, are still, in general religious characters usually denominated and are Atits.
These are the Atits or A 'Dandis viz. the Vanas, Aranytas, Puris, Giris, Parvata, Sagaras and half the Bharatia, reputed to have fallen to some extent from orthodoxy, but are still looked upon as religious avatars.
Unlike the Dandis, the Atits do not carry the shaft i.e. a Trishul.
They differ from the former also in their use of clothing money and ornaments, their methods of preparing food and their admission of members from any order of Hindus.
Some of them lead an ascetic life, while others mix freely in the world, carry on trade and acquire property.
Most of them are celibate but some of them marry and are often known as Samyogi or Gharbari Atits.
They are collected in Maths and monastries.
They wear ochre coloured garments, and carry a rosary of rudraksha seeds sacred to Lord Siva.
Their religious theories (when they have any) are based on the advaita Vedanta of their founder Sankaracharya.
[686 H, 687 A D] There is also a sub division of the Puri division of the Dasanami Sect.
They have tenets much in common, based on the central idea that the Supreme diety is incomprehensible or 'unseeable '.
They denounce idolatory.
This more or less conforms to the tenets of the 'Sant Mat ' Sect.
[678 D E] The followers of the 'Sant Mat ' treat the Guru as the incarnation of God.
They have no faith in inanimate idols installed in temples nor do they worship them in their cult.
There are no caste restrictions and any one can be admitted into the Sant Mat fraternity.
According to the custom and usage of the Sant Mat Sampradaya, the initiation of a chela by the Guru results in complete renunciation of the world and he ceases to have all connection with his previous Ashramas before becoming a Sanyasi.
For becoming a sanyasi it is not necessary that he should be of a particular Varnashram previously, i.e. even a Sudra can become a Sanyasi.
[671 G H, 672 E] 8.
Though according to the orthodox Smriti writers a Sudra cannot legitimately enter into a religious order and although the strict view does not 664 sanction or tolerate ascetic life of the Sudras, the existing practice all over India is quite contrary to such orthodox view.
In cases, therefore, where a Sudra can enter into a religious order in the same way as in the case of the twice born classes, such usage should be given effect to.
[670E F] 9.
In order to prove that a person has adopted the life of a Sanyasi, it must be shown that he has actually relinquished and abandoned all worldly possessions and relinquished all desire for them or that such ceremonies are performed which indicate the severance of his natural family and his secular life.
It must also be proved in case of orthodox sanyasis, that necessary ceremonies have been performed such as Pindadana or Birajahoma or Prajapathiyesthi without which the renunciation will not be complete.
[687 G H] Amongst Dasnamis, a ceremony called the Bijla Homa i.e. the Biraja Homa has been considered essential.
The recitation of the Pravesha Mantram or the renunciation formula is of course indispensable.
[688 A] In the instant case: (a) there is overwhelming evidence in proof of the fact that the requisite ceremonies of Biraj homa or Prajapathiyesthi were performed in case of Swami Sarupanand and Swami Atma Vivekanand.
If the Prajapathiyesthi or Biraj Homa ceremonies were performed then it must necessarily give rise to the irresistable inference that Swami Atma Vivekanand must have performed his Atma Sradh before he was initiated as a chela; (b) The appellant was precluded from contending that his father Baikunth Singh was not a Hindu Sanyasi in view of his express admission in the plaint filed in an earlier suit.
The burden of proof shifted upon him to disprove it; (c) Swami Harsewanand (Mathura Ahir) was the validly initiated chela of Swami Atma Vivekanand and upon his demise was duly installed as the Mahant of 'Garwaghat Math ' according to the tenets of 'Sant Mat ' Sampradaya.
[689 G, H, 693 C D] 10.
The question whether a suit abates in its entirety or not upon the death of the plaintiff must necessarily depend upon the nature of the suit.
This is not a class of case to which the maxim, actio personalis moritur cum persona applies.
[694 C D] 11.
According to Hindu jurisprudence, a religious institution such as a math is created as a jurisdic entity with a legal personality capable of holding and acquiring property.
It therefore follows that the suit instituted by the mahant for the time being, on its behalf, is properly constituted and cannot abate under the provisions of Order 22 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the death of the mahant pending the decision of the suit or appeal, as the real party to the institution is the institution.
The ownership is in the institution or the idol.
From its very nature a math or an idol can act and assert its rights only through human agency known as a mahant or shebait or dharmakarta or sometimes known as trustee.
It follows that merely because the mahant for the time being dies and is succeeded by another mahant, the suit does not abate.
[695 B C, E] Ram Swarup Das vs Rameshwar Das vs ILR 29 Pat.
989, over ruled.
The general rule is that all rights of action and all demands whatsoever existing in favour of or against a person at the time of his death survive to or against his legal representative within the meaning of section 2(11) of C.P.C. [699 A,F] Muhamed Hussain vs Khushalo, ILR 9 All. 131; approved.
