A sum of Rs. 15000/ was advanced to the Respondent by the appellant for the purpose of setting up a panel pins and wire nails industry in Hardoi on the former hypothecating under the mortgage deed his house by way of security for the loan.
The respondent committed default in repayment of the loan.
The State Government was compelled to take coercive measures to recover the balance of the amount due and payable under the deed as if it were an arrear of land revenue by resorting to section 3 of the Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act, 1965 read with sections 279/281 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950.
The respondent, therefore, filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution on the file of the High Court of Allahabad (Lucknow Bench) questioning the competence of the revenue authorities to recover the balance of the amount due under the deed as if it were an arrear of land revenue on the ground of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Following the decision of this Court in Northern Indian Caterers P. Ltd. and Anr.
vs State of Punjab and Anr.
, ; (which held the field at that time and since overruled) the High Court declared that Section 3 of the Act violated Article 14 of the Constitution and quashed the recovery proceedings initiated by the revenue authorities.
Allowing the appeal by certificate, the Court ^ HELD: Section 3 of the Public Moneys (Recovery of Dues) Act 1965 which enables the State Government to recover the sums advanced under the circumstances mentioned therein, as if these were arrears of land revenue cannot be held to be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[1023D E] (a) Section 3(1)(c) of the Act provides that where any person is a party to any agreement providing that any money payable thereunder to the State Government shall be recoverable as arrear of land revenue and such person makes any default in repayment of the loan or advance or any instalment thereof then the arrear due and payable by him may be recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue by issuing a certificate to the Collector.
The remedy of the State Government to recover the amount by instituting a suit also remains unaffected by the Act.
[1019G H] (b) There is reasonable basis for the classification made by the statute and that the classification does have a reasonable relation to the object of the statute.
The Act is passed with the object of providing a speedier remedy to the State Government to realize the loans advanced by it or by the Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation.
The State Government while advancing loans does not act as an ordinary banker with a view to earning interest.
1016 Ordinarily it advances loans in order to assist the people financially in establishing an industry in the State or for the development of agriculture, animal husbandry and for such other purposes which would advance the economic well being of the people.
The amounts so advanced are repayable in easy instalments with interest which would ordinarily be lower than the rate of interest payable on loans advanced by banking institutions which are run on commercial lines.
The loans are advanced from out of the funds of the State in which all the people of the State are vitally interested.
Moneys advanced by the State Government have got to be recovered expeditiously so that fresh advances may be made to others who have not yet received financial assistance from the State Government.
If the State Government should resort to a remedy by way of a suit on the mortgage deeds or bonds executed in its favour, the realization of the amounts due to the Government is bound to be delayed resulting in non availability of sufficient funds in the hands of the State Government for advancing fresh loans.
It is with the object of avoiding the usual delay involved in the disposal of suits in civil Courts and providing for an expeditious remedy, the Act has been enacted.
In the instant case, the mortgage deed provided that the amount due thereunder could be realised as if it were an arrear of land revenue: and [1020B G] (c) The mere fact that there is no express provision in the Act containing guidelines to the authorities concerned regarding the circumstances under which the amounts could be realized by resorting to the procedure prescribed for recovering arrears of land revenue, however, in the circumstance of the case is not sufficient to hold that section 3 of the impugned Act confers arbitrary power on the State Government and makes a hostile discrimination.
The Act which is passed with the object of providing a speedier remedy itself provides sufficient guidance to the officer concerned as to when he should resort to the remedy provided for.
[1021A C] Shri Mannalal and Anr.
vs Collector of Jhalwar and Ors, ; ; Lachhman Das on behalf of Firm Tilak Ram Bux vs State of Punjab & Ors., ; and Maganlal Chhagganlal (P) Ltd. vs Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay and Ors., ; followed.
