The original owners of the land in dispute granted a permanent lease of the land to a company.
The lessee could use the land for any purpose and could also transfer the leasehold interest.
Though a permanent lease the lessor could forfeit the lease if the lessee failed to pay rent for three consecutive years.
The lessors interest changed hands twice and by virtue of a decree in a suit for pre emption filed by the respondents they became entitled to such interest.
In the meanwhile the company went into voluntary liquidation and the liquidator executed an agreement of sale of all its assets including the leasehold interest in favour of a Bank which was the biggest creditor of the Company.
Immediately thereafter the Bank itself went into liquidation.
Sometime later the official liquidator of the Bank found that no deed of transfer was executed by the voluntary liquidator in favour of the Bank, the erstwhile voluntary liquidator therefore executed a deed of sale in favour of the Bank.
Thereafter the official liquidator of the Bank transferred the lease hold interest in the land to the defendant appellant.
Before the company went into liquidation the first transferee of the land accepted rent from the voluntary liquidator.
After the transfer of the leasehold interest to the Bank the second transferee demanded from the official liquidator arrears of rent for four years and claimed that the lease was forfeited by reason of the Bank 's failure to pay rent for a continuous period of three years in terms of the lease.
The official liquidator denied the right to forfeit the lease.
He, however, paid rent which was accepted by the lessors.
Even subsequently rent was accepted by the lessors.
The respondent sued to recover possession of the suit land on the ground that the lease hold interest was not validly transferred by the voluntary liquidator and that therefore neither the Bank nor the defendant acquired any right in the land.
The defendants contended that the voluntary liquidator had the authority in law to execute the deed of sale and formally complete a transaction which had already taken place, that the predecessors in interest of the plaintiff having accepted rent from the official liquidator were estopped 822 from contending that the transfer in favour of the Bank was not valid and that the lease hold interest in the land had escheated to the Government on the dissolution of the company.
The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court and the Appellate Court.
On second appeal, the High Court decreed the suit holding that the voluntary liquidator had no authority to execute the deed of sale after the dissolution of the company and that there was neither estopped nor escheat.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that the liquidator had no jurisdiction to execute the deed of sale after the company had been dissolved.
Once the company was dissolved in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 it ceased to exist and therefore the voluntary liquidator could not represent a non existent company.
If the liquidator was to discharge any duty or perform any function on behalf of the dissolved company he should have express statutory authority to do so, which he did not have under the Act.
[826 D, 825 G] 2.
If the company had a subsisting interest in the lease on the date of dissolution, such interest must necessarily vest in the Government by escheat or bona vacantia.
It is well settled that the property of an intestate dying without leaving lawful heirs and the property of a dissolved corporation passes to the Government by escheat or bona vacantia.
If the lease hold interest of company became vested in the Government on its dissolution, a suit at the instance of the plaintiffs was not maintainable.
[826 E, 827 G] 3.
The successors in interest of the original lessors accepted rent from the official liquidator indicating that they accepted the position that the Bank had succeeded to the rights of the company in the lease hold interest.
The official liquidator sold the land to the defendant with the permission of the Company Judge only when he failed to get the highest bid in public auction.
At no point of time did the predecessors in interest of the plaintiffs raise an objection to the sale of the lease hold interest.
When the defendant obtained permission of the Municipal Board and raised constructions on the land, the plaintiffs who resided near about the land did not raise any objection to the constructions.
In the circumstances the plaintiffs were estopped from contending that the defendant had no right in the land.
Their only right is to receive rent.
[827 F 828 B]
