The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of the U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act of 1953, and two notifications issued by the State Government on September 27, 1954 and November 9, 1955, the former under sub sec.
1(a) read with sub sec.
2(b) of section 16 of the impugned Act providing that where not less than three fourths of the canegrowers within the area of operation of a Canegrowers ' Co operative Society were members thereof, the occupier of the factory to which that area is assigned should not purchase or enter into an agreement to purchase cane except through that society and the latter under section 15 of the Act assigning to different sugarcane factories specified cane purchasing centers for supply to them of sugarcane for the crushing season of 1955 56.
They contended that the impugned Act was ultra vires the 394 State Legislature, the subject matter of legislation being within the exclusive jurisdiction of Parliament, and repugnant to Act LXV of 1951 and Act X of 1955 passed by Parliament and that sections 15 and 16(1)(a) and (2)(b) and the two notifications infringed their fundamental rights under articles 14, 19(1)(c), (f) and (g) and 31 and violated the provisions of article 301 of the Constitution.
Held, (1) that the impugned Act and the notifications issued thereunder were intra vires the State Legislature, did not infringe any fundamental rights of the petitioners nor violated the provisions of article 301 of the Constitution and the petitions must be dismissed; (2)that the Central Acts in respect of sugar and sugarcane and the notifications thereunder having been enacted and made by the Central Government in exercise of concurrent jurisdiction under Entry 33 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act of 1954, the State Legislature was not deprived of its jurisdiction thereunder and no question of legislative incompetence of the U.P. Legislature or its trespassing upon the exclusive jurisdiction of the centre in enacting the impugned Act could arise; (3) that the provisions of the impugned Act compared to those of the Central Acts clearly showed that the impugned Act was solely concerned with the regulation of the supply and purchase of sugarcane and in no way trenched upon the exclusive jurisdiction of the Centre with regard to sugar and the U.P. Legislature was, therefore, quite competent to enact it; (4) that no question of repugnancy under article 254 of the Constitution could arise where Parliamentary Legislation and State Legislation occupied different fields and dealt with separate and distinct matters even though of a cognate and allied character, and that where, as in the present case, there was no inconsistency in the actual terms of the acts enacted by Parliament and the State Legislature, the test of repugnancy would be whether Parliament and the State Legislature, in legislating under an entry in the Concurrent List, exercised their powers over the same subject matter or whether the laws enacted by Parliament were intended to be exhaustive so as to cover the entire field; (5) that the provisions of section 18 G of Act LXV of 1951 did not cover sugarcane nor indicate the intention of the Parliament to cover the entire field of such legislation; the expression "any article or class of articles relatable to any scheduled industry" used in sections 18 G, 15 and 16 of the Act did not refer to raw materials but only to finished products of the scheduled industries the supply and distribution of which section 18 G was intended to regulate, its whole object being the equitable distribution and availability of manufactured articles at fair prices and not to invest the Central Government with the power to legislate in regard to sugarcane; 395 (6) that even assuming that sugarcane was such an article and fell within the purview of section 18 G of the Act, no order having been issued by the Central Government thereunder, no question of repugnancy could arise, as repugnancy must exist as a fact and not as a mere possibility and the existence of such an order would be an essential pre requisite for it; (7) that as the provisions of Act X of 1955, and those ' of the impugned Act and the U.P. Sugarcane Regulation of Supply and Purchase Order, 1951, made thereunder, relating to sugarcane were mutually exclusive and did not impinge upon each other and the one legislature did not trench upon the field of the other, the Centre remaining silent where the State spoke and the State remaining silent where the Centre spoke, there could be no inconsistency between them and no provision of the impugned Act and the Rules made thereunder was invalidated by any of the provisions of Act LXV of 1951 as amended by Act XXVI of 1953 or Act X of 1955 and the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955, issued thereunder; Clyde Engineering Company, Limited vs Cowburn ([1926] , Ex Parte McLean ([1930] ; , Stock Motor Plough Ltd. vs Forsyth ([1932] ; , G. P. Stewart vs B.K. Boy Chaudhury (A.I.R. and Shyamakant Lal vs Rambhajan Singh ([1939] F.C.R. 188), referred to.
(8) that the power of repeal conferred on Parliament by the proviso to article 254(2) of the Constitution was a limited power and could be exercised only by enacting a law relating to the matter dealt with by the state law and the state law must be one of the kind indicated in the body of article 254(2) itself, and as the impugned Act did not fall within that category the proviso did not apply and the impugned Act, the notifications made thereunder and the U. P. Sugarcane Regulation of Supply and Purchase Order, 1954, stood unrepealed by section 16(1)(b) of Act X of 1955 and cl.
7(1) of the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955 made thereunder; Zaverbhai Amaidas vs The State of Bombay ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 799), referred to.
(9) that the power of repeal conferred by the proviso to article 254(2) could be exercised by Parliament alone and could not be delegated to an executive authority and, consequently, the Central Government acquired no power of repeal under cl. 7 of the Sugarcane Control Order, 1955; (10) that the contention that the impugned Act infringed the fundamental right guaranteed by article 14 inasmuch as very wide powers were given to the Cane Commissioner which could be used in a discriminatory manner was without any foundation since his powers under section 15 of the impugned Act were well defined and the Act and Rules framed thereunder gave the canegrowers or a Canegrowers ' Co operative Society or the occupier of a factory the right to appeal to the State Government against any order passed by him 396 and thus provided a sufficient safeguard against any arbitrary exercise of those powers; (11) that equally unfounded was the contention that the im pugned Act and the notification dated September 27, 1954, violated the fundamental right guaranteed by article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
Although the right to form an association was a fundamental right, it did not necessarily follow that its negative, i.e. the right not to form an association must also be so, as all rights which an Indian citizen had were not fundamental rights.
No canegrower was compelled to become a member of the Canegrowers ' Co operative Society or prevented from resigning therefrom or selling his crops elsewhere and, consequently, the impugned Act and the notification did not violate his fundamental right; (12) that the powers given to the Cane Commissioner by section 15 of the impugned Act to declare reserved or assigned areas were well defined and controlled by higher authorities and by no means absolute and unguided and were not, therefore, bit by article 19(1)(f) and (g) and the notification dated November 9, 1955, could not, therefore, be impugned on that ground; (13) that the restriction imposed by the notification dated September 27, 1954, on canegrowers in regard to sale of sugarcane to occupiers of factories in areas where the membership of the Canegrowers ' Co operative Society was not less than 75 per cent.
of the total number of canegrowers was a reasonable restriction in the public interest, designed for the benefit of a large majority of canegrowers, and as such came within the protection of article 19(6) and did not violate article 19(1)(f) and (g) of the Constitution; (14) that the impugned notifications, being intra vires the State Legislature, could not also be challenged under article 31 as none of the petitioners was deprived of his property, if any, save by authority of law.
Messrs Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and two others ([1954] S.C.R. 803), referred to.
(15) Nor could it be contended that the impugned Act and the notifications contravened the provisions of article 301 of the Constitution in view of the provision of article 304(b) which made it permissible for the State Legislature to impose reasonable restrictions in the public interest.
Commonwealth of Australia vs Bank of New South Wales ([1950] A.C. 235) and Hughes and Vale Proprietary Ltd. vs State of New South Wales and others ([1955] A.C. 241), referred to.
