Plaintiff No. 1 and plaintiff No. 2 were father and son while defendant was the brother of plaintiff No. 1.
The plaintiffs in their suit against the defendant claimed that the suit house in which the defendant was living, belonged to them by virtue of a patta issued in their names.
They alleged that the deceased brother of plaintiff No. 1, who remained a bachelor till his death, loved plaintiff No. 2 as his son and had thought of adopting plaintiff No. 2 but since he died all of a sudden it could not be done.
The defendant on the other hand claimed that he and his deceased brother lived as members of a joint family after the partition of their family that as a result of the joint efforts of himself and his deceased brother the Maharaja, of Bikaner sanctioned sale of the house to them, that the purchase money was paid out of their joint income but that the patta was granted in the names of the plaintiffs due to political reasons and therefore the plaintiffs were at the most benamidars.
The trial court held that the house was acquired by the deceased brother from the Government of Bikaner for the plaintiffs and the patta was granted in favour of the plaintiffs and that they were in its possession till 1956.
It rejected the defendant 's claim that it was acquired with the joint funds of himself and his deceased brother.
On appeal the High Court held that the house had been purchased by the deceased brother out of his own money in the names of the plaintiffs without any intention to confer any beneficial interest on them and on his death plaintiff No. 1 and the defendant succeeded jointly to the estate as his heirs. ^ HELD: The transaction under which the patta was obtained was not a benami transaction.
The house was acquired by the deceased brother with his money and with the intention of constituting plaintiff No. 2 as the absolute owner thereof.
[648G] Where a person buys property with his own money but in the name of another person without any intention to benefit such other person, the transaction is called benami.
In that case the transferee holds the property for the benefit of the person who has contributed the purchase money and he is a real owner.
The second case which is loosely termed a benami transaction is a case where a person, who is the owner of the property, executes a conveyance in favour of another without the intention of transferring the title to the property thereunder.
In this case the transferor continues to be the real owner.
The difference between the two kinds of benami transactions is that whereas in the former there is an operative transfer from the transferor to the transferee, though the transferee holds the property for the benefit of the person who has 629 contributed the purchase money, in the latter there is no operative transfer at all and the title rests with the transferor notwithstanding the execution of the conveyance.
One common feature in both cases is that the real title is divorced from the ostensible title and they are vested in different persons.
The question whether a transaction is a benami transaction or not depends upon the intention of the person who has contributed the purchase money in the former case, and upon the intention of the person who has executed the conveyance in the latter case.
The principle underlying the former case is statutorily recognized in section 82 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882.
[638B E] Meenakshi Mills, Madurai vs The Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, ; at p. 722; Mohammad Sadiq Ali Khan vs Fakhr Jahan Begam & Ors.
59 I.A. 1; Manmohan Das & Ors.
vs Mr. Ramdai & Anr.
A.I.R. 1931 P. C. 175; Jaydayal Poddar (deceased) through his L.Rs. & Anr.
vs Mst.
Bibi Hazra & Ors.
referred to. 2.
The principles governing the determination of the question whether a transfer is a benami or not are: (1) The burden of showing that a transfer is a benami transaction lies on the person who asserts that it is such a transaction; (2) if it is proved that the purchase money came from a person other than the person in whose favour the property is transferred, the purchase is prima facie assumed to be for the benefit of the person who supplied the purchase money, unless there is evidence to the contrary; (3) the true character of the transaction is governed by the intention of the person who has contributed the purchase money and (4) the question as to what his intention was, has to be decided on the basis of the surrounding circumstances, the relationship of the parties the motives governing their action in bringing about the transaction and their subsequent conduct.
[641C E] In the instant case the deceased brother was a bachelor.
On the death of the wife of plaintiff No. 1, plaintiff No. 2 and his younger brother were staying with the deceased brother.
Plaintiff No. 1 was almost in an indigent condition while defendant practised law for some time and later entered into service.
The patta for the house was issued in the name of plaintiffs nos.
1 and 2 at the request of the deceased brother for the benefit of plaintiff No. 2 and was handed over to him after he completed his education.
This conduct of the deceased brother established that it was his intention that, when he secured the patta from the State Government in the names of plaintiffs it was his intention that plaintiff No. 2 whom he loved, should become the owner.
[641F H] 3.
The declaration made by the deceased, who had contributed the purchase money subsequent to the date of purchase to the effect that the property belonged to plaintiff No. 2 was admissible in evidence either under section 32(3) or section 21 of the Indian Evidence Act to prove his intention that he intended that plaintiff No. 2 should become its owner.
[647E] Shephard & Anr.
vs Cartwright & Anr.
; , distinguished.
