The appellant in his return filed before the Deputy Collector had shown the total lands in his possession to be 370 acres and 34 gunthas.
Proceedings under the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling of Holdings) Act, 1961 were taken against him in order to determine whether the return filed was correct or not.
It was alleged by the appellant that some time in the year 1956 there was a partition between the appellant and his nephews as a result of which his family got 202 acres of land.
The appellant had sold 51 acres of land to other persons before the Act came into force and that he gave some land to his adopted son in lieu of the latter 's share and that the adopted son thereafter gave 93.25 acres of land to his mother under Civil Court decree.
All these transactions took place some time in the year 1956.
The Collector after examining the return found that the total land owned by the appellant was 118 acres 36 gunthas and the excess was only 4 acres 36 gunthas which could be taken over under the Act.
The Commissioner called for the records and interfered suo moto.
After making some enquiry, he held that the land declared by the appellant in his return far exceeded the ceiling limit and in computing the total lands owned by the appellant he took into account even the lands which had been given by the adopted son to his mother, the wife of the appellant.
The appellant filed a writ petition against the order of the Commissioner in the High Court which refused to interfere on the ground that the transfer of the land in favour of the adopted sons was held to be collusive as also the decree.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that under the provisions of the Act, land which was received by his wife from the adopted son was her personal property and could not be included in the ceiling of the appellant and that the Commissioner had no jurisdiction to add that land and treat the same as the land of the appellant and to set aside the order of the Deputy Collector.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that the word 'person ' defined in section 2(22) of the Act includes family and that 'family ' as defined in section 2(11) includes, a Hindu Undivided family, and in the case of other persons, a group or unit, the members of which by custom or usage are joint in an estate or possession or residence.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
The judgment of the High Court is set aside as also that of the Commissioner and that the judgment of the Deputy Collector restored.
[1052B] 1049 2.
The Act clearly exempts the land which may have been acquired or transferred prior to 4 8 1959.
Section 8, 10 and 12 which deal with the subject clearly enjoin that only those transfers would be hit by the Act which are made at any time on or after 4 8 1959.
[1051A] 3.
There was neither any pleading nor any case made out either before the Deputy Collector or even before the Commissioner to indicate that the transfer of the land in favour of the adopted son and the transfer by the adopted son in favour of his mother were collusive or tainted by fraud.
Both these transactions took place as far back as 1956 that is to say 5 years before the Act came into force.
[1050G H] 4.
The High Court was not justified in presuming that the transfer made by the appellant in favour of his adopted son towards his share and the transfer by the adopted son to his mother was either collusive or fraudulent.
There was neither any foundation in the pleadings nor any evidence to support this conjecture of the High Court.
[1051A C] 5.
Sections 2(11), 2(12) are of no assistance as Section 6 takes within its fold lands belonging to the owner, or his family as a single unit and is not meant to cover the separate or individual property of a member of the family which is self acquired property and cannot be clubbed together with the land of the owner or his family.
To begin with, the Act merely intended to include the land within the ceiling limits of a person or his family which belonged to such a person or persons having different shares in that property.
That is why all transfers made prior to 1959 were expressly exempted from the operation of the Act.
[1051E G]
