The petitioner was directed to be detained by an order dated August 31, 1979 under section 3(1) of the and in pursuance thereof was arrested on September 5, 1979.
He was served with the grounds of detention on the same day.
The petitioner 's advocate wrote a letter dated September 7, 1979 to the detaining authority second respondent stating that it was not possible to make an effective representation without the copies of statements and documents referred to in detention order.
The detaining authority did not take any action on the letter but forwarded it to the Deputy Secretary to the Government of India who by a communication dated September 10, 1979 acknowledged its receipt and requested the advocate to contact the Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement, Bombay regarding the supply of copies of statements and documents.
As no further communication was received, the advocate addressed a letter dated September 14, 1979 to the Deputy Director to supply him copies of the statements and documents.
The Deputy Director in his communication dated September 22, 1979 requested the advocate to see him on September 24, 1979 to take inspection of the documents.
On inspecting the documents the advocate was not satisfied and insisted on supply of copies of documents, which were supplied on three days, September 26, 1979, September 28, 1979 and September 29, 1979.
On October 5, 1979 the petitioner made his representation against the detention.
In the writ petition, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that as there was unreasonable delay in furnishing of the statements and documents referred to in the grounds of detention and the right to make an effective representation was denied, the detention could not be said to be according to the procedure prescribed by law.
On behalf of the detaining authority it was contended that the constitutional right of the petitioner to make an effective representation had not been infringed and that it was not incumbent upon the detaining authority to supply copies of all documents relied upon in the grounds of detention and that the grounds of detention were sufficiently detailed so as to enable the petitioner to make an effective representation against the detention.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The detaining authority failed to act with reasonable expedition in furnishing the statements and documents referred to in the grounds of detention.
The detention is therefore not in accordance with the procedure contemplated under law, and the continued detention is not warranted.
[1077G] 2.
It is settled law that the appropriate authority is bound to give an opportunity to the detenu to make representation and to consider the representation 1073 of the detenu as early as possible.
There should not be any delay in the matter of consideration.
[1074G] Jayanarayan Sukul vs State of West Bengal, ; , referred to.
(i) The right to make a representation is a fundamental right.
The representation thus made should be considered expeditiously by the Government.
In order to make an effective representation, the detenu is entitled to obtain information relating to the grounds of detention.
When the grounds of detention are served on the detenue he is entitled to ask for copies of the statements and documents referred to in the grounds of detention to enable him to make an effective representation.
When the detenu makes a request for such documents, they should be supplied to him expeditiously.
[1075E] (ii) When the Act contemplates the furnishing of grounds of detention within five days of the order of detention, the intention is clear that the statements and documents which are referred to in the grounds of detention and which are required by the detenu should be furnished with reasonable expedition.
[1076B] 4.
If there is undue delay in furnishing the statements and documents referred to in the grounds of detention the right to make an effective representation is denied.
It is the duty of the detaining authority to satisfactorily explain the delay, if any, in furnishing of the documents.
[1076A, 1075G] 5.
It may not be necessary for the detaining authority to supply copies of the documents relied upon in the grounds of detention at the time when the ground are furnished to the detenu but once the detenu states that for effective representation it is necessary that he should have copies of the statements and documents referred to in the grounds of detention it is the duty of the detaining authority to furnish them with reasonable expedition.
The detaining authority cannot decline to furnish copies of the documents on the ground that the grounds were sufficiently detailed to enable the petitioner to make an effective representation.
[1077D E]
