One Karappan son of Chulliparambil Krishnan had two wives Naini and Ponni.
Through his first wife Naini he had four sons Krishnan (D1), Shankaran (D2), Raman and the husband of plaintiff appellant Kallyani who died after him and Madhavan who predeceased him and husband of D3 and father of D4, D5 and D6 and four daughters.
He had one son by name Kesavan and two daughters, through his second wife Ponni.
One Valli was the second wife of his father and she had three daughters.
Karappan and his family are Ezhavas and in the matter of inheritance, succession and on the question of personal law they were governed essentially by customary law and in the absence of any specific custom, they are governed by the Hindu Mitakshara law.
Karappan executed a registered deed variously described as a will or a deed of partition or evidencing family arrangement, exhibit P1 dated January 25, 1910.
In this deed after narrating his near relations including his two wives male and female children born to each and his father 's second wife and her children, he described the manner in which the A, B and C scheduled properties should be taken by them, after his death.
In February 1910 Karappan died.
Raman, the husband of the plaintiff appellant, the third son of the first wife died on February 20, 1936.
Plaintiff widow of Raman sued for partition and separate possession of her undivided 1/4 share in properties set out in A, B and C schedules to the plaint.
The Trial Court held that Ext.
P1 had the effect of constituting a coparcenary of four brothers, sons of first wife of Karappan and that it was their joint family property and they did not hold as tenants in common but as joint tenants and were governed by survivorship in the matter of succession.
The contention that even in such a situation the widow would be entitled to her husband 's share because of a customary right was negatived.
In respect of B & C schedule properties, it was held that they belonged exclusively to defendant 1 and his wife and plaintiff cannot claim a share in them.
The High Court affirmed the Trial Court 's judgment and decree treating exhibit P1 as family arrangement and hence the plaintiff 's appeal by certificate.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1. Ext.
P1, styled as a will by the deceased Karappan is not effective as a will.
If by Ext.
P 1 deceased Karappan attempted to make a will of the ancestral property in his hand in which his sons had acquired 1131 interest by birth, obviously he had no power to make a will in respect of such property.
exhibit P1 does not purport to devise by will the undivided share of testator Karappan in the joint family property, but he attempts to dispose of by a will all the properties in which his sons had interest by birth.
He had not claimed any share in the property but claimed a right to deal with ancestral property as he desired.
In exhibit P1 itself he describes properties set out in schedules A and B annexed to exhibit P1 as his tarvad properties.
[1139B C] 2.
Expression "tarvad" in Marumakkattayam law is the name given to the joint family consisting of males and females, all descendants in the female line from a common ancestress.
A tarvad may consist of two or more branches known as 'Thavazhies ', each tavazhi or branch consisting of one of the female members of the tarvad and her descendants in the female line.
Thus when property is described as tarvad property in a broad sense it is admitted to be joint family.
This also becomes clear from the recital in exhibit P.1 that properties set out in A and B schedules were tarvad properties and property in C schedule were claimed by him as his self acquired properties and they were to be kept joint and were not sought to be dealt with by exhibit P1.
Therefore, to the extent exhibit P1 purports to dispose of an ancestral properties by will it would be ineffective as a will as Karappan had no power or authority to dispose of by will ancestral properties in his hand.
[1139C G] 3.
Partition is a word of technical import in Hindu law.
Partition in one sense is a severance of joint family status and coparcener of a coparcenary is entitled to claim it as a matter of his individual volition.
In this narrow sense all that is necessary to constitute partition is a definite and unequivocal indication of his intention by a member of a joint family to separate himself from the family and enjoy his share in severalty.
Such an unequivocal intention to separate brings about a disruption of joint family status, at any rate, in respect of separating member or members and thereby puts an end to the coparcenary with right of survivorship and such separated member holds from the time of disruption of joint family as tenant in common.
Such partition has an impact on devolution of shares of such members.
It goes to his heirs displacing survivorship.
Such partition irrespective of whether it is accompanied or followed by division of properties by metes and bounds covers both a division of right and division of property.
A disruption of joint family status by definite and unequivocal indication to separate implies separation in interest and in right, although not immediately followed by a de facto actual division of the subject matter.
This may at any time, be claimed by virtue of the separate right.
A physical and actual division of property by metes and bounds follows from disruption of status and would be termed partition in a broader sense.
[1140A E] 4.
A Hindu father joint with his sons governed by Mitakshara law has the power to partition the joint family property at any moment during his life time.
The consent of the sons is not necessary for the exercise of that power.
This power comprehends the power to disrupt joint family status.
[1141H, 1142A] Kandaswamy vs Doraiswamy Iyer, Mad. 317; approved.
Even though the father has a right to make a partition of the joint family property in his hand, he has no right to make a partition by will of joint family property amongst various members of the family except, of course, with their consent.
In the instant case, if by exhibit P1 Karappan attempted to make 1132 a partition of the property by his will, exhibit P1 would be ineffective as a partition.
By exhibit P1 Karappan does not divide his property by metes and bounds vesting the share of each in present in each of his sons.
[1142B C] exhibit P1 would not be effective as a partition in broader sense, namely, dividing property by metes and bounds from the date on which it was executed as it was to be effective from a future date and that future uncertain even was the death of Karappan and that during the time he would remain alive he would deal with the properties at his sweet will.
Further, there was no effective partition by metes and bounds by exhibit P1 though the shares of sons were specified as also the provision for female members was made.
If intention of the testator is to be gathered from the language of exhibit P1 Karappan intended it to be a will not a partition in presenti.
Therefore, exhibit P1 cannot be effective as a deed of partition in the broader sense i.e., partition by metes and bounds.
[1142E G] Brijraj Singh vs Sheodan Singh, 10 I.A. 161; referred.
An ineffective will sometimes though not always, if otherwise consented by all adult members, may be effective as a family arrangement but as the father of a joint Hindu family has no power to impose a family arrangement under the guise of exercising the power of partition, the power which undoubtedly he had but which he has failed to effectively exercise, it cannot in the absence of consent of all male members bind them as a family arrangement.
[1143D F] 7.
A family management must be an agreement amongst the various members of the family intended to be generally and reasonably for the benefit of the family and secondly the agreement should be with the object either of compromising doubtful or disputed rights or for preserving the family property or the place and security of the family.
In this case, both these ingredients are absent.
[1143F G] H. N. Aryamurthy & Anr.
vs N. D. Subbaraya Setty (dead) through I.rs and Ors., ; applied.
Brijraj Singh vs Sheodan Singh, 40 I.A. 161; Lakshmichand vs Anandi, 53 I.A. 123; discussed.
To be effective as a family arrangement the deed must be one intended to operate from the date of the execution, and it must be assented to and acquiesced in and acted upon by all affected party.
In the instant case, exhibit P1 in term reserves to Karappan his right to deal with the property at his sweet will and was to be operative after his death.
Moreover, at the time of the execution of exhibit P.1 there is no evidence as to who were the adult members of the family other than Karappan who consented to the alleged family arrangement.
Assuming that exhibit P1 was to be treated as family arrangement after the death of Karappan, the absence of any evidence of agreement amongst family members entitled to share, to the terms of exhibit P.1 when it was executed, the absence of any dispute at or about the time exhibit P.1 was executed amongst the members of the family sought to be settled by exhibit P.1 and the absence of evidence that arrangement was necessary for the security of the family or property would wholly negative the contention that exhibit P.1 would furnish evidence of family arrangement.
It is doubtful whether a Hindu father can 1133 impose family arrangement sans direct evidence of consent of each of his sons, to be effective after his death.
Therefore exhibit P 1 does not furnish evidence of family arrangement.
[1444E H, 1145A C] 9.
In Hindu Law qua joint family and joint family property the word partition ' is understood in a special sense.
If severance of joint family status is brought about by a deed, a writing or an unequivocal declaration of intention to bring about such disruption, qua the joint family, it constitutes partition.
To constitute a partition all that is necessary is a definite and unequivocal indication of intention by a member of a joint family to separate himself from the family What form such intimation, indication or representation of members should take would depend upon the circumstances of each case.
A further requirement is that the unequivocal indication of intention to separate must be to the knowledge of the persons affected by such declaration: This intention to separate may be manifest in diverse ways.
Undoubtedly, indication or intimation must be to members of the joint family likely to be affected by such a declaration.
[1145E H, 1146A] Raghavan vs Chenchamma, ; ; referred to.
Partition can be partial qua person and property but a partition which follows disruption of joint family status will be amongst those who are entitled to a share on partition.
Till disruption of joint family status takes place no coparcener can claim what is his exact share in coparcenary property.
It is liable to increase and decrease depending upon the addition to the number or departure of a male member and inheritance by survivorship.
But once a disruption of joint family status takes place, coparceners cease to hold the property as joint tenants but they hold as tenants in common.
[1146E G] In the instant case, on death of Karappan, Kesavan the son of the second wife obtained a physical partition of the property took his owon share and left the family, there was first a disruption of the joint family status.
Looking to the terms of exhibit P 1 there was a disruption of joint family status as the share of each son was specified and vested, liabilities and obligations towards the family members were defined and imbalance out of unequal division was corrected.
This certainly has the effect of bringing about disruption of joint family status and even if there was no partition by metes and bounds and the coparceners continued to remain under the same roof or enjoyed the property without division by metes and bounds, they did not hold as joint tenants unless re union is pleaded and proved.
[1146G H, 1147A] 11.
There is no presumption when one coparcener separates from other that the latter remained united.
An agreement amongst them must be proved either to remain united or to re unite.
A Hindu family is presumed to be joint unless the contrary is proved but where it is admitted that one of the coparceners did separate himself from the other members of the joint family and had his share in the joint property partitioned off for him, there is no presumption that the rest of the coparceners continued to be joint.
There is no presumption on the other side too that because one member of the family separated himself there has been separation with regard to all.
It would be a question of fact to be determined in each case upon the evidence relating to the intention of the parties whether there was a separation amongst the other coparceners or they remained united.
Except that four sons by Naini remained 1134 under one roof and were joint in food laboured together there is no evidence that they agreed to constitute a coparcenary assuming that a coparcenary a creature of law could be created by agreement.
And if Karappan specified even the share of each of his sons by Naini in exhibit P 1, this evidence of remaining together is hardly sufficient to warrant a conclusion that these four sons constituted a coparcenary.
exhibit P 1, could not support such a conclusion and the High Court was in error in spelling out such conclusion from exhibit P 1 overlooking its specific direction of a specified share of each of his sons and liability to pay owelty.
[1148B F] Palani Ammal vs Muthuvenkatachala Mariagon, 52 I.A. 83; Bhagwan Dayal vs Mrs. Reoti Devi, ; ; Balabax vs Rukhmabai ILR 3C IA. 130; Sengoda vs Muthu, I.L.R. ; referred to.
Bhagwati Prasad Shah and Ors.
vs Pulhin Rameshwari Juer and Anr., , followed.
Partition branchwise is unknown to Mitakshara Law.
In the instant case, if five sons of Karappan each constituted a branch obviously after one son as a branch separated unless a reunion is pleaded, other four cannot constitute a corporate body like a coparcenary by agreement or even by subsequent conduct of remaining together enjoying the property together.
[1148F, 1149E] Balakishan Das and Ors.
vs Ram Narain Sahu and Ors., 30 I.A. 139; bhagwan Dayal vs Mrs. Reoti Bai, [1962] 3 S.C.R. 440; Boddu Venkatakrishna Rao and Ors.
vs Boddu Satyavathi and Ors., ; ; referred to.
Once disruption of joint family status takes place, it covers both a division of right and division of property.
If a document clearly shows the division of rights and status its legal construction and effect cannot be altered by evidence of subsequent conduct of parties.
[1150C] 14.
There is no concept known to Hindu Law that there would be a branch of a family wife wise.
[1150D] In this case exhibit P 1 itself specifies the share of each member separately.
Therefore, tavazhi wife wise stated in exhibit P 1 has to be ignored.
Ex P 1 did bring about a specification of shares and once such shares were defined by the father who had the power to define and vesting the same there was a disruption of joint family.
There was thus a division of rights and division of property by allotment of shares.
The mode of enjoyment immediately changed and members of such family ceased to be coparceners holding as joint tenants but they held as tenants in common.
The plaintiff would be entitled to the share to which her deceased husband Raman was entitled.
Raman had 1/4th share in 'A ' schedule properties which the plaintiff would be entitled.
[1150D, E F, 1151C]
