The expression "bhatha land" means land which forms part of the bed of a river on which vegetables, melon, cucumber etc.
can be grown during the lean period after the rainy season is over, when the level of the water in the river is quite low.
The cultivation of such land is possible only till the next rainy season as the land gets submerged under the river water.
The occupancy rights over such land cannot ordinarily be granted on a permanent basis as in the case of cultivable lands, in view of the fact that the land gets submerged under the river water every year for 4 5 months.
Till the year 1951 the cultivation rights over 'bhatha lands ' were disposed of by public auction and the successful bidders were treated as lessors of the lands for short periods.
In the year, 1951 the State Government ordered that the leasehold rights over 'bhatha lands ' should be disposed of by selection, the order of priority being (1) bona fide agriculturists who had cultivated the land personally for five years or more, (2) adjacent land holders who had insufficient land for maintenance of their families, (3) cooperative farming societies and (4) priority holders under the Waste Land Rules.
This order was however cancelled and superseded by the Government Resolution dated September 19, 1962 which provided that on the expiry of the then existing leases, not held by cooperative farming societies, bhatha land should be disposed of on the basis of five years ' lease by public auction.
Experience showed that only the moneyed people were able to purchase the leasehold rights at the public auction and persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the other weaker sections of society were not even able to participate in such auctions.
Consequently, in the year 1964 leasehold rights over bhatha lands were disposed of on ekasal basis by public auctions.
The question relating to the disposal of leasehold rights over bhatha lands was discussed at the meeting of the District Collectors held in 1965 1966 and in pursuance to the suggestions made at the meeting and after considering all relevant matters the State Government by a Resolution dated 28th December, 1966, directed that the existing procedure for disposal of bhatha lands by auction be discontinued with effect from January 1, 1967 and the disposal of such lands were ordered to be in the following priority: (1) bona fide agriculturists of the village who were holding land less than 5 acres, preference being given to harijans, adivasi and backward class people (2) holders of the land adjoining the 1183 bhatha land holding less than 16 acres and having genuine need of additional land for maintenance of their families; (3) cooperative farming societies of harijans, adivasi and backward classes people, (4) cooperative farming societies consisting of landless labourers or small holders and (5) any of the priority holders under the Waste Land Rules.
In pursuance to the aforesaid Resolution, the Collector by his Order dated July 18, 1967, granted 22 members belonging to Waghari Harijan Community leasehold rights in respect of bhatha lands for a period of 10 years.
The respondents questioned the validity of the Government Resolution dated December 28, 1966 and the Order of the Collector dated July 18, 1967 granting the lease, in their writ petitions.
They alleged that some of them were in possession of portions of the land of which they had been dispossessed by the Order of the Collector by virtue of the eksal tenures created in their favour in the auctions held in or about the year 1964 and that they could not be dispossessed without following the procedure prescribed by section 79(A) read with section 202 of the Bombay Land Revenue Code, 1879.
They also contended that the Government Resolution dated December 28, 1966 and the grants made by the Collector on the basis of the said Resolution were liable to be struck down on the ground that they were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and that they had been arbitrarily deprived of an opportunity to offer bids at public auctions and to acquire leashold rights.
The State Government contested the petitions on the ground that none of the respondents was in possession of the lands in question on the date of the writ petitions and that some of them who continued to remain in possession of certain portions of the land after the expiry of the eksal lease were dispossessed in accordance with law and that the lands have been handed over to the grantees as per the Kabza receipts.
The Resolution dated December 28, 1966, was passed in order to grant lease in respect of bhatha lands in favour of the landless persons or persons having small extent of lands or persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward classes and members of cooperative societies at reasonable rent without being put to the necessity of offering bids at public auctions, where only moneyed persons could become successful bidders.
The High Court quashed the Resolution on two grounds: (1) That the act of the State Government in passing the Resolution amounted to a fraud on the Statute as the power of the State under the Code which was a taxation measure had been utilized for a collateral purpose of achieving a welfare scheme and (2) that the Resolution was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as there was no rational nexus between the object to be achieved by the Code viz. realisation of land revenue and the classification of persons eligible for the grant of lease hold rights in respect of bhatha lands into several groups.
It further directed the State Government not to take into consideration the Government 's circular issued pursuant to the impugned Resolution while considering the question of renewal of leases or disposal of bhatha lands and not to dispossess the writ petitioners except in due course of law.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1(i) The Preamble of the Code provides that it had been passed as it was found expedient to consolidate and amend the law relating to Revenue 1184 Officers and to the assessment and recovery of Land Revenue and to other matters connected with Land Revenue Administration.
[1193B].
(ii) The other provisions of the Code and the Rules made thereunder show that it is open to the Collector to dispose of unoccupied lands belonging to the Government either for cultivation or for any other purpose in favour of individuals or aggregate of individuals either free of charge or at an upset price to be fixed by him or by public auction.
A review of the several Government orders passed under the Code shows that lands belonging to Government had been set apart free of charge for several public purposes such as free pasturage, burial grounds, roads, religious institutions, dhobies ' ghats, potters ' grounds, threshing floors etc.
Land revenue was remitted when there were drought conditions.
Forfeited holdings were often given back to defaulters who had not paid land revenue once again, on payment of arrears out of compassion.
Tagavi loans were given by Government to occupants to improve lands.
The dominant purpose of the Code, therefore appears to be public welfare, even though land revenue which was recoverable under the Code constituted an important source of revenue of the State Government.
[1196A E] (iii) After India became independent, land reform measures had to be introduced by the States in India to prevent concentration of land in a few hands and to impose ceiling on the extent of land that could be held by an individual or a family, to take possession of land from individuals or families which was in excess of the ceiling so imposed and to distribute such excess land amongst persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections of society.
All these laws were made in order to implement the Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Articles 38, 39 and 46 of the constitution by strengthening agrarian economy.
Never before was there a greater need as during the post Constitution period for administering land revenue laws in an equitable manner so that the economic interests of the weaker sections of the society and in particular of members belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are protected and promoted.
[1196F H] (iv) There is no provision in the Code or the Rules made thereunder which prohibits disposal of occupancy rights or leasehold rights in respect of unoccupied lands in any manner other than public auction.
[1197A] (v) The conclusion reached by the High Court that the basic scheme of the Code was the realization of land revenue by disposing of unoccupied lands by public auction alone appears to be baseless.
[1197B] (vi) The finding of the High Court that the impugned Resolution which provides for the disposal of bhabha lands amongst bona fide agriculturists, harijans, adivasis and backward class people and other persons mentioned therein without resorting to public auction but by having recourse to the procedure set out in it is contrary to the latter and the spirit of the Code is set aside.
[1197C] 2(i) The Resolution is designed to bring about distribution of agricultural lands as best to subserve the common good thus eliminating concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
It helps persons, who are in need of lands for their bare maintenance and who have otherwise no chance of getting them, to acquire lands at a low rate of rent.
[1199D] 1185 (ii) The classification made in the impugned Resolution of persons or cooperative societies who are eligible to secure grants of leasehold rights, bears a reasonable relation to the object with which the Code is enacted.
It cannot be characterised as arbitrary.
There is no infirmity in the above classification.
The Resolution aims at bringing about social and economic justice and assists people who are not strong enough to secure leasehold rights at a public auction for purposes of cultivation.
The leases to be granted are not for any unlimited period.
[1199E] (iii) The High Court was in error in holding that the Resolution was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[1199F] 3.
The High Court did not record any firm finding on the question of possession of any part of the land by any of the writ petitioners.
The direction issued by the High Court to the State Government and the Revenue authorities not to dispossess the writ petitions except in due course of law therefore becomes unsustainable.
[1191H]
