The Union of India has enacted Central Government Health Scheme and in implementation thereof has set up various institutions for medical relief and medical education.
A Central Health Service became a necessity for effectively implementing the scheme.
With a view to constituting the service, Central Health Service Rules, 1963 were framed and brought into operation on May 15, 1963.
The Rules envisaged categorisation of personnel manning the service into five different categories, to wit, category 'A ' supertime scale Rs. 1600 2000; Category 'B ' supertime scale Rs. 1300 1600; Category 'C ' Senior scale Rs. 675 1300, Category 'D ' Junior scale Rs. 425 950; and Category 'E ' class II scale Rs. 325 800.
On account of various imponderables the service could not be constituted and 1963 Rules were amended by Central Health Service (Amendment) Rules, 1966.
Initial constitution of service was to be on and from September 9, 1966.
1966 Rules contemplated again the division of service into four categories, namely, Category I comprising supertime scale Grade I Rs. 1800 2250; supertime scale grade II Rs. 1300 1800, Category II consists of Specialists ' grade Rs. 600 1300; Category III includes General Duty officers Grade I Rs. 450 1250.
and Category IV comprises General Duty officers Grade II Rs. 350 900.
1966 Rules provided the method for initial constitution of the service.
Rules 7A(1) and 7A(2) provided for absorbing departmental candidates holding posts in categories 'A ' and 'B ' under 1963 Rules in supertime Grade I and supertime Grade II respectively of reorganized service under the 1966 Rules.
Those in service on September 9, 1966 and holding posts in Categories 'C ', 'D ' and 'E ' were either absorbed in specialists ' grade or General Duty Officers Grade as the case may be.
For the purposes of selection and absorption of departmental candidates on the date of initial constitution of reorganised service, a Selection Committee was set up and absorption was made in accordance with the recommendation of the Committee.
This process of absorption was over in March 1967, but the constitution of the service was deemed to be effective from September 9, 1966.
Rule 2(c) defines category to mean a group of posts specified in column 2 of the table under Rule 4.
Rule 4 provides for classification categories and scales of pay.
Rule 5 of Rules 1966 provides for authorised strength of the service.
Rule 8 prescribes the manner in which future vacancies, after appointments have been made to the Service under Rule 7 and 7A shall be filled in Supertime Grade II.
45 The authorised strength of the various categories of the service on the date of commencement of 1966 Rules shall be as specified in the First Schedule.
The vertical promotional channel is from Specialists ' grade and General Duty officers Grade I to supertime Grade II and from thereon to Supertime Grade I. On the date of initial constitution of service there were 275 permanent and 102 temporary, in all 377 posts in Specialists ' grade.
Out of this strength of posts in specialists ' grade 28 posts were upgraded to supertime Grade II, 19 being classified as unspecified specialists ' posts and 9 unspecified posts.
The Central Government converted one post from amongst the 19 unspecified specialists ' grade posts in Supertime Grade II in Ophthalmology speciality in Willingdon Hospital and transferred one Dr. B. section Jain, respondent 3, who was then working as Chief opthalmologist cum Associate Professor of Ophthalmology, Himachal Pradesh Medical College, Simla, and offered the vacancy to in Supertime Grade II caused by the transfer of respondent 3 to appellant who was next in seniority by way of promotion on ad hoc basis as per Memorandum dated December 7, 1970.
As the appellant was prepared to accept only if the posting was at Delhi and not in Simla, one Dr. G. C. Sood was promoted to supertime Grade II post and was appointed at Simla.
The appellant, thereafter filed a writ petition praying for Mandamus that he may be deemed to have been promoted from February 18, 1971, the date when Dr. Jain was posted at Willingdon Hospital.
The appellant also questioned the promotions of respondents 4 to 24 to supertime grade II on various dates after February 18, 1971 and before July 17, 1978 when he was actually promoted on a certain interpretation of Rule 8(3) of the Central Health Service Rules 1963.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
A Letters Patent Appeal was partly allowed.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
The appellant contended that: (a) the promotions of Respondents 4 to 24 are in contravention of Rule 8 of 1966 Rules; and (b) when a post in Ophthalmology at Willingdon Hospital was created on February 1, 1971, by conversion of one post from amongst unspecified specialists ' grade posts in supertime Grade II, the post could only have been filed in by promotion from amongst those holding the post in specialists ' grade in Ophthalmology speciality and he being the senior most and otherwise qualified, he should have been promoted from that date; (c) filling in the post at Willingdon Hospital by transfer of respondent 3 was in violation of the statutory rule and hence invalid; (d) the offer of the post to him at Simla was an eye wash and malafide as he lacked teaching experience and the post is a teaching post; (e) "service in that category" means service in that category which was constituted under the 1966 amendment Rules and (f) rule 8(3) does not permit inter se transfers in posts which are in the same category.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD : 1.
Unlike other professions, medical profession has developed branchwise expert specialised knowledge referable generally to number of parts in which human anatomy is divisible.
General medicine and general surgery are two broad genus but under each one of them there are numerous specialities and there is intensive study and research in speciality for being qualified for the speciality.
Being an expert in any one speciality simultaneously results in being 46 excluded from other specialities even though the specialities may be species of a genus like general medicine or general surgery.
Again, in each speciality there will be a post of a Lecturer, an Assistant Professor, an Associate Professor and a Professor with a vertical movement by way of promotion.
In a nonteaching hospital there will be posts like Junior Surgeon, Senior Surgeon, Head of the Department and so on.
In a profession so compartmentalised speciality wise ex hypothesi it is difficult to provide for promotional avenue by way of a general seniority list integrating different specialities categorywise, cadrewise or gradewise.
If such a general seniority list including persons belonging to different specialities albeit in the same grade is drawn up for purposes of promotion it might lead to a startling result because the need may be of a promotional post in a speciality and the man at top of the seniority list may not belong to that speciality and the man at top of the seniority list may not belong to that speciality but may belong to a different speciality and if any promotion was to be given to him to a post in a speciality for which he is neither qualified nor eligible it would be impossible to give vertical promotions by referring to such general seniority list.
If the promotion is to a post generally called administrative post in a hospital a general seniority list including experts belonging to different specialities may be helpful but when promotions are to be given to posts in different specialities a general seniority list is not only unhelpful but may really impede the process of promotion.
Again, demands of different specialities for additional strength may differ from hospital to hospital, from area to area and even from time to time.
In order to meet such unforeseen eventualities the rules provide for an addition to the strength of supertime grade II by keeping 19 posts designated as unspecified Specialists ' grade, posts and 9 unspecified posts in a pool.
Whenever a demand came for providing a higher post in supertime grade II in any particular speciality ordinarily where the strength of the service is prescribed a post will have to be created which any one familiar with bureaucratic jaggornot would immediately realise how time consuming it is.
Anticipating such a situation and to meet with the demands of specialities within a reasonable time it was provided that there would be a pool of 19 unspecified specialists ' posts in supertime grade II and 9 unspecified posts also in supertime grade II.
This would facilitate conversion from the pool of unspecified Specialists ' posts of an unspecified Specialists ' post to a specified specialist post in a speciality where a need has been felt.
Once the need is felt and a post is converted from an unspecified post to a specified post in supertime grade II it becomes an addition to the strength of that speciality and the post can be filled in, in accordance with the relevant rule.
But it is implicit in this arrangement that the person to be appointed to such a post would be one who is eligible to be appointed to that speciality and not some one who is on top of the general seniority list in Specialists ' grade or general duty officers ' grade from which promotion is to be made.
If promotion has to be made from a general seniority list which includes all Specialists in the Specialists ' grade the one at the top may be Cardiologist and the post may be converted into Anesthesiology.
Certainly a Cardiologist cannot be appointed as an Anaesthetic.
Therefore when a post from amongst unspecified Specialists ' posts is converted to a specified post which means specified in the speciality in which a need has been felt from amongst those in the Specialists ' grade belonging to that speciality and in order of their inter se seniority a promotion could be given.
[54 FH, 55A H 56A B] Union of India and Ors.
vs D. B. Kohli and Anr., ; followed.
Merely because all 28 posts were deducted from the strength of posts in Specialists ' grade it could not be said that all 28 posts would be available for promotion to those belonging to Specialists ' grade only.
The language employed in rule 5 also points in this direction.
All the 28 posts need not necessarily be filled in by promotion from amongst those who belong to Specialists grade only.
Hence with the division of 28 posts in two different designations and dividing the 28 posts in two different nomenclatures.
28 posts are made up of 19 posts designated as unspecified Specialists posts and 9 unspecified posts.
Undoubtedly 19 posts which were designated as unspecified Specialists ' post must be filled in from amongst those belonging to the Specialists ' grade but that itself also shows that the remaining 9 unspecified posts can be filled in from amongst those who may be promoted from General Duty Officers grade I because General Duty Officers grade I are also promotable to supertime grade II.
The nomenclature unspecified Specialists ' post and unspecified post provides an effective answer and indicates that while in the case of the former promotion must be given from Specialists in respect of the latter General Duty officers Grade I would equally be eligible for promotion.
[56 D H] 3.
To interpret that 19 unspecified Specialists ' posts could only by filled in by promotion would run counter to the express provision contained in Rule 8(3) which is statutory.
Rule 8 of the Central Health Service Rules, provides for future maintenance of the service.
Rule 8(3) provides for 50% of the vacancies in supertime grade II to be filled in by promotion of General Duty Officers Grade I and Specialists ' grade officers in the ratio of 2 : 3 and the remaining 50% of the vacancies to be filled in by direct recruitment in the manner specified in the second schedule.
Now, once an unspecified Specialists ' grade post in supertime grade II is converted and made a specified post in a speciality it is an addition to the strength of the speciality and the filling in of such post shall be governed by rule 8(3).
Undoubtedly if it is to be filled in by promotion, that would only be from amongst those belonging to Specialists ' grade officers as the converted post was unspecified Specialists ' post.
But to say that it can be filled in only by promotion is to ignore the mandate of statutory rule 8(3) which provides for filling in posts in supertime grade II by either promotion or nomination in the ratio therein prescribed.
Once there is a post in supertime grade II which is to be filled in subsequent to the initial constitution of the service, rule 8(3) will be attracted in all its rigour.
[57 B E] Further Rule 8(3) provides for filling in posts in supertime grade II by promotion as well as by direct recruitment in the ratio of 1 : 1.
On a true interpretation of the 1966 Rules in general and rule 8(3) in particular it could not be gainsaid that whenever an unspecified Specialists ' post is converted into a specified post and assigned to a speciality it can be filled in either by promotion or by direct recruitment as the situation warrants according to the rule and as determined by the quota rule.
[57 E G] No argument can be founded or any relief can be claimed merely on a stand taken by the Union of India in their counter affidavit in an earlier writ petition, unless estoppel is claimed or urged.
Even if such be the stand of the Central Government it will have to be negatived and was in fact negatived in the case of Dr. B. section Jain.
[58C D] Union of India vs Bhim Singh, [1971] 2 SLR p. 111 @ 124; P. C. Sethi and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; at 210; J. K. Steel Ltd. vs 48 Union of India; , @ 498; Commissioner of Income Tax vs K. Srinivasan and K. Gopalan [1953] S.C.R. 486; applied.
When a post is created it is an addition to the strength of that particular category and the additional strength has to be filled in the manner prescribed in the rule and that no sanctity attaches to the place where the post is created but the sanctity attaches to the number of posts and the manner of filling them.
[59 B C] Transfers in posts which are in the same grade or are considered equivalent can be effected on administrative exigencies.
Once a new post is created and it is an increase in the strength of the cadre in which the post is created, every one in that cadre is eligible to fill in that post and transfer is permissible.
There is no violation of Rule 8(3) and transfer of Dr. B. section Jain was valid.
[59 E F] E. P. Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu and Anr., ; at 363.
If an employee eligible for promotion is offered a higher post by way of promotion, his refusal to accept the same would enable the employer, the Central Government in this case, to fill in the post by offering it to a junior to the Government servant refusing to accept the post and in so acting there will be no violation of Art, 16.
Further, the Government servant who refuses to accept the promotional post offered to him for his own reason cannot then be heard to complain that he must be given promotional post from the date on which the avenue for promotion opened to him.
[60 B C] Undoubtedly, it may be that under the Medical Council Regulations stricto sensu, the appellant may not be qualified for the post of Associate Professor because he did not possess the requisite teaching experience.
But an ad hoc arrangement could have been made and it was open to the Central Government, if the appellant had accepted the post, to move the Medical Council of India to permit the Central Government to appoint the appellant at Simla.
Some way could have been found but the door was bolted by the appellant himself deciding the offer for reasons other than his qualification which he may have found compelling.
The offer made to him by the Government was not eye wash or make believe.
His refusal to accept the offer of promotion would postpone his promotion.
Further, since his refusal to accept the promotion at Simla and till July 1978, the appellant was never superseded by any one junior to him in his speciality it is difficult to entertain the contention that in refusing promotion to him when some posts were converted from unspecified Specialists ' posts into different specialities and were filled in by those who were qualified to be promoted in the respective speciality in which the post was created he could be said to have been superseded in violation of article 16.
[62 D H] 6.
Remote chances of promotion could hardly be said to be condition of service which if impaired would be violative of article 16.
Even assuming that a remote chance of promotion in adversely affected would give a cause of action, in view of appellants ' impending retirement on superannuation the argument would be of no avail to him.
[63 F G] 7.
The word 'category ' used in Rule 8(3) has to be understood to mean the post included in that category and consequently service in that category would mean service in a post included in that category.
[66 B C] 49 It is a well recognised canon of construction that the construction which makes the Rule otiose or unworkable should be avoided where two constructions are possible and the Court should lean in favour of the construction which would make the rule workable and further the purpose for which the rule is intended.
While prescribing experience qualification in 1966 Amendment Rules, the framers of the Rules could not have intended to ignore wholly the past service.
A Specialist who was in category 'C ' was included in category II with the designation Specialists ' grade officer.
Similarly, General Duty Officer grade I in category 'D ' acquired the same nomenclature General Duty Officer grade I in category III.
There was an upward revision of pay scales of both the categories.
The change in designation should not be understood to mean that the service rendered as specialist or as General Duty Officer is wholly wiped out for any future promotion.
Even after change of designation the duties never underwent any change.
Same duty was performed a day prior to September 9, 1966 and the day thereafter by both the categories in the respective posts.
Further this change was with a purpose in as much as when certain qualifying service is prescribed for being eligible for promotion in a category the emphasis is on service rendered in a post irrespective of the grade.
A Specialists ' grade officer belonging to category II was a Specialists ' grade officer in category C. He was even then eligible for promotion to supertime grade II.
It was never intended that a Specialists grade officer belonging to category 'C ' under 1963 Rules who had put in more than 8 years of service but who was not promoted prior to September 9, 1966, the date of initial constitution of service, or on the date of initial constitution of service, would be ineligible for promotion for a period of 8 years simply because the designation of the category changed.
It was never intended that there should be a complete hiatus for a period of 8 years in promoting Specialists ' grade officers to supertime grade II and for a period of 10 years in case of General Duty Officers grade I.
There is no warrant for such an inference from the Rules.
[65 A H, 66 A C] 8.
The contention that executive instruction cannot run counter to the statutory rule is untenable in the facts of this case.
Service rendered in equivalent post prior to the date of initial constitution of service could be taken into account in calculating qualifying service for next promotion.
[66 E F] 9.
The need for the post or the requirements of the hospital or the need for an ad hoc or additional appointment is a matter which the Government is competent to decide and in the absence of requisite material the Court cannot interpose its own decision on the necessity of creation or abolition of posts.
Whether a particular post is necessary is a matter depending upon the exigencies of the situation and administrative necessity.
The Government is a better judge of the interests of the general public for whose service the hospitable are set up.
And whether a hospital catering to the needs of general public providing medical relief in different specialities has need for a particular post in a particular speciality would be better judged by the Government running the hospital.
If Government is a better judge it must have the power to create or abolish the posts depending upon the needs of the hospital and the requirements of general public.
[67 C E] Creation and abolition of posts is a matter of Government policy and every sovereign Government has this power in the interest and necessity of internal administration.
The creation or abolition of post is dictated by police decision, 50 exigencies of circumstances and administrative necessity.
The creation, the continuance and the abolition of post are all decided by the Government in the interest of administration and general public.
The Court would be the last competent in the face of scanty material to decide whether the Government acted honestly in creating a post or refusing to create a post or its decision suffers from mala fide, legal or factual.
In this background it is difficult to entertain the contention of the appellant that posts were created to accommodate some specific individuals ignoring the requirements of the hospital or the interests of the general public at large.
[67 F H] M. Ramanatha Pillai vs State of Kerala and Anr., at 520; followed.
No adverse inference could be drawn against a party unless they appear before the Court and they are served with necessary papers.
[68 C D] In the present case, Respondents 9 and 23 had not appeared in the High Court and there is no evidence that the subsequent affidavit of the appellant was served on them.
It may be that the Government may not be interested in either denying or admitting this averment which directly and adversely affects respondents 9 and 23.
However, in view of the fact that they were selected by the Departmental Promotion Committee and the promotion was approved by the U.P.S.C. it is difficult to entertain the contention at the hand of the appellant who is not in any way going to be benefited by the invalidation of their promotion.
[68 B, D, E] 11.
Once the challenge on merits fails in a case, the second string to the bow need not be examined.
The appellant here, is least competent to challenge the promotions of Respondents 4 to 24.
[69 B C] Chitra Ghosh and Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; @ 420.
