The respondents in Civil Appeal No. 708/78 Mamanchand Ratilal Agarwal and others, who are the landlords of premises bearing door No. 16 in Nawa Bazar Area Kirkee Cantonment, filed a civil suit No. 17,0 of 1964 against the Appellant tenant for recovery of possession and arrears of rent under the provisions of Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
The suit was decreed.
There was an appeal by the tenant.
It resulted in a com promise decree dated July 12, 1967 by which some time was given to the tenant to vacate the premises.
On April 29, 1969, in the case of Indu Bhushan Bose vs Rama Sundari Devi and Anr.
; , this Court held that Parliament alone had and the State Legislature did not have the necessary competence to make a law in regard to the "regulation of house accommodation in Cantonment Areas.
" The expression "regulation of house accommodation" was interpreted as not to be confined to allotment only but as extending to other incidents, such as termination of existing tenancies and eviction of persons in possession of house accommodation etc.
To get over the situation created by the said decision, on December 29, 1969, the Central Government issued a notification under section 3 of the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act, 1957 extending the pro visions of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, to the Kirkee and other cantonment areas.
In June 2, 1972, the Parliament also enacted Act 22 of 1972 amending the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control laws) Act 1957, purporting to enable the Central Government to make the Rent Control Laws in the several States applicable to Cantonment areas from dates anterior to the dates of notification and further purporting to validate certain pre existing decrees.
In the meanwhile, taking advantage of the decision in the case of Indu Bhushan Bose vs Rama Sundari Devi and Anr., the appellant tenant filed Miscellaneous Application No. 597/70 for a declaration that the decree obtained against him was a nullity and incapable of being executed.
This application was allowed by the Court on November, 19, 1971.
But, after the enactment of Act 22 of 1972, on January 11, 1973 the landlords filed Darkhast No. 104 of 1973 to execute the decree in their favour.
The appellant tenant raised three objections, namely, (i) subsequent to the compromise decree there was a 225 fresh agreement of lease between the landlords and himself; (ii) the provisions of the amending Act 22 of 1972 were not extensive enough to save the decree dated July 12, 1967; ,(iii) in any case, the decision in Miscellaneous Application No. 597/70 holding the decree to be a nullity operated as res judicata between the parties.
The first objection was left open by all the Courts for future adjudication, as the landlord denied the existence of any fresh agreement.
The second and third objections alone were considered.
In the judgment under appeal, the High Court overruled them and hence this appeal by special leave and two other similar appeals.
Dismissing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
In Indu Bhushan Bose vs Rama Sundari and Anr., [1970 ] 1 S.C.R. 443, the Supreme Court agreed with the view of the Calcutta and Rajasthan High Courts and held that the power of the State Legislature to legislate in respect of landlord and tenant of buildings was to be found not in Entry 18 of the List II, but in Entries 6, 7 and 13 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and that such power was circumscribed by the exclusive power of Parliament to legislate on the same subject under Entry 3 of List I.
But even before this decision Parliament took the view of the Calcutta Rajasthan High, Courts as the correct view and proceeded to enact the Cantonment (Extension of Rent control Laws) Act, 1957, by section 3 of which the Central Government was enabled, by notification in the official Gazette to extend to any cantonment with such restrictions and modifications as it thought fit, any enactment relating to the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation which was in force on the date of the notification in the State in which the Cantonment was situated.
Though this Act came into force on December 18, 1957, no notification was issued extending the provisions of the Bombay Rents Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, to Kirkee and other Cantonment areas within the State of Bombay until 1969.
Apparently such a notification was thought unnecessary in view of the fact that the Bombay Act was supposed to operate within the said Cantonment areas because of the consistent view taken by the Bombay High Court regarding the applicability of the Bombay Act to such areas.
In view of the Supreme Court decision in Indu Bhushan 's case, it became necessary that a notification under section 3 of the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act, 1957, should be issued.
It was accordingly done on December 29, 1969.
But it was realised that the entire problem was not thereby solved since all such notifications as the one issued on December 29, 1969 could only be prospective and could not save decrees which had already been passed.
Therefore, Amending Act 22 of 1972 was enacted for the express purpose of saving decree which had already been passed.
By section 2 of the Amending Act of 1972 the Principal Act of 1957 was itself deemed to have come into force on January 26, 1950.
Original Section 3 was renumbered as subsection 1 and the words "on the date of the notification" were omitted and "were deemed always to have been omitted." [229 B G & 230 C D] 2.
Under section 3 of the unamended Act, 1957, a notification could be issued extending a State Legislation to a Cantonment area with effect from the date of notification.
As a result of the introduction of sub section 2 of section 3 the notification can be given effect from an anterior date or a future late but it cannot be made effective from a date earlier than the commencement 226 of the State Legislation or the establishment of the Cantonment or the commencement of the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act, 1957.
Sub section 3 is merely consequential to sub section 2, in that it provides that a State Legislation when extended to a Cantonment area with effect from the date of the notification from an anterior date, such legislation is to stand extended with all the amendments to such State Legislation made after such anterior date but before the commencement of the 1972 Amending Act, the amendments being applicable as and when they come into force.
Sub section
4 makes provision for the saving of decrees or orders for the regulation of or for eviction from any house accommodation in a Cantonment made before the extension of the State Legislation to the Cantonment provided certain conditions are fulfilled.
One condition is that the decree or order must have been made by any Court, Tribunal or other authority in accordance with a law for the control of rent and regulation of house accommodation for the time being in force in the State in which such Cantonment is situated.
In other words the decree or order must have been made by the wrong application of the State Legislation to the Cantonment area.
If a decree or order has been made by such wrong application of the State Legislation to the Cantonment area it shall be deemed, with enact from the date of the notification to have been properly made under the relevant provisions of the State Legislation.
1231 A H, 232 A BI 3.
The applicability of sub section 4 cannot be confined to cases where notifications are issued with retrospective effect under sub section 2.
Sub section 4 is not so confined.
It applies to all cases of decrees or orders made before the extension of a State Legislation to a Cantonment area irrespective of the question whether such extension is retrospective or not.
The essential condition to be fulfilled is that the decree or order must have been made as if the State Legislation was already in force, although.
strictly speaking, it was not so in force.
Subsection 4 is wide enough to save all decrees and orders made by the wrong application of State rent control and house accommodation legislation to a Cantonment area, though such State Legislation could not in law have been applied to cantonment areas at the time of the passing of the decrees or order.
The decree obtained by the respondent is saved by the pro visions of section 3, sub section 4 of the Cantonment (Extension of Rent Control Laws) Act 22 of 1957, as amended by Act 22 of 1972.
[232 E F] 4.
If the decision in the previous proceeding was to be regarded as res judicata it would assume the status of a special rule of law applicable to the parties relating to the jurisdiction of the Court in derogation of the rule declared by the legislature.
[234 A] In the present case, the executing Court had refused to exercise jurisdiction and to execute the decree on the ground that the decree was a nullity as the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947, had no application to buildings in Cantonment areas.
That defect having been re moved and all decrees obtained on the basis that the Bombay rent law applied to the Kirkee Cantonment area having been validated by Act 22 of 1972, it cannot be said that the earlier decision holding that the decree was a nullity operated as res judicata.
[234 B D] Mathura Prasad Bajoo Jaiswal and ors.
vs Dessibai N. B. Jeejeebhoy, (@) 836: followed.
