A notice under section 7 of the , was Issued by the Assistant Custodian of Evacuee Property to the appellant and his brother (since deceased) stating that there was "credible information in possession of the Custodian" that they were evacuees under clause (iii) of section 2(d) of the Act and calling upon them to show cause why they would not be declared evacuees and their property as evacuee property The Assistant Custodian eventually declared the appellant and his brother as evacuees under clauses (i), (ii) & (iii) of section 2(d) of the Act.
The Authorised Deputy Custodian, although he dismissed the appellant ' appeal under section 24 of the Act, pointed out that the ground based on clause (iii) of section 2(d) was "very vague" and that the notice was "defective to that extent".
The Assistant Custodian General Evacuee Property dismissed the appellant 's review petition and the High Court dismissed the writ petition in limine.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The notice and the declaration that followed stating that the appellant was an evacuee under clauses (i) and (ii) of section 2(d) of the Act are invalid.
[252E, F] 1.
The notice called upon the appellant and his brother to show cause why they should not be declared evacuees under clause (iii) of section 2(d) and the ground mentioned in the notice was also based on that clause, yet the Assistant Custodian found that they were evacuees under clauses (i) and (ii) as well.
The Authorised Deputy Custodian held that the ground given in the notice in support of the case based on clause (iii) was vague and the notice was defective so far as that ground was concerned, but that was the only case the appellant was called upon to answer.
The foundation of a proceeding under section 7 is a valid notice and an inquiry which travels beyond the bounds of the notice is impermissible and without jurisdiction to that extent.
[252D E 2.
From the facts stated above, it would appear that the Authority concerned did not apply his mind to the relevant material before issuing the notice.
The same thing is apparent from another fact.
On November 29, 1952 the Deputy Custodian dropped the proceeding seeking to declare the appellant an intending evacuee and that on the same day directed initiation of a proceeding under section 7.
Section 7 required the Custodian to form an opinion that the property in question was evacuee property within the meaning of the Act 249 before any action under that section was taken.
Under rule 6 of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Central) Rules 1950 the Custodian had to be satisfied from information in his possession or otherwise that the property was prima facie evacuee property before a notice was issued.
On November 29, 1952 no evidence was found to support a declaration that the appellant was an intending evacuee.
There was no material on record to suggest on that very day the authority had before him any evidence to justify initiation of a proceeding to declare the appellant an evacuee and his property as evacuee property.
The notice under section 7 appears to have been issued without any basis.
The Assistant Custodian General, who found no merit in the reversional application preferred by the appellant, overlooked these aspects of the case.
[252H, 253 A B]
