The prosecution alleged that a girl below 16 years of age was sleeping outside her house with her family and that the petitioner in the company of another (acquitted accused) carried her away under intimidation to a neighbouring godown belonging to another acquitted accused and in that secluded venue committed rape on the young woman and afterwards put her back on her cot.
The trial court convicted the petitioner but on grounds of benefit of doubt acquitted the other accused.
The High Court affirmed this order.
In the special leave petition to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the evidence of the prosecutrix without substantial corroboration, was inadequate to rest a conviction under section 376 IPC.
Dismissing the special leave petition, ^ HELD 1.
To forsake vital consideration and go by obsolete demands for substantial corroboration is to sacrifice commonsense in favour of an artificial concoction called 'judicial ' probability.
[308A] 2.
Human psychology and behavioural probability must be borne in mind when assessing the testimonial potency of the victim 's version.
What girl would foster rape charges on a stranger unless a remarkable set of facts or cleanest motives are made out? The inherent bashfulness, the innocent naivete and the feminine tendency to conceal the outrage of masculine sexual aggression are factors which are relevant to improbabilise the hypothesis of false implication.
The injury on the person of the victim has corroborative value.
[307G] 3.
The court loses its credibility if it rebels against realism.
The law court is not an unnatural world.
[308 B] 4.
Merely because the trial court has ultra cautiously acquitted someone, the higher court must, for that reason, cannot acquit everyone.
[308C] 5.
A socially sensitized judge is a better statutory armour against gender outrage than long clauses of a complex section with all the protections writ into it.
[308C] 6.
Observation on probative force of circumstances are not universal laws of nature but guidelines and good counsel.
[307 F] Gurcharan Singh vs State of Haryana ; referred to. 306
