By the U.P. Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) ordinance, 1971 (which later became an Act) twelve sugar undertakings stood transferred and vested in a Government.
undertaking named the U.P. State; Sugar Corporation Limited.
The appellants ' writ petitions before the! High Court impugning the constitutional validity of the Act were dismissed.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that since sugar is a declared industry under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 in view of entry 52 in Union List read with entry 24 in state list further read with article 246.
Parliament alone is competent to pass the law on the subject and not the State Legislature and, therefore, the impugned legislation is void.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: Industry being a matter enumerated in entry 24 of List II only the State legislature has the exclusive power to legislate in respect of it, but this power is subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I.
While under entry 7, if a declaration is made by Parliament that a particular industry is necessary for defence or for the prosecution of war, Parliament, to the exclusion of the State legislature, would be entitled to legislate in respect of that industry, a declaration by Parliament by law to assume control over any particular industry in public interest in a sine qua non to clothe Parliament with power under entry 52, List I to legislate in respect of that industry.
The declaration contemplated by this entry is a declaration by law.
A mere declaration unaccompanied by law is incompatible with entry 52 of List I.
But that does not mean that once a declaration is made in respect of an industry that industry as a whole is taken out of entry 24, List II.
[337 F H; E] Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; at 113 and State of Haryana & Anr.
vs Chanan Mal, etc.
; at 700 referred to.
The control under section 2 of the 1951 Act was assumed for a specific and avowed object namely development and regulation of certain industries.
This control has to be exercised in the manner provided under the statute.
Therefore, Parliament, has made a declaration for assuming control in respect 332 of the declared industries set out in the schedule of the Act only to the extent provided in the Act.
A conspectus of the provisions of the impugned Act shows that in pith and substance it is one for acquisition of scheduled undertakings and such acquisition by transfer of ownership of those undertakings to the Corporation would in no way come in conflict with any of the provisions of the Central Act of 1951.
The Central Act is primarily concerned with development and regulation of declared industries and is not concerned with ownership of industrial undertakings in declared industries, except to the extent of control over management of the undertaking by the owner.
By the acquisition under the impugned Act aud vesting of the undertakings in the Corporation they would still be under the control of the Central Government because the Corporation would be amenable to the authority and jurisdiction of the Central Government.
Therefore, there is no conflict between the impugned legislation and the control exercised by the Central Government under the provisions of the Central Act.
[340 H 341 A. 344 C G. 345 D] There is no force in the argument that the power of acquisition under Entry 42, List II is incidental to the power to legislate in respect of various topic in the lists and, therefore, when the Union assumed control over the declared industry such control comprehends the power to acquire and hence the power of the State Legislature to enact legislation for acquisition of properly of scheduled undertakings would be denude.
By the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, Entry 33 in List I and Entry 36 in List II were deleted and a single comprehensive Entry 42 in List III (acquisition and requisitioning of property) was added.
The power to acquire property can now be exercised concurrently by the Union and the States.
After the substitution of Entry 42 in List III it cannot be said that the power of acquisition and requisitioning of property is incidental to the other power.
It is an independent power provided for in a specific entry.
Therefore, both the Union and the state would have power of acquisition and requisition of property.
[345 E F; 346 B E] There is a long line of decisions which clearly establishes the proposition that power to legislate for acquisition of property is an independent and separate power and is exercisable only under Entry 42, List III and not as an incident of the power to legislate in respect of a specific head of legislation in any of the three lists.
This power of the State legislature to legislate for acquisition of property remains intact and untrammeled except to the extent where on assumption of control of an industry by a declaration as envisaged in Entry 52, List I a further power of acquisition is taken over by a specific legislation.
[353 H 354 A] Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India ; at 567, Rajamundry Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh State of West Bengal vs Union of India [1964]1 S.C.R. 371, referred to.
The argument that the State legislature lacked competence to enact the impugned legislation is without force.
Legislative power of the State under Entry 24, List II is eroded only to the extent control is assumed by the Union pursuant to a declaration made by the Parliament in respect of a declared 333 industry as spelt out by the legislative enactment and the field occupied by such enactment is the measure of erosion.
Subject to such erosion, on the remainder the State legislature will have power to legislate in respect of declared industry without in any way trenching upon the occupied field.
State legislature, which is otherwise competent to deal with industry under Entry 24, List II, can deal with that industry in exercise of other powers enabling it to legislate under different heads set out in Lists II and III and this power cannot be denied to the State.
[354 C, 352 E F] The contention that the impugned Act is in violation of section 20 of the Central Act has no merit.
The impugned legislation was not enacted for talking over the management or control of any industrial undertaking by the State Government.
In pith and substance it was enacted to acquire the scheduled undertakings.
If an attempt was made to take over the management or control of any industrial undertaking in a declared industry the bar of section 20 would inhibit exercise of such executive power.
The inhibition of section 20 is on the executive power but if as a sequel to an acquisition of an industrial undertaking the management or control of the industrial undertaking stands transferred to the acquiring authority section 20 is not attracted.
It does not preclude or forbid a State legislature exercising legislative power under an entry other than Entry 24 of List II and if in exercise of that legislative power the consequential transfer of management or control over the industry or undertaking follows as an incident of acquisition such taking over of management or control pursuant to an exercise of legislative power is not within the inhibition of section 20.
[355 F, A E] The challenge to the validity of the impugned legislation on the ground of violation of Article 31(2) must fail.
At the time of acquisition the scheduled undertakings had a heavy backlog of carry forward losses, they failed to pay the growers the price of cane purchased, the labour was not paid as a result of which there was labour unrest.
The situation did not improve even when some of the undertakings were taken over under the Central Act and a drastic remedy was called for in public interest and while applying that drastic remedy of acquisition the principle which are valid for determining the value of machinery were adopted.
The adequacy or otherwise of compensation on the calculus made by applying the principles is beyond judicial review.
[360 C, 359 H 360 1] Rustom Cavasjee Cooper vs Union of India ; at 567, Vajravelu Mudaliar vs Special Deputy Collector of Land Acquisition West Madras [1965] 1 SR 614, Union of India vs Metal Corporation of India & Anr. , State of Gujarat vs Shantilal Mangaldas & Ors. ; and His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagaivalu vs State of Kerala referred to.
Pathak & Koshal JJ (concurring in the result) It is not necessary in this case to express any opinion on the question whether the declaration made by Parliament in section 2 of the Industries (Development and Regulation) ct, 1951 in respect of the industries specified in the First schedule to that Act can be regarded as limited to removing from the scope of Entry 2 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution only so much of the legislative field as is covered by the subject matter.
and content of that Act or it can be regarded as effecting the removal from that entry of the 334 entire legislature field embracing all matters pertaining to the industries specified in.
the declaration.
The controversy in the preset case can be adequately disposed of on the ground that the legislation falls within Entry 42 of Lt m and cannot be related to Entry 52 of List I or Entry 24 of List II.
352 E F, 363 Bl The Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. and others vs The State of Orissa and others , State of orissa vs M. A. Tulloch and C. [964} 4 SCR 461, Baijnath Kedia vs State of Bihar & ors.
and State of Haryana & Anr.
vs Chanan Mal, etc.
; held inapplicable.
