The appellants were appointed Inspectors of Police in 1953.
After working as Inspectors for about 12 years, they were promoted by notification dated June 16, 1965 to officiate as Deputy Superintendents of Police.
Before promotion they were subjected to the scrutinies prescribed by rules 22, 23 and 24 of the Bihar Police Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1953.
Rule 648 B of the Bihar and Orissa Police Manual (Volume I) requires a promoted Deputy Superintendent of Police to pass an examination in accounts.
The appellants passed the examination and satisfied all the requirements for confirmation.
However, the posts in which they were officiating were temporary posts.
Thereafter the Government by a notification dated August 22, 1974, confirmed the appellants and other similarly situated officers as Deputy Superintendents of Police with effect from the dates which according to these officers were arbitrarily chosen.
On September 1, 1974 the Government published a combined gradation list in which these promotees were placed even below the direct recruits who were appointed in 1974.
The appellants challenged this gradation list in the High Court by a Writ Petition and during the pendency of the said Writ, the State Government constituted "Saran Singh Committee", to assess the promotional prospects of different State services, examine the problem of "stagnation", and suggest remedial measures.
The recommendations of the committee were accepted by the State Government by Resolution dated April 11, 1977.
In the Writ Petition, the High Court directed the State Government to re examine the matter and prepare a fresh gradation list on the basis of the statement made by the Government in the light of the committees ' recommendations.
None of the parties appealed against this order.
By notification dated January 7, 1978 the State Government appointed on probation the Officers who had been officiating in those posts with effect from the dates mentioned against their names in the notification and the notification issued previously promoting these officers on officiating basis was cancelled.
The dates from which these officers were said to have been appointed on probation were the dates of their promotion as officiating Deputy Superintendents of Police.
The names of the appellants figured against serial numbers 23, 24 and 25 in the list given in the notification dated January 7, 1978.
The revised gradation list which is under challenge was thereafter issued.
451 The appellants questioned the correctness of the Judgment of the High Court which allowed the two Writ Petitions made by two different groups of direct recruits challenging the gradation lists of permanent Deputy Superintendents of Police on February 24,1978.
Accepting the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The appellants were promoted to officiate as Deputy Superintendents of Police in the year 1965 (other promotees like the appellants had also been officiating as Deputy Superintendents of Police from different dates between 1948 and 1970), and by the Government order dated December 30,1977 fifty four temporary posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police created between 1948 and 1970 were made permanent from the dates these posts were created.
[456D G] 2.
It is well settled that in the absence of any legislation on the subject, or a rule framed under the Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, the State Government can regulate its public services in the exercise of its executive power.
[456 F G] B. N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore , Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan ; , referred to.
There is no statute or any rule framed under the Proviso to Article 309 to determine the seniority as between the direct recruits and the promotees.
The determination of seniority on the basis of continuous officiation has been held valid in section B. Patwardhan 's case ; The gradation list cannot therefore be challenged on the ground that an arbitrary date was taken as its basis or that it offends Article 14 of the Constitution.
[456G H. 457A] 4.
In the year 1977 exigencies of the situation prompted the Government to convert the temporary posts created between 1948 and 1970 into permanent posts with effect from the dates on which the temporary posts had been created.
The appellants were promoted in 1965 to officiate as Deputy Superintendents of Police in posts which were then temporary.
The Governor while exercising his powers under rule 3 in the year 1965 could not naturally take into account the number of posts made permanent in 1977 with effect from 1965.
Whatever was done subsequently to increase the strength of the cadre in 1965 under compulsion of the situation cannot be said to have effected the validity of the action taken by the Governor in 1965.
[457 F] section G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors. ; ; referred to.
Rule 3 of the Bihar Police Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1953 is not really a quota rule, it does not lay down a fixed proportion, all it does is to insist that the number of vacancies to be filled by proportion, should not be less than half of the total number of vacancies to be filled in any year.
Adding to the number of vacancies and filling them by promotees does not certainly violate the rule requiring, that no less than half of the vacancies must be filled by promotees.
What the Governor had done in a previous year in exercise of his power under rule 3, if it was valid then is not invalidated by the subsequent conversion of some posts which were temporary at the time into permanent posts with effect from the earlier year.
If for administrative reasons 452 such a measure was considered necessary, there is nothing rule 3 to suggest a bar.
Rule 3, as already mentioned, does not prescribe a fixed proportion of promotees and direct recruits for the vacancies to be filled in any year but only ensures not less that half of the vacancies for the promotees, that being so, filling more than half of the vacancies by promotees, cannot be an infringement of that rule.
[457G H, 458A B] 6.
The gradation list contains certain mistakes, and these shall be corrected by the concerned authority.
[458F]
