In the two election petitions E. P. No. 18/78 and E. P. No. 20/78 filed by the defeated candidates, allegation of corrupt practice, namely "indulgence in promoting hatred rousing religious sentiments by speeches made at certain places" was made against the appellant, a successful candidate.
After the election petitioner closed his evidence and the High Court directed the appellant to file the list of his witnesses, the appellant filed two applications before the High Court namely, one for summoning witnesses Nos. 6, 8, 15 and 16 and another for amendment of his counter.
The High Court however refused to summon these witnesses on the ground that no foundation for the facts on the basis of which these witnesses were sought to be cited or for the points on which they were to be, examined was laid in the counter.
Similarly, the High Court rejected the application for amendment of the counter on the same grounds.
The High Court was of the view that in the absence of any specific plea of alibi, having been taken in the counter, the appellant could not be allowed to examine the witnesses or amend the counter.
Hence the two appeals, by special leave.
Allowing the appeals the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Under the provisions of the Representation of People Act, the onus lies entirely on the petitioner to prove the corrupt practices alleged against the elected candidate.
The necessary facts and particulars and the statements of facts etc.
are to be pleaded by the election petitioner with exactitude and precision.
It is now well settled by a large catena of the authorities of this Court that a charge of corrupt practice must be proved to the hilt, the standard of proof of such allegation is the same as a charge of fraud in a criminal case.
[442B C] D. Venkata Reddy vs R. Sultan and Ors., [1976] 2 section C. C. followed.
So far as the elected candidate is concerned, he is merely to rebut the allegations made by the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code as far as practicable.
In the instant case, the appellant had taken an express plea in his counter that he did not make any speech at the places alleged by the election petitioner.
He also stated that tape records or the cassets alleged to contain his speech were fabricated.
One of the ways of proving this plea could be by showing that the appellant was not physically present at the places where the speeches are alleged to have been made as he was present at that time, at some other place.
This is what the appellant sought to do through the proposed amendment and by summoning 440 the witnesses.
Thus it was clearly open to the appellant to have proved facts in order to rebut the allegations made by the petitioner that he was not present at the places where he is said to have made speeches.
[442E G] 3.
Under section 116 of the Representation of the People Act an election petition has to be tried as nearly as possible according to the procedure applicable under the Civil Procedure Code to the trial of suits.
Under O.VIII R. 2 the defendant must raise by his pleading all matters which show that the suit is not maintainable, or that the transaction is either void or voidable in point of law, and all such grounds of defence, as, if not raised, would be likely to take the opposite party by surprise, or would raise issues of fact not arising out of the plaint.
Having expressly denied the allegation of having made the speech, the appellant was fully justified in raising this defence.
[442G H, 443A] In the instant case, it cannot be said that the witnesses sought to be examined by the appellant or the plea which he claimed in his counter by virtue of the amendment would spring surprise on the election petitioner because the appellant had already denied in clear terms that he never made any speeches at the places mentioned in the election petition.
There was no corresponding duty on the appellant to give full particulars or detailed statement of fact which the petitioner had to do in order to set at naught the electoral process which resulted in the election of the appellant.
[443A C] 4.
So far as the discretion vested on the High Court by Section 87 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 to refuse to summon any witness lies only when it is of the opinion that the evidence of the witness is not material or that the party tendering such witness is doing so on frivolous ground or with a view to delay the proceedings.
[443D E] In the instant case none of these conditions are present.
In order to repel the plea of the election petitioner, the appellant was entitled to lead evidence to show that he did not make any speech as he was physically incapable in doing so at the time and place as alleged by the petitioner.
By virtue of the amendment the appellant sought to insert a plea that he could not have made the speeches as alleged by the election petitioner because he was at that time out of station and was present in Adoni 180 miles from the places where he is said to have delivered speeches.
In fact, witnesses Nos. 6, 8, 15, 16 and 17 were summoned to prove the fact that this appellant was in Adoni.
[441G H, 442A, 443E]
