The Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 (U.P. Act XXV of 1964) provides for the regulation of sale and purchase of agricultural produce and for the establishment superintendence and control of markets in Uttar Pradesh.
The enactment was passed for the development of new market areas and for efficient data collection and processing of arrivals in the Mandies to enable the World Bank to give a substantial help for the establishment of various markets in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
It led to the establishment of Market Areas, Principal Market Yards and Sub Market Yards and levying of the fee in relation to transactions of certain commodities in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
Various Market Committees were formed known as Mandi Samitis.
In order to give effect to the working of the Act the Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Niyamawalli 1965, being Rules under the Act were made by the Governor.
The Act was amended several times but the Rules were not accordingly amended as and when required to make them uptodate in accordance with the amended Act.
"Agricultural Produce" has been defined in clause (a) of section 2 of the Act to mean: "Such items of produce of agriculture, horticulture, viticulture, apiculture, sericulture, pisci culture, animal husbandry or forest as are specified in the Schedule, and includes a mixture of two or more of such items, and also includes any such item in processed form, and further includes gur, rab, shakkar, khandsari and jaggery." while Clause (e) defines "commission agent" or "Arhatiya" to mean: "a person who, in the ordinary course of business, makes or offers to make, a purchase or sale of agricultural produce, on behalf of the owner or seller or purchaser of agricultural produce, for Arhat or commission".
105 under clause (p), ""producer" means a person who, whether by himself or through hired labour, produces, rears or catches, any agricultural produce, not being a producer who also works as a trader, broker or Dalal, commission agent or Arhatiya or who is otherwise ordinarily engaged in the business of storage of agricultural produce".
Cause (y) defines a "trader" to mean: "a person who in the ordinary course of business is engaged in buying or selling agricultural produce as a principal or as a duly authorised agent of one or more principals and includes a person, engaged in processing of agricultural produce.
" Under Clause (k), 'Market Area ' means an area notified as such under Section 6, or as modified under Section 8, while 'Principal Market Yard ' has been defined under clause (o) to mean, the portion of a Market Area, declared as such under Section 7, and 'Sub Market Yard ' under clause (w) means a portion of a Market Area, declared as such under Section 7.
The State Government under section 8 has got the power to alter any market area and modify the list of agricultural produce.
Section 9 provides for the effect of declaration of Market Area.
Chapter III of the Act deals with the establishment, incorporation and constitution of the Market Committees, section 17 provides for the power of the Committee.
Clause (i) authorises a Committee to issue or renew licences under the Act on such terms and conditions and subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed.
Clause (iii) authorises a Committee to levy and collect (a) such Fees as may be prescribed for the issue or renewal of licences, and (b) market fee at the rate and in the manner provided therein.
[Though clause (b) of section 17 (iii) had undergone drastic changes from time to time, the Rules were not correspondingly amended.] Section 19 provides for the Market Committee Fund and its utilisation.
Section 19 B was introduced in the Act by U.P. Act 7 of 1978 w.e.f.
29 12 1977 providing for the establishment of 'Market Development Fund ' for each committee.
The Rule making power of the State Government is in Section 40.
Rule 66 deals with the levy of market fee, Rule 68 provides for its recovery and Rule 67 provides for licence fee.
By a State Government notification, which was issued on April 11, 1978 making it effective from May 1, 1978, almost the whole of Uttar Pradesh had been declared to be a Market Area, dividing it into 250 areas and indicating in Schedule 8 of the Notification 115 commodities in respect of which the fee could be levied by the Market Committees.
Declaration of Principal Market Yards and Sub Market Yards under Section 7 had also been made.
Various traders carrying on business in the State of Uttar Pradesh within the jurisdiction of several Market Committees challenged the levy of fee in the High Court from time to time.
There were several rounds of litigation and the writ petitions were dismissed.
On account of the litigations between the traders and the Market Committees, the working of the Committees had not successfully proceeded, as fees levied from time to time could not be 106 realised in full.
Sometimes illegal or unauthorised collections have been made.
Money justifiably realised also had not been fully utilised as it ought to have been done.
In the appeals and writ petitions to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants and petitioners that: 1.
Big areas consisting of towns and villages have been notified as Market Areas without rendering any service, which is contrary to the whole object of the Act and the concept of fee.
No market area or market yard had been validly created.
No Mandi Samiti (Market Committee) had been validly appointed.
No machinery had been provided in the Rules for adjudication of disputes.
Fixation of minimum of 1% to be charged as market fee by all the Market Committees under section 17(iii)(b) of the Act was illegal as the requirement of and the services to be rendered by the various Market Committees could not be on the same footing.
There was no application of mind in issuing the notification dated 11 4 1978 whereby 250 market areas were notified and 115 items of agricultural produce were specified.
There could not be any multi point levy of any market fee either in the same market area or in different market areas.
The retrospective operation of the law brought about in section 17(iii)(b) by U.P. Act 7 of 1978 w.e.f. 12 6 1973 was bad.
No market fee could be levied on goods not produced within the limits of a particular market area and if produced outside and brought in such area.
No market fee could be levied both on paddy and rice.
The rice millers had been illegally asked to pay market fee on their sale of rice.
Similarly no market fee was payable on Ghee either by the producer trader of Ghee or by its purchaser.
Fee could be charged on sale of animals but could not be charged on hides and skins as was being illegally done.
Fee could be charged on wood or timber but could not be charged either on furniture manufactured from such wood or timber or on Catechu (Katha).
Wood cut and brought from the jungle by a manufacturer or paper could not be subjected to levy of fee.
Some of the items mentioned in the notification are Kirana goods brought from outside the market area or even from other States for sale in different Mandis, and cannot be subjected to the levy of market fee.
No market fee could be charged on tobacco or tendu leaves nor on bidis.
No market fee could be charged on rab salawat and rab galawat.
107 17.
No market fee can be charged if only goods are brought in a market area and despatched outside it without there taking place any transaction of purchase and sale in respect of these goods.
If no licence is issued or taken under section 9(1) of the Act then there is no liability to pay a market fee.
No market fee can be levied on transactions of match boxes, soyabin products.
No market fee can be charged from the vendors of fruits and vegetables through their Commission Agents.
Fee can be charged only on those transactions in which the seller is producer and not on any other transaction, and market fee can be charged only on those transactions in which the seller is the purchaser of agricultural produce and not on any other transaction.
^ HELD: 1.
Declaration of big areas as Market Areas does not offend any provision of law.
Any area big or small including towns and villages can be declared as Market Area under section 6 of the Act.
[121 F] 2.
The traders are required to take out licences under s.9(2) read with s.11 of the Act, for such place which is either a principal Market Yard or a sub Market Yard or at any specified place in the Market Area.
No body can be permitted to carry on his business anywhere in the Market Areas as the Market Committee will not be able to control and levy fee throughout the Market Area.
[121 G H] 3.
(i) Market Committees have not yet been constituted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 13 of the Act.
They have been constituted temporarily under Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samitis (Alpakalik Vyawastha) Adhiniyam, 1972 which was a temporary Act, extended from year to year.
It is high time that Market Committees should be constituted in a regular manner on a permanent basis in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter III of the Act.
[123 C] (ii) The levy and collection of fee by the temporary Market Committees is not illegal as argued on behalf of the appellants.
[123 D] Kewal Krishan Puri vs State of Punjab [1979] 3 S.C.R. 1217, referred to.
A machinery for adjudication of disputes is necessary to be provided under the Rules for the proper functioning of the Market Committees.
[123 E] 5(i) Under clause (b) of section 17(iii) of the Act a minimum and maximum limit of market fee chargeable has been fixed by the legislature.
The minimum is 1% and the maximum is 1 1/2% of the price of the agricultural produce sold.
The fixing of the minimum of 1% fee by itself is not illegal but it would be subject to the rendering of adequate services.
[123 G] (ii) The charging of 1% fee throughout the State of Uttar Pradesh by all the market Committees is not illegal and does not go beyond the quid pro quo theory discussed in Puri 's case.
[124 A] 108 6.
The notification dated 11 4 1978 indicates that in the various Districts, which number about 55, 250 Market Committees have been constituted and about 115 items have been selected in respect of which market fee has been directed to be levied.
None of the items so specified is such that it cannot be covered by the Schedule which is a part of the Act.
The definition of 'agricultural produce ' is very wide, and it is not confined to items of agricultural produce ' only but includes items of produce of horticulture, viticulture, apiculture, sericulture, pisci culture, animal husbandry or forest.
[124 C] 7(i) All the four clauses of clause (b) of section 17(iii) are mutually exclusive.
If the produce is purchased from a producer directly the trader shall be liable to pay the market fee to the Committee in accordance with sub clause (2).
But if the trader sells the same produce or any product of the same produce to another trader neither the seller trader nor the purchaser trader can be made to pay the market fee under sub clause (3).
[125 C] (ii) In a particular market area market fee cannot be levied both in relation to the transaction of purchase and sale of paddy and the rice produced from the same paddy.
Fee can be charged only on one transaction.
This finds support from the unamended Rules as they are, wherein is to be found sub r.
(2) of Rule 66.
There is nothing in the provisions of the Act or the Rules to warrant the view that in another market area the Market Committee of that area cannot levy fee on a fresh transaction of sale and purchase taking place in that area.
[125 H 126 A] 8(i) Before 1973, reading the provisions of the Act and the Rules, market fee was to be charged at such rates as specified in the bye laws of a particular Market Committee.
But it could not exceed 1/2 percentum of the price of the agricultural produce.
The liability to pay the fee was of the seller of the agricultural produce.
Market fee was liable to be paid under Rule 68(2) (ii) even if the specified agricultural produces was sold directly by the seller to the consumer.
This provision has now been superseded by an amendment in the Act brought about by U.P. Act 19 of 1979.
[127 F G] (ii) After the amendment in the Statute, Rules could apply only mutatis mutandis and wherever there was a conflict between the Rules and the Statute the latter had o prevail.
[128 D] (iii) The State Legislatures are competent to make retrospective amendment and retrospective imposition of a fee is valid.
However, in a given case and in a given situation the retrospective operation may be hit by Article 19.
[129 A B] B. Banerjee vs Anita Pan ; , M/s. section K. G. Sugar Ltd. vs State of Bihar & Ors.
[1975] 1 S.C.R. 312 and H. H. Sudhundra Thirtha Swamiar vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious & Charitable Endowments, Mysore [1963] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 302 referred to.
(iv) The Rules which were framed in 1965 namely Rules 66 and 68 are very different from the present provision of law.
The Government has failed to amend the Rules and bringing it in confirmity with the amended provisions of the Statute from time to time.
The Rules will apply as far as possible so long they do not come in conflict with the Statute and even 109 without the aid of the Rules the provision in section 17(iii) (b) as it stands after the amendment brought about by U.P. Act 7 of 1978 is workable and can be given effect to.
[128 G H] In the present case the retrospectivity of the law as such is not bad and the only safeguard will be that if market fee has been realised by any Market Committee in respect of transactions of sale of agricultural produce taking place between 12 6 1973 and the coming into force of U.P. Act 7 of 1978, in accordance with law as it prevailed then, no market fee under the amended law can be realized again.
But if in respect of any transactions aforesaid market fee had not yet been realised then it can be realised in accordance with the amended provision of the law.
[129 C] 9.
No provision in the Act or the Rules limit the operation of the law in a particular market area only in respect of the agricultural produce produced in that area.
[129 G] 10(i) A producer who produces agricultural produce generally does not indulge in trading activities so as to become a trader within the meaning of clause (y).
He is covered by clause (p) only.
If a person is simply a trader indulging in trading activities he is covered by the definition in clause (y).
The expression producer trader has been coined for a person who is both a producer of agricultural produce and himself trades in it.
For the purposes of the Act he ceases to be a producer and becomes a trader only as the definition indicates.
[130 A B] (ii) If paddy is purchased in a particular market area by a rice miller and the same paddy is converted into rice and then sold the rice miller will be liable to pay market fee on his purchase of paddy from the agriculturist producer under sub clause (2) of section 17 (iii) (b).
He cannot be asked to pay market fee over again under sub clause (3) in relation to the transaction of rice.
[130 E] (iii) Market fee has to be levied and collected in relation to the transaction of paddy alone.
Otherwise there will be a risk of violation of Article 14 if it is left to the Market Committee in the case of some rice millers to charge market fee on the transaction of paddy and in the case of others to charge it when the sale of the rice takes place.
If, however, paddy is brought by the rice miller from another market area, then the Market Committee of the area where paddy is converted into rice and sold will be entitled to charge market fee on the transaction and sale in accordance with sub clause (3).
[130 F G] (iv) In transactions of Ghee, a dealer who purchases milk or cream from the villagers and others and manufactures Ghee in his plant will be liable to pay market fee because he is the producer of Ghee within the meaning of the Act and at the same time a trader in Ghee also.
When he sells Ghee to another dealer in Ghee who is simply a dealer then under sub clause (3) of Section 17(iii)(b), the manufacturing dealer will be liable to pay market fee to the Market Committee or the transaction of Ghee, but he will be entitled to pass on the burden to his purchaser.
[131 C D] 11.
The definition clause (a) of section 2 uses the expression 'animal husbandry 's by way of a descriptive one without strictly confining to the pro 110 products of animal husbandry as the additions, of the words 'specified in the schedule ' indicates.
In the schedule under the group 'husbandry products ' are mentioned item 11 hides and skins, item 12 bones, item 13 meat etc.
Market fee is, therefore, leviable on the transactions of hides and skins as no market fee can be charged on transactions of sale and purchase of animals in a market area in the State of Uttar Pradesh the same having not been included in the notification.
Had it been included in the notification, then no market fee could be charged in the same market area on hides and skins.
It could only be charged in relation to the transaction of purchase and sale of animals.
[131 H, G; 132 B C] 12.
Group E of the notification dated 11 4 1978 deals with forest products.
The items mentioned therein are (1) Gum, (2) Wood, (3) Tendu leaves, (4) Catechu, and (5) Lac.
Market fee can be charged on purchase of wood by a trader from a producer.
No fee can be charged on the sale of furniture manufactured by the purchaser of wood.
According to the Market Committees Catechu is a product from timber or trees like Gum or Lac, which trickles down from the trees, while, according to the Catechu dealers by processing of Khar trees Catechu is produced.
This question of fact is left to be decided by the Market Committees concerned in the first instance and then by a court of law.
If Catechu is a product of Khar trees by some processing as prima facie it appears to be so, it is plain that market fee can be charged only on the purchase of Khar wood and not on the sale of Catechu.
[D, F] 13.
The owner of the jungle wherefrom the wood is cut and brought will be a producer within the meaning of the Act and the licensee producer of that wood would be a purchaser of an agricultural produce within the meaning of sub clause (2) of section 17(iii) (b) of the Act liable to pay market fee.
It matters little what use is made of the wood by him.
The question of quid pro quo and service cannot be decided by a dichotomy of service to every payer of fee as held in Kewal Krishan Puri 's case.
The matter has to be judged in a broad sense and not in the sense of rendering service to every individual payer of the fee.
[133 B C] 14.
In group A VI Spices are mentioned including certain Kirana items such as Ripe Chillies, Sonf, turmeric etc.
They are sold by the Kirana dealers.
Sometimes they purchase them from the agriculturists in the same market area.
In relation to those transactions they will be liable to pay market fee under sub clause (2) of section 17(iii) (b).
More often than not such articles are brought from outside and sold by the Kirana merchants.
If they are sold to consumers, no market fee can be levied in view of the proviso added in the year 1979.
If they are sold in wholesale, then the transaction can be subjected to the levy of market fee because in a particular market area they enter into the first transaction of sale in respect of the specified agricultural produce.
[133 E F] 15.
Market fee can be charged on transaction of tobacco as it is included in group A V of the notification.
Similar is the position in regard to tendu leaves which is mentioned in group E. Bidi cannot be treated as an agricultural produce as it is not an admixture of tobacco and tendu leaves within the meaning of section 2(a) of the Act.
But if a Bidi manufacturer purchases tobacco and tendu leaves in the market area and uses them in the manufac 111 ture of bidi, he will be liable to pay market fee in relation to the transaction of tobacco and tendu leaves.
[133 G 134 A] 16.
Market fee can be levied on the first transaction of rab taking place in any market area in accordance with any of the sub clause of section 17(iii)(b), as may be applicable.
It cannot be again charged on the second transaction of rab galawat or rab salawat even assuming that it is rab.
[134 F] 17.
If goods are merely brought in any market area and are despatched outside it without any transaction of sale taking place therein, then no market fee can be charged.
If the bringing of the goods in a particular market area and their despatch therefrom are as a result of transactions of purchase and sale taking place outside the market area, it is plain that no fee can be levied.
[135 B] 18(i) Producer as defined in clause (p) of section 2 is not required to take any licence for selling his agricultural produce nor is he required to pay market fee under any of the sub clauses of section 17(iii) (b).
But if he is a producer trader in the sense explained above, then he will be required to take out a licence in accordance with section 9(2) of the Act and no body can be permitted to carry on any trade in agricultural produce in the market area without a valid licence.
[135 E] The proviso to clause (p) of section 2 will be attracted only if a question arises as to whether any person is a producer or not for the purposes of the Act and in that event the decision of the Director made after an inquiry conducted in the manner prescribed by the Rules shall be final.
If a question arises whether a person is merely a producer or producer trader the Director will have no power to decide this question.
Such a question will have to be decided by the Market Committee itself which will be subject to the final decision of a court of law.
[135 G H] (ii) The traders cannot escape their liability to pay the fee on account of their default of taking out licences.
[136 D] 19.
Market fee can be charged only on the transactions of purchase of wood and if a manufacturer of match sticks purchases wood from the producer for the purpose of manufacturing the sticks he will be required to pay market fee on such purchase of wood only and not on the sale of match sticks or match boxes.
Similarly market fee will be leviable on the transaction of purchase of soyabin and not on transaction of sale of soyabin products.
[136 E] 20.
Under sub clause (1) of section 17(iii)(b) of the Act when fruits and vegetables are sold through a commission agent by the producer then the commission agent is liable to pay the market fee and he can realise it from the purchaser of fruits and vegetables.
The burden does not fall on the producer.
The liability in the first instance is of the commission agent and finally of the purchaser of the articles.
[136 H] 21.
In the U.P. Act even traders under certain circumstances have been made liable to pay such fees.
The argument that market fee can be charged only on those transactions in which the seller is the producer of agricultural produce and not on any other transaction is devoid of substance.
[138 C] 112 Mangalchand Ramchandra and others etc.
vs State of Bihar approved.
If anything has been realised from the traders or any other person which goes contrary to this judgment the same should be refunded by the Market Committee concerned within six months.
The form of the order in relation to the refund of the market fee may vary from case to case depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
[138 D] 23.
Market fee due from the traders should be regularised and be charged in the light of this judgment, and paid within a period of six month.
If there is any disputed question of fact to be decided by the Market Committee then it should be decided as quickly as possible leaving the person concerned to agitate the matter in a court of law, preferably, in the High Court, within short time thereafter.
[138 E F]
