The respondent was appointed on a purely temporary basis to the post of a medical Officer in the Oil and Natural Gas Commission.
Under the terms and conditions of service, he was to remain on probation for a period of one year which could be extended that the discretion of the appointing authority He was appointed on October 15, 1965.
During the period of his probation, on a report against him for negligence and dereliction of duty, a departmental enquiry was held against him but that was not proceeded with, nor was any punishment imposed on him.
His period of probation was extended for six months from 15 10 1966 and before his services were terminated, there was no express order either confirming him or extending the period of probation.
His services were terminated with effect from 28th July 1967.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High court on the ground that the order terminating his services was malafide and was in fact passed by way of penalty entailing evil consequences The plea taken by the respondent found favour with the High Court which allowed the petition and quashed the order of the appellant terminating the services of the respondent.
Hence the appeal by special leave by the State.
Allowing the appeal the Court ^ HELD: l.
A temporary employee is appointed on probation for a particular period only in order to test whether his conduct is good and satisfactory so that he may be retained.
The remarks, the assessment roll merely indicate the nature of the performance put in by the officer for the limited purpose of determining whether or not his probation should be extended.
These remarks were not intended to cast any stigma.
[607G H. 608A] R. L. Butail vs Union of India followed 2.
The contention that the real motive behind the termination of the service of the respondent was to inflict a punishment on him and as the appellants did not comply with the requirements of Article 311 of the Constitution, the order impugned was illegal is not correct.
In the first place, it was clearly pleaded by the Government in its counter affidavit that although an enquiry was held it was not continued and no punishment was imposed on the respondent.
As the respondent was merely a probationer the appointing, authority did not consider it necessary to continue the enquiry but decided to terminate the services of the respondent as he was not found suitable for the job.
In the case of n probationer or a temporary employee.
who has no right to the post, such a termina 604 tion of his service is valid and does not attract the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution [608C E, G H, 609A] Even if misconduct, negligence, inefficiency may be the motive or the inducing factor which influences the employer to terminate the services of the employee, a power which the appellants undoubtedly possessed, even so as under the terms of appointment of the respondent such power flowed from the R contract of service it could not be termed as penalty or Punishment.
[611C D] Shamsher Singh and Anr.
vs State of Punjab ; ; Purshottam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India ; ; State of U.P. vs Ram Chand Trivedi ; ; State of Maharashtra vs Veerappa R. Saboji and Anr. ; , followed.
The order impugned is prima facie an order of termination simpliciter without involving any stigma.
The order does not in any way involve any evil consequences and is an order of discharge simpliciter of the respondent who was a probationer and had no right to the service.
The respondent has not been able to make out any strong case for this Court to delve into the documents, materials in order to determine a case of victimisation or one of punishment The short history of the service of the respondent clearly showed that his work had never been satisfactory and he was not found suitable for being retained in service and that is why even though some sort of an enquiry was started, it was not proceeded with and no punishment was inflicted on him.
In these circumstances therefore, if the appointing authority considered it expedient to terminate the services of the respondent a probationer it cannot be said that the order of termination attracted the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution.
Thus, if the appellant found that the respondent was not suitable for being retained in service that will not vitiate the order impugned.
[611G H, 612B D] State of Bihar vs Gopi Kishore Parsad A.I.R. 1960, 689; distinguished.
