The appellant, assessee in an Abkari contractor.
It filed a return of its income for the assessment year 1959 60, disclosing a total turnover of Rs. 10,92,132/ and an income of Rs. 7,704/ .
The Income Tax Officer did not accept the correctness of the return.
He found that on 12th December, 1957 and 16th January, 1958 the excess of expenditure over the disclosed available cash was Rs. 17,726/ and Rs. 65,066 respectively.
He also noticed several deposits, totalling Rs. 28,200, entered in the names of certain Sendhi shopkeepers.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the account books of the assessee and his explanations for the discrepancies thereof and estimated the assessee 's income on an overall figure of Rs. 5,00,018.
In appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and thereafter before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal the assessee succeeded in getting the assessed income reduced to Rs. 1,30,000 in addition to the books profits.
Penalty proceedings were taken against the assessee and the case was referred to the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, who imposed a penalty of Rs. 75,000 under section 271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
On appeal by the assessee, the Appellate Tribunal held that there was no positive material to establish that the cash deposits represented concealed income.
In regard to the cash deficits, the Appellate Tribunal noticed that for the assessment year 1957 58 an addition of Rs. 2,00,000 had been made to the book profits, and it observed that some part of that amount could have been ploughed back into the business.
It held that an amount of Rs. 90,000 representing unledgerised cash credits of that year could be said to have been introduced in that year.
Allowing the appeal, the Appellate Tribunal set aside the penalty order made by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner.
On a reference to the High Court, at the instance of the Commissioner of Income Tax, the High Court held that the Appellate Tribunal was not justified in holding that no penalty was leviable.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Directing the Appellate Tribunal to take up the appeal under section 260(1) of the Income Tax Act, the Court ^ HELD: An order imposing a penalty is the result of quasi criminal proceedings.
The burden of proof lies on the Revenue to establish that the disputed amount represents income and that the assessee has consciously concealed the particulars of his income or has deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars.
It is for the Revenue to prove these ingredients before a penalty can be imposed.
[622B C] 619 Since the burden of proof in a penalty proceeding varies from that involved in an assessment proceedings a finding in an assessment proceeding that a particular receipt is income cannot automatically be adopted as a finding to that effect in the penalty proceeding.
In the penalty proceeding the taxing authority is bound to consider the matter afresh on the material before it and, in the light of the burden to prove resting on the Revenue, to ascertain whether a particular amount is a revenue receipt.
No doubt, the fact that the assessment order contained a finding that the disputed amount represents income constitutes good evidence in the penalty proceeding but the finding in the assessment proceeding cannot be regarded as conclusive for the purposes of the penalty proceeding.
Before a penalty can be imposed the entirety of the circumstances must be taken into account and must point to the conclusion that the disputed amount represents income and that the assessee has consciously concealed particulars of his income or deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars.
The mere falsity of the explanation given by the assessee is insufficient without there being in addition cogent material or evidence from which the necessary conclusion attracting a penalty could be drawn.
[622C G] Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal and Anr.
vs Anwar Ali ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras vs Khoday Eswara and Sons, ; applied.
When an 'intangible ' addition is made to the book profits during an assessment proceeding, it is on the basis that the amount represented by that addition constitutes the undisclosed income of the assessee.
That income although commonly described as 'intangible ', is as much a part of his real income as that disclosed by his account books.
It has the same concrete existence.
It could be available to the assessee as the book profits could be.
[623A B] 3.
Secret profits or undisclosed income of an assessee earned in an earlier assessment year may constitute a fund, even though concealed, from which the assessee may draw subsequently for meeting expenditure or introducing amounts in his account books.
Any part of that fund need not necessarily be regarded as the source of unexplained expenditure incurred or of cash credits recorded during a subsequent assessment year.
The mere availability of such a fund cannot, in all cases, imply that the assessee has not earned further secret profits during the relevant assessment year It is a matter for consideration by the taxing authority, in each case, whether the unexplained cash deficits and the cash credits can be reasonably attributed to a pre existing fund of concealed profits or they are reasonably explained by reference to concealed income earned in that very year.
In each case the true nature of the cash deficit and the cash credit must be ascertained from an overall consideration of the particular facts and circumstances of the case.
Evidence may exist to show that reliance cannot be placed completely on the availability of a previously earned undisclosed.
income.
A number of circumstances of vital significance may point to the conclusion that the cash deficit or cash credit cannot reasonably be related to the amount covered by the intangible addition but must be regarded as pointing to the receipt of undisclosed income earned during the assessment year under consideration.
It is open to the Revenue to rely on all the circumstances pointing to that conclusion.
What those several circumstances can be is difficult to enumerate and indeed, from the nature of the enquiry, it is almost impossible to do so.
However, they must be such as can lead to the firm conclusion that 620 the assessee has concealed the particulars of his income or has deliberately furnished inaccurate particulars.
[623C H, 624A] Lagadapti Subha Ramiah vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, ; section Kuppuswami Mudaliar vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras, ; approved.
In an income tax reference, a High Court should confine itself to deciding the question of law referred to it on facts found by the Appellate Tribunal.
It is the Appellate Tribunal which has been entrusted with the authority to find facts.
[624D E]
