On selection by the Punjab Public Service Commission B. R. Kapur (appellant in CA 2413/78) and Harjeet Singh (Appellant in CA 2526/77) were directly recruited in 1951, as Deputy Superintendents of Police in the Punjab Police Service.
B. R. Kapur was senior to Harjeet Singh as Deputy Superintendent of Police.
In 1960, both of them were included in the Select List prepared under Regulation 7 of the Indian Police Service, (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955.
On November 24, 1960, B. R. Kapur was appointed as Assistant Inspector General of Police which post was a cadre post.
In May 1961 he was appointed to a non cadre post as Director of Sports and Youth Programme and Deputy Secretary to Government, Sports Department.
He held this post upto November 18, 1962, and thereafter he was appointed as Additional Controller of Stores, Punjab which was also a non cadre post.
He continued to hold the post of Additional Controller of Stores till 1965, from July 19, 1965 he was Commandant, 40th Battalion PAP, J & K which was a cadre post.
He held the post till July 11, 1966 when he took over as Commandant of 25th Battalion PAP.
On the reorganisation of the State of Punjab, he was appointed as Assistant General of Police, State of Punjab from November 1, 1966.
Thereafter he continuously held cadre posts and was finally appointed to the Indian Police Service with effect from September 3, 1969.
Shri Harjeet Singh was appointed to officiate as Superintendent of Police in December 1960.
The post was a cadre post.
He continued to hold a cadre post till he was appointed to the Indian Police Service with effect from September 3, 1969.
After the two officers were appointed to the Indian Police Service the question of assignment of year of allotment and fixation of seniority arose for the consideration of the Government of India.
Shri B. R. Kapur was allotted the year 1963 and placed below Sube Singh and above section R. Sharma (direct recruits) in the Indian Police Service, counting his continuous officiating service from 1 11 66 only, as service in a senior cadre post and not his service in the 460 non cadre post.
In the case of Harjeet Singh, though he admittedly officiated continuously in a senior cadre post from December 1960, he was also allotted to the year 1963 and placed below Sri Kapur on the ground that he ranked below Sri Kapur in the select list.
Kapur and Harjeet Singh filed writ petitions in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana questioning the allotment of the year 1963.
The Writ petitions were accepted.
The Court directed the Union and Punjab Governments to redetermine the year of allotment and seniority of Harjeet Singh and Kapur taking December 17.
1960 and July 29, 1965 respectively as the dates of their continuous officiation in a senior post.
A further direction was issued that before redetermining the seniority of the two officials, the respondents to the Writ Petitions who were direct recruits should be afforded an opportunity to make their representation.
Appeals under clause 10 of the Letters Patent were filed by the affected direct recruits as also by B. R. Kapur.
The direct recruits contended that neither B. R. Kapur nor Harjeet Singh would have ever started officiating in the senior post on the dates from which they officiated or claimed officiating in the senior post on the dates from which they officiated or claimed to have officiated in senior posts, if the State Governments had not created artificial vacancies by excessive utilisation of the "deputation and central reserve" quota in contravention of the cadre Rules and the Cadre strength Regulations.
The arguments before the Division Bench therefore was that the period of service attributable to over utilisation of 'deputation and central reserve ' quota should not be treated as service in a senior post for the purpose of determining the year of allotment of officers promoted to the Indian Police Service.
The argument was accepted by the Division Bench and a direction was issued to the Central Government to reconsider the question of year of allotment after taking into consideration the question of over utilisation and its effect.
The finding of the learned Single Judge that B. R. Kapur was entitled to have his service as Commandant 25th battalion as officiation in a senior post was however affirmed.
Hence the appeals by special leave by Harjeet Singh and Kapur.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the Petitions, the Court.
^ HELD: 1 Rule 3(3)(b) of the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules, 1954 is valid.
[476E] A.P. Sharma vs Union of India, ; followed.
Rule 3(3)(b) as well as Rule 4(4) of the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority Rules 1954 throw up the date of continuous officiation of an officer in a cadre post as the most important factor both for the purpose of assignment of year of allotment and for the purpose of assignment of seniority.
For the purpose of assignment of year of allotment the date of continuous officiation in a senior post is the only relevant factor while for the purpose of assignment of seniority, first, the date of continuous officiation in a senior post, then the date of appointment to the Service if the date of commencement of continuous officiation in a Senior post of more than one officer is the same and, finally, the order in the Select List if the date of appointment is also the same and, finally, the order in the Select List if the date of appointment is also the same are the several relevant factors in that order.
Thus the order in the Select List is irrelevant for the purpose of determining the year of allotment 461 and is relevant in determining the seniority, only if the year of allotment of the officers is also the same, and their date of appointment is also the same.
Since the order in the Select List is dependent on the seniority in the State Service, it follows that seniority in the State Police Service is irrelevant for the purpose of determining the year of allotment and is relevant for the purpose of determining the seniority only if the year of allotment and the date of appointment of two or more officers are the same.
Therefore an officer who is junior to another in the State Police Service but, who starts continuous officiation in a Senior post from a date earlier than the other, may frog leap and gain seniority by the consequential assignment of an earlier year of allotment.
Neither the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules nor any other rule in the innumerable Rules and Regulations governing the recruitment, appointment and Regulation of seniority of officers of the Indian Police Service is designed to deprive an officer, the benefit of continuous officiation in a senior post.
[471G H, 472A E] 3.
Though under the Indian Police Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, the Select List is prepared on the basis of merit and ability, the order in which officers are placed in the Select List is according to seniority in the State Police Service and not according to merit and ability.
Merit and ability are considered for the purpose of inclusion in the Select List but thereafter seniority in the State Police Service takes over and the names of officers are arranged in the order of that seniority.
Therefore the benefit of continuous officiation in a Senior post cannot be denied to an officer appointed to the Indian Police Service merely on the ground that an officer senior to him in the State Police Service did not so continuously officiate.
[472F H] 4.
It is true that under Regulation 8 of the Indian Police Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulation & Appointments to cadre posts from among non cadre officers should be made according to the order in which the names of such officers appear in the Select List.
A deviation from the order is permissible if administrative exigencies require it and if the vacancy is not likely to last for more than three months.
Of course, the Regulation does not license uninhibited deviation to favour individual non cadre officers.
If that is done the deviation is liable to challenge.
But where there is no such allegation, there is no reason why a junior non cadre officer should lose the benefit of his continuous officiation in a cadre post merely because a non cadre officer senior to him in the Select List did not continuously officiate likewise.
In such a situation, it would be for the Government of India to consider whether the relevant rules may not be so relaxed as to enable such non cadre officer to add his officiation in a non cadre post to his officiation in a cadre post, regard being had to the circumstances under which the officer had to work in a non cadre post while his junior in the Select List was made to fill the cadre post.
But, surely, it cannot work to the prejudice of the junior officer in the Select List so as to nullify the actual, continuous, officiating service rendered by him.
In the present case there is no allegation that B. R. Kapur was appointed to the non cadre posts of Director of Sports and Additional Controller of Stores with a view to favour Harjeet Singh.
[472 H, 473A D] 5.
Non cadre officers if they are appointed to cadre posts in accordance with Rule 9 of the Cadre Rules should not be denied the benefit of continuous officiation in senior post merely because cadre officers were appointed on deputation elsewhere in excess of the number of posts specified against a 462 Deputation Reserve in the schedule to the Cadre Fixation of Strength Regulation.
[473E F] Fixation of Cadre Strength Regulations are made in exercise of the power conferred on the Central Government by Rule 4(1) of the Cadre Rules and are, therefore, subordinate to the Cadre rules even as rules made in exercise of powers conferred by a Statute are necessarily subordinate to the Statute.
Rule 6 of the Cadre Rules provides for the deputation of Cadre officers and Rule 9 of the same rules provides for the temporary appointment of non cadre officers to cadre posts.
In making appointment of non cadre officers to cadre posts the rule prescribes the fulfillment of certain conditions.
In the instant case.
that the conditions prescribed by rule 9 of the Cadre Rules were fulfilled is clear from the impugned order.
[473F H] 6.
Rule 4(1) of the Cadre Rules enables the Central Government to make Regulations determining the strength and composition of the Cadre of each State.
A definite number of posts is also specified against "Deputation Reserve" in the schedule to the fixation of Cadre Strength Regulations.
But if owing to the situational demands and exigencies of the administration, the number is exceeded and the State Government is compelled to utilise the services of experienced non cadre officers to fill cadre posts in strict compliance with the Cadre Rules, the Service rendered by the non cadre officers in such posts should not be ignored.
In the instant case, the deputation of cadre officers was in accordance with Rule 6 of the Cadre Rules.
[474A C] 7.
Fixation of cadre strength Regulations made under Rule 4 of the Cadre Rules do not over ride the Recruitment Rule, the remaining Cadre Rules and the Seniority Rules so as to render invalid any service rendered by a non cadre officer in a cadre post on the mere ground of breach of the Fixation of Cadre Strength Regulations, when there has been strict compliance with Rule 9 of the Cadre Rules.
Fixation of Cadre Strength is the exclusive concern of the Central and the State Governments and the Regulations are made for their convenience and better relationship.
Excessive utilisation of 'Deputation or Central Reserve ' is a matter for adjustment and controversy between the Central and the State Governments and is of no concern to any member of the service.
For example no cadre officer who is asked to fill a deputation post can refuse to join the post on the ground that the 'Deputation Reserve ' has already been exceeded.
The Regulations are not intended to and do not confer any right on any member of the Service, unlike some other Rules which do confer or create rights in the members of the Services.
A mere breach of the rule furnishes no cause of action on the ground that his seniority is affected in some round about way.
[474C G and 475A] 8.
Under Rule 6(A) (2) of the Indian Police Service Recruitment Rules a direct recruit in the junior time scale of pay can be appointed to a post in the Senior time scale of pay if having regard to his length of service, experience and performance he is found to be suitable for appointment to post in the Senior time scale of pay.
Since at that time in Punjab, there was no direct recruit in the junior time scale of pay who possessed experience of at least four years who could be thought of for appointment in the Senior post, the State Government had no option except to appoint experienced and suitable non cadre officers to cadre posts.
Further no cadre officer who had been so deputed suffered in any manner in the matter of his career.
[475B D] 463 Further, the appointment of non cadre officers to cadre posts is subject to the directions of the Central Government, who may terminate such appointment.
The Central Government too is bound to obtain the advice of the Union Public Service Commission if the appointment is to extent beyond six months.
Moreover non cadre officers of proven merit only are appointed to cadre posts.
They are appointed to cadre posts if they are already in the Select List and the appointments are made in accordance with the order in which they are placed in the Select List which is prepared under the Indian Police Service Recruitment Rules after following an elaborate procedure involving a thorough examination at various levels, of the merit of the officers of the State Police Service.
A State officer whose name appears on the Select List may expect to be appointed to a cadre post and to be promoted to the Indian Police Service at any time thereafter according to vacancy position.
A direct recruit who ordinarily comes into the picture years after a State Officer 's name appears on the Select List cannot have any real grievance that the promoted officer is given an anterior date for the purpose of seniority since such date can never be earlier than the date from which the junior most direct recruit continuously officiated in a Senior post prior to the commencement of the continuous officiation of the promoted officer.
[475E H, 476A B] 9.
Every departure from a rule which departure gives certain advantages to one group of Civil servants as against another does not necessarily involve an encroachment of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Fixation of Cadre Strength Regulations cannot be interpreted as comprising any "Quota" rule.
There is no allegation of breach of "quota" rule embodied in Rule 9(2) of the Recruitment Rules either.
[476B E] N. K. Chauhan and Ors.
vs State of Gujarat, ; , distinguished.
"The over utilisation" of "Deputation and Central Reserve" does not affect the questions of assignment of the year of allotment and the seniority of the appellants.
[476F G]
