On the question whether sections 7 and 16 of the U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special Provisions) Act, 1976 (Act 127 of 1976) related only to "approved" Schemes under section 68D of the and, therefore, the approved scheme for inter state range Agra Dholpur of Agra region was inoperative, the Court, while dismissing the Writ Petitions and the connected special leave petitions.
^ HELD: (1) Sections 7 and 16 of U.P. Motor Vehicles (Special Pro visions) Act, 1976 have validly provided that the specification of the number of services is not and shall be deemed to have never been an essential requirement in a scheme prepared and published under section 68D of the .
[503A B] The marginal note to section 7 states "specification of number of services not an essential requirement of section 68C or section 68D", makes the intention clear that the section is intended to cover section 68C also.
The intention is also carried out by the Section providing that "Nothing contained in section 68C or section 68D of the Principal Act shall be deemed to require. " The operation of section 7 is thus intended to apply both to sections 68C and 68D.
The result would be that if one of the requirements of section 68C is that it should specify the number of services to be provided, it shall be deemed that requirement was never there.
The reference to the approved scheme is because section 68C and section 68D form part of the same procedure of publication of a scheme and approval of the scheme.
That this is the object is put beyond all doubt by the introduction of the validation section, section 16, which provides that in any scheme prepared or published under section 68C or approved or modified under section 68D of the Principal Act shall not be deemed to be invalid on the ground of number of services to be provided being not specified therein.
[502F H, 503A] Shashi Kant Rai & ors.
vs Regional Transport Authority, Varanasi Region and ors.
AIR 1978 All.
68 over ruled.
Failure to specify the member of services would not invalidate the draft scheme under section 68C or the approved scheme under section 68D of the .
It cannot be said that when the word "particulars" is used in this part of section 68C, it can only be satisfied if the exact number of vehicles and trips for each rank is specified, and, that 499 there is no other way of satisfying the requirement implicit in the use of the A word "particulars".
The exact number of vehicles and trips for each route need not be given and all that section 7 of the amended Act provides is that the draft scheme as well as the approved scheme need not specify the number of services.
[504C E] B.B. Aswathanarayan Singh & Ors.
vs State of Mysore & ors. , applied.
(3) In the instant case, the impugned scheme cannot be held to be inoperative for non mentioning of the maximum or minimum number of buses, vehicles and trips, since the scheme notified in U.P. Gazette on 4 12 1961 gave the required particulars.
A reading of the scheme would indicate that transport vehicles and services would be provided on the routes taken over by country type vehicles with 30 to 45 seats capacity.
Moreover, this objection which was not taken before the scheme was approved in 1963 would not be allowed to be taken after a lapse of 15 years.
[504 G H, 505 A B]
