The Municipal Committee of Bahadurgarh, respondent No. 2 established Mandi Fateh in Bahadurgarh Town with a view to improve trade in the area.
The Municipal Committee decided that the purchasers of the plots for sale in the Mandi would not be required to pay octroi duty on goods imported within the said Mandi.
A resolution (No. 8) dated 20 12 1916 was passed by the Municipality to this effect.
Hand bills were issued for the sale of the plots on the basis of the resolution and it was proclaimed that Fateh Mandi would remain exempt from payment of octroi.
Subsequently by resolution No. 4 dated 20 5 1917, the Municipal Committee decided that the term No. 14 to the conditions of sale, namely, that the purchasers of plots would not be required to pay octroi, be amended to the effect that the Mandi shall remain immune from payment of octroi duty for ever.
When the resolution was received by the Commissioner of Ambala, in paragraph 3 of his letter dated 26 6 1917, he minuted that the undertaking by the Municipal Commissioner never to impose octroi duty in the Mandi was ultra vires and therefore the purchasers of the plots should be informed so that they may withdraw from the purchases.
On receipt of this letter the President of the Municipal Committee made representations that if octroi duty was to be levied, there would be no purchasers for the plots and the entire scheme would fall through.
On this, the Commissioner revised his earlier view and withdrew his objection by further observing that "as soon as the market is established it will be necessary to consider what form of taxation is best to cover the market share of municipal expenses".
The Municipal Committee on 10 3 1919 imposed house tax of Rs. 3 14 6 per cent per annum on the shopkeepers to cover the expenditure of the market.
This state of affairs continued till 4 9 1953 when the Municipal Committee by notification No. 9697 C 53/63830 dated 4 9 1953 included Fateh Mandi, Bahadurgarh, within the octroi limits.
The Examiner of Local Funds pointed out that the Municipal Committee is under obligation to charge octroi on goods imported into Fateh Mandi.
The President of the Municipal Committee made a representation to the Deputy Commissioner on 24 2 1954.
The Municipal Committee again passed another resolution No. 1 dated 2 3 1954 that the Fateh Mandi will remain free from octroi duty according to the terms of the proclamation of the sale relating to the sale of plots.
The matter was referred to Punjab State which after thoroughly examining the whole matter, confirmed Resolution No. 1 passed by the Municipal Committee on 2 3 1954, Subse 690 quently, the Municipal Committee changed its mind and by its resolution dated 8 5 1954, resolved that octroi duty should also be levied on the goods imported into Fateh Mandi.
But this resolution was annulled by the Punjab Government under section 236 of the Punjab Municipal Act.
The Examiner of Local Funds Accounts in the meantime insisted on the levy of octroi duty on the goods imported into Fateh Mandi and the Punjab Government after discussing the issue on 9 4 1956 informed the President of the Municipal Committee that the Government 's action in confirming the resolution No. 1 of 2 3 1954 of the Municipal Committee, Bahadurgarh exempting goods imported into Fateh Mandi from levy of octroi duty under section 70(2)(c) of the Municipal Act, 1911, is quite in order and that no separate notification to this effect was necessary under the rules.
Again on 21 7 1965, the Municipal Committee Bahadurgarh resolved that the Government be requested to cancel Resolution No. 1 dated 2 3 1954.
The State of Haryana Respondent No. 1 which came into existence on 1 11 64 under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, by its memo dated 13 10 1967 approved the resolution No. 6 dated 21 7 65 of the Municipal Committee and cancelled the Municipal Resolution No. 1 of 2 3 1964.
As a result of the decision of the Government, the Municipal Committee started charging octroi duty on the goods imported into the Mandi.
On these facts, the petitioners submitted that the resolution No. 6 of the Municipal Committee dated 21 7 1965 (Annexure 6) and approval granted by the Haryana State as per its order dated 30 10 1967 (Ann.
H) were illegal and ultra vires and without jurisdiction.
A Full Bench of the High Court rejected the petition mainly on three grounds.
Firstly, it found that the State Government is entitled under section 62 A of Punjab Act, 48/1953 to direct the Municipal Committee to impose octroi duty and as such even if the municipality is found to have erred in imposing the Octroi Duty, the legislative powers of the State cannot be questioned.
Secondly, it found, that it was not within the competence of the Municipality to grant any exemption from payment of octroi duty and this act was ultra vires of its powers and cannot be enforced.
Thirdly, it found that the Court cannot go into the question as to whether the petitioners ' plea based on equity that the Municipality is bound, cannot be gone into far want of adequate facts.
The High Court however granted certificates to the appellants.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Under section 62 A of the Punjab Municipal Act.
1911 as amended by Punjab Act 43/1958 the State Government is empowered to impose octroi duty and under sub clause (b) if the committee fails to carry cut the order of the Government, the State Government may impose octroi Duty.
Under section 70(2)(c), a Municipal Committee by a resolution passed at a special meeting and confirmed by the State Government may exempt in whole or in part from payment of any such tax any person or class of persons or any property or description of property.
In exercise of those powers, the State Government had by its order dated 4 5 1954 confirmed resolution No. 1 passed by the Municipal Committee in its special meeting held on 2 3 1954 regarding the exemption of goods imported into Fateh Mandi from levy of octroi Duty.
Subsequently, in reply to the objection raised by the Examiner of Local Funds, the Government pointed out by its letter dated 9 4 1956 (Ann. F) that the Government 's action confirming the resolution No. 1 dated 2 3 1954 of the Municipal Committee exempting Goods imported into Fateh Mandi, under section 70(2)(c) of 691 the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, was quite in order.
By the impugned order dated 20 10 1967 the Government approved the resolution No. 6 of the Municipal Committee dated 21 7 1965 and permitted the Municipality to levy the octroi Duty.
Therefore, the action taken by the State Government is strictly in conformity with the powers conferred on it under section 70(2)(c) of the Act.
It exempted the petitioners from payment of octroi Duty for a particular period and ultimately withdrew the exemption.
The action of the Government cannot be questioned as it is in exercise of its statutory functions.
The plea of estoppel is not available against the State in the exercise of its legislative or statutory functions.
The Government have power to direct the Municipality to collect the octroi Tax if the Municipality fails to take action by itself under section 60(A) (3).
Further, even on facts, this plea is not available as against the Government as it is not the case of the petitioners that they acted on the representation of the Government.
[698 E H, 699 A C] 2.
The Municipality is not estopped from levying or recommending the levy of the tax to the Government even though in the proclamation of sale it was notified that no octroi duty would be levied and it was only in pursuance of such representation the appellants purchased the property because the Municipal Committee had no authority to exempt the Fateh Market from the levy of Octroi duty.
If the Municipal Committee had passed a resolution or issued a notification that no octroi duty will be levied, it will be ultra vires of the powers of the Municipal Committee.
When a public authority acts beyond the scope of its authority the plea of estoppel is not available to prevent the authority from acting according to law.
It is in public interest that no such plea should be allowed.
Further, in the instant case, the appellants are not entitled to any enforceable legal right under the terms of the Municipal Act, since non production of any sale deed executed by the Municipal Committee in favour of the purchasers raises the only presumption that the contract between the parties have not been proved to have been reduced in writing and executed in the manner prescribed under section 47 of the Municipality Act, 1911 (Act 3 of 1911).
[699 C E 700 B D] 3.
Article 299(1) of the Constitution of India corresponding to Section 175 (3) of the Government of India Act, 1935 provides that all contracts made in the exercise of executive powers of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by the President or by the Governor of the State, as the case may be, and all such contracts and assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor by such persons and in such manner as he may direct or authorise.
The provisions of this Article is mandatory and not directory, is enacted as a matter of public policy that the State should not be saddled with liability for unauthorised contracts and is enacted in the public interest.
The provisions are embodied on the ground of public policy on the ground of protection of general public.
[700 F H, 701 A B] Seth Bhikraj Jaipuria vs Union of India, ; ; Mulam Chand vs State of M.P., Karamshi Jethabhiai Samrayya vs State of Bombay, ; ; referred to.
The scope of the plea of doctrine of promissory estoppel against the Government is as follows: (a) The plea of promissory estoppel is not available against the exercise of the legislative or executive functions of the State.
There could not be estoppel 692 against express provisions of the law nor could the State by its action waive its rights to exercise powers entrusted to it for the public good.
[721 F] Antonio Buttigieg vs Captain Stephen H. Cross and ors.
AIR 1907 PC; Adants vs London Improved Motor Coach Builders, [821] 1 K.B. 495, York Corporation vs Henry Leethan and Sons Ltd., ; William Cory and Sons Ltd. vs London Corporation, ; Howell vs Falmouth Boat Construction Co. Ltd., ; Commissioner of Crown Lands vs Page, ; South end on Sea Corporation vs Hodgson (Wickrord) Ltd., ; Federal Insurance Corpn.
vs Marril, 382 U.S. 380; quoted with approval.
Robertson vs Minister of Pensions, dissented from.
Assistant Custodian of E.P. and ors.
vs Brij Kishore Agarwala, ; ; Bihar Eastern Gangetic Fishermen Cooperative Society vs Sipahi Singh & ors. ; ; applied.
Union of India vs Indo Afghan Agencies, ; ; Century Spinning & Manufacturing Co. Ltd. and Anr.
vs Ulhas Nagar Municipal Council and anr., [1970] 3 SCR 854; Turner Morrison Co. Ltd. vs Hungerford Investment Trust Ltd., ; ; explained and distinguished.
Collector of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay and ors.
,[1952] SCR p. 43; Excise Commr.
U.P., Allahabad vs Ram Kumar, [1976] Supp.
SCR 532; M. Ramanatha Pillai vs State of Kerala, ; ; State of Kerala and Anr.
vs The Gwalior Manufacturing (Wvg.) Co. Ltd.; , ; followed.
(b) The doctrine cannot be invoked for preventing the Government from discharging its functions under the law.
[721 G] (c) When an officer of the Government acts outside the scope of his authority, the plea of promissory estoppel is not available.
The doctrine of ultra vires will come into operation and the Government cannot be held bound by the unauthorised acts of its officers.
[721 G H] (d) When the officer acts within the scope of his authority under a scheme and enters into an agreement and makes a representation and a person acting on that representation puts himself in a disadvantageous position, the Courts is entitled to require the officer to act according to the scheme and the agreement or representation.
The officer cannot arbitrarily act on his mere whim and ignore his promise on some undefined and undisclosed grounds of necessity or change the conditions to the prejudice of the person who had acted upon such representation and put himself in a disadvantageous position.
[721 G H, 722 A B] Union of India vs Indo Afghan Agencies Ltd., ; ; discussed and followed.
(e) The officer would be justified in changing the terms of the agreement to the prejudice of the other party on special considerations such as difficult foreign exchange position or other matters which have a bearing on general interest of the State.
[722 B C] Union of India vs M/s Indo Afghan Agencies Ltd., ; applied.
693 5.
It is only in public interest that it is recognised that an authority acting on behalf of the Government or by virtue of statutory powers cannot exceed his authority.
Rule of ultra vires will become applicable when he exceeds his authority and the Government would not be bound by such action.
Any person who enters into an arrangement with the Government has to ascertain and satisfy himself that the authority who purports to act for the Government, acts within the scope of his authority and cannot urge that the Government is in the position of any other litigant liable to be charged with liability.
[705 G H, 706 A] 6.
The doctrine of estoppel which burst out into sudden blaze in 1946 and ever since continuing to smoulder due to the consistent maintenance of the original author 's interest in its further development, now in this direction and now in that, though interesting is not relevant in administering Indian Law.
Section 63 of the Contract Act which provides that when a creditor accepts a lesser sum in satisfaction of the whole debt, the whole debt becomes discharged is a wide departure from the English law as laid down in Jordan vs Monye.
The doctrine of estoppel referred to in High Trees case is to some extent taken care of by section 65 and 70 of the Indian Contract.
Section 65 provides that when a contract becomes void, any person who has received any advantage under such agreement or contract is bound to restore it or to make compensation for it, to the person from whom he received it.
Under section 70 of the Contract Act.
an obligation is cast on the person enjoying benefit of a non gratutious act to compensate the person who lawfully performed the Act.
[707 A, 708 B, D F] Foakes vs Beer, ; ; Jordan vs Money, [1854] 5 H.L. Cas 185; Fenner vs Blake, ; Woodhouse Ltd. vs Nigerian Produce Ltd., , In Re. Wickham William Porter and Co. Ltd., [1937] 2 All.
E.R. 361; Central London Property Trust Ltd. vs High Trees House Ltd., ; referred to.
The provisions of Section 70 of the Indian Contract Act are applicable to contract which is not according to Section 175 of the Government of India Act and Article 299 of the Constitution of India.
[708 G H] State of West Bengal vs B. K. Mondal and Ors., [1962 Supp.
SCR p. 876; New Marine Coal Co. Ltd. vs Union of India.
; ; referred to.
All that the Indo Afghan Agencies case laid down was that a public authority acting on behalf of the Government cannot on its own whim and in an arbitrary manner seek to alter the conditions accepted by him to the prejudice of the other side.
The decision in terms accepts that after taking into consideration the exigencies and change of circumstances the authority can modify the conditions in exercise of his powers as a public policy.
Apart from not noticing Howell 's case, the Court in Indo Afghan 's case did not say that the law as extracted from the judgment in Robertson 's case by Denning J. was applicable to India.
[719 D E, 721 A] 9.
The Judgment in M/s Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. (P) Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1979] 2 SCR p. 641 is not in accordance with the view consistently taken by the Supreme Court in following respects : [722 F] (i) The decision in the case of Union of Indian vs M/s Indo Afghan Agencies Ltd., ; cannot be constructed in the manner in which it was 694 done.
All that the Indo Afghan case purports to lay down is that the Court can enforce an obligation incurred by an authority on which another has acted upon and put himself in a disadvantageous position, when the authority resiles arbitrarily or on mere whim or on some undefined and undisclosed grounds of necessity.
[722 F G] (ii) The decision of this Court in Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd and Anr.
vs The Ulhasnagar Municipal Council and Anr., [1970] 3 SCR 854 was understood as refusing to make a distinction between the private individual and public body so far as the doctrine of promissory estoppel is concerned.
[723 F] (iii) The three decisions of this Court, two by Constitution Benches M. Ramanatha Pillai vs State of Kerala, State of Kerala vs The Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. and the third by a Bench of four judges in Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad vs Ram Kumar cannot be ignored on the ground that the observations are in the nature of obiter dicta and that it cannot be insisted as intending to have laid down any proposition of law different from that enunciated in the Indo Afghan Agencies case.
It was not necessary for this Court in the three cases to refer to Union of India & others vs Indo Afghan Agencies.
If properly understood it only held that the authority cannot go back on the agreement arbitrarily or on its own whim.
[723 H, 724 A B] (iv) The case of the House of Lords in Howell vs Falmouth Boat Construction Co. Ltd. cannot be read as not having overruled the view of Denning J. and as not having expressed its disapproval of the doctrine of promissory estoppel against the crown in Robertson vs Minister of Pensions.
[724 B C] (v) The Indian Constitution as a matter of high policy in public interest has enacted Article 299 so as to save the Government from liability arising out of unauthorised acts of its officers and contracts not duly executed.
Sections 65 and 70 of the Indian Contract Act provide for certain reliefs in void contracts and in unenforceable contracts where a person relying on a representation has acted upon it and put himself in a disadvantageous position.
The activist jurisprudence and the wide implications thereof, propounded in the Motilal Padampat, Sugar case doubted.
[724 E, F, G] (vii) The Indian Contract Act regulates the right of parties and expressly insists on the necessity for lawful consideration which cannot be dispensed with by invoking some new equitable doctrine.
Under Section 10 of the Contract Act, for a contract to be valid, it should be for a lawful consideration and Section 25 of the Contract Act provides that an agreement made without consideration is void unless it satisfies one of the conditions mentioned in that section.
[725 B C, D] (viii) Sankaranarayan vs State of Kerala, ; ; Narendra Chand Hem Ram and Ors.
vs Lt. Governor Administration, Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh, ; ; State of Tamil Nadu and Ors. etc.
vs section K. Krishnamurthi etc.
; , ; and M/s Andhra Industrial Works vs Chief Controller of Imports and Ors., ; indicate that the Rule of estoppel against Government cannot be invoked against the Government.
What are the moral values of the society is a complex question because the concept of moral values amongst different persons and classes of persons is not always the same.
Being not a state one, it differs from time to time and from society to society.
It is hazardous for a Court to attempt to enforce what according to it is the moral value.
Before embarking on the mission of "closing the gap between the law and morality and bring about as near an approximation between the two as possible", it is necessary for the Court to understand clearly its limitations.
The powers of the Court to legislate is strictly limited.
"Judges ought to remember that their office is jus dicere and not jus dare to interpret the law, and not to make law or give law".
[727 F, G, 728 A C] The courts by its very nature are most ill suited to undertake the task of legislating.
There is no machinery for the Court to ascertain the condition of the people and their requirements and to make laws that would be most appropriate.
Further two judges may think that a particular law would, be desirable to meet the requirements whereas another two judges may most profoundly differ from the conclusions arrived at by two judges.
[728 G H, 729 A] Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.
vs State of U.P., [1908] 3 SCR p. 383 followed.
