The proviso to section 2(i) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 excludes from the term "turnover" proceeds of sale of agricultural or horticultural produce grown by a person on any land in which he has interest.
The assessee, who was an agriculturist, owned tea gardens in the State.
After being plucked from tea shrubs tea leaves are withered in shade in rooms, crushed by hand or foot, roasted for 15 minutes, then covered by wet sheets for the purpose of generating fermentation, graded and finally roasted again with charcoal for obtaining flavour and colour.
The final product is sold in the market.
Before the Sales Tax Authorities the assessee contended that tea leaves sold by him were agricultural produce grown by him on his own land and that, therefore, the sale of tea effected by him was exempt from sales tax under the proviso to section 2(i) of the Act.
The Sales Tax Authorities rejected the assessee 's contention.
The High Court answered the reference in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (per Untwalia J.): The High Court was right in holding that sales of tea leaves were not exigible to sales tax.
The commodity which was sold was not different from the commodity which was produced in agriculture and, therefore, the proviso to section 2(i) is attracted.
Almost every kind of agricultural produce has to undergo some kind of processing or treatment by the agriculturist himself either on the farm or elsewhere in order to make it non perishable, transportable and marketable.
Some minimal process is necessary to be applied to many varieties of agricultural produce.
The test in these cases is to see whether in relation to that agricultural produce the process applied was minimal or was so cumbersome and long drawn out that either in common parlance or in the market or even otherwise no one would treat the produce as an agricultural produce.
The mere fact that in the case of a particular product the process is a bit longer or even a bit complicated would not rob the produce of its character of being an agricultural produce.
[597 B C; F G] 2.
All the processes enumerated by the Revising Authority were necessary for the purpose of saving the tea leaves from perishing, making them fit for transporting and marketing.
The processes applied were all within the region of minimal processes and at no point of time they crossed that limit and robbed the leaves of their character of being and continuing to be agricultural produce.
[598 C E] 594 Vol.
21 Encyclopaedia Britannica (1968 edition), referred to.
The State of Madras vs Swasthik Tobacco Factory 17 S.T.C., 316, The State of Madras vs Bell Mark Tobacco Co. 19 S.T.C., 129 referred to.
The State of Madras vs R. Saravana Pillai 7 S.T.C., 541, Deputy Commissioner of Agricultural Income Tax and Sales Tax, Sough Zone vs Sherneilly Rubber & Cardamom Estates Ltd. & others.
12 S.T.C. 519, Commissioner of Income Tax vs Woodland Estates Ltd. Rayavarapu Mrityanjaya Rao vs The State of Andhra Pradesh 20 S.T.C., 417, Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P., Lucknow vs Harbilas Rai and Sons, 21 S.T.C., 17 approved.
Killing Valley Tea Company Ltd. vs Secretary to State A.I.R. 1921 Calcutta, 40 distinguished.
(Pathak, J. concurring).
In Killing Valley Tea Co. Ltd. vs Secretary to State A.I.R. 1921 Calcutta, 40 the Calcutta High Court was of opinion that while process of selecting and plucking tea leaves from the tea shrubs could be deemed to be agriculture, the subsequent process which included drying and rolling of the leaf was a manufacturing process.
If the Calcutta High Court could be said to have laid down that as a result of those processes the tea leaf ceased to be agricultural produce, it is not correct.
The tea leaf remained what it always was.
It was tea leaf when selected and plucked and it continued to be tea leaf when after the process of withering, crushing and roasting, it was sold in the market.
The process applied was intended to bring out its potential qualities of flavour and colour.
The potential inhered in the tea leaf from the outset when still a leaf on the tea bush.
The potential surfaced in the tea leaf when the mechanical processes of withering, crushing and roasting, fermenting by covering with wet sheets and roasting again were applied.
At no stag, did it change its essential substance.
It remained tea leaf throughout.
In its basic nature it continued to be agricultural produce.
[603 B C]
