The Management Tea Co. Ltd. appellant in C. A. 1538/71 retrenched on November 5, 1966, 23 workmen, 16 of whom were paid retrenchment compensation allegedly in terms of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act based on wages obtaining prior to Wage Board Award, which came into force on 1 4 66 retroactively and in the order of 'last come, first go ', while the services of other seven were terminated, although on payment of retrenchment compensation, allegedly in breach of Section 25G of the Act, i.e. out of turn.
The dispute that was raised was decided by the Tribunal which upheld the validity of the retrenchment of the 16, but set aside the termination of the other seven.
The High Court agreed with the Tribunal 's Award and hence the appeals both by the workmen and the management after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing both the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The plea that the amount paid by way of retrenchment compensation envisaged in Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, not having been computed as per the revised pay scales as per the Wage Board Award, fell short of what was legally due and hence there was non compliance is not tenable because before the Tribunal this contention was neither pleaded nor proved.
There was no hint of it in the Award.
In the High Court this new plea based on the facts was not permitted.
Further the Wage Boards ' Award was subsequent to the retrenchment although retroactively applied and the workmen had accepted the retrenchment compensation on the wages prevalent at the time of the retrenchment.
In the absence of any basis for this new plea Supreme Court cannot reopen an ancient matter of 1966.
But the 16 Workmen, being admittedly eligible for the Wage Board scale, would be paid the difference for the period between 1 4 66 to 5 11 66.
[969 A E] 2.
Section 25G of the Industrial Disputes Act postulates that ordinarily the 'last come, first go ' will be the methodology of retrenchment.
Of course, it is not an inflexible rule and extra ordinary situations may justify variations.
There must be valid reason for this decision, and, obviously, the burden is on the Management to substantiate the special ground for departure from the rule.
Surely, valid and justifiable reasons are for the management to make our, and if made out, section 25G will be vindicated and not violated, varying the ordinary rule of 'last come first go. ' There is none made out here, nor even alleged, except the only plea that the retrenchment was done in compliance 967 with section 25G grade wise.
Absence of mala fides by itself is no absolution from the rule in s.25G.
Affirmatively, some valid and justifiable grounds must be proved by the Management to be exonerated from the 'last come first go ' principle.
The above rule can be applied category wise.
That is to say those who fell in the same category shall suffer retrenchment only in accordance with the principle of last come first go.
[969 E, H, 970 A, B, D F] M/s. Om Oil & Oil Seeds Exchange Ltd., Delhi vs Their Workmen, , followed.
Grading for purposes of scales of pay and like considerations will not create new categorisation.
It is a confusion or unwarranted circumvention to contend that within the same category if grades for scales of pay, based on length of service etc., are evolved, that process amounts to creation of separate categories.
In the instant case, the seniority List is the same which is a telling circumstance to show that they fell in the same category.
[971 C E] 4.
Supreme Court cannot sympathise with a party who gambles in litigation to put off the evil day and when that day arrives prays to be saved from his own gamble.
The Award had given convincing reasons for reinstatement and even reduced the back wages to half.
Still, the workmen were dragged to the High Court and, worse, when worsted there, were driven from Assam to Delhi to defend their pittance.
The logistics of litigation for indigent workmen is a burden the management tried to use by a covert blackmail through the judicial process.
Misplaced sympathy is a mirage justice.
[971 G H, 972 A B]
