In the year 1978, a proviso was added to Rule 3(j) of the Bar Council of Delhi Election Rules, 1968 with the approval of the Bar Council of India in accordance with the requirement of Sub section (3) of section 15 of the .
In accordance with that proviso a copy of the declaration form was sent on 14th June, 1978 to the Advocates whose names found place in the State roll of Advocates asking them to return the declaration form duly filled up and signed within the specified period.
A publication to this effect was also made in some newspapers viz. Hindustan Times, Indian Express, Statesman etc.
The last extended date for the submission of the declaration forms was 14th September, 1978 and the electoral roll was finally published on the 16th September, 1978 excluding the names of about 2,000 Advocates who had failed to submit such declaration forms.
On the basis of the electoral roll so prepared, elections to the Bar Council of Delhi was held on the 17th November, 1978.
The total number of advocates on the Advocates roll was 5,000 and odd out of which the names of about 3,000 and odd only were included in the electoral roll in accordance with the proviso to Rule 3(j) of the Election Rules of the Bar Council of Delhi.
The results of the election were declared on the 19th November, 1978.
The names of the 15 persons who were declared elected were published in the Gazette on the 22nd November, 1978.
Thereafter the respondents in these appeals filed writ petitions challenging the whole election by attacking the validity of the proviso to Rule 3(j).
The Delhi High Court allowed the three writ petitions taking the view, (i) so far as the qualifications to be possessed by and the conditions to be satisfied by an advocate before being brought on to the Electoral Roll was concerned only the Bar Council of India has the competence to make the rules under section 3(4) and section 49(1)(a) of the and the State Bar Council has no power at all to make a rule on this subject; (ii) the plea of estoppel against Surjeet Singh does not arise, (iii) rank injustice has been done to the petitioners because more than 2000 advocates were wrongfully disqualified being brought on the Electoral Roll.
This has materially affected the result of the elections; and (iv) Rule 3(j) of the Bar Council of Delhi Election Rules, 1968 is in excess of the rules making power of Bar Council of Delhi.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The impugned proviso to Rule 3(j) of the Delhi Bar Council of Election Rules is ultra vires and invalid and the electoral roll prepared by 947 the Delhi Bar Council on the basis of the same resulting in the exclusion of the names of about 2000 advocates from the said roll was not valid in law.
[958D E] (b) The whole election was invalid on that account and it could be challenged as such in a writ petition.
It was not a case of challenging the preparation of the electoral roll on the factual basis of wrong exclusion of a few names.
For the said purpose Rule 4 occurring in Chapter I of the Bar Council of India Rules could come into play.
But here, because of the invalidity of the Rules itself, the preparation of the electoral roll was completely vitiated a matter which cannot be put within the narrow limit of the said rule.
[958E F] However, it depends upon the nature and the intensity of the error committed in the preparation of the electoral roll and its effect on the whole election for deciding the question as to whether a writ petition would be maintainable or not.
[862E F] Chief Commissioner, Ajmer vs Radhey Shyam Dani, ; ; Parmeshwar Mahaseth and Ors.
vs State of Bihar and Ors.
, ; Umakant Singh and Ors.
vs Binda Choudhary and Ors., AIR 1965 Patna 459; Dev Prakash Balmukand vs Babu Ram Rewti Mal and Ors.
AIR 1961 Punjab 429; Ramgulam Shri Baijnath Parsad vs The Collector, District Guna and Ors., and Bhoop Singh vs Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana through its Secretary and Ors., AIR 1976 M.P. 110; referred to.
(c) The illegal preparation of the electoral roll by the Delhi Bar Council on the basis of the invalid proviso to Rule 3(j) goes to the very root of the matter and no election held on the basis of such an infirmity can be upheld.
There is no question of the result being materially affected in such a case.
[958F G] (d) The contesting respondents could not be defeated in their writ petitions on the ground of estoppel or the principle that one cannot approbate and reprobate or that they were guilty of laches.
In the first instance some of the contesting respondents were merely voters.
Even Sri Surjeet Singh in his writ petition claimed to be both a candidate and a voter.
As a voter he could challenge the election even assuming that as a candidate after being unsuccessful he was estopped from doing so.
But, merely because he took part in the election by standing as a candidate or by exercise of his right of franchise he cannot be estopped from challenging the whole election when the election was glaringly illegal and void on the basis of the obnoxious proviso.
There is no question of approbation and reprobation in such a case.
A voter could come to the High Court even earlier before the election was held.
But merely because he came to challenge the election after it was held it cannot be said that he was guilty of laches and must be non suited on that account.
[958F H, 959A B] Kanglu Beula Kotwal and Anr.
vs Chief Executive Officer, Janpad Sabha, Durga and Ors., ; distinguished.
(e) The manner of resolving disputes as to the validity of election is provided for in Rule 34 of the Delhi Bar Council Election Rules.
This is not an 948 appropriate and adequate alternative remedy to defeat the writ petitioner on that account.
Firstly, no clause of Rule 34 covers the challenging of the election on the ground that it has been done in this case.
Secondly, the Election Tribunal will not be competent to declare any provision of the Election Rules ultra vires and invalid.
It is not a case where the name of any voter was wrongly omitted from the electoral roll but it is a case where the preparation of the whole electoral roll was null and void because of the invalidity of the impugned proviso.
[959C D, E F] Ramgulam Shri Baijnath Pd.
vs The Collector, Dist.
Guna and Ors., and Bhupendra Kumar Jain vs Y. section Dharmadhikari and Ors., AIR 1976, M.P. 110; referred to.
Bhoop Singh vs Bar Council of Punjab and Haryana through its Secretary and Ors., AIR 1977 Pb. & Haryana; quoted with approval.
K. K. Srivastava etc.
vs Bhupendra Kumar Jain and Ors., AIR 1977 S.C. 1703; distinguished.
If the alternative remedy fully covers the challenge to the election then that remedy and that remedy alone must be resorted to even though it involves the challenge of the election of all the successful candidates.
But if the nature and the ground of the challenge of the whole election are such that the alternative remedy is no remedy in the eye of law to cover the challenge or, in any event, is not adequate and efficacious remedy, then the remedy of writ petition to challenge the whole election is still available.
In the present case the Election Tribunal would have found itself incompetent to declare the proviso to Rule 3(j) of the Delhi Bar Council Election Rules ultra vires and that being so the alternative remedy provided in Rule 34(8) was no remedy at all.
[964D F] Suryya Kumar Ray vs The Bar Council of India and Ors.
Matter No. 304 of 1976 decided on December 17, 1976, overruled.
Harish Sambhu Prasad vs Bar Council of Gujarat, Special Civil Application Nos. 542 and 551 of 1969; approved.
So long the existing rules framed by the Bar Council of India remained in vogue all persons whose names are on the State Roll are entitled proprio vigore to be put on the electoral roll.
Sections 24(e) (1) and 26A of the read with Rules 1, 2 and 3 of Chapter I of of the Bar Council of India Rules make this position clear.
[954A B, D H] 4.
On a plain reading of sub sections 4 of section 3 of the , it is manifest that under the Act the qualifications and conditions entitling an advocate to vote at an election or for being chosen as a member of the State Bar Council has to be prescribed by the Bar Council of India.
The State Bar Council has no such power.
The power of the State Bar Council is merely to prepare and revise from time to time the electoral roll subject to the Rules made by the Bar Council of India concerning the qualifications and conditions aforesaid.
This interpretation of Section 3(4) of the Act finds ample support from the very special and specific provision contained in section 49(1) (a) providing for the general power of the Bar Council of India.
[956F H] 949 5.
It is true that the power to make rules conferred by section 15 is both for the Bar Council of India as also for the Bar Council of a State.
But no provision of section 15 can override the specific provision made in section 3(4) and section 49(1)(a) of the Act.
Sub section (1) of section 15 says "A Bar Council may make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter" which means Chapter II including section 3.
But the power to prescribe qualifications and conditions entitling an advocate to vote at an election being that of the Bar Council of India section 15(1) cannot be interpreted to confer power on the State Bar Council to make rules regarding the qualifications and conditions aforesaid.
[957B D] The State Bar Council can frame rules for the preparation and revision of electoral rolls under section 15(2)(a).
That would be in conformity with the latter part of sub section (4) of section 3 also.
But in the garb of making a rule for the preparation and revision of the electoral rolls it cannot prescribe disqualifications, qualifications or conditions subject to which an advocate whose name occurs in the State roll can find place in the electoral roll resulting in his deprivation of his right to vote at the election.
In the instant case under the impugned proviso failure on the part of an advocate to submit the required declaration within the specified time entitles the State Bar Council to exclude his name from the electoral roll.
Such a thing was squarely covered by the exclusive power conferred on the Bar Council of India under sections 3(4) and 49(1)(a) of the .
The State Bar Council had no such power.
[957F H] 6.
The approval of the Bar Council of India can make the rule made by the State Bar Council valid and effective only if the rule made is within the competence of the State Bar Council otherwise not.
Mere approval by the Bar Council of India to a rule ultra vires the State Bar Council cannot make the rule valid.
Nor has it the effect of a rule made by the Bar Council of India.
Making a rule by the Bar Council of India and giving approval to a rule made by the State Bar Council are two distinct and different things.
One cannot take the place of the other.
[958B D]
