The respondent landlady purchased shop No. 66 in the city of Jhansi in 1969 from one Brij Mohan (DW 2), occupied the first floor and allowed the appellant/tenant to occupy the ground floor in 1970 on a lease deed which recited that the building was erected in 1965.
In 1975, the respondent filed the ejection suit on the basis that the building was new, that the Act did not deter eviction of new constructions put up within ten years of the suit and so a decree was inevitable.
The appellant tenant resisted the claim on the plea that the building was constructed 50 years earlier.
The Trial Court negatived the defence and decreed eviction and this was upheld by the High Court.
Hence the appeal by special leave to this Court.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the matter to the Trial Court, the Court ^ HELD : 1.
In the normal course, no doubt the appeal must be dismissed as concluded by findings of fact.
To avoid possible public mischief through a new class of litigation for eviction by easy resort to the "new construction," expedient, interference under Article 136 of the Constitution is necessary.
[1037 A B] 2.Section 2(2) of the U.P. Act, uses the phrase "nothing in the rent control legislation shall apply to a building" during a period of ten years from the date on which its construction is completed.
In other words, in regard to all buildings the Act applies save where this exemption operates.
Therefore the landlord who seeks exemption must prove that exception.
The burden is on him to make out that notwithstanding the rent control legislation, his building is out of its ambit.
It is not for the tenant to prove that the building has been constructed beyond a period of ten years, but it is for the landlady to make out that the construction has been completed within ten years of the suit.
This is sensible not merely because the statute expressly states so and the setting unnecessarily implies so, but also because it is the landlady who knows best when the building was completed, and not the tenant.
As between the two, the owner of the building must tell the court when the building was constructed, and not the tenant thereof.
Speaking generally, it is fair that the onus of establishing the date of construction of the building is squarely laid on the landlord although in a small category of cases where the landlord is a purchaser from another, he will have to depend on his assignor to prove the fact.
[1038 C F] 3.
An analysis of Explanation 1 to section 2(2) of the U.P. Act indicates: (1) Where a building has not been assessed, it is the date on which the completion was reported to, or otherwise recorded by the local authority having jurisdiction.
[1038 G H] 1035 (2) Where a building has been assessed, it is the date on which the first assessment comes into effect.
Provided that if the date on which the completion was reported, to, or otherwise recorded by, the local authority is earlier than the date of the first assessment, the date of completion will be such earlier date.
[1039 A B] (3) Where there is no report, record or assessment, it is the date of actual occupation for the first time (not being an occupation for the purpose of supervising the construction or guarding the building under construction).
[1039 B C] Unfortunately, it is not possible for the purchaser respondent or the tenant appellant to give direct testimony about the time of the construction or the nature of the construction vis a vis Explanation (b) or (c).
The best testimony is the municipal records about the completion of the building and the verification by the municipal authorities as to whether a new construction has come into being or an old construction has been remodelled and, if so, when exactly the completion took effect.
It is quite conceivable that the municipal records bearing on the completion of the construction may throw conclusive light, whatever might have been the original proposal in the plan submitted.
It is perfectly possible that on a view of the earlier construction, vis a vis the completed new building the former may form but a small part.
It may also be that the implication of the expression "increased assessment" may be explained with reference to earlier assessment records in the municipality.
Moreover, whenever a new building is completed, a report has statutorily to be made and only on a completion survey and certificate, occupation is ordinarily permitted.
These records must also be available in the office of the local authority.
The statute makes it clear that reliance upon the municipal records rather than on the lips of witnesses, is indicated to determine the date of completion and the nature of the construction.
This statutory guideline has been wholly overlooked and the burden lying on the landlord has not been appreciated.
The result is that the eviction order has to be demolished.
[1039 F G, 1040 D G] In the instant case (i) the Municipal assessment record produced in the Court merely states "increased assessment".
It may suggest the existence of an assessment which has been increased or it may perhaps be argued that when the building was reconstructed a new assessment was made which was more than the previous assessment and, therefore, was described as increased assessment; (ii) the oral evidence is inconsequential being second hand testimony.
Even the recital in the rent deed that there was a new construction in 1965 66 is by the appellant and the respondent, neither of whom has any direct knowledge about the construction.
Of course, an admission by the appellant is evidence against him but an admission is not always conclusive especially in the light of the municipal records such as are available and the burden such as has been laid by the statute; and (iii) the failure of the trial Court specifically to record when the building was completed and what was the extent of rebuilding, whether it was a case of total demolition and reconstruction or such extensive additions as to push the existing building into a minor part, becomes fatal.
These basic issues have failed to receive any attention from the courts below.
A finding recorded on speculative basis is no finding and that is the fate of the holding.
[1039 G H, 1040 A D] 1036
