Section 321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 which corresponds to section 494 of the 1898 code provides for the withdrawal from prosecution by the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor incharge of a case with the consent of the Court at any time before the judgment is pronounced.
In Criminal Appeal No. 287/79, the case instituted against George Mathew Fernandes & others on 24 9 76 was allowed to be withdrawn on March 26, 1977 on an application under section 321 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 made by N. section Mathur Special Public Prosecutor.
The learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate expressed his opinion that "it was expedient to accord consent to withdraw from the prosecution".
A revision petition under section 397 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 challenging the said order granting permission to withdraw filed by the appellant an advocate in the High Court failed.
The High Court also held that the appellant had no locus standi.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 3115/79 was filed by one Manohar Lal directly under Article 136 of the Constitution against the order of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bhiwani, permitting the public prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution in case No. 186 1 filed by the State against Chaudhury Bansilal Ex Defence Minister, his son Surinder Singh, exhibit M.L.A., R. section Verma, exhibit Deputy Commissioner, Bhiwani and several others officials and non officials for a host of offences.
In Crl.
Appeal No. 287/79, the Contentions were: (a) The offence for which the accused persons were to be tried were exclusively triable by a Court of Session, and therefore, the Committing Magistrate had no jurisdiction to give consent to the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecutions; (b) The Public Prosecutor had abdicated his function and had filed the application at the behest of the Central Government without applying his mind; (c) The Magistrate was in error in giving consent on the ground that it was expedient to do so.
Expedience was never for the judiciary; (d) section N. Mathur who had filed the application for withdrawal from the prosecution was not the Public Prosecutor incharge of the case and the application was therefore incompetent.
In the special leave (Crl.) No. 3115/79, it was contended: (i) the Public Prosecutor filed the application at the behest of Sri Bhajan Lal, the Chief Minister of Haryana and that he never applied his mind to the facts of the case; (ii) Sri Bhajan Lal ordered the withdrawal of the Public Prosecutor from the prosecution because his ministry would not survive without the help of 983 Chaudhuri Bansi Lal and (iii) the withdrawal was not based on any public policy.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave and the special leave petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The contention that under the new code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Court of Committing Magistrate had no judicial function to perform in relation to the case which he was required to commit to the Court of Session as was the position under section 494 of the 1898, and since the Court of the Committing Magistrate under the new code was not invested with the power of acquitting or discharging the accused, it was not the Court which could grant its consent to withdraw from the prosecution is erroneous.
In the first place there is no warrant for thinking that only the Court competent to discharge or acquit the accused under some other provision of the Code can exercise the power under section 321 Criminal Procedure Code.
The power conferred by section 321 is itself a special power conferred on the Court before whom a prosecution is pending and the exercise of the power is not made dependent upon the power of the Court to acquit or discharge the accused under some other provision of the Code.
The power to discharge or acquit the accused under section 321 is a special power founded on section 321 itself, to be exercised by the Court independently of its power of enquiry into the offence or try the accused.
Again, the expression 'judgment ' in the context may be understood to mean the judgment which may be ultimately pronounced if the case were to be committed to a Court of Session.
In the second place it may not be accurate to say that the Committing Magistrate has no judicial function to perform under the 1973 Code of Criminal Procedure.
section 209 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1973 obliges the Magistrate to commit the case to the Court of Session when it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session.
Therefore, the Magistrate has to be satisfied that an offence is prima facie disclosed and the offence so disclosed is triable exclusively by the Court of Session.
If no offence is disclosed the Magistrate may refuse to take cognizance of the case or if the offence disclosed is one not triable exclusively by the Court of Session he may proceed to deal with it under the other provisions of the Code.
To that extent the Court of the Committing Magistrate does discharge a judicial function.
[991 E H, 992 A E] State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey.
followed.
A. Venkataramana vs Mudem Sanjeeva Ragudu and Ors.
(1976) Andhra Law Times Reports 317; over ruled.
The notification dated June 17, 1966 of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, shows that the Senior Public Prosecutor, Public Prosecutor and Assistant Public Prosecutor of the Delhi Special Police Establishment attached to the Delhi office of the Special Police Establishment were appointed as Public Prosecutors under section 492(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code 1898 to conduct the cases of the Special Police Establishment before the Courts of Magistrates, Special Judges, and Sessions Judges, in the Union Territory of Delhi.
All notifications issued under the old Code are deemed to have been made under the corresponding provisions of the new Code.
Sri section N. Mathur is a Public Prosecutor attached to the Special Police Establishment at Delhi and has been functioning right through as Public Prosecutor in the Union Territory of Delhi and it was he who was in charge of the case practically throughout.
[992 G H, 993 A B] 984 3.
In this country the scheme of the administration of Criminal Justice places the prime responsibility of prosecuting serious offences on the executive authorities.
The investigation, including collection of the requisite evidence, and the prosecution for the offence with reference to such evidence were the functions of the executive, and in that particular segment the power of the Magistrate was limited and intended only to prevent abuse.
[993 H, 994 A B] From the precedents of this Court, the following propositions emerge: (i) Under the scheme of the Code prosecution of an offender for a serious offence is primarily the responsibility of the Executive.
(ii) The withdrawal from the prosecution is an executive function of the Public Prosecutor.
(iii) The discretion to withdraw from the prosecution is that of the Public Prosecutor and none else, and so, he cannot surrender that discretion to some one else.
(iv) The Government may suggest to the Public Prosecutor that he may withdraw from the prosecution but none can compel him to do so.
(v) The Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution not merely on the ground of paucity of evidence but on other relevant grounds as well in order to further broad ends of public justice, public order and peace.
The broad ends of public justice will certainly include appropriate social, economic and, political purposes Sans Tammany Hall enterprises.
(vi) The Public Prosecutor is an officer of the Court and responsible to the Court.
(vii) The Court performs a supervisory function in granting its consent to the withdrawal.
(viii) The Court 's duty is not to reappreciate the grounds which led the Public Prosecutor to request withdrawal from the prosecution but to consider whether the Public Prosecutor applied his mind as a free agent, uninfluenced by irrelevant and extraneous considerations.
The Court has a special duty in this regard as it is the ultimate repository of legislative confidence in granting or withholding its consent to withdrawal from the prosecution.
[996 B G] It shall be the duty of the Public Prosecutor to inform the Court and it shall be the duty of the Court to apprise itself of the reasons which prompt the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution.
The Court has a responsibility and a stake in the administration of criminal justice and so has the public Prosecutor, its 'Minister of Justice '.
Both have a duty to protect the administration of Criminal Justice against possible abuse or misuse by the Executive by resort to the provisions of section 361 Criminal Procedure Code.
The independence of the judiciary requires that once the case has travelled to the Court, the Court and its officers alone must have control over the case and decide what is to be done in each case.
[996 H, 997 A B] State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, ; M. N. Sankaranarayanan Nair vs P. V. Balakrishnan and Ors. ; ; State of Orissa vs Chandrika Mahapatra and Ors., ; at 340; Balwant Singh and Ors.
vs State of Bihar, @ 605; Subhash Chander vs The State (Chandigarh Admn.) and Ors., ; ; referred to.
Paucity of evidence is not the only ground on which the Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution.
In the past, it has been found ex 985 pedient and necessary in the public interest that the Public Prosecutor should withdraw from prosecutions arising out of mass agitations, communal riots, regional disputes, industrial conflicts, student unrest etc.
Wherever issues involve the emotions and there is a surcharge of violence in the atmosphere it has often been found necessary to withdraw from prosecutions in order to restore peace, to free the atmosphere from the surcharge of violence, to bring about a peaceful settlement of issues and to preserve the calm which may follow the storm.
To persist with prosecutions where emotive issues are involved in the name of vindicating the law may even be utterly counter productive.
An elected Government, sensitive and responsive to the feelings and emotions of the people, will be amply justified if for the purpose of not disturbing a calm which has descended it decides not to prosecute the offenders involved or not to proceed further with prosecutions already launched.
In such matters, it is only the Government and none else can and should decide in the first instance whether it should be baneful or beneficial to launch or continue prosecutions.
[997 B F] 5.
Under the Code of Criminal Procedure it is the Public Prosecutor that has to withdraw from the prosecution and it is the Court that has to give its consent to such withdrawal.
Rightly too, because the independence of the judiciary so requires it.
The Public Prosecutor is an officer of the Court.
He conducts the prosecution in the Court for the people.
So it is he that is entrusted with the task of initiating the proceeding for withdrawal from the prosecution.
But, where such large and sensitive issues of public policy are involved, he must, if he is right minded, seek advice and guidance from the policy maker.
If the policy makers themselves move in the matter in the first instance, as indeed it is proper that they should where matters of momentus public policy are involved, and if they advice the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution, it is not for the Court to say that the initiative came from the Government and therefore the Public Prosecutor cannot be said to have exercised a free mind.
Nor can there be any quibbling over words.
If ill informed but well meaning bureaucrats choose to use expressions like "the Public Prosecutor is directed" or "the Public Prosecutor is instructed", the Court will not on that ground alone stultify the larger issue of Public Policy by refusing its consent on the ground that the Public Prosecutor did not act as a free agent when he sought withdrawal from the prosecution.
What is at stake is not the language of the letter or the prestige of the Public Prosecutor but a wider question of policy.
The Court, in such a situation is to make an effort to elicit the reasons for withdrawal and satisfy itself that the Public Prosecutor too was satisfied that he should withdraw from the prosecution for good and relevant reasons.
[997 G H, 998 A D] However, the bureaucrat too should be careful not to use peremtory language when addressing the Public Prosecutor since it may give rise to an impression that he is coercing the Public Prosecutor to move in the matter.
He must remember that in addressing the Public Prosecutor he is addressing an Officer of the Court and there should be no suspicion of unwholesome pressure on the Public Prosecutor.
Any suspicion of such pressure on the Public Prosecutor may lead the Court to withhold its consent.
[998 D E] 6.
It is true that the Indian Penal Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure do not recognise offences of a political nature, as a category of offences; they cannot, in the ordinary course of things.
That does not mean the offences of a political character are unknown to jurisprudence or that judges must 986 exhibit such naivette as to feign ignorance about them.
In fact International Law recognises offences of a political character and the Indian Extradition Act specifically refers to them.
[998 F H] Briefly, politics are about Government and therefore, a political offence is one committed with the object of changing the Government of a State or inducing it to change its policy.
The expression "political offence" is thus commonly used and understood though perhaps "political offence" may escape easy identification.
[998 H, 999 A, C] To say that an offence is of a political character is not to absolve, the offenders of the offence.
But it will be a valid ground for the Government to advise the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution.
The Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution of a case not merely on the ground of paucity of evidence but also in order to further the broad ends of public justice and such broad ends of public justice may well include appropriate social, economic and political purposes.
[999 E F] If the Government of the day interpreted the result of the elections, as in the appeal, as a mandate of the people and on the basis of that interpretation, the Government advised the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution, it cannot be said that the Public Prosecutor was activated by any improper motive in withdrawing from the prosecution nor can it be said that the Magistrate failed to exercise the supervisory function vested in him in giving his consent.
[999 H, 1000 A B] Observation: Criminal justice is not a plaything and Criminal Court is not a play ground for politicking.
Political fervour should not convert the prosecution into persecution nor political favour reward wrongdoer by withdrawal from prosecution.
If political fortunes are allowed to be reflected in the processes of the Court very soon the credibility of the rule of law will be lost.
Courts when moved for permission for withdrawal from prosecution must be vigilant and inform themselves fully before granting consent.
While it would be obnoxious and objectionable for a Public Prosecutor to allow himself to be ordered about, he should appraise himself from the Government and thereafter appraise the Court the host of factors relevant to the question of withdrawal from the cases.
But under no circumstances should he allow himself to become anyone 's stooge.
[1005 E G]
