HELD: 1.
Ordinarily when a State Legislation is being interpreted the meaning received by it in the High Court as the settled intent should rarely be disturbed by the Supreme Court unless the error is so egregious, the impact goes beyond the State or like legislation elsewhere and decisions of the High Courts thereon may lead to confusion and uncertainty.
[979 A B] 2.
Viewing the text of Section 3, lexically literally, schematically, and in the setting of social justice of which saving the average litigant from the intoxication of tantalising litigation is component, "No revision to the High Court" would be the only conclusion.
Purposively speaking, it will be stultifying to interpret, section 3 to mean that orders in appeal by District Courts must suffer a distant journey to revisory justice from the High Court.
[980 C D] Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; clarified.
The short test to refuse revisory jurisdiction to the High Court is to ascertain whether the decision sought to be challenged is in a case arising out of a suit of the valuation of Rs. 20,000/ and more.
If the answer is 'Yes ' then the High Court has revisory power, but if the suit from which the case arises and in which the decision is made is one where the valuation is less than Rs. 20,000/ then the litigation cannot travel beyond the District Court except in that class of cases where the decision is taken for the first time by the District Court itself in a case arising out of an original proceeding.
From this angle, none of the Special Leave Petitions survive.
[980 D F] After all, our District Courts are easier of access for litigants, and the High Courts, especially in large States like Uttar Pradesh, are 'untouchable ' and 'unapproachable ' for agrestic populations and even urban middle classes.
Nor is there ground to distrust the District Judges.
A hierarchy of courts built upon a heritage of disbelief in inferiors has an imperial flavour.
If we suspect a Munsif and put a District Judge over him for everything he does, if we distrust a district Judge and vest the High Court with pervasive supervision, if we be skeptical about the High Courts and watch meticulously over all their orders, the System will break down as its morale will crack up.
A psychic communicable disease of suspicion, skepticism and servility cannot make for the health of the 974 judicial system.
If the Supreme Court has a super Supreme Court above it, it is doubtful whether many of its verdicts will survive, judging by the frequency with which it differs from itself.
[979 E G] Observation Democracy, in a vast country of diversity, demographic immensity, logistic difficulty and large scale indigency, makes decentralisation an imperative of Administration.
Access to Justice also implies early finality within reach of the rich and the poor.
These considerations persuaded the U.P. State, one of direst in poverty, largest in population, and most agrestic in life style, to attempt a tepid procedural reform in the field of revision to the High Court in litigations of lesser financial stakes.
Judicial reform is upto now a tinkering exercise, not an engineering project but even that little tinkering is fiercely challenged as litigative anathema by the profession which is unfortunate.
[980 G H, 981 A B]
