Section 57, of the Bombay Police Act, 1951 provides that if a person has been convicted of certain offences detailed therein, "the Commissioner, the District Magistrate or the Sub Divisional Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government in this behalf, if he has reason to believe that such person is likely again to engage himself in the commission of an offence similar to that for which he was convicted, may direct such person to remove himself outside the area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, by such route and within such time as the said officer may prescribe and not to enter or return to the area from which he was directed to remove himself".
Under the provisions of the said section an order of externment was passed against the petitioner who challenged the order on the grounds that section 57 contravened clauses (d) and (e) of Article 19(1) of the Constitution, that the provisions of the said section imposed unreasonable restrictions on the petitioner 's fundamental rights of free movement and residence and that the order passed against him was illegal inasmuch as it was based on vague allegations and inadmissible material.
Hold, per section R. DAS C.J., VENKATARAMA AYYAR, B. P. SINHA and JAFER IMAM JJ.
(JAGANNADHADAS J. dissenting) (1) Section 57 of the Bombay Police Act, 1951 is not uncon stitutional, because, it is an instance of the State taking preventive measures in the interests of the public and for safeguarding individual rights, by preventing a person, who has been proved to be a criminal from acting in a way which may be a repetition of his criminal propensities, and the restrictions that it imposes on the individual 's right to reside in and move freely in any part of India are reasonable within the meaning of clause (5) of article 19 of the Constitution.
(2) The restrictions cannot be said to be unreasonable on the ground that the person dealt with under section 57 of the Act may be 507 directed to remove himself altogether outside the limits of the State of Bombay as the Act extends to the whole of the State, because, unless the person makes himself so obnoxious as to render his presence in every part of the State a menace to public peace and safety, every District authority would not think of acting in the same way in respect of the same person.
(3)It cannot be laid down as a universal rule that unless there isa provision for an Advisory Board which could scrutinise the material on which the officers or authority contemplated by section 57 had taken action against a person, such a legislation would be unconstitutional.
(4) The provisions in sections 55, 56, 57 and 59 of the Act are not invalid on the ground that only the general nature of the material allegations against the person externed are required to be disclosed and that it would be difficult for him to get the matter judicially examined.
The provisions are intended to be used in special cases requiring special treatment, that is, cases which cannot be dealt with under the preventive sections of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(5)The legality of the order of externment cannot be im pugned on the ground that there was not sufficient evidence to bring the charge home to the petitioner, because these are all matters which cannot be examined by this Court in an objective way, when the legislature has provided for the subjective satisfaction of the authorities or officers who have been entrusted with the duty of enforcing the special provisions of the Act.
Gurbachan Singh vs The State of Bombay ([1952] S.C.R. 737), followed.
Per JAGANNADHADAS J: Section 57 of the Act is constitu tionally invalid because: (1)Clause (a) of section 57 of the Act not being confined to off" serious in their nature or with reference to the attendant circumstances within the Chapters specified therein, prevention of the repetition thereof cannot be considered a reasonable restriction.
It is in excess of what may be considered justifiable.
(2)The previous commission of an offence of the category specified, without any reference to the time, environment and other factors has no rational relation to the criterion of "reasonableness in the interest of public".
(3)The exercise of the power not being limited by the consideration of non availability of witnesses is also not rationally related to the criterion of "reasonableness in the interest of the public".
Gurbachan Singh vs The State of Bombay ([1952] S.C.R. 737), distinguished.
