Pera Ram, Ganga Ram, Bhago and Kalu Ram were the tenants of agricultural land owned by Mrs. Raj Kanta, the appellant.
The tenants made separate applications under section 18 of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953, on September 4, 1961 for purchasing the land held by them from the land owner.
These applications were allowed by the Assistant Collector on October 31, 1961.
Accordingly, the tenants deposited the first instalment in November 1961.
Ultimately, however, the tenants did not pay the rent of the respective holdings for Kharif 1961.
It is common ground that the last date by which the rent for Kharif 1961 was payable by the tenants to the land owner was January 15, 1962 and that the tenant did not pay the rent and did not show sufficient cause for the same.
In view of the default, the land owner filed separate applications under section 9(1)(ii) of the Act on the ground that as the tenants had failed to pay the rent regularly without sufficient cause, they were entitled to be ejected by the land owner.
The applications for ejectment were, however, dismissed but on appeal the Collector allowed the appeals by his order dated May 31, 1962.
Second appeals preferred by the tenants in the ejectment proceedings were dismissed by an order dated 5 11 62 of the Commissioner and ultimately upheld by the Financial Commissioner by his Order dated December 21, 1962.
Having failed before the Revenue courts, the tenants respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court which was heard by a single judge.
But in the case of Kalu Ram the Financial Commissioner allowed the petition and rejected the prayer for his ejectment by the land owner as a result of which the land owner filed a writ petition in the High Court.
All the petitions were consolidated and heard together, by the single Judge who allowed the writ petition of the tenants and quashed the order of the Financial Commissioner directing ejectment of the tenants.
The writ petition of the land owner against Kalu Ram was, however, dismissed.
Hence, the four appeals by the land owner appellant to this Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act 1953 is a piece of social legislation meant to ameliorate the lot of the tenants by conferring on them the status of a permanent tenancy or the rights to purchase the land on payment of instalments.
At the same time, the landlords within a very limited sphere have been assured protection in respect of the rights which they possess in the land and have been given the right to eject the tenants on specified grounds which are contained in the various sub clauses of section 9 of the Act.
Sub Clause (ii) is one such sub clause.
This right was absolute and could not 1007 be curtailed by interpreting clause (ii) of section 9(1) of the Act through a process of twisting the law and doing violence to the language of the section, especially when it admits of no ambiguity.
[1010 A C, 1011 A B] Bhagirath Ram Chand vs State of Punjab and Ors., A.I.R. 1954 Punjab 167: referred to.
The word 'regular ' which is derived from the word 'regula ' which means 'rule ', means in a regular manner, methodically, in due order and postulates a state of symmetry, consistency and uniformity.
In other words, 'regular ' means a consistent course of conduct without any break or breach.
[1011 B, D, F & 1012 A] Arab Bank vs Ross, ; Hammond vs London County Council, [1931] Chancery 540; quoted with approval.
Although the Act is heavily loaded in favour of the rights of the tenants so as to confer on them several important benefits and privileges yet as the Act is confiscatory in nature, so far as the landlord is concerned, it should be strictly construed within the limited sphere inasmuch as the landlord is conferred limited grounds on which ejectment is permissible under section 9 of the Act which appears to be a safety valve for the limited rights that are left with the landlord under the Act.
In order therefore to advance the object of the Act so as to assure the limited protection to the landlord, the language employed in the various clauses of section 9 has to be construed so as to give real benefit to the landlord within the limited range that the section operates.
[1012 D F] A correct interpretation of the plain language and the words and phrases used in clause (ii) of section 9(1) of the Act would be that the word 'regular ' connotes a consistent course of conduct without any break or breach and the 'regular payment of rent ' would mean that the rent should be paid punctually without any default or laxity.
The Legislature clearly intended to use the word 'regularly ' to mean payment of rent in this manner.
The Legislature never contemplated that a single default could be condoned.
The word 'regularly ' has been used immediately after the words 'fails to pay the rent ' and is followed by the words "without sufficient cause".
The Legislature clearly provided that if the tenant had committed a default whether one, two or more, the same could only be condoned if sufficient cause is shown and not otherwise.
[1012 A D] 4.
The words "failure to pay rent regularly without sufficient cause" in Section 9(1)(ii) of the Act cause postulate the following conditions: 1.
there must be a failure on the part of the tenant to pay rent; 2.
such failure must be to pay rent regularly, that is to say, the rent should be paid punctually consistently without any break or breach; 3.
if there is any default ranging from one to several, the tenant has got to show sufficient cause if his case is to be taken out of the mischief of section 9(1)(ii).
[1012 F H] 5.
It is well settled that the Legislature does not waste words and every word that is used by it must be presumed to have some significance.
The function of the Court is 'jus decere ' not 'jus dare '.
The Court cannot, therefore, in 1008 order to promote its social philosophy turn and twist the plain and unambiguous language of the law so as to ascribe to it a meaning different from the one intended by the Legislature.
The words 'without sufficient cause ' clearly indicate that in order to escape ejectment, the tenant must at least be regular in payment of the rent and if he wants to get rid of the consequences of his default, he must prove sufficient cause.
Reading the entire sentence, the cumulative effect thereof unmistakably is that the Act includes even a single default and that is why instead of using the word 'default ', the word 'regularly has been employed which is immediately followed by the words 'without sufficient cause '.
If the legislature intended that a single default would not entitle a landlord to eject the tenant under the Act, then it would have said so expressly either by way of an explanation or otherwise in clause (ii) of section 9(1) of the Act.
[1013 C F] 6.
While the Explanation to section 9(1) of the Act takes care to define as to when a tenant would be deemed to be in arrears and fixes a period of two months, indeed if the intention of the legislature was that a single default in payment of rent could be condoned, it should have included this incident also in the explanation.
This provides therefore, the most important intrinsic circumstance to support the interpretation of clause (ii) of section 9(1) of the Act.
[1014 A B]
