Allowing the petition the Court ^ HELD: Per Iyer J. (on behalf of Chinnappa Reddy J. and himself).
The guarantee of human dignity forms part of an Constitutional culture and the positive provisions of Articles 14, 19 and 21 spring into action to disshackle any man since to manacle man is more than to mortify him; it is to dehumanize him and, therefore, to violate his very personhood, too often using the mask of 'dangerousness ' and security.
Even a prisoner is a person not an animal, and an under trial prisoner is a fortiori so.
Our nations founding document admits of no exception.
Therefore, all measures authorised by the law must be taken by the Court to keep the stream of prison justice unsullied.
[862 D F, 863 E F] Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration and ors.
; ; followed .
The Supreme Court is the functional sentinel on the qui vive where "habeas" justice is in jeopardy.
If iron enters the soul of law and of the enforcing agents of law rather, if it is credibly alleged so the Supreme Court must fling aside forms of procedure and defend the complaining individual 's personal liberty under Articles 14 19 and 21 after due investigation.
Access to human justice is the essence of Article 32.
[864 A B] 3.
Where personal freedom is at stake or torture is in store to read down the law is to write off the law and to rise to the remedial demand of the manacled man is to break human bondage.
if within the reach of judicial process.
[864 F G] 4.
There cannot be a quasi caste system among prisoners in the egalitarian context of Article 14.
In plain language, to say that the "better class under trial be not handcuffed without recording the reasons in the daily diary for considering the necessity of the use on such a prisoner while escort to and from court" means that ordinary Indian under trials shall be rentively handcuffed during transit between jail and court auld the better class prisoner 856 shall be so confined only if reasonably apprehended to be violent or rescued and is against the express provisions of Article 21.
[863 D E, 865 G H] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 2 SCR 621 @ 647; applied.
Vishwanath vs State Crl.
Main No. 430 of 1978 decided on 6 4 79 (Delhi High Court), overruled.
Though circumscribed by the constraints of lawful detention, the indwelling essence and inalienable attributes of man qua man are entitled to the great rights guaranteed by the Constitution.
That is why in India, as in the similar jurisdiction in America, the broader horizons of habeas corpus spread out, beyond the orbit of release from illegal custody, into every trauma and torture on persons in legal custody, if the cruelty is contrary to law, degrades human dignity or defiles his personhood to a degree that violates Articles 21, 14 and 19 enlivened by the Preamble.
[868 A B, 867 G H] 6.
The collection of handcuff law, namely, Prisoners (Attendance in Courts) Act, 1955; Punjab Police Rules, 1934, (Vol.
III) Rules 26: 22(i) (a) to (f); 26.21A, 27.12, Standing order 44, Instruction on handcuffs of November, 1977, and orders of April 1979, must meet the demands of Articles 14, 19 and 21.
Irons forced on under trials in transit must conform to the humane imperatives of the triple Articles.
Official cruelty, sans constitutionality degenerates into criminality.
Rules, standing orders, Instructions and Circulars must bow before Part III of the Constitution.
[872 B D] The Preamble sets the human tone and temper of the Founding Document and highlights justice, Equality and the dignity of the individual.
Article 14 interdicts arbitrary treatment, discriminatory dealings and capricious cruelty.
Article 19 prescribes restrictions on free movement unless in the interests of the general public.
Article 21 is the sanctuary of human values, prescribes fair procedure and forbids barbarities, punitive or procedural.
such is the apercu.
[872 C E] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR 621 @ 647; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, [1978] 4 S.C.C. 494 @ 545; reiterated.
Handcuffing is prima facie inhuman and, therefore, unreasonable, is over harsh And at the first blush, arbitrary.
Absent fair procedure and objective monitoring to inflict "irons" is to resort to zoological strategies repugnant to Article 21.
Surely, the competing claims of securing the prisoner from fleeing and protecting his personality from barbarity have to be harmonized.
To prevent the escape of an under trial is in public interest, reasonable, just and cannot, by itself be castigated.
But to bind a man hand and foot, fetter his limbs with hoops of steel, shuffle him along in the streets and stand him for hours in the courts is to torture him, defile his dignity, vulgarise society and foul the soul of our Constitutional culture.
[872 F G] 8.
Insurance against escape does not compulsorily required handcuffing.
There are other measures whereby an escort can keep safe custody of a detenu without the indignity and cruelty implicit in handcuffs or other iron In contraptions.
Indeed, binding together either the hands or feet or both has not merely a preventive impact but also a punitive hurtfulness.
Manacles are mayhem on the human person and inflict humiliation on the bearer.
857 The three components of "irons" forced on the human person are: to handcuff i.e., to hoop harshly to punish humiliatingly and to vulgarise the viewers also.
Iron straps are insult and pain writ large, animalising victim and keepers.
Since there are other ways of ensuring safety as a rule handcuffs or other fetters shall not be forced on the person of an under trial prisoner ordinarily.
As necessarily implicit in Articles 14 and 19, when there is no compulsive need to fetter a person 's limbs it is sadistic, capricious, despotic and demoralizing to humble a man by manacling him.
Such arbitrary conduct surely slaps Article 14 on the face.
The animal freedom of movement, which even a detained is entitled to under Article 19, cannot be cut down cruelly by application of handcuffs or other hoops.
lt will be unreasonable so to do unless the State is able to make out that no other practical way of forbidding escape is available, the prisoner being so dangerous and desperate and the circumstances so hostile to safe keeping.
[872 G H, 873 A E] 9.
Once the Supreme Court make it a constitutional mandate and law that no prisoner shall be handcuffed or fettered routinely or merely for the convenience of the custodian or escort, the distinction between classes of prisoners become constitutionally obsolete.
Apart from the fact that economic an i social importance cannot be the basis for classifying prisoners for purposes of handcuffs or otherwise, a rich criminal or under trial is in no way different from a poor or pariah convict or under trial in the matter of security risk.
An affluent in custody may be as dangerous or desperate as an indigent, if not more.
He may be more prone to be rescued than an ordinary person.
Therefore, it is arbitrary and irrational to classify prisoners for purposes of handcuffs, into 'B ' class and ordinary class.
No one shall be fettered in any form based on superior class differential as the law heats them equally.
It is brutalising to handcuff a person in public and so is unreasonable to do so.
Of course, the police escort will find it comfortable to fetter their charges and be at ease, but that is not a relevant consideration.
[873 E H] 10.
The only circumstance which validates incapacitation by irons an extreme measure is that otherwise there is no other reasonable way of preventing his escape, in the given circumstances.
Securing the prisoner being a necessity of judicial trial, the State must take steps in this behalf.
But even here, the policeman 's easy assumption or scary apprehension or subjective satisfaction of likely escape if fetters are not fitted on the prisoner is not enough.
The heavy deprivation of personal liberty must be justifiable as reasonable restriction in the circumstances.
Ignominy, inhumanity and affliction, implicit in chains and shackles are permissible, as not unreasonable, only if every other less cruel means is fraught with risks or beyond availability.
So it is that to be consistent with articles 14 an(l 19 handcuffs must be the last refuge, not the routine regimen.
If a few more guards will suffice, then no handcuffs.
If a close watch by armed policemen will do, then no handcuffs.
If alternative measures may be provided, then no iron bondage.
This is the legal norm.
[874 A C] Functional compulsions of security must reach that dismal degree that no alternative will work except manacles.
Our Fundamental Rights are heavily loaded in favour or personal liberty even in prison, and so, the traditional approaches without reverence for the worth of the human person are obsolete, although they die hard.
Discipline can be exaggerated by prison 858 keepers; dangerousness can be physically worked up by escorts and sadistic disposition, where higher awareness of constitutional rights is absent, may overpower the finer values of dignity and humanity.
[874 D E] Therefore, there must first be well grounded basis for drawing a strong inference that the prisoner is likely to jump jail or break out of custody or play the vanishing trick.
The belief in this behalf must be based on antecedents which must be recorded and proneness to violence must be authentic Vague surmises or general averments that the under trial is a crook or desperado, rowdy or maniac, cannot suffice.
In short, save in rare cases of concrete proof readily available of the dangerousness of the prisoner in transit the onus of proof of which is on him who puts the person under irons the police escort will be committing personal assault or mayhem if he handcuffs or fetters his charge.
It is disgusting to see the mechanical way in which callous policemen, cavalier fashion, handcuff prisoner in their charge, indifferently keeping them company assured by the thought that the detainee is under 'iron ' restraint.
[874 F H] 11.
Even orders of superiors are no valid justification as constitutional rights cannot be kept in suspense by superior orders, unless there is material, sufficiently stringent, to satisfy a reasonable mind that dangerous and desperate is the prisoner who is being transported and further that by adding to the escort party or other strategy he cannot be kept under control.
It is hard to imagine such situations.
It is unconscionable, indeed outrageous, to make the strange classification between better class prisoners and ordinary prisoners in the matter of handcuffing.
This elitist concept has no basic except that on the assumption the ordinary Indian is a sub citizen and freedoms under Part III of the Constitution are the privilege of the upper sector of society.
[875 A C] Merely because a person is charged with a grave offence he cannot be handcuffed.
He may be very quiet, well behaved, docile or even timid.
Merely because the offence is serious, the inference of escape proneness or desperate character does not follow.
Many other conditions mentioned in the Police Manual are totally incongruous and must fall as unlawful.
Tangible testimony, documentary or other, or desperate behaviour, geared to making good his escape, along will be a valid ground for handcuffing and fettering, and even this may be avoided by increasing the strength of the escorts or taking the prisoners in well protested vans.
And increase in the number of escorts, arming them if necessary special training for escorts police, transport of prisoners in protected vehicles, are easily available alternatives.
[875 C E] 12.
Even in cases where, in extreme circumstances handcuffs have to be put on the prisoner, the escorting authority must record contemporaneously the reasons for doing so.
otherwise under article 21 the procedure will be unfair and bad in law.
Nor will mere recording of the reasons do, as that can be a mechanical process mindlessly made.
The escorting officer, whenever he handcuffs a prisoner produced in court, must show the reasons so recorded to the Presiding Judge and get his approval.
Otherwise, there is no control over possible arbitrariness in applying handcuffs and fetters.
The minions of the police establishment must make good their security recipes by getting judicial approval.
And, once the court directs that handcuffs shall 859 be off, no escorting authority can overrule judicial direction.
This is implicit in article 21 which insists upon fairness, reasonableness and justice in the very procedure which authorises stringent deprivation of life and liberty.
[875 G H, 876 A] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 2 SCR 621, and Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration ; ; applied. 13.
Punjab Police Manual, in so far as it puts the ordinary Indian beneath the better class breed (paragraphs 26.21A and 26.22 of Chapter XXVI) is untenable and arbitrary and Indian humans shall not be dischotomised and the common run discriminated against regarding handcuffs.
The provisions in para 26.22 that every under trial who is accused of a non bailable offence punishable with more than 3 years prison term shall be routinely handcuffed is violative of articles 14, 19 and 21.
So also para 26.22 (b) and (c).
The nature of the accusation is not the criterion.
The clear and present danger of escape breaking out of the police control is the determinant.
And for this there must be clear material not qlib assumption record of reasons and judicial oversight and summary hearing and direction by the Court where the victim is produced.
Para 26, 22(1)(d), (e) and (f) also hover perilously near unconstitutionality unless read down Handcuffs are not summary punishment vicariously imposed at police level, at once obnoxious and irreversible.
Armed escorts, worth the salt, can overpower any unarmed under trial and extraguards can make up exceptional needs.
In very special situations, the application of irons cannot be ruled out.
The prisoner cannot be tortured because others will demonstrate or attempt his rescue.
The plain law of under trial custody is thus contrary to unedifying escort practice.
[876 C G] 14.
The impossibility of easy recapture supplied the temptation to jump custody, not the nature of the offence or sentence.
Likewise, the habitual or violent 'escape propensities ' proved by past conduct or present attempts are a surer guide to the prospects of ruling away on the sly or by use of force than the offence with which the person is charged or the sentence.
Many a murderer, assuming him to be one, is otherwise a normal, well behaved, even docile, person and it rarely registers in his mind to run away or force his escape.
It is an indifferent escort or incompetent guard, not the Section with which the accused is charged, that must give the clue to the few escapes that occur.
To abscond is a difficult adventure.
"Human rights" seriousness loses it valence where administrator 's convenience prevails over cultural values.
There is no genetic criminal tribe as such among humans.
A disarmed arrestee has no hope of escape from the law if recapture is a certainty.
He heaves a sigh of relief if taken into custody as against the desperate evasions of the chasing and the haunting fear that he may be caught any time It is superstitious to practise the barbarous bigotry of handcuffs as a routine regimen an imperial heritage well preserved.
The problem is to get rid of mind cuffs which make us callous to hand cuffing prisoner who may be a patient even in the hospital bed and tie him up with ropes to the legs of the cot.
[877 A D, 878 A C] 15.
The rule regarding a prisoner in transit between prison house and court house is freedom from handcuffs and the exception, under conditions of judicial supervision will be restraints with irons to be justified before or after.
The judicial officers, before whom the prisoner is Produced shall 860 interrogate the prisoner, as a rule, whether he has been subjected to handcuffs or other 'irons ' treatment and, if he has been, the official concerned shall he asked to explain the action forthwith.
[879 G H, 880 A B] Per Pathak J. (Concurring) 1.
It is an axiom of criminal law that a person alleged to have committed an offence is liable to arrest.
Sections 46 and 49 of the Code of Criminal Procedure define the parameters of the power envisaged in the Code in the matter of arrest.
And section 46, in particular foreshadows the central principle controlling the power to impose restraint on the person of a prisoner while in continued custody.
Restraint may be imposed where it is reasonably apprehended that the prisoner will attempt to escape, and it should not be more than is necessary to prevent him from escaping.
Viewed in the light of the law laid down by this Court in Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration and ors.
; , ; that a person in custody is not wholly denuded of his fundamental rights, the limitations flowing from that principle acquire a profound significance.
[880 C F] The power to restrain, and the degree of restraint to be employed, are not for arbitrary exercise.
An arbitrary exercise of that power infringes the fundamental rights of the person in custody.
And a malicious use of that power can bring section 220 of the Indian Penal Code into play.
Too often is it forgotten that if a police officer is vested with the power to restrain a person by handcuffing hum or otherwise there is a simultaneous restraint by the law on the police officer as to the exercise of that power.
[880 F G] 2.
Whether a person should be physically restrained and, if so, what should be the degree of restraint, is a matter which affects the person in custody so long as he remains in custody.
Consistent with the fundamental rights of such person the restraint can be imposed, if at all, to a degree no greater than is necessary for preventing his escape.
To prevent his escape is the object of imposing the restraint and that object at once defines that power.
[880 H, 881 A] 3.
Section 9(2)(e) of the Prisoners (Attendance in Court) Act, 1955 empowers the State Government to make rules providing for the escort of persons confined in a prison to and from Courts in which their attendance is required and for their custody during the period of such attendance.
The Punjab Police Rules, 1934 contain Rule 26.22 which classifies those cases in which hand cuffs may be applied.
The classification has been attempted somewhat broadly.
But the classification attempted by some of the clauses of Rule 26.22, particularly (a) to (c) which presume that in every instance covered by any of these clauses the accused will attempt to escape cannot be sustained.
[881 C E] The rule should be that the authority responsible for the prisoners custody should consider the case of each prisoner individually and decide whether the prisoner is a person who having regard to his circumstances, general conduct, behaviour and character will attempt to escape or disturb the peace by becoming violent.
That is the basic criterion, and all provisions relating to the imposition of restraint must be guided by it.
In the ultimate analysis it is that guiding principle which must determine in each individual case whether a restraint should be imposed and to what degree.
[881 E G] 861 4.
Rule 26.22 read with Rule 26.21 A of the Punjab Police Rules 1934 draw a distinction between "better class" under trial prisoners and "ordinary" under trial prisoners, as a basis for determining who should be handcuffed and who should not be.
The social status of a person, his education and habit of life associated with a superior mode of living is intended to protect his dignity of person.
But that dignity is a dignity which belongs to all, rich and poor, of high social status and low, literate and illiterate.
It is the basic assumption that all individuals are entitled to enjoy that dignity that determines the rule that ordinarily no restraint should be imposed except in those cases where there is a reasonable fear of the prisoner attempting to escape or attempting violence.
It is abhorrent to envisage a prisoner being handcuffed merely because it is assumed that he does not belong to "a better class", that he does not possess the basic dignity pertaining to every individual.
Then there is need to guard against a misuse of the power from other motives.
It is grossly objectionable that the power given by the law to impose a restraint, either by applying handcuffs or otherwise, should be seen as an opportunity for exposing the accused to public ridicule and humiliation.
Nor is the power intended to be used vindictively or by way of punishment.
Even Standing order 44 and the instructions on handcuffs of November 1977 operate some what in excess of the object to be observed by the imposition of handcuffs, having regard to the central principle that only he should be handcuffed who can be reasonably apprehended to attempt from escape or become violent.
[881 G H. 882 A D] 5.
Whether handcuffs or other restraint should be imposed on a prisoner is primarily a matter for the decision of the authority responsible for his custody.
It is a judgment to be exercised with reference to each individual case.
It is for that authority to exercise its discretion.
The primary decision should not be that of any other The matter is one where the circumstances may change from one moment to another, and inevitably in some cases it may fall to the decision of the escorting authority midway to decide on imposing a restraint on the prisoner.
The prior decision of an external authority can not be reasonably imposed on the exercise of that power.
But there is room for imposing a supervisory regime over the exercise of that power.
One sector of superviory jurisdiction could appropriately lie with the court trying the accused, and it would be desirable for the custodial authority to inform that court of the circumstances in which, and the justification for, imposing a restraint on the body of the accused.
It should be for the court concerned to work out the modalities of the procedure requisite for the purpose of enforcing such control 882 E G] 6.
In the present case, the question whether the petitioner should be handcuffed should be left to be dealt with by the Magistrate concerned before whom he is brought for trial in the cases instituted against him.
[882 H, 883 A]
