The respondent assessee, Pio Food Packers carries on the business of manufacturing and selling canned fruit besides other products.
The Pineapple purchased by the assessee is washed and then the inedible portion, the end crown, skin and inner core are removed, thereafter the fruit is sliced and the slices are filled in cans, sugar is added as a preservative, the cans are sealed under temperature and then put in boiling water for sterilisation.
In its return for the year 1973 74 under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 the assessee claimed that a turnover of Rs. 3,84,138 89 representing the purchase of pineapple fruit was not covered by Section 5 A(1)(b) of the Act.
It was asserted that the pineapple was converted into pineapple slices, pineapple jam, pineapple squash and pineapple juice.
The assessee maintained that by the conversion of pineapple fruit into its products no new commodity was created and it was erroneous to say that there was a consumption of pineapple fruit "in the manufacture of" these goods.
The Sales Tax Officer did not accept the contention and completed the assessment on the finding that a manufacturing process was involved and that, therefore, the case fell within section 5 A (1) (a).
In revision before the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal, the assessee conceded that pineapple jam and pineapple squash would be covered by section 5 A(1)(a), and in regard to pineapple juice the Tribunal found that section 5 1(a) was attracted.
The only question which remained was whether the preparation of pineapple slices fall within section 5 A(1)(a).
On that question two members of the Tribunal found in favour of the assessee, and the third member found in favour of the Revenue.
The Revenue then applied in revision to the High Court and the High Court, has by its judgment dated 24th January, 1978, maintained the order of the Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal, by special leave, the court ^ HELD : 1.
When pineapple fruit is processed into pineapple slices for the purpose of being sold in sealed cans, there is no consumption of the original pineapple fruit for the purpose of manufacture within the meaning of Section 5A(1)(a) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 [1277 E F] 2.
Section 5 A(1)(a) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act envisages the consumption of a commodity in the manufacture of another commodity.
The goods purchased should be consumed, the consumption should be in the process of manufacture, and the result must be the manufacture of other goods.
1272 There are several criteria for determining whether a commodity is consumed in the manufacture of another.
The generally prevalent test is whether the article produced is regarded in the trade, by those who deal in it, as distinct in identity from the commodity involved in its manufacture.
Commonly, manufacture is the end result of one or more processes through which the original commodity is made to pass.
The nature and extent of processing may vary from one case to another, and indeed there may be several stages of processing and perhaps a different kind of processing at each stage.
With each process suffered, the original commodity experience a change.
But it is only when the change, or a series of changes, take the commodity to the point where commercially it can no longer be regarded as the original commodity but instead is recognised as a new and distinct article that a manufacture can be said to take place.
Where there is no essential difference in identity between the original commodity and the processed article it is not possible to say that one commodity has been consumed in the manufacture of another.
Although it has undergone a degree of processing, it must be regarded as still retaining its original identity.
[1274 F H, 1275 A B] In the present case, there is no essential difference between pineapple fruit and the canned pineapple slices.
The dealer and the consumer regard both as pineapple.
The only difference is that the sliced pineapple is a presentation of fruit in a more convenient form and by reason of being canned it is capable of storage without spoiling.
The additional sweetness in the canned pineapple arises from the sugar added as a preservative.
The pineapple slices continue to possess the same identity as the original pineapple fruit.
[1275 G H, 1276 A] Tunghabhadra Industries Ltd., Kurnool vs Commercial Tax Officer, Kurnool, [1960] 10 S.T.C. 827 (SC); Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P., Lucknow vs Harbilas Rai & Sons, [1968] 21 S.T.C. 17 (SC); followed.
East Texas Motor Freight Lines vs Frozen Food Express, ; ; Anheuser Busch Brewing Association vs United States, 52 L. ed.
336 338; quoted with approval.
Anwarkhan Mahboob Co. vs The State of Bombay and Ors., [1960] 11 STC 698, A Hajee Abdul Shukoor and Co. vs The State of Madras, [1964] 15 STC 719; The State of Madras vs Swasthik Tobacco Factory, [1966] 17 STC 316 and Ganesh Trading Co. Karnal vs State of Haryana and Anr., [1973] 32 STC 623; held inapplicable.
The fact that the pineapple slices have a higher price in the market than the original fruit does not imply that the slices constitute a different commercial commodity.
The higher price, is occasioned only because of the labour put into making the fruit more readily consumable and because of the can employed to contain it.
It is not as if the higher price is claimed because it a different commercial commodity.
[1277 A B] 4.
The fact that the pineapple slices appeal to a different sector of the trade and that when a customer asks for a can of pineapple slices he has in mind something very different from fresh pineapple fruit does not give to the canned pineapple slices a separate identity either.
The distinction in the mind of the consumer arises not from any difference in the essential identity of the two, but is derived from the mere form in which the fruit is desired.
[1277 B C] 1273 5.
Clause (1) (a) of Section 5 A of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, speaks of goods consumed in the manufacture of other goods for sale or goods consumed in the manufacture of other goods for purposes other than sale.[1277 C D]
