By a lease dated 14th December 1948, the respondent plaintiff gave to the appellant defendant on lease two plots Nos. 12 and 13 situated at Sitaladevi Temple Road, Mahim for a period of 15 years commencing from 1st December 1948 at the yearly rent of Rs. 10,200/ payable in equal quarterly instalments of Rs. 2,550/ in advance.
The lease deed provided that the appellant was at liberty to erect building and structures on the two plots of land.
The appellant agreed to pay and discharge all taxes and outgoings imposed on the above two plots as also on the buildings to be erected by the defendant.
On the expiration of the term of the lease, the appellant agreed to deliver back the possession of two plots to the respondent `free of all buildings, erections and structures and levelled and put in good order and condition to the satisfaction of the respondent '.
Clause IV of the lease provided for determination and forfeiture of the lease in the event of the rents having been allowed to be in arrears for more than 30 days or upon breach of conditions of the lease.
The forfeiture clause also provided that upon forfeiture the respondent would be entitled to re enter upon not only the two plots of land but also the structure standing thereon.
The appellant constructed on plot No. 12 a three storied building consisting of about 72 flats, shops with carpet area of 13,000 square feet and the cost of the building with superstructures in 1949 was about Rs. 6,00,000/ .
Since the appellant defaulted not only in payment of rent but also in payment of dues in respect of lands and buildings which he erected, the respondent filed a suit in 1951 for ejectment.
The appellant filed an application for the fixation of standard rent and the standard rent was fixed at Rs. 435/ per month from September 1, 1950.
A compromise was entered into between the parties in the suit on 5th March, 1954, by which they agreed on a rent of Rs. 435/ per month from September 1950 to February 1954.
An appeal against the fixation of standard rent of Rs. 435/ per month was disposed of on 28th June, 1955 whereby standard rent was refixed at Rs. 620/ p.m. from 1st September 1950.
The appellant again defaulted in payment of rent and taxes.
The arrears of rent amounted to Rs. 11,472.30 and taxes to the extent of Rs. 1,12,053.60 for the period ending 30th September 1960.
The respondent by a notice determined and forfeited the lease and called upon the appellant to deliver possession of the lands alongwith structures thereupon.
The notice also specified that the notice was not only a notice of forfeiture, but also notice under section 12 of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947.
On 1st 1016 December 1961, as the appellant failed to pay the arrears of rent and the taxes, the respondent filed the suit for ejectment and prayed for a decree for ejectment against the appellant in respect of two plots of land Nos. 12 and 13 and also the buildings and structures standing thereon, and claimed arrears of rent of Rs. 11,472.50 and mesne profits at the rate of Rs.620/ p.m. The appellant in order to get the benefit of section 12(3)(b) of the Rent Control Act, 1947, applied for time for making deposit of arrears of rent.
The appellant could not make the payment within the extended time allowed, but after the issues were framed and the suit was taken up for trial, he deposited the arrears of rent and cost in the Court after the Court made an endorsement "accept without prejudice".
Subsequently, on 11th November, 1964 the Trial Court passed a decree for ejectment in respect of plots and the buildings in favour of the respondent.
A decree was granted regarding arrears of rent and for mesno profits.
Both the appellant and the respondent preferred appeals and the Bench of two Judges of the Court of Small Causes by a common judgment disposed of both the appeals on 4th April 1965.
The Appellate Court held that it had no jurisdiction to give a decree for ejectment in respect of the two buildings constructed on plot No. 12 by the appellant.
It held that clause IV of the lease which permitted forfeiture was in the nature of penalty and the appellant was entitled to be relieved from the liability to deliver possession of the buildings constructed by him upon forfeiture by the respondent.
It also found that the appellant was entitled to be relieved from the penalty of forfeiture of the lease under section 114 and 114A of the Transfer of Property Act.
It rejected the plea of the appellant that he was always ready and willing to pay arrears of rents and found that because of repeated defaults the appellant was not entitled for relief from ejectment under section 12(3)(b) of the Bombay Rent Act.
The respondent filed a revision petition against the order of the appellate Court declining to direct possession of the two buildings and the appellant tenant filed an appeal against the order of appellate Court directing his ejectment from the two plots of lands Nos. 12 and 13.
The High Court disposed of both the revision petition and the cross appeal by a common judgment whereby it allowed the revision petition of the respondent/landlord and dismissed the appeal of the appellant/tenant and decreed the suit of the respondent directing the appellant to deliver peaceful possession of the land demised to him and also buildings which have been constructed by the appellant on the demised lands.
It also confirmed the decree regarding arrears of rents and mesne profits.
Hence the appeal by certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
Section 28 of the Bombay Rent Act, 1947 confers jurisdiction on the Court of Small Cause.
Bombay to entertain try any suit for proceedings between a landlord and tenant relating to recovery of rents or possession of any premises to which any of the provisions of that part applied.
The Jurisdiction thus conferred enables the Court to try any Suit between the landlord and the tenant relating to recovery of possession of the premises.
[1022 A B] Importers and Manufacturers Ltd. vs Pheroze Framroze Taraporewala and Ors. ; Babulal Bhura Mal and Anr.
vs Nandram Shivram and Ors., ; ; followed.
1017 Raizada Tapen Das and Anr.
vs M/s Gorakhram Gokalchand ; ; Sushila Kashinath Dhonde and Ors.
vs Harilal Govinji Bhogani and Ors., ; explained and distinguished.
The conditions specified in section 12(3)(b) of the Bombay Rent Act, 1947 will have to be strictly observed by the tenant if he wants to avail himself of the benefits provided under the section.
In the instant case, the persistent default of the appellant tenant on various occasions and his clear statement that he was not in a position to pay the arrears would exclude any relief under section 12(3) (b) of the Act.
The respondent plaintiff would be entitled to a decree for possession of the plots under the provisions of the Bombay Rent Act and in effect the decree for possession of the land would mean that the land should be delivered to him without the structures.
[1023 D G, 1025 D E] Ganpat Lodha vs Sachikant Vishnu Shivale. ; ; applied. 3.
To contend that as the respondent plaintiff has sought two reliefs one under the Bombay Rent Act and another under the contract, the entire plaint must be rejected is wrong.
In asking for the relief for possession of the land.
the respondent plaintiff is entitled to incidental and consequential reliefs such as for effectively taking possession of the plot without the structure, that is he is entitled to ask for the demolition of the superstructure.
The prayer in the plaint asking for possession of the land including the structures would not take the suit out of the competence of the Small Causes Court.
[1025 E. F G] Ramachandra Raghunath Shirgaonkar vs Vishnu Balaji Hindalekar.
; Khimjee Thakorsee vs Pioneer Fibre Co. Ltd., AIR 1941 Bom.
337 and K Arumugham Naicker and Anr.
vs Tiruvalluva Nainar Temple by its Trustee.
AIR 1954 Mad. 985; approved.
