A ceiling on agricultural holdings was imposed in Maharashtra by the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act 27 of 1961, which was brought into operation on January 26, 1962.
The ceiling fixed by the Act (Principal Act) was lowered and certain other amendments were made to that Act by Acts 27 of 1975, 47 of 1975 and 2 of 1976.
The validity of these Acts was challenged in the Bombay High Court.
The Division Bench at Nagpur repelled that challenge by its judgment dated August 13, 1976 in Vithalrao Udhaorao Uttarwar vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 1977 Bombay 99.
The appeals filed against the said decision were dismissed by the Supreme Court by its judgment in Dattatraya Govind Mahajan vs State of Maharashtra ; The only point urged in these appeals was that the Principal Act.
as amended, was void being violative of the second proviso to Article 31A(1), in so far as it created an artificial "family unit" and fixed the unit on the agricultural holdings on such family units.
The argument that the violation of the particular proviso deprived the impugned laws of the protection conferred by Article 31A was rejected by the Court on the view that even if the impugned provisions were violative of the second proviso they would receive the protection of Article 31B by reason of the inclusion of the Principal Act and the amending Acts in the Ninth Schedule.
The Court considered whether, in fact.
the provisions of the impugned Acts were violative of the second proviso and held that it was entirely for the Legislature to decide what policy to adopt for the purpose of restructuring the agrarian system and the Court could not assume the role of an economic adviser for pronouncing upon the wisdom of such policy.
The second proviso to Article 31A(1) was therefore held not to have been contravened.
The judgment of this Court in these appeals was delivered on January 27, 1977 while the proclamation of emergency was in operation.
On the revocation of that proclamation, petitions were filed in the Court by the appellants 2 praying for the review of the judgment in Dattaraya Govind Mahajan on the ground that several contentions, which were otherwise open to them for assailing the constitutional validity of the impugned Acts, could not be made by reason of the emergency and that they should be permitted to make those contentions since the emergency was lifted.
Fresh Writ Petitions were also filed in this Court in which those contentions were put forward.
The Court acceded to the request for the review and hence the petitions.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD : (Majority view) Per Chandrachud, C.J. (On his own behalf and on behalf of Krishna Iyer, Tulzapurkar and Sen, JJ.) A. (1) The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 which introduced Article 31A into the Constitution with retrospective effect and sec.
3 of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955 which substituted a new clause (1), sub clauses (a) to (e) for the original clause (1) with retrospective effect, do not damage any of the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure and are valid and constitutional being within the constituent power of the Parliament.
[9 F G=45 H, 46 A B] (2) The Agricultural Ceiling Acts, fall squarely within the terms of clause (a) of Article 31A(1).
Those Acts provide for the extinguishment and modification of rights in an "estate", the expression "estate" being defined by clause (2) (a) (iii) to mean "any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto. ".
It must follow, as a necessary corollary, that the impugned Acts are entitled to the protection of Article 31A(1)(a) with the result that their provisions cannot be deemed, and there fore cannot be declared, to be void on the ground that they are inconsistent with or take away or abridge any of the rights conferred by Articles 14, 19 or 31.
[17 A C] (3) If a constitutional provision, which deprives the petitioners of the benefit and protection of Articles 14, 19 and 31 is invalid, the petitioners will be entitled to challenge the impugned laws on the ground that they are inconsistent with or that they take away or abridge the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
Article 13(2) has a sensitive touchstone.
Not only does it mandate that the State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Part III but, it provides that any law made in contravention of the clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
Mere abridgement, that is to say curtailment, that is to say curtailment, and not necessarily abrogation that is to say total deprivation, is enough to produce the consequence provided for by Article 13(2).
[17 C E] (4) Though the withdrawal of the application of Articles 14, 19 and 31 in respect of laws which fall under clause (a) is total and complete, that is to say, the application of those articles stands abrogated, not merely abridged, in respect of impugned enactments which indubitably fall within the ambit of clause (a), every case in which the protection of a fundamental right is withdrawn will not necessarily result in damaging or destroying the basic structure of the Constitution.
The question as to whether the basic structure is damaged or destroyed in any given case would depend upon which particular Article of 3 Part III is in issue and, whether what is withdrawn is quint essential to the basic structure of the Constitution.
[18 B D] (5) The true position of law on the subject of Parliament 's power to amend the Constitution is that though the Parliament has the power to amend each and every Article of the Constitution including the provisions of Part III the amending power cannot be exercised so as to damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
[19 G H] H. H. Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp.
SCR 1; Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain, and Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., [1981] 1 SCR p. 206, referred to.
(6) If Article 31A were not enacted, some of the main purposes of the Constitution would have been delayed and eventually defeated and that by the First Amendment, the constitutional edifice was not impaired but strengthened.
The First and the Fourth Amendments, especially the First were made so closely on the heels of the Constitution that they ought indeed to be considered as a part and parcel of the Constitution itself.
These amendments are not born of second thoughts and they do not reflect a fresh look at the Constitution in order to deprive the people of the gains of the Constitution.
They are in the truest sense of the phrase, a contemporary practical exposition of the Constitution.
[26 E F, G H, 27A] (7) Article 39 of the Constitution directs by clauses (b) and (c) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good; that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common detriment.
These twin principles of State policy were a part of the Constitution as originally enacted and it is in order to effectuate the purpose of these Directive Principles that the First and the Fourth Amendments were passed.
[27 A B] (8) Article 31A(I) could easily have appeared in the original Constitution itself as an illustration of its basic philosophy.
What remained to be done in the hope that vested interests will not distort the base of the Constitution, had to be undertaken with a sense of urgency and expediency.
It is that sense and sensitivity which gave birth to the impugned amendment.
The progress in the degeneracy of any nation can be rapid, especially in societies riven by economic disparities and caste barriers.
We embarked upon a constitutional era holding forth the promise that we will secure to all citizens justice, social, economic and political; equality of status and of opportunity; and, last but not the least, dignity of the individual.
Between these promises and the First Amendment there is discernible a nexus, direct and immediate.
Indeed, if there is one place in an agriculture dominated society like ours where citizens can hope to have equal justice, it is on the strip of land which they till and love, the land which assures to them the dignity of their persons by providing to them a near decent means of livelihood.
[28 E H] (9) The First Amendment has made the constitutional ideal of equal justice a living truth.
It is like a mirror that reflects the ideals of the Constitution, it is not the destroyer of its basic structure.
The provisions introduced by it and the Fourth Amendment for the extinguishment or modification of rights in lands held or let for purposes of agriculture or for purposes ancillary thereto, strengthen rather than weaken the basic structure of the Constitution.
[29 A B] 4 The First Amendment is aimed at removing social and economic disparities in the agricultural sector.
It may happen that while existing inequalities are being removed, new inequalities may arise marginally and incidentally.
Such marginal and incidental inequalities cannot damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
It is impossible for any Government, howsoever expertly advised, socially oriented and prudently managed, to remove every economic disparity without causing some hardship or injustice to a class of persons who also are entitled to equal treatment under the law.
Thus, the adoption of "family unit" as the unit of application for the revised ceilings may cause incidental hardship to minor children and to unmarried daughters.
That cannot, however, furnish an argument for assailing the impugned laws on the ground that they violate the guarantee of equality.
It seems ironical indeed that the laws providing for agricultural ceilings should be stigmatised as destroying the guarantee of equality when their true object and intendment is to remove inequalities in the matter of agricultural holdings.
[29 B E] The note of the Panel set up by the Planning Commission in May 1959 on the adoption of "family unit" as the unit of application for the revised ceilings and the counter affidavit of the Deputy Secretary to the Govt.
of Maharashtra show the relevance and efficacy of the family being treated as the real operative unit in the movement for agrarian reform.
Considering the Indian social milieu, the Panel came to the conclusion that agricultural ceiling can be most equitably applied if the base of application is taken as the family unit consisting of husband, wife and three minor children.
In view of this expert data a law passed truly for implementing the objective of Article 31A(l)(a) cannot be open to challenge on the ground that it infringes Articles 14,19 or 31.
[29 E G] B. (1).
The Amendment introduced by sec.
4 of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 does not damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
That Amendment must, therefore, be upheld on its own merits.
[29 H] (2) The validity of Article 31A cannot be upheld by applying the doctrine of stare decisis, though the Article has continued to be recognised as valid ever since it was introduced into the Constitution.
The constitutional validity of Article 31A has been recognised in the four decisions, namely.
Shankari Prasad vs Union of India, ; , 95; Sajjansingh vs State of Rajasthan,[1965] 1 SCR 933; I.C. Golakanath vs Union of India & Ors,[1967] 2 SCR 762 and H. H. Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalavaru vs State of Kerala, sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly and sometimes incidentally.
It may be mentioned, though it has no relevance on the applicability of the rule of stare decisis, that in none of the three earlier decisions was the validity of Article 31A tested on the ground that it damaged or destroyed the basic structure of the Constitution.
That theory was elaborated for the first time in Kesavananda Bharati and it was in the majority judgment delivered in that case that the doctrine found its first acceptance.
Even in the two latest cases, namely, Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P., [1980] 3 SCR p. 1159, Thumati Venkaiah vs State of A.P., ; the question as to whether Article 31A can be upheld by applying the doctrine of stare decisis was never decided.
Nor was the question of vires of Articles 31A, 31B and 31C (unamended) considered in these decisions.[30G H, 31A B, C, 32 B C] 5 It is true to say that for the application of the rule of stare decisis, it is not necessary that the earlier decision or decisions of long standing should have considered and either accepted or rejected the particular argument which is advanced in the case on hand.
Were it so, the previous decisions could more easily be treated as binding by applying the law of precedent and it will be unnecessary to take resort to the principle of stare decisis.
It is, therefore, sufficient for invoking the rule of stare decisis that a certain decision was arrived at on a question which arose or was argued, no matter on what reason the decision rests or what is the basis of the decision.
In other words, for the purpose of applying the rule of stare decisis, it is unnecessary to enquire or determine as to what was the rationale of the earlier decision which is said to operate as stare decisis.
Therefore, the reason why Article 31A was upheld in the earlier decisions.
if indeed it was, are not germane for the purpose of deciding whether this is a fit and proper case in which to apply that rule.[34 C G] But there are four principal reasons for not invoking the rule of stare decisis for deciding upon the constitutionality of Article 31A.
In the first place, Article 31A breathes its own vitality, drawing its sustenance from the basic tenets of our Constitution.
The second reason is that neither in Shankari Prasad, nor in Sajjan Singh nor in Golak Nath and evidently not in Kesavananda Bharati, was the question as regards the validity as such of Article 31A raised or decided.
Thirdly, the history of the World 's constitutional law shows that the principle of stare decisis is treated as having a limited application only.
The fourth reason is that on principle rules like stare decisis should not be invoked for upholding constitutional devices like Articles 31A, 31B and 31C which are designed to protect not only past laws but future laws also.
The principle of stare decisis can apply, if at all, to laws protected by these articles, if those laws have enjoyed the protection of these articles for a long time, but the principle cannot apply to the articles themselves.
The principle of stare decisis permits the saving of laws the validity of which has been accepted or recognised over the years.
It does not require or sanction that, in future too, laws may be passed even though they are invalid or unconstitutional.
Future perpetration of illegality is no part of the doctrine of stare decisis.[34 F H, 35 A B, D, 36 B E] Burnet vs Coronado Oil & Gas Co., ; , 406; Tramways Case (No. 1) 1914 (CLR) 54@ 58; Bengal Immunity Case ; Income Tax officer, Tuticorin vs T. section D. Nadar; , ; New York vs United States, ; , 590 591 [1946]; U.S. vs International Boxing Club, ; , 249 [1955]; Mac Pherson vs Buick Motor Co., , 391 [1916]: State of Washington vs W. C. Dawson & Co., ; , 238 [1924] James.
Monoroe vs Frank Pape, U.S. 492, 523, 528, quoted with approval.
C. (1) All amendments to the Constitution which were made before April 24, 1973 and by which the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution was amended from time to time by the inclusion of various Acts and Regulations therein are valid and constitutional.
Amendments to the Constitution made on or after April 24, 1973 by which the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution was amended from time to time by the inclusion of various Acts and Regulation therein, are open to challenge on the ground that they, or any one or more of them, are beyond the constituent power of the Parliament since they damage the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure in view of the Judg 6 ment in Kesavananda Bharati.
If any Act or Regulation included in the Ninth Schedule by a constitutional amendment made on or after April 24, 1973 is saved by Article 31A, or by Article 31C as it stood prior to its amendment by the Forty Second Amendment, the challenge to the validity of the relevant constitutional Amendment by which that Act or Regulation is put in the Ninth Schedule, on the ground that the Amendment damages or destroys a basic or essential feature of the Constitution or its basic structure as reflected in Articles 14, 19 or 31, will become otiose.
[10 C F=46 C F] (2) Article 31B provides that the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule shall not be deemed to be void or ever to have become void on the ground that they are inconsistent with or take away or abridge any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
The provisions of the Article are expressed to be without prejudice to the generality of the provisions in Article 31A and the concluding portion of the Article supersedes any judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal to the contrary.
This Article was introduced into the Constitution by section 5 of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, Article 31A having been introduced by section 4 of the same Amendment.
Article 31B has to be read along with the Ninth Schedule because it is only those Acts and Regulations which are put in that Schedule that can receive the protection of that article.
The Ninth Schedule was added to the Constitution by section 14 of the First Amendment Act, 1951.
The device or mechanism which sections 5 and 14 or the First Amendment have adopted is that as and when Acts and Regulations are put into the Ninth Schedule by constitutional amendments made from time to time, they will automatically by reason of the provisions of Article 31B, receive the protection of that article.
[36F H, 37A B] The view of the Court that it would not be proper to invoke the doctrine of stare decisis for upholding the validity of Article 31A, must govern the question of the validity of Article 31 B.
But just as there are significant similarities between Articles 31A and 31B, there is a significant dissimilarity too.
Article 31A enables the passing of laws of the description mentioned in clauses (a) to (e), in violation of the guarantee afforded by Articles 14 and 19.
In so far as Article 31B is concerned, it does not define the category of laws which are to receive its protection, and secondly, it affords protection to Schedule laws against all the provisions of Part III of the Constitution.
No Act can be placed in the Ninth Schedule except by the Parliament and since the Ninth Schedule is a part of the Constitution, no additions or alterations can be made therein without complying with the restrictive provisions governing amendments to the Constitution.
Thus, Article 31B read with the Ninth Schedule provides what is generally described as, a protective umbrella to all Acts which are included in the Schedule, no matter of what character, kind or category they may be.
Putting it briefly, whereas Article 31A protects laws of a defined category, Article 31B empowers the Parliament to include in the Ninth Schedule such laws as it considers fit and proper to include therein.
Thus the fourth reason for not applying the rule of stare decisis to Article 31A that any particular law passed under clauses (a) to (e) can be accepted as good if it has been treated as valid for a long number of years but the device in the form of the Article cannot be upheld by the application of that rule, applies to Article 31B read with the Ninth Schedule by the self same test.[37 G H, 38 B D, E F] (3) The decision in Kesavananda Bharati must be treated as a landmark.
The theory that the Parliament cannot exercise its amending power so as to 7 damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution, was propounded and accepted for the first time in Kesavananda Bharati.
This is one reason for holding the laws incorporated into the Ninth Schedule before April 24,1973, on which date the judgment in Kesavananda Bharati was rendered.
The second reason for drawing a line at a convenient and relevant point of time is that the first 66 items in the Ninth Schedule, which were inserted prior to the decision in Kesavananda Bharati, mostly pertains to laws of agrarian reforms.[38 G H, 39A, B] D. (1) Article 31C of the Constitution, as it stood prior to its amendment by section 4 of the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act, 1976, is valid to the extent to which its constitutionality was upheld in Kesavananda Bharati.
Article 31C, as it stood prior to the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act does not damage any of the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure.
Once it is held that Article 31A is valid on its own merits, it must follow logically that the unamended Article 31C is also valid.
The unamended portion of Article 31C is not like an unchartered ship.
It gives protection to a defined and limited category of laws which are passed for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of Article 39.
It is impossible to conceive that any law passed for such a purpose can at all violate Article 14 or Article 19.
In fact, far from damaging the basic structure of the Constitution, laws passed truly and bona fide for giving effect to directive principles contained in clause (b) and (c) of Article 39 will fortify that structure.
[10 F G, 40 G H, 41 A C] E. (1) The normal term of the Lok Sabha expired on March 18, 1976.
On April 2, 1976, the Lok Sabha passed the Fortieth Amendment Act by which the Maharashtra Land Ceiling Amendment Acts were put in the Ninth Schedule as Items 157, 159 and 160.
On November 24, 1976 the House of People (Extension of Duration) Amendment Act was passed extending the term of the Parliament for a further period of one year.
The Forty Second Amendment Act was passed on November 12, 1976.
The Lok Sabha was dissolved on January 18, 1977 and both the emergencies dated December 3, 1971 and June 25, 1975 were revoked on March 21, 1977.
[43 E G] In so far as the proclamation of December 3, 1971 is concerned, there was manifest justification for that course of action.
The danger to the security of the country was clear and present.
From the various dates and events mentioned and furnished to the Court, it may be possible for a layman to conclude that there was no reason to continue the state of emergency at least after the formality of exchanging the prisoners of war was completed.
But Courts have severe constraints which deter them from undertaking a task which cannot judicially be performed.
[44 D F, H] (2) The two Acts, the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, Act 30 of 1976 and the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Amendment Act 109 of 1976, by which the duration of the Lok Sabha was extended are valid and lawful.
The Fortieth and the Forty Second Constitutional Amendments cannot, therefore, be struck down on the ground that they were passed by a Lok Sabha which was not lawfully in existence.
[45 F G] Section 2 of the first of these Acts, Act 30 of 1976, which was passed on February 16, 1976, provided that the period of five years in relation to the then House of the People shall be extended for a period of one year "while the Pro 8 clamation of Emergency issued on the 3rd day of December, 1971 and on the 25th day of June, 1975, are both in operation.
" The second Act of Extension continues to contain the same provision.
Both the proclamations of emergency were in fact in operation on February 16, 1976 when the first Act was passed as also on November 24, 1976 when the second Act, 109 of 1976, was passed.
Neither the first Proclamation can be deemed not to be in existence, nor can the second Proclamation be held to have been issued mala fide and, therefore non est, since the evidence produced before the Court is insufficient for recording a decision on either of these matters.
[45 C F] Per Bhagwati, J. (Contra) The doctrine of stare decisis can be invoked for sustaining the constitutional validity of Article 31A. [50 E] Minerva Mills vs Union of India, [1981] 1 SCR p. 206 reiterated; Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P., [1980] 3 SCR p. 1159, followed.
Per Krishna Iyer, J. (Contra) Applying the principle of stare decisis, Article 31A is valid.
In constitutional issues over stress on precedents is inept.
Even so, great respect and binding value are the normal claim of rulings until reversed by larger Benches.
[51 C D] Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P., [1980] 3 SCR p. 1159 reiterated.
