The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Act I of 1973 was enacted on 1st of January 1973.
Though a Full Bench of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh when challenged by some of the land holders held by its judgment dated 11th April, 1973, the Act to be constitutionally valid; yet the said Act was not brought into force till 1st January 1975.
In ]977, the Act was amended with retrospective effect from 1st January 1975 by the Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings) Amendment Act 1977.
As soon ns the Amending Act was passed, the land holders once again filed writ petitions in the High Court, challenging the constitutional validity of the Andhra Pradesh Act.
The main ground, inter alia, was that by reason of the enactment of the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Central Act, 1976, the Andhra Prdesh Act had become void and inoperative.
A Full Bench of five judges of the High Court held that the enactment of the Central Act did not have the effect of invalidating the whole of the Andhra Pradesh Act, but since the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Act were repugnant to the provisions of the Central Act so far as concerned land satisfying both the definition of "land" in the Andhra Pradesh Act and the definition of "vacant land", in the Central Act, the Andhra Pradesh Act was held not applicable to "vacant lands" falling within the ambit of the Central Act.
ave for this limited relief, the High Court dismissed the writ petitions in all other respects.
Hence the appeals by the land holders after obtaining special leave from this Court.
Writ Petitions were also filed directly in this Court by some of the land holders.
Dismissing the appeals, and writ petitions, the Court ^ HELD :1.
Article 246 of the Constitution of India carves out an exception derogating from the normal distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States.
The effect of passing of resolutions by the Houses of Legislature of two or more States under this constitutional provision is that Parliament which has otherwise no power to legislate with respect to a matter, 1144 except as provided in Articles 249 and 250, becomes entitled to legislate with regard to such matter and the State Legislature passing the resolutions cease to have power to make law relating to that matter.
The resolutions operate as abdication or surrender of the powers of the State Legislatures with respect to the matter which is the subject of the resolutions and such matter is placed entirely in the hands of Parliament and Parliament alone can then legislate with respect to each.
It is as if such matter is lifted out of list II and placed in List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
A plain natural construction of the language of Clauses (1) and (2) of Article 252 makes this position clear.
It was in pursuance of clause (1) of Article 352 that a resolution was passed by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council on 7th April, 1972 to the effect that "the imposition of ceiling of urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling and all matters concerned therewith or ancillary and incidental thereto should be regulated in the State or Andhra Pradesh by Parliament by law" and on identical resolution in the same terms was passed on the next day by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly.
The result was that at the date when the Andhra Pradesh Act was enacted, Parliament alone was competent to legislate with respect to ceiling on urban immovable property and acquisition of such property in excess of the ceiling and all connected, ancillary or incidental matters, and the Andhra Pradesh Legislature stood denuded of its power to legislate on that subject.
[1149 A, E H, 1150 A C] Union of India vs V. B. Choudhary, 19791 3 SCR 802; followed.
Under the powers thus transferred Parliament enacted the Central Act with a view to imposing ceiling on vacant land, other land mainly used for the purpose of agriculture, in an urban.
agglomeration.
The Central Act imposes a ceiling on holding of land in urban agglomeration other than land which is mainly used for the purpose of agriculture and agriculture in this connection includes horticulture, but does not include raising of grass, daily farming, poultry farming, breeding live stock and such cultivation or the growing of such plants as may be prescribed by the Rules, and, moreover, in order to fall within the exclusion, the land must be entered in the revenue cr land record before the appointed day as for the purpose of agriculture and must also not have been specified in the master plan for a purpose other than agriculture.
[119 C F] 3.
It is no doubt true that if the Andhra Pradesh Act seeks to impose ceiling on land falling within an urban agglomeration, it would be outside rh art of its legislative competence, because it cannot provide for imposition of ceiling on urban immovable property.
But the only urban agglomerations in the State of Andhra Pradesh recognised in the Central Act were those referred to in Section 2(n) (A) (i) and there can be no doubt that so far as these urban agglomerations are concerned, it was not within the legislative competence of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature to provide for imposition of ceiling on land situate within these urban agglomerations.
But, the Andhra Pradesh Act is not out side the legislative competence of the Andhra Pradesh Legislative in so far as lands situate in the other areas of the State of Andhra Pradesh are concerned.
Any other area in the State of Andhra Pradesh with a population of more than one lakh could be notified as an urban agglomeration under section 2(n) (A) (ii) of the Central Act but until it is so notified would not be an urban agglomeration and the Andhra Pradesh Legislature would have legislative competence to provide for imposition of ceiling on 1145 land situate within such area.
No sooner such area is notified to be an urban agglomeration, the Central Act would apply in relation to land situate within such area, but until that happens the Andhra Pradesh Act would continue to be applicable to determine the ceiling on holding of land.
The Andhra Pradesh Act came into force on 1st January 1975 and it was with reference to this date that the surplus holding of land in excess of the ceiling area was required to be determined and if there was any surplus it was to be surrendered to the State Government.
Therefore, in an area other than that comprised in the urban agglomerations referred to in section 2(n)(A) (i), land held by a person in excess of the ceiling area would be liable to be determined as on 1st January 1975 under the Andhra Pradesh Act and only land within the ceiling area will be allowed to remain with him.
It is only in respect of land remaining with a person whether an individual or a family after the operation of the Andhra Pradesh Act, that the Central Act would apply if and when the area in question is notified to be an urban agglomeration under section 2(n)(A)(ii) of the Central Act.
[1155 G H, 1156 A G] Merely because an area may possibly in the future be notified as an urban agglomeration under section 2(n) (A) (ii) of the Central Act, the Andhra Pradesh Legislature would not cease to have competence to legislate with respect to ceiling on land situate in such area even though it is not an urban agglomeration at the date of the enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Act.
Undoubtedly, when an area is notified as an urban agglomeration under section 2(n) (A) (ii), the Central Act would apply to land situate in such area and the Andhra Pradesh Act would cease to have application but by that time the Andhra Pradesh Act would have already operated to determine the ceiling on holding of land falling within the definition in section 3(j) of that Act and situate within such area.
Therefore, the whole of the Andhra Pradesh Act is neither ultravires nor void as being outside the area of legislative competence of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature.
It is only in respect of land situate within the urban agglomerations referred to in section 2(n) (A)(i) of the Central Act that the Andhra Pradesh Act would not apply but it would be fully applicable in respect of land situate in all the other areas of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
[1156 G X 1157 A B] 4.
A divided minor cannot be excluded from the 'family unit ' as defined in section 3(f) of the Andhra Pradesh Act.
That would be flying in the face of sections 3(f) and 4 of the Andhra Pradesh Act.
It is true that a partition affected prior to 2nd May 1972 is not invalidated by the Andhra Pradesh Act and therefore any property which comes to the share of a divided minor son would in law belong to him and would not be liable to be regarded as part of joint family property.
But under the definition of family unit in section 2(f) the divided minor son would clearly be included in the family unit and by reason of section 4 his land whether self acquired or obtained on partition would be liable to be clubbed with the land held by the other members of the family unit.
The land obtained by the divided minor son on partition would be liable to be aggregated with the lands of other members of the family unit not because the partition is invalid but because the land held by him howsoever acquired is liable to be clubbed together with the lands of others for the purpose of applying the ceiling area to the family unit.
[1157 C, F HI 14 610 SCI/80 1146 5.
The Andhra Pradesh Act is admittedly an agrarian reform legislation and it is protected against challenge on the ground of infraction of Article 14, 19 and 31 by the protective umbrella of Article 31A. [1158 B C] 6.
The definition of 'family unit ' is nor violative of Article 14 of the Constitution by including ' a minor son in the family unit while excluding a major son from it.
[1158 A] Seth Nand Lal vs State of Haryana.
[1980] 3 SCR p. 1181 followed.
