On the ground that the tenant had sublet the premises without his consent the landlord sought the tenant 's eviction from the premises under section 11(4)(i) of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965.
The Rent Controller ordered eviction and this order was affirmed by the Subordinate Judge, District Judge and the High Court.
Before this Court it was contended on behalf of the tenant that under section 108(j) of the , it was a term of every lease that the lessee might sublease the whole or any part of his interest in the property and, therefore, unless the lease expressly prohibited the lessee from sub letting the whole or part of the premises, the landlord could not have recourse to section 11(4)(i) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: What section 11(4)(i) of the Act provides is that sub letting shall be a ground for eviction but not if it was by agreement of the landlord.
[142G] 1(a) What section 11(4)(i) means is that a tenant may be evicted on the ground of sub letting unless such sub letting is permitted by a term of the lease itself or by subsequent consent of the landlord.
If the clause "if the lease does not confer on him any right to do so" was not there the position would be unarguable that section 108(j) of the would offer no protection.
But the addition of the clause only clarified that the right to sublet could be conferred on the tenant either at the time of the lease or subsequently but it had to be conferred; it could not be claimed unilaterally by the tenant.
[142B D] (b) Quite obviously the legislature thought that the tenant, whose tenancy was well secured and protected by the rights conferred by the Act should alone be entitled to such security and protection and that the tenant should not be allowed to profit by the protection given to him by subletting the premises and extending the protection to others beside himself unless the landlord by his act agreed to such a course.
[142F] 2.
It is well settled law that not all the rights conferred on the landlord and tenant by section 108 and other provisions of the have been left intact by the various State Rent Acts and that if a State Rent 140 Act makes provision for eviction on certain specified grounds, eviction cannot be resisted on the basis of rights conferred by the .
Section 108(j) stands displaced by section 11(4)(i) of the Act and is no defence to an action for eviction based on this section.
[143G] V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal. ; @ 1747= ; referred to.
