The residents (respondents) of a prominent residential locality of the Municipality (petitioner) in their complaint under section 133 Criminal Procedure Code to the Sub Divisional Magistrate averred that the Municipality had failed despite several pleas, to meet its basic obligations, like provision of sanitary facilities on the roads, public conveniences for slum dwellers who were using the road for that purpose, and prevention of the discharge from the nearby Alcohol Plant of maladorous fluids into the public street, and that the Municipality was oblivious to the statutory obligation envisaged in section 123 M. P. Municipalities Act, 1961 The Municipal Council contested the petition on the ground that the owners of houses had gone to that locality on their own choice, fully aware of the insanitary conditions and therefore they could not complain.
It also pleaded financial difficulties in the construction of drains and provision of amenities.
The Magistrate found the facts proved, and ordered the municipality to provide the amenities and to abate the nuisance by constructing drain pipes with flow of water to wash the filth and stop the stench and that failure would entail prosecution under section 188 I.P.C.
The order of the Magistrate was found unjustified by the Sessions Court, but upheld by the High Court.
In the Special Leave Petition by the Municipality to this Court on the question whether a Court can by affirmative action compel a statutory body to carry out its duty to the community by constructing sanitation facilities at great cost and on a time bound basis.
^ HELD : 1.
Wherever there is a public nuisance, the presence of section 133 Criminal Procedure Code must be felt and any contrary opinion is contrary to the law.
[112D] 2.
The public power of the Magistrate under the Code is a public duty to the members of the public who are victims of the nuisance and so he shall exercise, it when the jurisdictional facts are present.
[107G] 98 3.
The Magistrate 's responsibility under section 133 Cr.
P.C. is to order removal of such nuisance within a time to be fixed in the order.
This is a public duty implicit in the public power to be exercised on behalf of the public and pursuant to a public proceeding.
Failure to comply with the direction will be visited with a punishment contemplated by section 188 I.P.C. [109C D] 4.
The Municipal Commissioner or other executive authority bound by the order under section 133 Criminal Procedure Code shall obey the direction because disobedience, if causes obstruction or annoyance or injury to any persons lawfully pursuing their employment, shall be punished with simple imprisonment or fine as prescribed in the section.
The offence is aggravated if the disobedience tends to cause danger to human health or safety.
[109E] 5.
Public nuisance, because of pollutants being discharged by big factories to the detriment of the poorer sections, is a challenge to the social justice component of the rule of law.
[110C] 6.
The imperative tone of section 133 Criminal Procedure Code read with the punitive temper of section 188 I.P.C. make the prohibitory act a mandatory duty.
[109E] 7.
The Criminal Procedure Code operates against statutory bodies and others regardless of the cash in their coffers, even as human rights under Part III of the Constitution have to be respected by the State regardless of budgetary provision.
[108H] 8.
Section 123 M. P. Municipalities Act 1961 has no saving clause when the municipal council is penniless.
[108H] 9.
Although the Cr.
P.C. and I.P.C. are of ancient vintage the new social justice orientation imparted to them by the Constitution of India makes them a remedial weapon of versatile use.
Social Justice is due to the people and, therefore, the people must be able to trigger off the jurisdiction vested for their benefit in any public functionary like a Magistrate under section 133 Criminal Procedure Code.
In the exercise of such power, the judiciary must be informed by the broader principle of access to justice necessitated by the conditions of developing countries and obligated by article 38 of the Constitution.
[109F G] 10.
A responsible municipal council constituted for the precise purpose of preserving public health and providing better finances cannot run away from its principal duty by pleading financial inability.
Decency and dignity are non negotiable facets of human rights and are a first charge on local self governing bodies.
Similarly, providing drainage systems not pompous and attractive, but in working condition and sufficient to meet the needs of the people cannot be evaded if the municipality is to justify its existence.
[110E] 11.
The Court, armed with the provisions of the two Codes and justified by the obligation under section 123 of the Act, must adventure into positive directions as it has done in the present case.
Section 133 Criminal Procedure Code authorises the prescription of a time limit for carrying out the order.
The same provision spells out the power to give specific directives.
[111A B] Govind Singh vs Shanti Sarup, ; , 279 referred to.
The state will realise that article 47 makes it a paramount principle of governance that steps are taken for the improvement of public health as amongst its primary duties.
The municipality also will slim its budget on 99 low priority items and elitist projects to use the savings on sanitation and public health.
[114C] 13.
Where Directive Principles have found statutory expression in Do 's and Don 'ts the court will not sit idly by and allow municipal government to become a statutory mockery.
The law will relentlessly be enforced and the plea of poor finance will be poor alibi when people in misery cry for justice.
The dynamics of the judicial process have a new `enforcement ' dimension not merely through some of the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code (as here) but also through activated tort consciousness.
The officers in charge and even the elected representatives will have to face the penalty of the law if what the Constitution and follow up legislation direct them to do are defied or denied wrongfully.
The wages of violation is punishment, corporate and personal.
[114G 115A] [The Court approved a scheme of construction work to be undertaken by the Municipality for the elimination of the insanitary conditions and directed that the work be commenced within two months and that the Magistrate inspect the progress of the work every three months and see that it is implemented.
[113 D 114 B]
