The two detenus were carrying Dn business in diamonds and precious stones.
The Customs Officer at Bombay raided their premises and seized a huge quantity of valuables.
During interrogation they claimed that some of the articles seized were not smuggled goods but were locally acquired and gave names of four persons from whom they were acquired.
The detenus were released on bail by the Magistrate on certain conditions.
An order of detention under section 3(i) of the COFEPOSA, 1974 alongwith the grounds of detention was served on the detenus on Feb. 16, 1980.
The wife of the detenu addressed a letter on Feb. 18, 1980 to the first respondent requesting him to furnish the detenus with the materials relied upon by the detaining authority in the grounds of detention.
The detenu received a letter dated March 14, 1980 from the State Government on March 25, 1980 declining the request for supply of copies.
The detenu had also sent a petition through the Central Government on March 11, 1980 complaining the non supply of copies of the necessary documents and also prayed for the revocation of the order of detention.
On April 3, 1980 the Central Government wrote to the detenu that his request for revocation had been rejected, The Central Government, however, advised the State Government to furnish the detenu with the copies of the required documents.
As a result, the copies were received by the detenu on April 3, 1980.
The detenu had also made a representation to the State Government on March 24, 1980 which, according to the information by the counsel of Respondent No. 1, was declined.
The counsel for the detenus challenged the detention order on the grounds; (i) that the detaining authority callously and deliberately refused to supply the copies of the statements and documents relied upon in the grounds of detention, (ii) the detenu had a constitutional right to be afforded a fair and full opportunity to make an effective representation against their detention and his representation dated March 11, 1980, was wrongly rejected by an unauthorised person.
The respondent argued that (i) the substance of the information required had been incorporated in the grounds of detention ! which were served on the detenus, (ii) the supply of further information would have exposed the informants to bodily harm and the information would have adversely affected the investigation and harmed public interest.
344 Accepting the petition ^ HELD: The very fact that soon after the directions of the Central Government copies were ready and despatched to the detenus within three days thereof, shows that there was no physical difficulty in preparing and supplying the copies to the detenus, with due promptitude.
[349A B] It is well settled that "the constitutional imperatives enacted in Article 22(5) of the Constitution are two fold: (i) the detaining authority must, as soon as may be, that is, as soon as practicable after the detention, communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the order has been made and (ii) tho detaining authority must afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the detention order.
In the context 'grounds ' does not merely mean a recital or reproduction of a ground of satisfaction of the authority in the language of section 3, nor is its connotation restricted to a bare statement of conclusion of fact.
Nothing less than all the basic facts and materials which influenced the detaining authority in making the order of detention must be communicated to the detenue.
[350B D] The mere fact that the grounds of detention served on the detenu are elaborate, does not absolve the detaining authority from its constitutional responsibility to supply all the basic facts and materials relied upon in the ground to the detenu.
In the instant case, the grounds contain only tho substance of the statements, while the detenu had asked for copies of tho full text of those statements.
[350E F] Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal & Ors. ; referred to.
The statements supplied to the detenus are their subsequent statements in which they have completely resiled from their earlier statements.
It is obvious that the supply of the earlier statements which were entirely in favour of the detenus and the full texts of which have been withheld, could not, by any reckoning, expose those persons to any harm or danger at tho hands of the agents or partisans of the detenus.
If any part of the statements of those witnesses had to be withheld in public interest, the appropriate authority could, after due application of its mind, make an order under clause (6) of Article 22 of the Constitution withholding the supply of those portions of statements after satisfying itself that their disclosure would be against the public interest.
[351 F G] The detaining authority, without applying its mind to the nature of the documents, the copies of which were asked for by the detenus, mechanically refused as desired by the Collector, to supply the copies of all the documents.
It was on receiving a direction from the Central Government that the copies were supplied.
On account of this chill indifference and arbitrary refusal, the detenu, who had applied for copies on Feb. 18, 1980 could get the same only on March 27, 1980 i.e. after more than one month.
Thus, there was unreasonable delay of more than a month in supplying the copies to the detenus of the material that had been relied upon or referred to in the 'grounds ' of detention.
There was thus an infraction of the constitutional imperative that in addition to the supply of the grounds of detention, all the basic material relied upon or referred to in those 'grounds ' must be supplied to the detenu with reasonable expedition 345 to enable him to make a full and effective representation at the earliest.
What is 'reasonable ' expedition is a question of fact depending upon the circumstances of the particular case.
[351 H, 352 A C] In the peculiar facts of the instant case, the delay of more than a month, in supplying the copies of the basic materials and documents to the detenus has vitiated the detention.
[352 C D]
