The appellants were convicted and sentenced for two offences under Section 22A of the Minimum Wages Act for contravention of rules 26(1), 26(2), 26(5) and 26B of the Gujarat Minimum Wages Rules, 1961.
The sentence imposed in consequence was a fine of Rs. 50 on each of the appellants in each case.
The trial court as well as the High Court took into consideration various provisions of the Act and came to the conclusion that the appellant 's mill fell within the ambit of Item 5 of Part I of Schedule to the said Act.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The appellant 's Company would be an oil mill within the meaning of Item 5 of Part I of the Schedule to the Act.
[448 C] (2) The various provisions of the Minimum Wages Act make it clear: (i) For an employer to be covered by the Act three conditions must be fulfilled; [445F] (a) he must be employing one or more employees in any scheduled employment; [445 G] (b) minimum rates of wages for such scheduled employment must have been fixed under the Act; and [445 G] (c) if a committee has been appointed by the Government under Section 5 in respect of such scheduled employment it must consist of persons representing employers and employees in the scheduled employment who shall be equal in number.
[445 H] (ii) Employment in an oil mill is a scheduled employment.
[446 A] In the instant case it cannot be said that these conditions are not satisfied.
[446 A] (3) Vanaspati is essentially an oil although it is a different kind of oil other than that oil (be it rapeseed oil, cotton seed oil, ground nut oil, soya bean oil or any other oil) which forms its basic ingredient.
Oil will remain oil if it retains its essential properties and merely because it has been subjected to certain processes would not convert it into a different substance.
In other words, although certain additions have been made to and operations carried out on oil, it will still be classified as oil unless its essential characteristics have undergone a change so that it would be a misnomer to call it oil as understood in ordinary parlance.
No doubt, the word 'oil ' is not defined in the Act.
Taking the dictionary meaning for interpreting the term 'oil mill ', in this case it is clear that hydrogenated vegetable oil falls within the said term.
[446 C G] 441 The various processes, namely, neutralization, bleaching, deodorisation, hardening and hydrogenation to which oil is subjected for being converted into vanaspati leave its basic characteristics untouched, that is, it remains a cooling medium with vegetable fat as its main ingredient.
Neutralisation, bleaching and deodorisation are merely refining processes so that the colour, the odour and foreign substances are removed from it before it is hydrogenated and hardened and even the two processes last mentioned allow the oil to retain those characteristics.
Even ghee, for that matter, is nothing but a form of oil although it is obtained from animal fat, being a derivative from milk.
Whether it liquefies in summer and solidifies in winter, nonetheless, ghee remains an oil and it makes no difference that it is called ghee in ordinary parlance.
The word ii merely a different name for an oil which is not derived from vegetables.
From that point of view the term 'vegetable ghee ' is a contradiction in terms, ghee being essentially an animal fat.
The reason why it has come to be called vegetable ghee is that in its finished form it resembles ghee in appearance and by viscosity and is also considered a more respectable form of cooking medium when so called, thus catering to the psychological satisfaction of the consumer.
Thus vanaspati must be regarded as an oil for the purpose of Item S in Part I of the Schedule to the Act in spite of the processes to which the oil forming its base has been subjected in order to convert it into the finished product.
[446H, 447A D; F] Further, in the instant case: (1) there is a clear finding of fact which is no longer open to challenge, that the company sells oil as such and also oil cakes which brings the Company within the meaning of an oil mill (2) the Company being an oil mill and oil Mills having been represented on the Committee formed by the Government and opportunity having been afforded to the appellants by that committee to represent their case.
Sections 5 and 9 of the Act are not applicable, and (3) the three categories, namely, skilled, semi skilled and unskilled employees exhaust the types of workers which would be employed in any undertaking (barring of course specialists and technical experts who admittedly do not fall within the category of employees embraced by the Act) and minimum wages were fixed for all those three categories.
The appellants ' contention therefore, that for any of the provisions of the Act were contravened is thus not tenable.
[447 G H, 448 D, E F]
