The appellant, an accounts officer, was promoted and appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
He was compulsorily retired on 27th August, 1975 in the public interest under F. R. Rule 56(j)(i) by the Accountant General.
The appellant challenged his pre mature retirement in the High Court by a Writ Petition which was dismissed in limine.
In his appeal by Special Leave, the appellant challenged the order of retirement and argued that (i) the Accountant General is not "appropriate authority" within the meaning of the rule and (ii) the retirement was not in the public interest.
The respondent contended that (i) the power of the appropriate authority in respect of accounts officers like the appellant was vested in the Auditor General by Notification of the Ministry of Finance dated 19 1 1972 and (ii) the impugned order of compulsory retirement was made by the Accountant General on the basis of the recommendations dated 23 8 1975 of the Reviewing Committee.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: An officer with continuous service for 14 years crossing the efficiency bar and reaching the maximum salary in the scale and with no adverse entries at least for five years immediately before the compulsory retirement cannot be cashiered on the score that long years ago, his performance had been poor, although his superiors had allowed him to cross the efficiency bar without qualms.
The order of compulsory retirement fails because vital material, relevant to the decision, has been ignored and obsolete material, less relevant to the decision, has influenced the decision.
[439D E] Any order which materially suffers from the blemish of overlooking or ignoring wilfully or otherwise vital facts bearing on the decision is bad in law.
Likewise, any action which irrationally digs up obsolete circumstances and obsessively reaches a decision based thereon, cannot be sustained.
[429 F] The Fundamental Rules govern the Central Civil Services and ensure the career security which is the sine qua non of contended service.
But potential compulsory retirement under F. R. 56 (j) (i) haunting the afternoon of official life injects an awesome uncertainty which makes even the honest afraid.
the efficient tremble and almost everyone genuflect, and is not a happy prospect for a Civil Servant too young to sit idle and too old to get a new job.
A jetsam has no option but to become driftwood or join the other profession where everyone, desirable and undesirable, has a chance.
This deleterious latency 431 of F.R. 56(j)(i) is stressed to underscore the unwitting harm to public interest it does in the name of public interest.
Judicial monitoring becomes an unpleasant necessity where power may be humour and a career may be a victim.
[432 E G] The order to retire must be passed only by the appropriate authority.
That authority must form the requisite opinion not subjective satisfaction hut objective and bona fide and based on relevant material.
The requisite opinion is that the retirement of the victim is in public interest not personal political or other interest but solely governed by the interest of public service.
The right to retire is not absolutely, though so worded.
[433 C D] Since the A.G. has been clothed, from 29 11 1972 with power to appoint substantively Accounts officers, he has become the appropriate authority for compulsory retirement even though the appellant had been appointed by the C & AG prior to 29 11 1972.
In the light of the note which is part of the rule, read with the notification delegating the power to the A.G., there is no flaw in the order impugned.
[434 A B] Ordinarily the appointing authority is also the dismissing authority but the position may be different where retirement alone is ordered.
The specific provision in the Note to FR 56 must hold good and article 311 is not violated either.
Nor is there any discrimination, because retirement is a category different from the punishment covered by article 311.
[434C] Security of tenure is the condition of efficiency of service.
The Administration, to be competent, must have servants who are not plagued by uncertainty about tomorrow At the age of 50, your experience, accomplishment and fulness of fitness become an asset to the Administration, if any only if you are not harried or worried.
These considerations become all the more important in departments where functional independence, fearless scrutiny, and freedom to expose evil or error in high places is the task.
And the Ombudsmanic tasks of the office of audit vested in the C & AG and the entire army of monitors and minions under him are too strategic for the nation 's financial health and discipline that immunity from subtle threats and oblique overawing is very much in public interest.
Under the guise of public interest if unlimited discretion is regarded acceptable for making an order of premature retirement, it will be the surest menace of public interest and must fail for unreasonableness, arbitrariness and disguised dismissal.
The exercise of power must be bona fide and promote public interest.
[434 F H, 435 A B] Judges cannot substitute their judgment for that of the Administrator but they are not absolved from the minimal review well settled in administrative law and founded on constitutional obligations.
Administration, to be efficient, must not be manned by drones, do nothings, incompetents and unworthies.
It is in public interest to retire a never do well, but to juggle with confidential reports when a man 's career is at stake is a confidence trick contrary to public interest.
Confidential reports are often subjective, impressionistic and must receive sedulous checking as basis for decision making.
[435D, E G]
