The appellants by virtue of two agreements with M/s. Balihari Colliery Co. Pvt. Ltd. and with New Dharamband Colliery Ltd. became the managing contractor for a period of 20 years of the former and the raising contractor of the latter.
In terms of the said agreements, they installed from time to time various fixed assets like machinery, plants and equipment and erected structures and raised new roads within the said collieries.
These two collieries were taken over by the Central Government under its management with effect from October 17, 1971, by virtue of the powers vested in it under the .
The appellants aggrieved by the said taking over filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court seeking a declaration that subs.
(I) of section 4 of the Nationalisation Act does not provide for the acquisition of the right, title and interest inasmuch as being raising contractors they were not covered by the term 'owner ' within the meaning of section 3(n) of the Nationalisation Act and, therefore, they were entitled to dismantle and remove the fixed assets like machinery, plants etc.
They also sought to recover the amount of subsidy of about Rs. 4,50,000 collected by the Central Government from the erstwhile Coal Board.
The High Court substantially disallowed the claim of the appellants holding that they fall within the meaning of term 'owner '.
It, however, held that the amount of subsidy of Rs. 4,50,000 receivable from the Coal Board by way of reimbursement towards the cost of sand stowing and hard mining operations carried on by them could not be treated to be as an amount due to the coking coal mine within the meaning of sub section
(3) of section 22 and, therefore, could not be utilised by the Central Government under sub section
4 of section 22 for discharge of the liabilities of the coking coal mine.
Hence, the two appeals one by the appellants and the other by the Union of India.
Allowing the Union of India 's appeal only and dismissing the Company 's appeal, the Court 376 ^ HELD: (I) The appellants do fall under the purview of the term "owner" in section 3(n) of the Nationalisation Act read with section 2 of the and any other construction as sought to be placed on the definition would frustrate the very object of the legislation and the intention of the Legislature.[387 F] Parliament, with due deliberation.
in section 3(n) adopted by incorporation the enlarged definition of the "owner" in section 2(1) of the to make the Nationalisation Act all embracing and fully effective.
The definition is wide enough to include three categories of persons (i) in relation to a mine.
the person who is the immediate proprietor or a lessee or occupier of mine or any part thereof, (ii) in the case of a mine the business whereof is carried on by a liquidator or a receiver, such liquidator or receiver, and (iii) in the case of a mine owned by a company, the business whereof is carried on by a managing agent, such managing agent.
Each is a separate and distinct category of persons and the concept of ownership docs not come in.
The insertion of the clause "but any contractor for the working of a mine or any part thereof shall be subject to this Act in like manner as if he were an owner, but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability" is to make both the owner as well as the contractor equally liable for the due observance of the Act Tn the case of a mine the working whereof is being carried on by a raising contractor he is primarily responsible to comply with the provisions of the .
Though a contractor for the working of a mine or any part thereof, is not an owner he shall be subject to the provisions of the in the like manner "as if he were a owner" but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability.
[387 A D] The whole object and purpose of the Nationalisation Act is to expropriate private ownership of coking coal mines and all interests created therein.
The term 'owner ' in sub section
(l) of section 4 is to be given an extended meaning so as to include a contractor for the working of a mine or any part thereof.
It has to be presumed that Parliament was fully aware of the normal pattern of working of all the coal mines, that is, by employment of raising contractors.
Any other consumption would lead to a manifest absurdity and attribute to Parliament a result which it never intended.
It would result in the contractors escaping from the consequences of vesting under sub section
(I) of section 4 of the Act and permit them to dismantle and remove the additional machinery, plants and equipment which are being utilised for the working of mines.
[388 B D] (2) The word 'occupier ' in 5. 3(n) of the Nationalisation Act should be understood to have been used in the usual sense according to its plain meaning.
In the legal sense an occupier is a person in actual occupation.
The appellants being "raising contractors" were under the terms of the agreement dated February 7, 1969 entitled to and were in fact in actual possession and enjoyment of the colliery and were, therefore, an occupier thereof.
That being so, the appellants in possession in their own right by virtue of their substantial right acquired by them under the agreement were not in possession on behalf of somebody else.
[384F G] The Chief Inspector of Mines and Anr.
vs Lala Katarnchand Thaper etc.
; , distinguished.
(3) The Nationalisation Act, no doubt, separately defines 'owner ' and 'managing contractor '.
The words and expressions used and defined in the Act have the meaning respectively assigned to them "unless the context otherwise requires".
Therefore, the expression 'managing contractor ' as defined in section 3(1) of the Nationalisation Act comes into play only for the purpose of apportionment 377 of compensation under sub section
(2) of section 26.
To exclude a "managing contractor" from term 'owner ' used in sub section
(I) of section 4 of the Nationalisation Act would be against the scheme of the Act.
The term 'owner ' in sub section
(I) of section 4 of the Act must bear the meaning given in the definition contained in section 3(n).
Any reservation under any process of any agreement between the parties to reserve the power to appoint managers, does not take the appellants out of the definition of 'managing contractor ' under section 3(1) of the Nationalisation Act since they still had substantial control over the mine.
The plea that not they but someone else was the managing contractor is only an after thought.
The appellants who have bound themselves by the terms of the agreement, cannot be permitted to escape from the provisions of sub section
(I) of section 4 of the Act, as they come within the purview of the definition of 'owner ' in section 3(n) of the Nationalisation Act.
[384 H, 385 C, 385 H 386 A; 386 E F] (4) When a legal fiction is incorporated in a statute, the Court has to ascertain for what purpose the fiction is created.
After ascertaining the purpose, full effect must be given to the statutory fiction and it should be carried to its logical conclusion.
The court has to assume all the facts and consequences which are incidental or inevitable corollaries to giving effect to the fiction.
The legal effect of the words "as if he were" in the definition of owner in section 3(n) of the Nationalisation Act read with section 2(1) of the is that although the petitioners were not the owners, they being the contractors for the working of the mines in question, were to be treated as such though, in fact, they were not so.
[388 E G] East End Dwelling Co. Ltd. vs Finebury Borough Council, L.R. [1952].A.C. 109, p. 132; quoted with approval.
(5) The bills for the subsidy were for the cost of stowing and connected safety operation and all hard mining operations which the appellants had already prior to October 17, 1971 at their own cost, carried out.
If that be so, the amount of subsidy in question was like any other amount due to the coking coal mines prior to the appointed day and, therefore, did not fall outside the purview of sub section
(3) of section 22.
[389 H 390 A] The payment in question was not by way of assistance receivable from the erstwhile Coal Board for carrying out the stowing and other safety operations and conservation of the coal mines.
The payment of Rs. 4,50,000 claimed by the appellants was, therefore, one to reimburse for the expenditure already undertaken.
Indubitably, the amount in dispute was payable 'by way of reimbursement".
The appellants were, therefore, free to utilise their money in any manner they liked.
In other words, the grant was not impressed with any particular purpose or purposes.
[390 B C] (6) Even if the subsidy receivable from the erstwhile Coal Board was by way of 'assistance ' the amount of Rs. 4,50,000 was recoverable by the Central 6 Government in whom the coking coal mines have vested under sub section
(1) of section 4 of the Nationalisation Act and not by tho appellants.
If the grant were by way of assistance under rule 49 of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Rules 1952, the grant being conditional, the Central Government would in that event, be bound to comply with the requirements of r. 54 and apply the same for the purposes for which it was granted namely, for the purposes of stowing or other safety operations and conservation of coal mines.
[390 D E] H Barclays Bank Ltd. vs Quistclose Investments Ltd., L.R. [1970] A.C. 567, Coal Products Private Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer explained and distinguished.
