Lallu Jogi Patel was detained on January 31, 1980 by an order of detention dated January 30, 1980 passed by the Minister of Home Affairs, Gujarat State under Section 3(1) of the and issued by the second respondent a Deputy Secretary of Government of Gujarat, Home Department.
The order was expressed in the name of the Governor of Gujarat.
On the same date, the grounds of detention were served on the detenu.
The detenu prayed for copies of the statements and documents relied upon in the grounds of detention on February 15, 1980.
On February 1, 1980 the detenu 's Advocate sought permission for an interview with the detenu to seek instructions from him for drafting his representation.
On February 20, 1980 the State Government informed the Advocate that his request for interview with the detenu had been granted.
After consulting the Collector of Customs, the Home Department also, supplied to the detenu the documents running into 461 pages on March 7, 1980 which were actually received by the detenu on March 11, 1980.
that is after a delay of 17 days, excluding the time taken in transit etc.
Dismissing the petition, the Court ^ HELD: (1) In view of the fact that the original detention order was, in fact, passed by the Home Minister against whom no personal mala fides are alleged and the said order was authenticated and issued under the Rules of Business by the Deputy Secretary, Home Department (Special), the latter 's swearing the counter affidavit in the case is valid.
[360 F G] (2) The introductory facts or history of the case incorporated in the grounds of detention cannot be considered as irrelevant matters which went into the consideration of the detention order.
[360G H] (3) A democratic Constitution is not to be interpreted merely from a lexicographer 's angle but with a realisation that it is an embodiment of the living thoughts and aspirations of a free people.
The concept of "grounds" used in the context of detention in Article 22(5) of the Constitution and in sub 354 section (3) of Section 3 of COFEPOSA, therefore, has to receive an interpretation which will keep it meaningfully in tune with a contemporary notions of liberty and fundamental freedoms guaranteed in Article 19(1), 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
[361 A C] (4) In Khudiram Das vs West Bengal the Supreme Court held that the constitutional imperatives enacted in Article 22(5) are two fold: (i) The detaining authority must, as soon as may be, that is, as soon as practicable after.
the detention, communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the order has been made; (ii) the detaining authority must afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the detention order and that these two are the barest minimum safeguards which must be observed before an executive authority can preventively detain a person; the grounds under Article 22(5) mean all the basic facts and materials on which the order of detention is based, therefore, all the basic facts and materials which influenced the detaining authority in making the order of detention must be communicated to the detenue.
[361 D G] (5) While the expression "grounds" in Article 22(5), and for that matter, in Section 3(3) of the COFEPOSA, includes not only conclusions of fact but also all the "basic facts" on which those conclusions are founded, they are different from subsidiary facts or further particulars or the basic facts.
The distinction between "basic facts" which are essential factual constituents of the "grounds" and their further particulars or subsidiary details is important.
While the "basic facts" being integral part of the "grounds" must, according to Section 3(3) of COFEPOSA "be communicated to the detenu, as soon as may be, after the detention, ordinarily not later than five days, and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, not later than 15 days from the date of detention", further particulars of those grounds, in compliance with the second constitutional imperative spelled out from Article 22(5) in Khudi Ram 's case, are required to be communicated to the detenu.
as soon as may be practicable, with reasonable expedition.
It follows, that it in a case the so called "grounds of detention" communicated to the detenu lack the basic or primary facts on which the conclusions of fact stated therein are founded, and this deficiency is not made good and communicated to the detenue within the period specified in Section 3(3), the omission will be fatal to the validity of the detention.
If, however, the grounds communicated are elaborate and contain all the "basic facts" but are not comprehensive enough to cover all the details or particulars of the "basic facts", such particulars also, must be supplied to the detenu, if asked for by him, with reasonable expedition, within a reasonable time.
What is "reasonable time conforming with reasonable expedition", required for the supply of such details or further particulars, is a question of fact depending upon the facts and circumstances of the particular case.
In the circumstances of a given case, if the time taken for supply of such additional particulars, exceeds marginally, the maximum fixed by the statute for communication of the grounds it may still be regarded "reasonable", while in the tacts of another case, even a delay which does not exceed 15 days, may be unjustified, and amount to an infraction of the second constitutional imperative pointed out in Khudi Ram 's case.
[362 C H, 363 A] In the instant case there is no breach of the first constitutional imperative embodied in Article 22(5).
The grounds supplied to the detenu were elaborate and full and contained all the "basic facts" although they did not set out all the details or particulars of those "basic facts" relied upon or referred to therein.
[363 A B] 355 (6) In the totality of the circumstances of the present case, the period of 17 days taken in considering the supply of the copies was not an unreasonably long period which could amount to a denial of the detenu 's right to make an effective representation and, therefore, infraction of the constitutional imperatives in Article 22(5) of the Constitution.
Firstly, the detenu was indulging in smuggling out silver from India and exporting it to the Gulf countries in a big way and the smuggling activity attributed to the detenu had international ramifications resulting in consultation with several authorities supervising the Customs.
The Government had to consult the Collector of Customs and even summon and discuss in a high level meeting before ordering the supply of the copies.
Secondly, the documents and statements of which the copies were sought covered more than 461 pages.
Preparation of such a bulky record could be time consuming if the aid of some appliance like the Zerox machine were not available to prepare the copies by mechanical process.
Thirdly, in spite of the grant of the request of the detenu 's lawyer to interview the former and the supply of the copies the detenu did not make any representation to the detaining authority or for the consideration of the Advisory Board which is a relevant circumstance to be taken into account for determining whether the delay in supplying the copies has, in fact, prejudiced the detenu 's right to make a speedy and effective representation.
[363 C E, H, 364 A D G] Khudi Ram vs State of West Bengal, ; , Golam vs The State of West Bengal, W.P. 270 of 1974 dated 12 9 74; Prabhu Dayal Deorah etc.
vs District Magistrate.
Kamrup & Ors., ; referred to.
