Minerva Mills Ltd. is a limited company dealing in textiles.
On August 20, 1970 the Central Government appointed a committee under section IS of the Industries (Development Regulation) Act, 1951 to make a full and complete investigation of the affairs of the Minerva Mills Ltd as it was of the opinion that there had been or was likely to be substantial fall in the volume of production.
The said Committee submitted its report to the Central Government in January 1971, on the basis of which the Central Government passed an order dated October 19, 1971 under section 18A of the 1951 Act, authorising the National Textile Corporation Ltd., to take over the management of the Mills on the ground that its affairs are being managed in a manner highly detrimental to public interest.
This undertaking was nationalised and taken over by the Central Government under the provisions of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974.
The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of certain provisions of the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 and of the order dated October 19, 1971, the constitutionality of the Constitution (Thirty Ninth Amendment) Act which inserted the impugned Nationalisation Act as Entry 105 in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, the validity of Article 31B of the Constitution and finally the constitutionality of sections 4 and 55 of the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act, 1976 on the ratio of the majority judgment in Kesavananda Bharati 's case, namely, though by Article 368 of the Constitution Parliament is given the power to amend the Constitution, that power cannot be exercised so as to damage the basic features of the Constitution or so as to destroy its basic structure.
Opining that sections 4 and 55 of the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act are void and beyond the amending power of the Parliament, the Court by majority (Per Chandrachud.
C.J., on behalf of himself, A. Gupta.
N.L. Untwalia & P.S. Kailasam, JJ.) ^ HELD: (1) The newly introduced clause S of Article 368 transgresses the limitations on the amending power of Parliament and is hence unconstitutional.
It demolishes the very pillars on which the preamble rests by empowering the Parliament to exercise its constituent power without any "limitation whatever".
No constituent power can conceivably go higher than the sky high power conferred by clause (5), for it even empowers the Parliament to "repeal the provisions of this Constitution", that is to say, to abrogate the democracy.
207 and substitute for it a totally antithetical form of Government.
That can most effectively be achieved, without calling a democracy by any other name, by a total denial of social, economic and political justice to the people, by emasculating liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship and by abjuring commitment to the magnificent ideal of a society of equals.
The power to destroy is not a power to amend.
[240C E] Since the Constitution had conferred a limited amending power on the Parliament, the Parliament cannot under the exercise of that limited power enlarge that very power into an absolute power.
Indeed, a limited amending power is one of the basic features of Indian Constitution and therefore, the limitations on that power cannot be destroyed.
In other words, Parliament cannot, under Article 368, expand its amending power so as to acquire for itself the right to repeal or abrogate the Constitution or to destroy its basic and essential features.
The donee of a limited power cannot by the exercise of that power convert the limited power into an unlimited one.
[240E G] Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Raj Narain, , followed.
(2) The newly introduced clause (4) of Article 368 is equally unconstitutional and void because clauses (4) and (5) are inter linked.
While clause (5) purports to remove all limitations on the amending power, clause (4) deprives the courts of their power to call in question any amendment of the Constitution.
[241E F] Indian Constitution is founded on a nice balance of power among the three wings of the State namely, the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary.
It is the function of the Judges, may their duty, to pronounce upon the validity of laws.
If courts are totally deprived of that power, the fundamental rights conferred upon the people will become a mere adornment because rights without remedies are as writ in water.
A controlled Constitution will then become uncontrolled.
Clause (4) of Article 368 totally deprives the citizens of one of the most valuable modes of redress which is guaranteed by Article 32.
The conferment of the right to destroy the identity of the Constitution coupled with the provision that no court of law shall pronounce upon the validity of such destruction is a transparent case of transgression of the limitations on the amending power.
[241H, 242A] If a constitutional amendment cannot be pronounced to be invalid even if it destroys the basic structure of the Constitution, a law passed in pursuance of such an amendment will be beyond the pale of judicial review because it will receive the protection of the constitutional amendment which the courts will be powerless to strike down.
Article 13 of Constitution will then become a dead letter because even ordinary laws will escape the scrutiny of the courts on the ground that they are passed on the strength of a constitutional amendment which is not open to challenge.
[242A C] (3) Though it is the settled practice of the Supreme Court not to decide academic questions and the Court has consistently taken the view that it will not formulate a rule of constitutional law broader than is required by the precise facts to which it is to be applied, it is difficult to uphold the preliminary objection to the consideration of the question raised by the petitioners as regards the validity of sections 4 and 55 of the Forty second Amendment.
In the instant case, the question raised as regards the constitutionality of sections 4 and 55 of the Forty Second Amendment is not an academic or a hypothetical question.
Further an order has been passed against the petitioners under section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, by which the petitioners are aggrieved.
[248C, E G] 208 Besides, there is no constitutional or statutory inhibition against the decision of questions before they actually arise for consideration.
Here, in view of the importance of the question raised and in view of the fact that the question has been raised in many a petition, it is expedient in the interest of Justice to settle the true position.
Secondly, what the court is dealing with is not an ordinary law which may or may not be passed so that it could be said that the court 's jurisdiction is being invoked on the hypothetical consideration that a law may be passed in future which will injure the rights of the petitioners.
What the court is dealing with is a constitutional amendment which has been brought into operation and which, of its own force, permits the violation of certain freedoms through laws passed for certain purposes.
[248G, 249A B] Commonwealth of Massachusetts vs Andrew W. Mellon, 67 Lawyers ' Edition, 1078, 1084; George Ashwander vs Tennessee Valley Authority, 80 Lawyers ' Edition, 688, 711, quoted with approval.
(4) The answer to the question whether in view of the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati it is permissible to the Parliament to so amend the Constitution as to give a position of precedence to directive principles over the fundamental rights, must necessarily depend upon whether Articles 14 and 19, which must now give way to laws passed in order to effectuate the policy of the State towards securing all or any of the principles of Directive Policy, are essential features of the basic structure of the Constitution.
It is only if the rights conferred by these two articles are not a part of the basic structure of the Constitution that they can be allowed to be abrogated by a constitutional amendment.
If they are a part of the basic structure, they cannot be obliterated.
out of existence in relation tn a category of laws described in Article 31C or, for the matter of that, in relation to laws of any description whatsoever, passed in order to achieve any object or policy whatsoever.
This will serve to bring out the point that a total emasculation of the essential features of the Constitution is, by the ratio in Keshavananda Bharati, not permissible to the Parliament.
[249E H] (5) The importance of Directive Principles in the scheme of our Constitution cannot ever be over emphasized.
Those principles project the high ideal which the Constitution aims to achieve.
In fact Directive Principles of State Policy are fundamental in governance of the country and there is no sphere of public life where delay can defeat justice with more telling effect than the one in which the common man seeks the realisation of his aspirations.
But to destroy the guarantees given by Part III in order purportedly to achieve the goals of Part IV is plainly to subvert the Constitution by destroying its basic structure.
Fundamental rights occupy a unique place in the lives.
of civilized societies and have been variously described as "transcendental", "inalienable" and "primordial" and as said in Kesavananda Bharati they constitute the ark of the Constitution.
[250B C, 254H, 255A] The significance of the perception that Parts III and IV together constitute the core of commitment to social revolution and they, together, are the conscience of the Constitution is to be traced to a deep understanding of the scheme of the Indian Constitution.
Parts III and IV are like two wheels of a chariot, one no less important than the other.
Snap one and the other will lose its efficacy.
They are like a twin formula for achieving the social revolution which is the ideal which the visionary founders of the Constitution set 209 before themselves.
In other words, the Indian Constitution is founded on the bed rock of the balance between Parts III and IV.
To give absolute primacy to one over the other is to disturb the harmony of the Constitution.
This harmony and balance between fundamental rights and directive principles is an essential feature of the basic structure of the Constitution.
[255B D] The edifice of Indian Constitution is built upon the concepts crystallized in the Preamble.
Having resolved to constitute ourselves into a Socialist State which carried with it the obligation to secure to our people justice social, economic and political, Part IV has been put into our Constitution containing directive principles of State Policy which specify the socialistic goal to be achieved.
Having promised the people a democratic polity which carries with it the obligation of securing to the people liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship, equality of status and of opportunity and the assurance that the dignity of the individual will at all costs be preserved, Part III has been put in our Constitution, conferring those rights on the people.
Those rights are not an end in themselves but are the means to an end.
The end is specified in Part IV.
Therefore, the rights conferred by Part III are subject to reasonable restrictions and the Constitution provides that enforcement of some of them may, in stated uncommon circumstances, be suspended.
But just as the rights conferred by Part III would be without a radar and a compass if they were not geared to an ideal, in the same manner the attainment of the ideals set out in Part IV would become a pretence for tyranny if tho price to be paid for achieving that ideal is human freedoms.
One of the faiths of our founding fathers was the purity of means.
The goals set out in Part IV have, therefore, to be achieved without the abrogation of the means provided for by Part III.
It is in this sense that Parts III and IV together constitute the core of our Constitution and combine to form its conscience.
Anything that destroys the balance between the two parts will ipso facto destroy an essential element of the basic structure of our Constitution.
[253D H, 256A B] (5A) on any reasonable interpretation, there can be no doubt that by the amendment introduced by section 4 of the Forty Second Amendment, Articles 14 and 19 stand abrogated at least in regard to the category of laws described in Article 31C. The startling consequence which the amendment has produced is that even if a law is in total defiance of the mandate of Article 13 read with Articles 14 and 19, its validity will not be open to question so long as its object is to secure a directive principle of State Policy.
[256D E] (6) No doubt, it is possible to conceive of laws which will not attract Article 31C, since they may not bear direct and reasonable nexus with the provisions of Part IV.
However, a large majority of laws, the bulk of them, can at any rate be easily justified as having been passed for the purpose of giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing some principle or the other laid down in Part IV.
In respect of all such laws, which will cover an extensive gamut of the relevant legislative activity, the protection of Articles 14 and 19 will stand wholly withdrawn.
It is then no answer to say, while determining whether the basic structure of the Constitution is altered, that at least some laws will fall outside the scope of Article 31C. [256E H] (7) A total deprivation of fundamental rights, even in a limited area, can amount to abrogation of a fundamental right just as partial deprivation in every area can.
The fact, therefore that some laws may fall outside the scope of Article 31C is no answer to the contention that the withdrawal of protection of Articles 14 and 19 from a large number of laws destroys the basic structure of the Constitution.
[256H, 257A B] 210 (8) Article 38 provides that the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life.
It is not correct that all the Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Part TV eventually verge upon Article 38.
Article 38 undoubtedly contains a broad guideline, but the other Directive Principles are not mere illustrations of the principle contained in Article 38.
Secondly, if it be true that no law passed for the purpose of giving effect to the Directive principle in Article 38 can damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution, there was no necessity and more so the justification, for providing by a Constitutional amendment that no law which is passed for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing any principle laid down in Part IV shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with or takes away or abridges the rights conferred by Articles 14 and 19.
[257C F] The object and purpose of the amendment of Article 31C is really to save laws which cannot be saved under Article 19(2) to (6).
Laws which fall under those provisions are in the nature of reasonable restrictions on the fundamental rights in public interest and therefore they abridge but do not abrogate the fundamental rights.
It was in order to deal with laws which do not get the protection of Article 19(2) to (6) that Article 31C was amended to say that the provisions of Article 19, inter alia cannot be invoked for voiding the laws of the description mentioned in Article 31C. [257F G] (9) Articles 14 and 19 do not confer any fanciful rights.
They confer rights which are elementary for the proper and effective functioning of a democracy They are universally so regarded, as is evident from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
If Articles 14 and 19 are put out of operation in regard to the bulk of laws which the legislatures are empowered to pass Article 32 will be drained of its life blood.
[257G H, 258A] Section 4 of the Forty Second Amendment found an easy way to circumvent Article 32(4) by withdrawing totally the protection of Articles 14 and 19 in respect of a large category of laws, so that there will be no violation to complain of in regard to which redress can be sought under Article 32.
The power to take away the protection of Article 14 is the power to discriminate without a valid basis for classification.
By a long series of decisions the Supreme Court has held that Article 14 forbids class legislation but it does not forbid classification.
The purpose of withdrawing the protection of Article 14, therefore, can only be to acquire the power to enact class legislation.
Then again, regional chauvinism will have a field day if Article 19(1)(d) is not available to the citizens.
Already, there are disturbing trends on a part of the Indian horizon.
Those trends will receive strength and encouragement if laws can be passed with immunity, preventing the citizens from exercising their right to move freely throughout the territory of India.
The nature and quality of the amendment introduced by section 4 of the Forty Second Amendment is, therefore, such that it virtually tears away the heart of basic fundamental freedoms.
[258B E] Article 31C speaks of laws giving effect to the policy of the "State".
Article 12 which governs the interpretation of Article 31C provides that the word "State" in Part III includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other 211 authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
Wide as the language of Article 31C is, the definition of the word "State" in Article 12 gives to Article 31C an operation of the widest amplitude.
Even if a State Legislature passes a law for the purpose of giving effect to the policy by a local authority towards securing a directive principle, the law will enjoy immunity from the provisions of Articles 14 and 19.
The State Legislatures are thus given an almost unfettered discretion to deprive the people of their civil liberties.
[258E G] (10) The principles enunciated in Part IV are not the proclaimed monopoly of democracies alone.
They are common to all polities, democratic or authoritarian.
Every State is goal oriented and claims to strive for securing the welfare of its people.
The distinction between the different forms of Government consists in that a real democracy will endeavour to achieve its objectives through the discipline of fundamental freedoms like those conferred by Articles 14 and 19.
Those are the most elementary freedoms without which a free democracy is impossible and which must, therefore, be preserved at all costs.
If the discipline of Article 14 is withdrawn and if immunity from the operation of that article is conferred, not only on laws passed by the Parliament but on laws passed by the State Legislatures also, the political pressures exercised by numerically large groups can tear the country asunder by leaving it to the legislature to pick and choose favoured areas and favourite classes for preferential treatment.
[259A D] (11) The device of reading down the provisions of a law for the purpose of saving it from a constitutional challenge is not to be resorted to in order to save the susceptibilities of the law makers, nor indeed to imagine a law of one 's liking to have been passed.
Article 31C cannot be read down so as to save it from the challenge of unconstitutionality because to do so will involve a gross distortion of the principle of reading down depriving that doctrine of its only or true rationale when words of width are used inadvertently one must at least take the Parliament at its word when, especially, it undertakes a constitutional amendment.
[259E G] If the Parliament has manifested a clear intention to exercise an unlimited power, it is impermissible to read down the amplitude of that power so as to make it limited.
The principle of reading down cannot be invoked or applied in opposition to the clear intention of the legislature.
In the history of the constitutional law, no constitutional amendment has ever been read down to mean the exact opposite of what it says and intends.
In fact, reading down Article 31C so as to make it conform to the ratio of the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati is to destroy the avowed purpose of Article 31C as indicated by the very heading "Saving of certain laws" under which Articles 31A, 31B and 31C are grouped.
Since the amendment to Article 31C was unquestionably made with a view to empowering the legislatures to pass laws of a particular description even if those laws violate the discipline of Articles 14 and 19, it is impossible to hold that the court should still save Article 31C from the challenge of unconstitutionality by reading into that Article words which destroy the rationale of that Article and an intendment which is plainly contrary to its proclaimed purpose.
[259H, 280A C] (12) Reading the existence of an extensive judicial review into Article 31C is really to permit the distortion of the very purpose of that Article.
It provides expressly that no law of a particular description shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it violates Article 14 or Article 19.
It would be sheer 212 adventurism of a most extraordinary nature to undertake such a kind of judicial enquiry.
[260F G] (13) In the very nature of things it is difficult for a court to determine whether a particular law gives effect to a particular policy.
Whether a law is adequate enough to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing a directive principle is always a debatable question and the courts cannot set aside the law as invalid merely because, in their opinion, tho law is not adequate enough to give effect to a certain policy.
The power to enquire into the question whether there is a direct and reasonable nexus between the provisions of a law and a Directive Principle cannot confer upon the Courts the power to sit in Judgment over the policy itself of the State.
At the highest, courts can, under Article 31C, satisfy themselves as to the identity of the law in the sense whether it bears direct and reasonable nexus with a Directive Principle.
If the court is satisfied as to the existence of such nexus, the inevitable consequence provided for by Article 31C must follow.
Indeed, if there is one topic on which all the 13 Judges in Kesavananda Bharti were agreed, it is this: that the only question open to judicial review under tho unamended Article 31C was whether there is a direct and reasonable nexus.
between the impugned law and tho provisions of Articles 39(b) and (c).
Reasonableness is evidently regarding the nexus and not regarding the law.
The. attempt therefore to drape Article 31C into a democratic outfit under which an extensive judicial review would be permissible must fail.
[260H, 261A E] (14) The avowed purpose of clauses (4) and (5) of Article 368 is to confer power upon the Parliament to amend the Constitution without any "limitation whatever".
Provisions of this nature cannot be saved by reading into them words and intendment of a diametrically opposite meaning and content.
[261F G] (15) Article 31A(1) can be looked upon as a contemporaneous practical exposition of the intendment of the Constitution, but the same cannot be said of Article 31C.
Besides there is a significant qualitative difference between the two Articles.
Article 31A, the validity of which has been recognised over the years, excludes the challenge under Articles 14 and 19 in regard to a specified category of laws.
If by a constitutional amendment, the application of Articles 14 and 19 is withdrawn from a defined field of legislative activity, which is reasonable in public interest, the basic framework of the constitution may remain unimpaired.
If the protection of those articles is withdrawn in respect of an uncatalogued variety of laws, fundamental freedoms will become a 'parchment in a glass case ' to be viewed as a matter of historical curiosity [262A C] (16) There is no merit in the contention that since article 31A was also upheld on the ground of state decisis.
article 31C can be upheld on the same ground.
The five matters which are specified in Article 31A are of such quality, nature, content and character that at least a debate can reasonably arise whether abrogation of fundamental rights in respect of those matters will damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution.
Article 31C does not deal with specific subjects.
The directive principles are couched in broad and ' general terms for the simple reason that they specify the goals to be achieved.
The principle of state decisis cannot be treated as a fruitful source of perpetuating curtailment of human freedoms.
No court has upheld the validity of Article 31A on the ground that it does not violate the basic structure of the Constitution.
There is no decision on the validity of Article 31A which can be looked upon as a measuring rod of the extent of the amending power.
To 213 hark back to Article 31A every time that a new constitutional amendment is challenged is the surest means of ensuring a drastic erosion of the Fundamental Rights conferred by Part III.
Such a process will insidiously undermine the efficacy of the ratio of the majority judgment in Kesavananda Bharati regarding the inviolability of the basic structure.
That ratio requires that the validity of each new constitutional amendment must be judged on its own merits.
[262C G] (17) It is not correct to say that when Article 31A was upheld on the ground of state decisis, what was upheld was a constitutional device by which a class of subject oriented laws was considered to be valid.
The simple ground on which Article 31A was upheld, apart from the ground of contemporaneous practical exposition, was that its validity was accepted and recognised over the years and, therefore, it was not permissible to challenge its constitutionality.
The principle of stare decisis does not imply the approval of the device.
Or mechanism which is employed for the purpose of framing a legal or constitutional provision.
[262G H, 263A B] (18) Under clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19, restrictions can be imposed only if they are reasonable and then again, they can be imposed in the interest of a stated class of subjects only.
It is for the courts to decide whether restrictions are reasonable and whether they are in the interest of the particular subject.
Apart from other basic dissimilarities, Article 31C takes away the power of judicial review to an extent which destroys even the semblance of a comparison between its provisions and those of clauses (2) to (6) of Article 19.
Human ingenuity, limitless though it may be, has yet not devised a system by which the liberty of the people can be protected except through the intervention of courts of law.
[263B D] Three Articles of the Indian Constitution and only three stand between the heaven of freedom into which Tagore wanted his country to awake and the abyss of unrestrained power.
They are Articles 14, 19 and 21.
Article 31C has removed two sides of that golden triangle which affords to the people of this country an assurance that the promise held forth by the Preamble will be performed by ushering an egalitarian era through the discipline of fundamental rights, that is, without emasculation of the rights to liberty and equality which alone can help preserve the dignity of the individual.
[263D E] Per Bhagwati, J. (concurring) (1) Since the question in regard to the constitutional validity of the amendment made in Article 31C did not arise in the writ petitions and the counter affidavits, it was wholly academic and superfluous to decide it.
Once it is conceded that Articles 31A, 31B and the unamended Article 31C are constitutionally valid it became wholly unnecessary to rely on the unamended Article 31 in support of the validity of Sick Textiles Undertaking (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 because Article 31B would, in any event, save it from invalidation on the ground of infraction of any of the fundamental rights.
[268F H] (2) Now either the Nationalisation Act was really and truly a law for giving effect to the Directive Principles set out in Article 39 clause (b) as declared in section 39 of the Act or it was not such a law and the legislative declaration contained in section 39 was a colourable device If it was the 214 former then the unamended Article 31C would be sufficient to protect the Nationalisation Act from attack on the ground of violation of Articles 14, 19 and 31 and it would be unnecessary to involve the amended Article 31C and if it was the latter, then neither the unamended nor the amended Article 31C would have any application.
Thus in either event, the amended Article 31C would have no relevance at all in adjudicating upon the constitutional validity of the Nationalisation Act.
In these circumstances, the court could not be called upon to examine the constitutionality of the amendment made in Article 31C. [269B E] Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v State of Maharashtra, ; , followed.
(3) Clause (4) of Article 368 of the Constitution is unconstitutional and void as damaging the basic structure of the Constitution.
[288E] The words "on any ground" in clause (4) of Article 368 are of the widest amplitude and they would obviously cover even a ground that the procedure prescribed in clause (2) and its proviso has not been followed.
The result is that even if an amendment is purported to have been made without complying with the procedure prescribed in sub clause (2) including its proviso, and is therefore unconstitutional, it would still be immune from challenge.
[284F F] As per Kesavananda Bharati 's case any amendment of the Constitution which did not conform to the procedure prescribed by sub clause (2) and its proviso was no amendment at all and a court would declare it invalid.
Thus if an amendment was passed by a simple majority in the House of the People and the Council of States and the President assented to the amendment, it would, in law, be no amendment at all because the requirement of clause (2) is that it should be passed by a majority of each of the Houses separately and by not less than two third of the Members present and voting.
But if clause (4) was valid it would become difficult to challenge the validity of such an amendment and it would prevail though made in defiance of a mandatory constitutional requirement.
Clause (2) including its proviso would be rendered completely superfluous and meaningless and its prescription would become merely a paper requirement.
Moreover, apart from nullifying the requirements of clause (2) and its proviso, clause (4) has also the effect of rendering an amendment immune from challenge even if it damages or destroys the basic structure of the Constitution and is, therefore, outside the amending power of Parliament.
So long as clause (4) stands, an amendment of the Constitution, though unconstitutional and void as transgressing the limitation on the amending power of Parliament as laid down in Kesavananda Bharati 's case, would be unchallengeable in a court of law.
The consequence of this exclusion of the power of judicial review would be that, in effect and substance, the limitation on the amending power of Parliament would, from a practical point of view, become non existent and it would not be incorrect to say, for covertly and indirectly by the exclusion of judicial review the amending power of Parliament would stand enlarged contrary to the decision of this Court in Kesavananda Bharati 's case.
This would, undoubtedly, damage the basic structure of the Constitution because there are two essential features of the basic structure which would be violated, namely, the limited amending power of the Parliament and the power of judicial review with a view to examining whether any authority under the Constitution has exceeded the limits of its powers.
[284F H, 285A D] Our Constitution is a controlled constitution which confers powers on the various authorities created and recognised by it and defines the limits of those 215 powers.
The Constitution is suprema lex, the paramount law of the land and there is no authority, no department or branch of the State which is above or beyond the Constitution or has powers unfettered and unrestricted by the Constitution.
The Constitution has devised a structure of power relationship which checks and balances and limits are placed on the powers of every authority of instrumentality under the Constitution.
Every organ of the State, be it the Executive or the Legislature or the Judiciary, derives its authority from the Constitution and it has to act within the limits of such authority.
Parliament too is a creature of the Constitution and it can only have such powers as are given to it under the Constitution.
It has no inherent power of amendment of the Constitution and being an authority created by the Constitution, it cannot have such inherent power but the power of amendment is conferred upon it by the Constitution and it is a limited power which is so conferred.
Parliament cannot in exercise of this power so amend the Constitution as to alter its basic structure or to change its identity.
Now, if by constitutional amendment, Parliament was granted unlimited power of amendment, it would cease to be an authority under the Constitution, but would become supreme over it because it would have power to alter the entire Constitution including its basic structure and even to put an end to it by totally changing its identity.
Therefore, the limited amending power of Parliament is itself an essential feature of the Constitution, a part of its basic structure, for if the limited power of amendment was enlarged into an unlimited power the entire character of the Constitution would be changed.
It must follow as a necessary corollary that any amendment of the Constitution which seeks, directly or indirectly, to enlarge the amending power of Parliament by freeing it from the limitation of unamendability of the basic structure would be violative of the basic structure and, hence, outside the amendatory power of Parliament.
[285E H, 286A C] It is a fundamental principle of our Constitution that every organ of the State, every authority under the Constitution derives its powers from the Constitution and has to act within the limits of such power.
The three main departments of the State amongst which the powers of Government are divided are: the Executive, the Legislature and the Judiciary.
Under our Constitution there is no rigid separation of powers but there is a broad demarcation though, having regard to the complex nature of governmental functions, certain degree of overlapping is inevitable.
The Constitution has created an independent machinery, namely, the judiciary which is vested with the power of judicial review to determine the legality of executive action and the validity of legislation passed by the Legislature.
It is a solemn duty of the judiciary under the Constitution to keep the different organs of the State, such as the Executive and the Legislature, within the limits of the power conferred upon them by the Constitution.
This power of judicial review is conferred on the judiciary by Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
[286D, E, 287B C].
It is a cardinal principle of our Constitution that no one, howsoever highly placed and no authority however lofty, can claim to be the sole judge of its power under the Constitution or whether its actions are within the confines of such power laid down by the Constitution.
The judiciary is the interpreter of the Constitution and the judiciary is assigned the delicate task to determine what is the power conferred on each branch of Government, whether it is limited, and if so, what are the limits and whether any action of that branch transgresses such limits.
It is for the judiciary to uphold the constitutional values and to enforce the constitutional limitations.
That is the essence of the rule of law, which inter alia requires that "the exercise of powers by 216 the Government whether it be the legislature or the executive or any other authority, be conditioned by the Constitution and the law".
The power of the judicial review is an integral part of our constitutional system and without it, there will be no Government of Laws and the rule of law would become a teasing illusion and a promise of unreality.
If there is one feature of our Constitution which, more than any other, is basic and fundamental to the maintenance of democracy and the rule of law, it is the power of judicial review and it is unquestionably a part of the basic structure of the Constitution.
However, effective alternative institutional mechanism arrangements for judicial review cannot be made by Parliament.
Judicial review is a vital principle of our Constitution and it cannot be abrogated without affecting the basic structure of the Constitution.
If by a constitutional amendment, the power of judicial review is taken away and it is provided that the validity of any law made by the legislature shall not be liable to be called in question on any ground, even if it is outside the legislative competence of the legislature or is violative of any fundamental rights, it would be nothing short of subversion of the Constitution, for it would make a mockery of the distribution of legislative powers between the Union and the States and render the fundamental rights meaningless and futile.
So also if a constitutional amendment is made which has the effect of taking away the power of judicial review and providing that no amendment made in the Constitution shall be liable to be questioned on any ground, even if such amendment is violative of the basic structure and, therefore, outside the amendatory power of Parliament, it would be making Parliament sole judge of the constitutional validity of what it has done and that would, in effect and substance, nullify the limitation on the amending power of Parliament and effect the basic constructure of the Constitution.
[287F H, 288A E] (4) Clause (5) of Article 368 of the Constitution is unconstitutional and void.
[289E F] After the decisions of Kesavananda Bharati 's case and Smt.
Indira Gandhi 's case there was no doubt at all that the amendatory power of Parliament was limited and it was not competent to Parliament to alter the basic structure of the Constitution and clause (5) could not remove the doubt which did not exist.
What clause (5) really sought to do was to remove the limitation on the amending power of Parliament and correct it from a limited power into an unlimited one.
This was clearly and indubitably a futile exercise on the part of the Parliament.
[288G H, 289A] The Constitution has conferred only a limited amending power on Parliament, so that it cannot damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution and Parliament by exercise of that limited amending power convert that very power into an absolute and unlimited power.
If it were permissible to Parliament to enlarge the limited amending power conferred upon it into an absolute power of amendment, then it was meaningless to place a limitation on the original power of amendment.
Parliament having a limited power of amendment cannot get rid of the limitation of exercising that very power and convert it into an absolute power.
Clause (5) of Article 368 which sought to remove the limitation on the amending power of Parliament by making it absolute, therefore, is outside the amending power of Parliament.
However, clause (5) seeks to convert a controlled Constitution into an uncontrolled one by removing the limitation on the amending power of Parliament which is itself an essential feature of the Constitution and it is, therefore, violative of the basic structure.
[289B E] 217 Per contra: (5) Section 4 of the Constitution (Forty second Amendment) Act, 1976 making amendments in Article 31C and giving primacy to Directive Principles over Fundamental Rights, in case of conflict between them, does not damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution and is within the amending power of Parliament and therefore amended Article 31C is constitutional and valid.
[342E F].
(i) It is not correct to say that Fundamental Rights alone are based on Human Rights while Directive Principles fall in some category other than Human Rights.
Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles cannot be fitted in two distinct and strictly defined categories.
Broadly stated, Fundamental Rights represent civil and political rights, while Directive Principles embody social and economic rights.
Both are clearly part of broad spectrum of human rights.
Even, the universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations on 10th December, 1948 contains not only rights protecting individual freedom (Articles 1 to 21) but also social and economic rights intended to ensure socio economic justice to every one (Articles 22 to 29).
The two other International Covenants adopted by the General Assembly for securing human rights, namely, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights are also to the same effect.
The socio economic rights embodied in the Directive Principles are as much a part of human rights as the Fundamental Rights.
Together, they are intended to carry out the objectives set out in the preamble of the Constitution and to establish an egalitarian social order informed with political, social and economic justice and ensuring dignity of the individual not only to a few privileged persons but to the entire people of the country including the have nots and the handicapped, the lowliest and the lost.
[320C H] Kesavananda Bharati vs State of Kerala, [1973] Supp.
SCR, referred to.
(ii) Although Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles appear in the Constitution as distinct entities, there was no such demarcation made between them during the period prior to the framing of the Constitution.
From the point of view of importance and significance, no distinction was drawn between justiciable and non justiciable rights by the Fathers of the Constitution and both were treated as forming part of the rubric of Fundamental Rights, the only difference being that whereas the Fundamental Rights were enforceable in Courts of Law, the Directive Principles of social policy were not to be enforceable.
[321A B, 322C D] (iii) To limit the potential of Fundamental Rights on the ground that they are merely negative obligations requiring the State to abstain as distinct from taking positive action is impermissible.
[323D C] No doubt, it is said that the Fundamental Rights deal with negative obligations of the State not to encroach on individual freedom, while the Directive principles impose positive obligations on the State to take certain kind of actions.
Though the latter part may be true that the Directive Principles require positive action to be taken by the State, it is not wholly correct that the Fundamental Rights impose only negative obligations on the State.
There are a few Fundamental Rights which have also a positive content, with the result that new dimensions of the Fundamental Rights are being opened up by the Supreme Court and the entire jurisprudence of Fundamental Rights is in a 218 stage of resurgent evaluation.
Moreover, there are three Articles, namely, Article 15(2), Article 17 and Article 23 within the category of Fundamental Rights which are designed to protect the individual against the action of other private citizens and seem to impose positive obligations on the State to ensure this protection to the individual.
[322 F H, 323 A B].
Hussainara Khatoon vs State of Bihar, ; Madhav Hayawadanrao Hoskot vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Sunil Batra etc.
vs Delhi Administration & Ors.
; , , followed.
(iv) The only distinguishing feature between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy is that whereas the former are made enforceable in a Court of Law the latter are not.
They are not justiciable be cause the social and economic rights and other matters dealt with in the Directive Principles are by their very nature incapable of judicial enforcement and moreover, the implementation of many of those rights would depend on the.
state of economic development in the country, the availability.
Of necessary finances and the government 's assessment of priority of objectives and values.
But merely because the Directive Principles are non justiciable, it does not follow that they are in any way subservient or inferior to the Fundamental Rights.
[323 B C, E F].
(v) The Indian Constitution is first and foremost a social document.
The majority of its provisions are either directly aimed at furthering the goals cf the socio economic revolution or attempt to foster this revolution by establishing the conditions necessary for its achievement.
The Fundamental Rights are no doubt important and valuable in a democracy, but there can be no real democracy without social and economic justice to the common man and to create socio economic conditions in which there can be social and economic justice to everyone, is the theme of the Directive Principles.
It is the Directive Principles which nourish the roots of a democracy, provide strength and vigour to it and attempt to make it a real participatory democracy which does not remain merely a political democracy but also becomes a social and economic democracy with Fundamental Rights available to all irrespective of their power, position or wealth.
The dynamic provisions of the Directive Principles fertilise the static provisions of the Fundamental Rights.
The object of the Fundamental Rights is to protect individual liberty, but individual liberty cannot be considered in isolation from the socio economic structure in which it is to operate.
There is a real connection between individual liberty and the shape and form of the social and economic structure of the society.
There cannot be any individual liberty at all for the large masses of people who are suffering from want and privation and who are cheated out of their individual rights by the exploitative economic system.
Their individual liberty would come in conflict with the liberty of the socially and economically more powerful class and in the process get mutilated or destroyed.
The real controversies in the present day society are not between power and freedom but between one form of liberty and another.
Under the present socio economic system, it is the liberty of the few which is in conflict with the liberty of the many.
The Directive Principles, therefore, impose an obligation on the State to take positive action for creating socio economic conditions in which there will be an egalitarian social order with social and economic justice to all so that individual liberty will become a cherished value and the dignity of the individual a living reality, not only for a few privileged persons but for the entire people of the 219 country.
Thus, the Directive Principles enjoy a very high place in the constitutional scheme and it is only in the framework of the socio economic structure envisaged in the Directive Principles that the Fundamental Rights are intended to operate, for it is only then they can become meaningful and significant for the millions of our poor and deprived people, who do not have even the bare necessities of life and who are living below the poverty level.
[323F G, 324C H, 325A B].
(vi) Article 37 of the Constitution is an Article of crucial importance unlike the Irish Constitution which provided the inspiration for introducing Directive Principles in our Constitution.
Article 37 says that the Directive Principles shall not be enforceable by any court, makes the Directive Principles fundamental in the governance of the country and enacts that it shall be the duty of the State to apply the Directive Principles in making laws.
The changes made by the framers of the Constitution are vital and they have the effect of bringing about a total transformation or metamorphosis of this provision, fundamentally altering the significance and efficacy.
The Directive Principle are not excluded from the cognizance of the court, as under the Irish Constitution; they are merely made non enforceable by a court of law.
Merely because the Directive Principles are not enforceable in a court of law, it does not mean that they are of subordinate importance to any part of the Constitution or that they cannot create obligations or duties binding on the State.
The crucial test which has to be applied is whether the Directive Principles impose any obligations or duties on the State, if they do, the State would be bound by a constitutional mandate to carry out such obligations or duties, even though no corresponding right is created in any one which can be enforced in a court of law.
On this question Article 37 is emphatic and make the point in no uncertain terms There could not have been more explicit language used by the Constitution makers to make the Directive Principles binding on the State and there can be no doubt that the State is under a constitutional obligation to carry out this mandate contained in Article 37.
In fact, non compliance with the Directive Principles would be unconstitutional on the part of the State and it would not only constitute a breach of faith with the people who imposed this constitutional obligation on the State but it would also render a vital part of the Constitution meaningless and futile.
For the purpose of the Directive Principles, the "State" has the same, meaning as given to it under Article 13 for the purpose of the Fundamental Rights.
This would mean that the same State which is injuncted from taking any action in infringement of the Fundamental Rights is told in no uncertain terms that it must regard the Directive Principles as fundamental in the governance of the country and is positively mandated to apply them in making laws.
This gives rise to a paradoxical situation and its implications are far reaching.
The State is on the one hand prohibited by the constitutional injunction in Article 13 from making any law or taking any executive action which would infringe any Fundamental Right and at the same time it is directed by the constitutional mandate in Article 37 to apply the Directive Principles in the governance of the country and to make laws for giving effect to the Directive Principles.
Both are constitutional obligations of the State.
When the State makes a law for giving effect to a Directive Principle, it is carrying out a constitutional obligation under Article 37 and if it were to be said that the State cannot make such a law because it comes into conflict with a Fundamental Right, it can only be on the basis that Fundamental Rights stand on a higher pedestal and have precedence over Directive Principles.
But it is not correct to say that under 220 our constitutional scheme Fundamental Rights are superior to Directive Principles or that Directive Principles must yield to Fundamental Rights.
Both are in fact equally fundamental and the courts have, therefore, tried to harmonise them by importing the Directive Principles in the construction of the Fundamental Rights.
For the purpose of determining the reasonableness of the restriction imposed on Fundamental Rights the court may legitimately take into account the Directive Principles and where executive action is taken or legislation enacted for the purpose of giving effect to a Directive Principle, the restriction imposed by it on a Fundamental Right may be presumed to be reasonable.
[325C, E H, 326A D, 327H, 328A H, 329A B].
State of Bihar vs Kameshwar Singh, ; Pathumma vs State of Kerala, ; ; M/s. Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy etc.
vs The State of Jammu & Kashmir & Anr., [1980] 3 SCR p. 1338, applied.
State of Madras vs Champkam Dorairajan, dissented from.
In Re Kerala Education Bill, [1959] SCR 995, Referred to.
(vii) If a law is enacted for the purpose of giving effect to a Directive Principle and it imposes a restriction on a Fundamental Right, it would be difficult to condemn such restriction as unreasonable or not in public interest.
So also where a law is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle in furtherance of the constitutional goal of social and economic justice it may conflict with a formalistic and doctrinaire view of equality before the law, but it would almost always conform to the principle of equality before the law in its total magnitude and dimension, because the equality clause in the Constitution does not speak of mere formal equality before the law but embodies the concept of real and substantive equality which strikes at inequalities arising on account of vast social and economic differentials and is consequently an essential ingredient of social and economic justice.
The dynamic principle of egalitarianism fertilises the concept of social and economic justice; it is one of its essential elements and there can be no real social and economic justice where there is a breach of the egalitarian principle.
If, therefore, there is a law enacted by the legislature which is really and genuinely for giving effect to a Directive Principle with a view to promoting social and economic justice, such law does not violate the principle of egalitarianism and is in accord with the principle of equality before the law as understood not in its strict and formalistic sense, but in its dynamic and activist magnitude.
In the circumstances, the Court would not be unjustified in making the presumption that a law enacted really and genuinely for giving effect to a Directive Principle in furtherance of the cause of social and economic justice, would not infringe any Fundamental Right under Article 14 or 19.
This being the correct interpretation of the constitutional provisions, the amended Article 31C does no more than codify the existing position under the constitutional scheme by providing immunity to a law enacted really and genuinely for giving effect to a Directive Principle, so that needlessly futile and time consuming controversy whether such law contravenes Article 14 or 19 is eliminated.
The amended Article 31C cannot in the circumstances be regarded as violative of the basic structure of the Constitution.
[329F H, 330A F].
(viia) A law enacted really and genuinely for giving effect to a Directive Principle, in discharge of the constitutional obligation laid down upon the State under Article 37, would not be invalid, because it infringes a fundamental right.
If the Court takes the view that it is invalid, it would be placing Fundamental Rights above Directive Principles, a position not supported at all by 221 the history of their enactment as also by the constitutional scheme.
The two A constitutional obligations, one in regard to Fundamental Rights and the other in regard to Directive Principles, are of equal strength and merit and there is no reason why, in case of conflict, the former should be given precedence over the latter.
Whether or not a particular mandate of the Constitution is justiciable has no bearing at all on its importance and significance and justiciability by itself can never be a ground for placing one constitutional mandate on a higher pedestal than the other.
The effect of giving greater weightage to the constitutional mandate in regard to Fundamental Rights would be to relegate the Directive Principles to a secondary position and emasculate the constitutional command that the Directive Principles shall be fundamental in the governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply them in making laws.
It would amount to refusal to give effect to the words fundamental in the governance of the country" and a constitutional command which has been declared by the Constitution to be fundamental would be rendered non fundamental.
The result would be that a positive mandate of the constitution commanding the State to make a law would be defeated by a negative constitutional obligation not to encroach upon a Fundamental Right and the law made by the legislature pursuant to a positive constitutional command would be delegitimised and declared unconstitutional.
This plainly would be contrary to the constitutional scheme because the Constitution does not accord higher place to the constitutional obligation in regard to Fundamental Rights over the constitutional obligation in regard to Directive Principles and does not say that the implementation of the Directive Principles shall only be within the permissible limits laid down in the Chapter on Fundamental Rights.
[330A, 331A F].
Karimbil Kunhikoman vs State of Kerala, [1962] I SCR 319 (supra) referred to.
(viii) It is not correct to say that consequent to the amendment of Article 31C the Constitution is now made to stand 'on its head and not on its legs. ' Prior to the amendments, Fundamental Rights had a superior or a higher position in the constitutional scheme than Directive Principles and there is accordingly no question at all of any subversion of the constitutional structure by the amendment.
There can be no doubt that the intention of the Constitution makers was that the Fundamental Rights should operate within the socioeconomic structure or a wider continuum envisaged by the Directive Principle, for then only would the Fundamental Rights become exercisable by all and a proper balance and harmony between Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles secured.
The Constitution makers, therefore, never contemplated that a conflict would arise between the constitutional obligation in regard to Fundamental Rights and the constitutional mandate in regard to Directive Principles.
But if a conflict does arise between these two constitutional mandates of equal fundamental character, since the Constitution did not provide any answer and perhaps for the reason that such a situation was not anticipated, the problem had to be solved by Parliament and some modus operandi had to be evolved in order to eliminate the possibility of conflict howsoever remote it might be.
[331G H, 332A D].
Parliament took the view that the constitutional obligation in regard to Directive Principles should have precedence over the constitutional obligation in regard to the Fundamental Rights in Articles 14 and 19, because Fundamental Rights though precious and valuable for maintaining the democratic way of life, have absolutely no meaning for the poor, down trodden and economically 222 backward classes of people who unfortunately constitute the bulk of the people of India and the only way in which Fundamental Rights can be made meaningful for them is by implementing the Directive Principles, for the Directive Principles are intended to bring about a socio economic revolution and to create a new socio economic order where there will be social and economic justice for all and every one, not only a fortunate few but the teeming millions of India, would be able to participate in the fruits of freedom and development and exercise the Fundamental Rights.
Parliament, therefore, amended Article 31C with a view to providing that in case of conflict Directive Principles shall have precedence over the Fundamental Rights in Articles 14 and 19 and the latter shall yield place to the former.
The positive constitutional command to make laws for giving effect to the Directive Principles shall prevail over the negative constitutional obligation not to encroach on the Fundamental Rights embodied in Articles 14 and 19.
[333C F].
Parliament made the amendment in Article 31C because it realised that "if the State fails to create conditions in which the fundamental freedoms could be enjoyed by all, the freedom of the few will be at the mercy of the man and then all freedoms will vanish" and "in order, therefore, to preserve their freedom, the privileged few must part with a portion of it." Therefore, it cannot at all be said that the basic structure af the Constitution is affected when for evolving a modus vivandi for resolving a possible remote conflict between two constitutional mandates of equally fundamental character, Parliament decides by way of amendment of Article 31C that in case of such conflict the constitutional mandate in regard to Directive Principles shall prevail over the constitutional mandate in regard to the Fundamental Rights under Articles 14 and 19.
The amendment in Article 31C far from damaging the basic structure of the Constitution strengthens and re enforces it by giving fundamental importance to the rights of the members of the community as against the rights of a few individuals and furthering the objective of the Constitution to build an egalitarian social order where there will be social and economic justice for all, every one including the low visibility areas of humanity in the country will be able to exercise Fundamental Rights and the dignity of the individual and the worth of the human person which are cherished values will not remain merely the exclusive privileges of a few but become a living reality for the many [334H, 335A D].
(ix) The principle of egalitarianism is an essential element of social and economic justice and, therefore, where a law is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle with a view to promoting social and economic justice, it would not run counter to the egalitarian principle and would not therefore be violative of the basic structure, even if it infringes equality before the law in its narrow and formalistic sense.
No law which is really and genuinely for giving effect to a Directive Principle can be inconsistent with the egalitarian principle and therefore the protection granted to it under the amended Article 31C against violation of Article 14 cannot have the effect of damaging the basic structure.
Therefore, there is no violation of the basic structure involved in the amendment of Article 31C.
In fact, one it is accepted that the unamended Article 31C was constitutionally valid, it could only be on the basis that it did not damage or destroy the basic structure of the Constitution, it cannot be said that the amended Article 31C is violative of the basic structure.
If the exclusion of the Fundamental Rights embodied in Articles 14 and 19 could be legitimately made for giving effect to the Directive Principles set out in clauses (b) and (e) of Article 39 without affecting the basic structure.
these 223 Fundamental Rights cannot be excluded for giving effect to the other Directive Principles.
If the constitutional obligation in regard to the Directive Principles set out in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 could be given precedence over the constitutional obligation in regard to the Fundamental Rights under Articles 14 and 19, there is no reason in principles why such precedence cannot be given to the constitutional obligation in regard to the other Directive Principles which stand on the same footing.
It would be incongruous to hold tho amended Article 31C invalid when the unamended Article 31C has been held to be valid by the majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati 's and by the order, in Waman Rao 's case, dated 9th May, 1980.
[335E H, 336A C].
(x) It is clear from the language of the amended Article 31C that the law which is protected from challenge under Articles 14 and 19 is law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing or any of the Directive Principles.
Whenever, therefore, any protection is claimed for a law under the amended Article 31C, it is necessary for the Court to examine whether the law has been enacted for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing any one or more of the Directive Principles and it is only if the court is so satisfied as a result of judicial scrutiny that the court would accord the protection of the amended Article 31C to such law.
Now it is undoubtedly true that the words used in the amended Article are "law giving effect to the policy of the State" but the policy of the State which is contemplated there is the policy towards securing one or more of the Directive Principles it is the constitutional obligation of the State to secure the Directive Principles and that is the policy which the State is required to adopt and when a law is enacted in pursuance of this policy of implementing the Directive Principles and it seeks to give effect to a Directive Principle, it would both from the point of grammar and language, be correct to say that it is made for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing such Directive Principle.
The words "law giving effect to the policy of the State" are not so wide but in the context and collocation in which they occur, they are intended to refer only to a law enacted for the purpose of implementing or giving effect to one or more of the Directive Principles.
[337A F].
(xi) The Court before which protection for a particular law is claimed under the amended Article 31C would, therefore, have to examine whether such law is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle, for genuinely it would have the protection of the amended Article 31C.
A claim that a particular law is enacted for giving effect to Directive Principles put forward by the State would have no meaning or value; it is the court which would have to determine the question.
Again it is not enough that there may be some connection between a provision of the law and a Directive Principle.
The connection has to be between the law and the Directive Principle and it must G be a real and substantial connection.
To determine whether a law satisfies this test, the court would have to examine the pith and substance, the true nature and character of the law as also its design and the subject matter dealt with by it together with its object and scope.
If on such examination, the court finds that the dominant object of the law is to give effect to the Directive Principle, it would accord protection to the law under the amended Article 31C.
But if the court finds that the law though passed seemingly for giving effect to a Directive Principle, is, in pith and substance, one for accomplishing an unauthorised purpose unauthorised in the sense of not being covered by any Directive Principle such law would not have the protection of the amended Article 31C.
The amended Article 31C does not give protection to 224 a law which has merely some remote or tenuous connection with a Directive.
Principle.
What is necessary is that there must be a real and substantial connection and the dominant object of the law must be to give effect to the Directive Principle, and that is a matter which the court would have to decide before any claim for protection under the amended Article 31C can be allowed.
[337F H, 338A B, F G].
The words used in the amended Article 31C are: "law giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing all or any of the principles laid down in Part IV" and these words on a plain natural construction do not include all the provisions of law but only those which give effect to the Directive Principle.
Therefore, it is not every provision of a statute which has been enacted with the dominant ' object of giving effect to a Directive Principle that is entitled to protection but only those provisions of the statute which are basically and essentially necessary for giving effect to the Directive Principles are protected under the amended Article 31C. If there are any other provisions in the statute which do not fall within this category, they would not be entitled to protection and their validity would have to be judged by reference to Articles 14 and 19.
Where, therefore, protection is claimed in respect of a statute under the amended Article 31C, the court would have first to determine whether there is real and substantial connection between the law and a Directive Principle and the predominant object of the law is to give effect to such Directive Principle and if the answer to this question is in the affirmative, the court would then have to consider which are the provisions of the law basically and essentially necessary for giving effect to the Directive Principle and give protection of the amended Article 31C only to those provisions.
The question whether any particular provision of the law is basically and essentially necessary for giving effect to the Directive Principle, would depend, to a large extent, on how closely and integrally such provision is connected with the implementation of the Directive Principle.
If the court finds that a particular provision is subsidiary or incidental or not essentially and integrally connected with the implementation of the Directive Principle or is of such a nature that though seemingly a part of the general design of the main provisions of the statute, the dominant object is to achieve an unauthorised purpose, it would not enjoy the protection of amended Article 31C and would be liable to be struck down as invalid if it violates Article 14 or 19.
[338 G H, 339A, D H, 340A D] Akadasi Padhan vs State of Orissa, [1963] 2 Supp.
SCR 691; Rashbihari Panda etc.
vs State of orissa; , ; M/s. Vrailal Manilal & Co. & ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
, ; and R. C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; , followed.
(xii) If the Court finds that even in a statute enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle, there is a provision which is not essentially and integrally connected with the implementation of the Directive Principle or the dominant object of which is to achieve an unauthorised purpose it would be outside the protection of the amended Article 31C and would have to meet the challenge of Articles 14 and 19.
[340F H] (xiii) Articles 39 to 51 contain Directive Principles referring to certain specific objectives and in order that a law should be for giving effect to one of those Directive Principles, there would be a real and substantial connection between the law and the specific objective set out in such Directive Principle.
Obviously, the objectives set out in these Directive Principles being specific and limited, every law made by a legislature in the country cannot possibly have a real and substantial connection with one or the other of these specific 225 objectives.
It is only a limited number of laws which would have a real A and substantial connection with one or the other of the specific objectives contained in these Directive Principles and any and every law would not come within this category.
[341A C].
(xiv) Article 38 is a general article which stresses the obligation of the State to establish a social order in which justice social, economic and political shall inform all the institutions of national life.
It no doubt talks of the duty of the State to promote the welfare of the people and there can be no doubt that standing by itself this might cover a fairly wide area but the objective set out in the Article is not merely promotion of the welfare of the people? but there is a further requirement that the welfare of the people is to be promoted by the State, not in any manner it likes, not according to its whim and fancy, but for securing and protecting a particular type of social order and that social order should be such as would ensure social, economic and political justice for all.
Social, economic and political justice is the objective set out in the Directive Principle in Article 38 and it is this objective which is made fundamental in the governance of the country and which the State is laid under an obligation to realise.
This Directive Principle forms the base on which the entire structure of the Directive Principles is reared and social, economic and political justice is the signature tune of the other Directive Principles.
The Directive Principles set out in the subsequent Articles following upon Article 38 merely particularise and set out facets and aspects of the ideal of social, economic and political justice articulated in Article 38.
[341C G].
(xv) The concept of social and economic justice may not be very easy of definition but its broad contours are to be found in some of the provisions of the Fundamental Rights and in the Directive Principles and whenever a question arises whether a legislation is for giving effect to social and economic justice, it is with reference to these provisions that the question would have to be determined.
There is nothing so vague or indefinite about the concept of social or economic justice that almost any kind of legislation could be justified under it.
Moreover, where a claim for protection is made in respect of a legislation on the ground that it is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle, the Directive Principle to which it is claimed to be related would not ordinarily be the general Directive Principle set out in Article 38, but could be one of the specific Directive Principles set out in the succeeding Articles because these latter particularise the concept of social and economic justice referred to in Article 38.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that if the amendment in Article 31C were held valid, it would have the effect of protecting every possible legislation under the sun and that would in effect and substance wipe out Articles 14 and 19 from the Constitution.
This is a tall and extreme argument, not justified in the provisions of the Constitution.
[341H, 342A D].
HELD further (concurring with the majority): 6. Clause (a) of Article 31A is constitutionally valid even on the application of the basic structure test.
[290D].
Where any law is enacted for giving effect to a Directive Principle with the view to furthering the constitutional goal of social and economic justice, there would be no violation of the basic structure, even if it infringes formal equality before the law under Article 14 or any fundamental right under Article 19.
Here, clause (a) of Article 31A protects a law of agrarian reform which is clearly in the context of the socio economic conditions prevailing in 226 India, a basic requirement of social and economic justice and 15 covered by the Directive Principals set out in clause (b) and (c) of Article 39 and it cannot be regarded as violating the basic structure of the Constitution.
On the contrary, agrarian reforms leading to social and economic justice to the . rural population is an objective which strengthens the basic structure of the Constitution.
[290B D].
Even on the basis of the doctrine of stare decisions the whole of Article 31A is constitutionally valid.
The view that Article 31A is constitutionally valid has been fallen in atleast three decisions of the Supreme Court, namely, Shankri Prasad 's case, Sajjan Singh 's case and Golaknath 's case and it has hold the field for over 28 years and on the faith of its correctness millions of acres of agricultural land have changed hands and now agrarian relations have come into being transferring the entire rural economy.
Even though the constitutional .
validity of Article 31A was not tested in these decisions by reference to the basic structure doctrine, the court would not be justified in allowing the earlier decisions to be reconsidered and the question of constitutional validity of Article 31A re opened.
These decisions have given a quietus to the constitutional challenge against the validity of Article 31A and this quietus should not now be allowed to be disturbed.
[290E, 292D, 294G H 295A].
Shankri Prasad vs Union of India, [19621 2 SCR 89; Sajjan Singh vs State of Rajasthan, [1965] I SCR 933; I.C. Golaknath vs Union of India, ; ; Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P. and Ors., [1980] 3 SCR .
followed It is no doubt true that the Supreme Court has power to review its earlier decisions or even depart from them and the doctrine of stare decisions cannot be permitted to perpetuate erroneous decisions of the court to the detriment of the general welfare of the public.
Certainty and continuity are essential ingredients of rule of law.
Certainty and applicability of law would be considerably eroded and suffer a serious set back if the highest court in the land were ready to overrule the views expressed by it in! earlier decisions even though that view has held the field for a number of years.
It is obvious that when constitutional problems are brought before the Supreme Court for its decision, complete and difficult questions are bound to arise and since the decision of many of such questions may depend upon choice between competing values, two views may be possible depending upon the value judgment or the choice of values made by the individual judge.
Therefore.
if one view has been taken by the court after mature deliberation the fact that another Bench is inclined to take another view would not justify the court in reconsidering the earlier decision and overrule it.
The law laid down by the Supreme Court is binding on all the courts in the country and numerous questions all over the country are decided in accordance with the view taken by the Supreme Court.
Many people arrange their affairs and large number of transactions also take place on the faith of the correctness of the decision given by the Supreme Court.
It would create uncertainty, unstability and confusion if the law propounded by the Supreme Court on the face of which numerous cases have been decided and many transactions have taken place is held to be not the correct law after a number of years.
The doctrine of stare decisions is evolved from the maxim "stare decisions et non quita movere" meaning "adhere to the decision and not unsettle things which are established" and it is a useful doctrine intended to bring about certainty and uniformity in the law.
But the doctrine of stare decisions cannot be regarded as a rigid 227 and inevitable doctrine which must be applied at the cost of justice There may be cases where it may be necessary to rid the doctrine of its petrifying rigidity.
The court may in an appropriate case overrule a previous decision taken by it, but that should be done only for substantial and compelling reasons.
The power of review must be exercised with due care and caution and only for advancing the public well being and not merely because it may appear that the previous decision was based on an erroneous view of the law.
It is only where the perpetuation of the earlier decision would be productive of mischief or inconvenience or would have the effect of deflecting the nation from the course which has been set by the Constitution makers or "where national crisis of great moment to the life, liberty and safety of this country and its millions are at stake or the basic direction of the nation itself is in peril of a shake up", that the court would be justified in reconsidering its earlier decision and departing from it.
It is fundamental that the nation 's constitution should not be kept in constant uncertainty by judicial review every now and then, because otherwise it would paralyse by perennial suspense all legislative and administrative action on vital issues.
The court should not indulge in judicial stabilisation of State action and a view which has been accepted for a long period of time in a series of decisions and on tho faith of which millions of people have acted and a large number of transactions have been effected should not be disturbed.
[292G H, 293A H, 294A D].
Ambika Prasad Mishra vs State of U.P. and Anr., [1980] 3 SCR p. 1159.
followed.
(7) Article 31B was conceived together with Article 31A as part of the same design adopted to give protection to legislation providing for acquisition of an estate or extinguishment or modification of any rights in an estate.
[295E F].
The Ninth Schedule of Article 31B was not intended to include laws other than those covered by Article 31A. Articles 31A and 31B were thus intended to serve the same purpose of protecting the legislation falling within a certain category.
It was a double barreled protection which was intended to be provided to this category of legislation, since it was designed to carry out agrarian reform which was so essential for bringing about a revolution in the socio economic structure of the country: [295F, H, 296A] Since all the earlier constitutional amendments were held valid on the basis of unlimited amending power of Parliament recognised in Shankri Prasad 's case and Sajjan Singh 's case and were accepted as valid in Golakhnath 's case and the Twenty Ninth Amendment Act was also held valid in Kesavananda Bharati 's case, though not on the application of the basic structure test and these constitutional amendments have been recognised as valid over a number of years and moreover, the statutes intended to be protected by them are all falling within Article 31A with the possible exception of only four Acts, it would not be justified in re opening the question of validity of these constitutional amendment and hence these amendments are valid.
[297F H].
But all constitutional amendments made after the decision in Kesavananda Bharati 's case would have to be decided by reference to the basic structure doctrine, for Parliament would then have no excuse for saying that it did not known the limitation on its amending power.
Now out of the statutes which are or may in future be included in the Ninth Schedule by subsequent constitutional amendments, if there are any which fall within a category covered 228 by Article 31A or 31C, they would be protected from challenge under Articles 14 and 19 and it would not be necessary to consider whether their inclusion.
in the Ninth Schedule is constitutionally valid, except in those rare cases where protection may be claimed for them against violation of any other.
fundamental rights.
This question would primarily arise only in regard to statutes not covered by Article 31A or 31C and in case of such statutes, the Court would have to consider whether the constitutional amendments including such statutes in the Ninth Schedule violate the basic structure of the Constitution in granting them immunity from challenge of the fundamental rights.
It is possible that in a given case even an abridgement of a fundamental right may involve violation of the basic structure.
It would all depend on the nature of the nature of the fundamental right, the extent and depth of the infringement, the purpose for which the infringement is made and its impact on the basic values of the Constitution.
For example, right to life and personal liberty enshrined in Article 21, stands on an altogether different footing from other fundamental rights.
If this fundamental right is violated by any legislation, it may be difficult to sustain a constitutional amendment which seeks to protect such legislation against challenge under Article 21.
So also where a legislation which has nothing to do with agrarian reform or any Directive Principles infringes the equality clause contained in Article 14 and such legislation is sought to be protected by a constitutional amendment by including it in the Ninth Schedule, it may be possible to contend that such constitutional amendment is violative of the egalitarian principle which forms part of the basic structure.
However, other situations may arise where infarction of a fundamental right by a statute, is sought to be constitutionally protected might effect the basic structure of the Constitution.
In every case, therefore, where a constitutional amendment includes a statute or statutes in the.
Ninth Schedule, its constitutional validity would have to be considered by E. reference to the basic structured doctrine and such constitutional amendment would be liable to be declared invalid to the extent to which it damages or destroys the basic structure of the Constitution by according protection against violation of any particular fundamental right.
[297H, 298C H, 299A B].
(8) Even on principle, the first part of the unamended Article 31C is constitutionally valid.
In view of the fact that the first part of the unamended Article 31C was held to be constitutionally valid by the majority decision in Keshavananda Bharati 's case, the question of its constitutional validity cannot be again reopened.
It is true, that the ratio decidendi of Keshavananda Bharati 's case was that the amending power of Parliament is limited and Parliament cannot in exercise of the power m f amendment alter the basic structure of the Constitution and the validity of every constitutional amendment has, therefore, to be judged by applying the test whether or not it alters the basic structure of the Constitution and this test was not applied by the six learned Judges, though their conclusion regarding constitutionality of the first part of the unamended Article 31C is valid.
Irrespective of the reasons which weighed with each one of the Judges who upheld the validity of the first part of the unamended Article 31C, the reasons for reaching the said conclusion would certainly have a bearing on the determination of the ratio decidendi of the case and the ratio decidendi would certainly be important for the decision of future cases where the validity of the first part or the unamended Article 31C is concerned, it was in so many terms determined by the majority decision in Keshavananda Bharati 's case, and that decision binds.
[300E H, 301A D, 302C] 229 What the first part of the unamended Article 31C does is merely to abridge the fundamental rights in Articles 14 and 19 by excluding the applicability to legislation giving effect to the policy towards securing the principles specified in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39.
The first part of the unamended Article 31C is basically of the same genre as Article 31A with only this difference that whereas Article 31A protects laws relating to certain subjects, the first part of the unamended Article 31C deals with laws having certain objectives.
There is no qualitative difference between Article 31A and the first part of the unamended Article 31C in so far as the exclusion of Articles 14 and 19 is concerned.
The fact that the provisions to the first part of the unamended Article 31C are more comprehensive and have greater width compared to those of Article 31A does not make any difference in principle.
If Article 31A is constitutionally valid, the first part of the unamended Article cannot be held to be unconstitutional.
The first part of the unamended Article 31C, in fact, stands on a more secure footing because it accords protection against infraction of Articles 14 and 19 to legislation enacted for giving effect to the Directive Principles set out in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39.
The legislature in enacting such legislation acts upon the constitutional mandate contained in Article 37 according to which the Directive Principles are fundamental in the governance of the country and it is the duty of the State to apply those principles in making laws.
It is for the purpose of giving effect to the Directive Principles set out in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 in discharge of the constitutional obligation laid upon the State under Article 37 that fundamental rights in Articles 14 and 19 are allowed to be abridged.
A constitutional amendment, therefore, making such a provision cannot be condemned as violative of the basic structure of the Constitution.
[301E H, 302A C].
(9) Even if the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment Act, 1976 is unconstitutional and void and the Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Act 11 of 1975), the .
Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on Holdings) and (Amendment) Act, 1975, (Act XLVII of 1945) and the Maharashtra Lands (Ceiling on holdings) Amendment Act, 1975, (Act II of 1976) have not been validly included in the Ninth Schedule so as to earn the protection of Article 31B, they are still saved from invalidation by Article 31A and so far as the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act, 1976, is concerned, it is outside the constituent power of Parliament in so far as it seeks to include clauses (4) and (S) in Article 368.
[302C D, G H].
It is clear on a plain natural construction of its language that under the proviso to Article 83(2) the duration of the Lok Sabha could be extended only during the operation of a proclamation of emergency and if, therefore, no proclamation of emergency was in operation at the relevant time, the House of People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976 would be outside the competence of Parliament under the proviso to Article 83(2).
Again the language of Article 352 (1) makes it clear that the President can take action under this clause only if he satisfies that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
The satisfaction of the President "that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India. is threatened whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance" is a condition precedent which must be fulfilled before the President can issue a proclamation under Article 352 clause (1).
When this condition precedent is satisfied, the President may exercise the power under clause (1) of Article 352 and issue a proclamation of emergency.
The constitutional implications of a 230 declaration of emergency.
under Article 352 clause (1) are vast and they are provided in Articles 83(2), 250, 353, 358 and 359.
The emergency being an exceptional situation arising out of a national crisis certain wide and sweeping powers have been conferred on the Central Government and Parliament with a view to combat the situation and restore normal conditions.
One such power is that given by Article 83(2) which provides that while a proclamation of emergency is in operation, Parliament may by law extend its duration for a period not exceeding one year at a time.
Further several drastic consequences ensue upon the making of a declaration of emergency.
The issue of a proclamation of emergency makes serious inroads into the principle of federalism and emasculates the operation and efficacy of the Fundamental Rights.
The power of declaring an emergency is, therefore, a power fraught with grave consequences and it has the effect of disturbing the entire power structure under the Constitution.
But it is a necessary power given to the Central Government with a view to arming it adequately to meet an exceptional situation arising out of threat to the security of the country on account of war or external aggression or internal disturbance or imminent danger of any such calamity.
It is, therefore, a power which has to be exercised with the greatest care and caution and utmost responsibility [303A B 306E H, 307E G].
(10) There is no bar to the judicial review of the validity of a proclamation of emergency issued by the President under Article 352 clause (1).
[308B C].
If a question brought before the court is purely a political question not involving determination of any legal or constitutional right or obligation, the court would not entertain it, since the court is concerned only with adjudication of legal rights and liabilities.
Merely because a question has a political colour the court cannot fold its hands in despair and declare "judicial hands off".
So long as the question is whether an authority under the Constitution has acted within the limits of its power or exceeded it, it can certainly be decided by the court.
Indeed it would be its constitutional obligation to do so.
The court is the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution and when there is manifestly unauthorised exercise of power under the Constitution, it is the duty of the court to intervene.
In fact, to this Court as much as to other Branches of Government is committed the conservation and furtherance of constitutional values.
The Court 's task is to identify those values in the constitutional plan and to work them into life in the cases that reach the Court.
"Tact and wise restraint ought to temper any power but courage and the acceptance of responsibility have their place too '.
The Court cannot and should not shirk this responsibility because it has sworn the oath of allegiance to the Constitution and is also accountable to the people of this country.
It would not, therefore, be right for the Court to decline to examine whether in a given case there is any constitutional violation involved in the President issuing a proclamation of emergency under clause (1) of Article 352.
The constitutional jurisdiction of this Court does not extend further than saying whether the limits on the power conferred by the Constitution on the President have been observed or there is transgression of such limits.
The only limit on the power of the President under Article 352 clause (1) is that the President should be satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or any part thereof is threatened whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
The satisfaction of the President is a subjective one and cannot be decided by reference to any objective tests.
It is deliberately and advisedly subjective because the matter in respect ' to 231 which he is to be satisfied is of such a nature that its decision must necessarily be left to the Executive Branch of Government.
There may be a wide range of situations which may arise and their political implications and consequences may have to .
be evaluated in order to decide whether there is a situation of grave emergency by reason of the security of the country being threatened by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
It would largely be a political judgment based on assessment of diverse and varied factors, fast changing situations, potential consequences and a host of other imponderables.
It cannot, therefore, by its very nature, be a fit subject matter for adjudication by judicial methods and materials and hence it is left to the subjective satisfaction of the Central Government which is best in a position to decide it.
The Court cannot go into the question of correctness or adequacy of the facts and circumstances on which the satisfaction of the Central Government is based.
That would ba a dangerous exercise for the Court, both because it is not a fit instrument for determining a question of this land and also because the Court would.
thereby usurp the function of the executive and in doing so enter the "political thicket" which it must avoid if it is to retain its legitimacy with the people.
But, if the satisfaction is mala fide or is based on wholly extraneous and irrelevant ground, the Court would have jurisdiction to examine it because in that case there would be no satisfaction of the President in regard to the matter on which he is required to be satisfied The satisfaction of the President is a condition precedent to the exercise of power under Article 352 clause (1) and if it can be shown that there is no satisfaction of the President at all, the exercise of the power would be constitutionally invalid.
[309C H, 310A B].
It is true that by reason of clause (5)(a) of Article 352, the satisfaction of the President is made final and conclusive and cannot be assailed on any ground, but, the power of judicial review is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution and hence this provision debarring judicial review would be open to attack on the ground that it is unconstitutional and void as damaging or destroying the basic structure.
This attack against constitutionality can, however, be averted by reading the provision to mean that the immunity from challenge granted by it does not apply whore the challenge is not that the satisfaction is improper or unjustified but that there is no satisfaction at all.
In such a case it is not the satisfaction arrived at by the President which is challenged but the existence of the satisfaction itself.
Where, therefore, the satisfaction is absurd or perverse or mala fide or based on a wholly extraneous and irrelevant ground it would be no satisfaction at all and it would be liable to be challenged before a court notwithstanding clause (5)(a) of Article 352.
No doubt, in most cases it would be difficult if not impossible to challenge the exercise of ' power under Article 352 clause (1) even on this limited ground because the facts and circumstances on which the satisfaction is based would not be known, but where it is possible the existence of the satisfaction can always be challenged on the ground that it is mala fide or based on a wholly extraneous or irrelevant ground.
[310C F].
Gormallion vs Lightfoot, ; ; Backer vs Carr; , , quoted with approval.
State of Rajasthan vs Union of India, ; , followed.
Gulam Sarwant vs Union of India, ; ; Bhutnath Mato vs State of West Bengal, ; , explained.
232 (11) on a plain natural interpreation of the language of sub clauses (a) to (c) of clause (2) that so long as the proclamation of emergency is not revoked by another proclamation under sub clause (2)(a), it would continue to be in operation irrespective of change of circumstances.
[312C].
Lakhan Pal vs Union of India, [1966] Supp.
SCR 209, applied.
It is true that the power to revoke a proclamation of emergency is vested only in the Central Government and it is possible that the Central Government may abuse this power by refusing to revoke a Proclamation of Emergency even though the circumstances justifying the issue of Proclamation have ceased to exist and thus prolong baselessly the state of emergency obliterating the Fundamental Rights and this may encourage totalitarian trend.
But the primary and real safeguard of the citizen against such abuse of power lies in "the good sense of the people and in the system of representative and responsible Government" which is provided in the Constitution.
Additionally, it may be possible for the citizen in a given case to move the court for issuing a writ of mandamus for revoking Proclamation of Emergency, if he is able to show by placing clear and cogent material before the court that there is no justification at all for the continuance of the Proclamation of Emergency.
But this would be a very heavy onus because it would be entirely for the Executive Government to be satisfied whether a situation has arisen where the Proclamation of Emergency can be revoked.
There would be so many facts and circumstances and such diverse considerations to be taken into account by the Executive Government before it can be satisfied that there is no longer any grave Emergency whereby the security of India is threatened by war or external aggression or internal disturbance.
This is not a matter which is fit for judicial determination and the court would not interfere with the satisfaction of the Executive Government in this regard unless it is clear on the material on record that there is absolutely no justification for the continuance of the Proclamation of Emergency and the Proclamation is being continued mala fide or for a collateral purpose.
The court may in such a case, if satisfied, beyond doubt grant a writ of mandamus directing the Central Government to revoke the Proclamation of Emergency.
But until that is done the Proclamation of Emergency would continue in operation and it cannot be said that though not revoked by another Proclamation it has still ceased to be in force.
In the present case, it was common ground that the first Proclamation of Emergency issued on 3rd December, 1971 was not revoked by another Proclamation under clause (2)(a) of Article 352 until 21st March, 1977 and hence at the material lime when the House of People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976, was passed the first Proclamation of Emergency was in operation.
[312F H, 313A F.].
If the first Proclamation of Emergency was in operation at the relevant time it would be sufficient compliance with the requirement of the proviso to clause (2) of Article 83 and it would be unnecessary to consider whether the second Proclamation of Emergency was validly issued by the President.
[313E F].
(12) The House of People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976, was enacted under the proviso to clause (2) of Article 83 for the purpose of extending the duration of the Lok Sabha and it was a condition precedent to the exercise of this power by Parliament that there should be a Proclamation of Emergency in operation at the date when the Act was enacted.
The words "while the Proclamation of Emergency issued on the 3rd day of December, 1971 233 and on the 25th day of June, 1975 are both in operation" were introduced , merely by way of recital of the satisfaction of the condition precedent for justifying the exercise of the power under the proviso to clause (2) of Article 83 and they were not intended to lay down a condition for the operation of section 2 of the Act.
Section 2 clearly and in so many terms extended the duration of the Lok Sabha for a period of one year and extension was not made dependent on both the Proclamations of Emergency being in operation at the date of the enactment of the Act.
It was for a definite period of one year that the extension was effected and it was not co extensive with the operation of both the Proclamations of Emergency.
The extension for a period of one year was made once for all by the enactment of section 2 and the reference to both the Proclamations of Emergency being in operation was merely for the purpose of indicating that both the Proclamations of Emergency being in operation, Parliament had competence to make the extension.
It was, therefore, not at all necessary for the efficacy of the extension that both the Proclamations of Emergency should be in operation at the date of enactment of the Act.
Even if one Proclamation of Emergency was in operation at the material date it would be sufficient to attract the power of Parliament under the proviso to Article 83 clause (2) to enact the Act extending the duration of the Lok Sabha.
No doubt, Parliament proceeded on the assumption that both the Proclamations of Emergency were in force at the relevant date and they invested Parliament with power to enact the Act.
but even if this legislative assumption were unfounded it would not make any difference to the validity of the exercise of the power so long as there was one Proclamation of Emergency in operation which authorised Parliament to extend the duration of the Lok Sabha under the proviso to clause (2) of Article 83.
It is true that the proviso to section 2 enacted that if both or either of the Proclamations of Emergency cease or ceases to operate before the expiration of the extended period of one year, the Lok Sabha shall continue until six months after the ceaser of operation of the said Proclamations or Proclamation, not going beyond the period of one year, but the opening part of this proviso can have application only in relation to a Proclamation of Emergency which was in operation at the date of enactment of the Act.
If such a Proclamation of Emergency which was in operation at the material date ceased to operate before the expiration of the extended period of one year, then the term of the Lok Sabha would not immediately come to an end, but it would continue for a further period of six months but not so to exceed the extended period of one year.
This provision obviously could have no application in relation to the second Proclamation of Emergency if it was void when issued.
In such a case, the second Proclamation not being valid at all at the date of issue would not be in operation at all and it would not cease to operate after the date of.
enactment of the Act.
The proviso would in that event have to be read as relating only to the first Proclamation of Emergency, and since the Proclamation of Emergency continued until it was revoked on 21st March, 1977, the duration of the Lok Sabha was validly extended for a period of one year from 18th March, 1976 and hence there was a validly constituted Lok Sabha on the dates when the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976 and the Constitution (Forty second Amendment) Act, 1976, were.
passed by Parliament.
(314G H, 315A H, 316A C].
(In view of the settled practice of the Supreme Court not to say any more than is necessary to get a safe resting place for the decision, His Lordship did not consider whether the second Proclamation of Emergency was validly issued.)
