The appellants were the tenants of the respondents landlord.
The suit filed by the respondents for eviction of the appellants under Section 13 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 on the ground of default in repayment of rent was decreed in spite of the fact that the appellants deposited all the rents before the date of filing of the suit, the future rent in advance before the first date of hearing and also the interest and cost of the suit amounting to Rs. 23 on the first date of hearing.
These deposits were made under Section 31 of the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 and under Section 13 of the Rent Act before the Rent Controller cum Senior Sub Judge respectively.
The suit was decreed on the ground that the said deposit was not a valid tender and the appellants could not claim any protection under the proviso to Section 13(2) of the Rent Act but the Appellate Court set aside the judgment of the Trial Court on the ground of the validity of the notice.
The High Court in revision following the decision of this Court in Yasodai Ammal 's case set aside the appellate order and decreed the suit.
Both the Appellate Court and the High Court never went into the question of deposit of rent so as to protect the tenant from eviction.
Hence the appeal by obtaining the special leave from this Court Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD (1) The main object of the Relief of Indebtedness Act, 1934 is to give relief to debtors and protect them from paying excessive rates of interest.
From the plain and unambiguous language of Section 31, it cannot be spelt out that the Act applies only to a particular type of debtors and creditors.
Section 31 has been couched in the widest possible terms and the legislature has advisedly not used the word debtor in Section 31 so as to confine the provisions of the section only to the 'debtor ' defined in the said Act and to no other but the legislature intended to embrace within its fold all persons owing money including tenants who are in arrears.
Thus, under Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act any person who owes money is entitled to deposit in court the money owed either in full or in part in tho name of his creditor.
It is clear, therefore, that Section 31 would apply even to a tenant who owes money to his landlord by way of rent due and he can also enjoy the facility provided by Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act.
[481 C, 482 E G] 477 (2) The combined effect of the provisions of Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act and the Notification No. 1562 Cr. 47/9224, dated 14th April, 1947 published in the Punjab Gazette Extraordinary and the Notification made under the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 by which a Senior Sub Judge was to function as a Controller under the Rent Act is that Section 31 is constituted a statutory agency or machinery for receiving all debts and paying the same to the creditors.
This is the dominant purpose and the avowed object of Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act.
It thus follows as a logical consequence that any deposit made by a tenant under Section 31 would have to be treated as a deposit under the Rent Act to the credit of the landlord and which will be available to him for payment whenever he likes to withdraw.
[482 H, 483 H 484 B] Kuldip Singh vs The State of Punjab & Anr. , followed.
Mam Chand vs Chhotu Ram & Ors I.L.R. 1964 Punjab 626 and Khushi Ram vs Shanti Rani & Ors.
1964 Punjab Law Reports 755, approved.
Vidya Prachar Trust vs Pandit Basarat Ram , overruled.
(3) To give a narrow meaning to the words "person who owes money" used in Section 31 of the indebtedness Act would be to unduly restrict the scope of Section 31 which is contrary to the intention of the legislature.
Furthermore, under the proviso to Section 13(2) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, the tenant was required to deposit interest also in order to get protection of the proviso.
Hence, the tenant was a debtor with a sort of a statutory agreement to pay interest and would therefore squarely fall within the definition of Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act.
[485 G 486 A] (4) There is absolutely no bar either under Section 6 or under Section 19 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 to receive future rent.
Section 6 of the Act merely provides that where a fair rent is fixed by the Controller it would not be open to the landlord to receive any amount in advance in excess of the fair rent.
Section 6, therefore, clearly deals with a situation where a fair rent under Section 6 is fixed by the Controller on the application of the parties.
Neither in the present case nor in Vidya Prachar Trust 's case was there any allegation that a fair rent had been fixed by the Controller.
So long as fair rent is not fixed by the Controller the parties are free to agree to payment of any rent and neither Section 6 nor Section 19 would be attracted to such a case.
Moreover, even if the tenant were to deposit future rent it is always open to the landlord not to withdraw the future rent but confine himself to taking out only the rent that is in arrears which will not at all violate any provision of the Rent Act.
Therefore, a deposit by a tenant under Section 31 of the Indebtedness Act was a valid tender.
[486D, G H; 487A C] (5) Like all other Rent Control Acts in the other States in the country, the Rent Act is a piece of social legislation which seeks to strike a just balance between the rights of the landlords and the requirements of the tenants.
The Act prevents the landlord from taking the extreme step of evicting the tenant merely on the ground of default in payment of rent if the landlord is guaranteed entire payment of the entire arrears of rent, cost and interest.
Thus the proviso to Section 13(2) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 affords a real and sanctified protection to the tenant which should not be nullified by giving a hypertechnical or literal 478 construction to the language of the proviso which instead of advancing the object of the Act may result in its frustration.
[487F G] (6) The statutory provisions of the proviso which is meant to give special protection to the tenant, if property and meaningfully construed, lead to the inescapable conclusion that the rent together with cost and interest, etc., should be paid on or before the date of the first hearing and once this is done, there would be sufficient compliance with the conditions mentioned in the proviso.
In the instant case all the necessary conditions of the proviso of Section 13(2) of the Rent Act were fully complied with.
[487H 488 A, B] Sheo Narain v Sher Singh ; , applied.
(7) Once it is held that the deposit under section 31 of the Indebtedness Act is a valid tender having been deposited on or before the first date of hearing, the exact point of time when the deposit is made is wholly irrelevant and will not amount to non compliance of the conditions of the proviso to Section 13(2) of the Rent Act.
In the instant case, the deposit of the arrears of rent had been made prior to the filing of ejectment petition and the interest and cost were raid on the first date of hearing.
[489B C]
