M/s. Shethia Mining and Manufacturing Corporation, Calcutta owned three non coking coal mines one of which was New Satgram Coal Mines.
besides a workshop called the New Satgram Engineering Works built on a plot adjacent to the New Satgram Coal Mines in 1964, a building known as the Technical Director 's Bungalow, built somewhere in 1957 58 outside the mining area but adjacent to it, and another building constructed in 1960 61 on the same plot of land, namely the Guest House used for the residence of officers and staff of mines.
The management of the New Satgram Coal Mines along with two other coal mines was taken over by the Central Government under the Coal Mines.
(Taking over of Management) Act, 1973, with effect from January 31, 1973.
Thereafter the was passed and by virtue of section 3(1) thereof, the right title and interest of M/s. Shethia Mining and Manufacturing Corporation vested in the Central Government with effect from May 1973 and subsequently by a notification in the Government company that is, the Coal (India) Ltd.
On May 17, 1973, the Central Government took over possession of the Technical Director 's Bungalow and the Guest House.
The. appellants who had filed two writ petitions challenging the taking over and the Nationalisation Act in the Supreme Court withdrew them and filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution in the Delhi High Court for the issuance of a writ or direction in the nature of mandamus in regard to the taking over of New.
Satgram Engineering Works and the dues pertaining to the New Satgram Coal Mines and New Majri Coal Mines.
The High Court partly allowed the petition but declined to go into the question as to whether the Engineering Unit, together with Shethia Bhavan and all its assets etc the Technical Director 's Bungalow and Guest House were or not covered by the definition.
of the term "mine" in section 2(h)(vi), (vii) & (xi) of the Nationalisation Act.
Hence the appeals by special leave one by New Satgram Engineering Works and the other by the Union of India.
Allowing the Government 's appeal and dismissing the appeal of the Engineering Works, the Court ^ HELD: (1) When the facts themselves are seriously controverted, the dispute relating to the properties in question raise a "serious question of title" and the parties must get their rights adjudicated upon in a civil court and not 407 under article 226 of the Constitution.
The question whether the engineering unit, was "situate in, or adjacent to" the new Satgram Coal Mines and was "substantially" used for the purposes of the mine as well as the question whether the Technical Director 's Bungalow and the Guest House were "solely" used for the residence of officers and staff of the mine and! therefore.
fell within the definition of 'mine ' as contained in section 2(h) of the Nationalisation Act, cannot be decided in proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution.
The proper remedy is by way of a suit.
[416H; 418G H] (2) Parliament instead of providing that the word 'mine ' shall have the meaning assigned to it in the , has given an enlarged definition of 'mine ' in section 2(h) so that not merely the colliery but everything connected with the mining industry should vest in the Central Government, that is, not only that part of the industry which consisted of raising, winning and getting coal but also that part of it which consisted in the sale of coal and its supply to customers both of which are a part of an integrated activity.
Parliament by an enlarged definition of mine as contained in section 2(h) of the Act has indicated the nature of the properties that vest, and the question whether a particular asset is taken within the sweep of i. 2(h) depends on whether it answers the description given therein.
[415 H, 416 A D] (3) The language used in section 2(h)(vii) and (xi) of the are different.
Sub clause (vii) used the words "in, or adjacent to, a mine" and "used substantially" for the purposes of the mine or a number of mines under the same management, in relation to workshops.
The use of the word 'and ' makes both the conditions conjunctive.
Sub Clause (xi) used the words "if solely used" for the location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for the residence of officers and staff of the mine, in relation to lands and buildings.
The difference in language between the two expressions "used substantially" and "solely used" is clear.
A workshop cr a building constructed initially for the purpose of a coal mine cannot by its being diverted to other purposes cease to belong to the mine.
What is of the essence is whether the workshop or the building originally formed a part and parcel of the coal mine.
The subsequent user may not b. very material.
[415 B E] (4) Merely because the land on which a workshop of a coal mine is located bears a different plot number, or even if there is a compound wall between the main office of the coal mine and the workshop, it would not cease to be part of the mine.
The question in such cases will always be whether the workshop is "located in, or adjacent to, a mine" and was "used substantially for the purposes of the mine under the same management".
Further the question whether a workshop is "substantially" used for the purposes of a mine necessarily involves an enquiry as to whether it pertains to, or in substance is, part of the mine.
The value of jobs executed for the mine as against those for others is not really determinative of the question.
If a workshop is, in fact a part of a coal mine, it does not cease to be so merely because its utilisation lies in the production of materials supplied to third parties.
While a workshop may form part of a mine and is substantially used as such, it may be utilised for turning out other products; it all depends upon the circumstances of each case, whether it forms part of a mine or not.
[416F G, 417 D F] (5) Sub sections (3) and (4) of section 19 of the Act are part of an integrated scheme and must be read with sub section (2) of section 18.
According to the provisions of sub sections (3) and (4) of section 19 the Central 408 Government, or the Government company was exclusively entitled to receive monies in question to the exclusion of other persons up to the specified ate and to utilise the same in discharge of the liabilities of the coal mine which could not be discharged by the appointed day.
Under the scheme of the Act, the owner of the coal mine which has vested in the Central Government under sub section (1) of section 3 is entitled to receive, besides the compensation amount as determined under section 8, additional compensation amount under sub section (1) of section 9, simple interest thereon at 40% per annum for the period specified therein, together with "such amount as may become due" to tho owner of the coal mine in relation to the period during which the management of the coal mine remained vested in the Central Government 35 provided by sub section (2) of section 18.
[421 C E] Provisions in sections 8, 9, 18 and 19 make it clear that unless the requirements of section 19 are fulfilled there can be no ascertainment of "such amount as may become due" to the owner of a coal mine, in relation to the period during which the management of the coal mine remained vested in the Central Government, as required under sub section (2) of section 18.
Anr other construction would render sub section (2) of section 18 entirely otiose.
The amounts collected on behalf of the erstwhile owners of coal mines, represent the money of such owners without distinction, and whether they were sale proceeds of coal or realisations from debtors.
the amounts were liable to be spent not only in the discharge of liabilities of the coal mine which could not be discharged by the appointed day, but also were liable to be spent for the purposes of management.
All the rights and liabilities arise from the provisions of the Acts, and the net balance in relation to the management period, means the difference between authorised collections and legitimate liabilities of the erstwhile owners.
It is necessarily this balance which "becomes due in relation to the period during which the management of the coal mines remained vested the Central Government" within the meaning of sub section (2) of section 18.
[423 B E] When there is a payment made by the Central Government under subs.
(2) of section 18, the elaborate procedure provided under sections 20 27 have to be followed.
The owner of a coal mine is entitled to the payment by the Commissioner of Payments, under section 26 of "the balance, if any out of the total amount of money credited to the account of the coal mine" after he has gone through all the stages provided for in Chapter VI.
Such being the scheme, there is no question of the owner of a coal mine, who is divested of his right, title and interest under sub section (1) of section 3 to realise from the Central Government any amount due to a coal mine, which remained to be realised until the specified date, that is, June 30, 1975.
In the instant case, in view of all these provisions of sections 20 to 27 of the Act and particularly, of sub section (1) of section 26 the claims made by the appellants Engineering Works are not proper.
They are certainly not entitled to recover any definite or ascertained sum.
All that they are entitled to under sub section (5) of section 19 is that they should be furnished with a copy of each statement of accounts prepared under section 19, to its being audited under sub section (6) and to the audit being conducted in such manner as the Central Government may direct under sub section (7), and to the payment under sub section (1) of section 26 of the balance, if any, out of the total amount of money credited to the account of a coal mine after all the liabilities have been discharged.
[423F, 424F H, 425A, D E] (6) There is no duty cast on the Central Government to make realisations 409 of any money due to a coal mine if it pertains to a period prior to the appointed, day, and to discharge the liabilities of the coal mine beyond the specified dated that is, June 30, 1975.
The 'appointed day ' under section 2(a) of the Management Act under the Nationalisation Act was January 31, 1973 and May 1, 1973 respectively; while the 'specified date ' for purposes of sub sections (3) & (4) of section 19 was June 30, 1975.
All that vested in the Central Government under sub section (I) of section 3 of the Management Act was the management of all coal mines, as defined in section 2(g) of The Act, which included sundry debts etc.
, pending nationalisation of such mines, with effect from the appointed day, that is, January 31, 1973.
But this was only for the purposes of management, the title all the time remaining in the erstwhile owners of the coal mines.
In the course of management under that Act, all the collections belonged to the owners, and the liabilities also in relation to the mines were the liabilities of the owners. 'The Custodian appointed by the Central Government under section 6 of the Management Act was liable for, the net balance in relation to the management period.
He had the right to collect and also the right to incur expenditure in relation to the management by reason of the provisions of that Act.
[426 C F] (7) The conferral of power upon the Central Government under subsections (3) and (4) of section 19 to make realisation of monies due to the coal mines and from such realisation to discharge the liabilities as well as to incur expenses in relation to the management thereof, was a necessary concomitant of the vesting of such coal mines under sub section (I) of section 3 of the Act.
The Nationalisation Act received the assent of the President on May 30, 1973 but the provisions of sub section (I) of section 3 were brought into force with retrospective effect, that is, with effect from the appointed day, that is, May 1, 1973.
It follows that, although there was a complete extinction of all the rights, title and interest of the owners of coal mines with effect from May 1. ; 1973, there was a fictional extension of the period of management under the Management Act from May 1 to May 30, 1973.
There is, therefore, provision made in section 9 that apart from the amount of compensation provided for by section 8, as mentioned in the Schedule, the owners of every coal mine shall be entitled to receive additional compensation under sub section (I) thereof.
This was to be an amount equal to the amount which would have been, but for the provisions of sections 3, 4 and S payable to such owner for the period commencing on May 1, 1973 and ending on the date on which the Act received P the assent of the President that is, May 30, 1973.
Under sub section (1) of section 11 the Central Government is entitled to exercise all such things as the owner of the coal mine was authorised to do.
[427C, 426G 427B] (8) The definitions of coal mine in section 2(h)(xii) includes the current assets belonging to a mine.
but by reason of the explanation inserted by the Coal Mines Nationalisation (Amendment) Act, 1978, the expression "current assets" appearing therein does not include amounts which had become due before the appointed day, that is, May 1, 1973.
Thus these dues did not vest in the Central Government.
This exclusion of sundry debts under the Nationalisation Act does not apply to the Management Act because there was no similar explanation to section 2(g)(xii) of that Act.
[427 D E] (9) The Management Act was to be followed by the Nationalisation Act and, therefore, the accountability of the Central Government in regard to the management period was provided for in section 19 of the Nationalisation Act.
Although there was vesting of the coal mines in the Central Government under 410 sub section (1) of section 3 of the Act, the accounts had still to be settled Sub sections (3) and (4) of section 19, therefore, extended the period during which the Central Government was authorised to collect monies due to the coal mines and to discharge the liabilities of such coal mines which could not be discharged by the appointed day, that is, May 1, 1973 till the specified date, that is, June 30, 1975.
The liabilities of the coal mines were not taken over under the Management Act.
Section 7 of the Nationalisation Act implies that after the specified date, that is, June 30, 1975 the erstwhile owners of coal mines would have to meet all their liabilities which could not be discharged before the appointed day.
It must result in the inevitable consequence, as a necessary corollary that any amount which could not be realised by the Central Government until the specified date, would be realisable by the owners directly in order to meet their pre existing liabilities.
[427 F 428 B] (10) Provisions of sub section (4) of section 19 of the are in part materia with sub section (3) of section 22 of the .
The subsidy receivable from the erstwhile Coal Board established under section 4 of the Coal Mines (Conservation and Safety) Act, 1952, being a payment "by way of reimbursement" was like any other dues, and, therefore, must be treated as 'any money due to the coking coal mine '.
Therefore, the directions made by the Court requiring the Union of India to pay to the Satgram Engineering Works Rs. 7,28,342 54 which is to be recovered by the erstwhile Coal Board as subsidy, is incorrect.
[428C D] Industrial Supplies Pvt. Ltd., & Anr.
vs The Union of India & Ors.
[1981] 1 SCR p. 375, followed.
