Section 2(c) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 defines "dealer" to mean any person or association of persons carrying on the business of buying or selling goods in Uttar Pradesh whether for commission, remuneration or otherwise.
By the U.P. Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1949 an Explanation was inserted in this section to provide that a factor, a broker, a commission agent or arhatiya, a del credere agent, an auctioneer, or any other mercantile agent by whatever name called, and whether of the same description as hereinbefore mentioned or not, who carries on the business of buying or selling goods on behalf of his principles, or through whom the goods are sold or purchased shall be deemed to be a dealer for the purposes of the Act.
The respondent (assessee) who was registered as a dealer under section 8A was carrying on business in jaggery, amchur, khandsari etc.
on its own account and as kutcha arhatiya.
The nature of the business carried on by the assessee was that cultivators brought their produce to the assessee for sale.
The goods were weighed at his shop and then supplied to the pucca arhatiyas or to other persons.
Price of the commodity in full or part was paid by the assessee to the cultivators directly, and the price from the purchaser were realised after wards.
During the assessment year 1967 68 the Sales Tax Officer by his assessment order rejected the account books of the assessee on the basis of some discrepancy found during the four surveys carried out at the shop and made a best judgment assessment under sub section (3) of section 7 of the Act, determining the taxable turnover of purchases effected by the assessee as a kutcha arhatiya at Rs. 5.3 lacs and taxed it.
On appeal the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial), Sales Tax reduced the taxable turnover of purchase by Rs. 1.5 lacs.
Cross revisions by the appellant as well as by the respondent were allowed by the Additional Judge (Revisions), Sales Tax who by his order negatived the plea of the assessee that he was not a dealer but held from the material on record that the taxable turnover of the assessee could not reasonably be determined at Rs. 3.8 lacs.
The orders of the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) and Sales Tax officer were set aside and a fresh best judgment assessment was directed to be made.
549 The High Court upon reference, as to the liability of the assessee to tax on the transactions effected by it as kutcha arhatiya held that the assessee was not a dealer.
It further held that a person can be liable to tax as a dealer only if he acts as an agent having the authority to pass title in the goods sold, and that a kutcha arhatiya merely brought together the seller and the purchaser and helped in settling the price and weighment of the goods etc.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that the High Court was wrong in holding that the assessee was not a dealer within section 2(c) of the Act and that the High Court had completely overlooked the Explanation to section 2(c) which was inserted by the U.P. Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1959 particularly the words "through whom the goods are sold or purchased", and that the Sales Tax Officer was not justified in making an assessment to the best of his judgment under section 7(3).
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: 1(i) The finding arrived at by the High Court that the assessee as a kutcha arhatiya merely brought together the seller and the buyer charging an additional sum by way of commission and, therefore, could not be regarded as a dealer i.e. a person engaged in the business of buying and selling goods, is contrary to the admitted facts of the case.
[551 H] (ii) Explanation to section 2(c) brought within the definition of 'dealer ' not only a commission agent, a factor, a del credere agent or any other mercantile agent by whatever name called, and whether of such description or not, but also a broker, an auctioneer as well as an arhatiya.
[554 D] (iii) The definition of 'dealer ' in section 2(c) is wide enough to include selling or purchasing agent of whatever name or description.
The term 'arhatiya ' is wide enough to include kutcha arhatiya.
[554 E] (iv) The basic distinction between a kutcha and a pucca arhatiya is that a kutcha arhatiya acts as an agent on behalf of his constituent and never acts as a principal to him.
A pucca arhatiya acts as a principal as regards his constituent and not as disinterested middleman who brings principals together, there being no privity of contract between the constituent and the third party.
On the other hand a kutcha arhatiya usually denotes a person who merely 'brings together the buyer and seller ' charging his commission, who has no dominion or control over the goods unlike a pucca arhatiya who deals as a principal in relation to both his constituent and to the third party.
In a commercial sense, a kutcha arhatiya acts as an agent on behalf of his constituent.
[552 G 553 B, F] Bhagwandas Parasram vs Burjorji Ruttonji Bomanji, LR (1917 18) 45 IA 29, Shivnarayan Kabra vs State of Madras.
; , Sobhagmal Gianmal vs Mukundchand Balia, L.R. (1926) 53 I.A. 241, Chowringhee Sales Bureau (P) Ltd. vs C.I.T. West Bengal; , , referred to.
2(i) The High Court should have declined to go into the question of the applicability of section 7(3) of the Act.
When a question of law was neither raised before the Addl.
Judge (Revisions) nor considered by him nor did it arise on findings given by him, it will not be a question arising out of his order.
[556 F] (ii) The question as to whether the Sales Tax Officer was justified in making a best judgment assessment under section 7(3) of the Act was not referred to the High Court.
It was, therefore, not open to the High Court to go into the question.
It could not allow the new point to be raised for the first time in reference.
[556 G] 550 (iii) The High Court was also not entitled on a reference under section 11(4) of the Act to set aside the findings of the Addl.
Judge (Revisions) merely because on a reappraisal of the evidence it would have come to a contrary conclusion.
It was also not entitled to examine whether the explanation of the assessee in regard to the deficiencies found in the account books should or should not be accepted.
[556 H]
