The State Government issued a notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act stating that the land referred to therein was needed for a public purpose, namely, for expansion of the factory of a Company at the expense of the company.
On the respondents ' objections that the purported purpose was not a public purpose in that the land was being acquired for the benefit of a company, the State Government issued another notification in respect of the same land as also some more land stating that the land was needed for industrial development at public expense.
Objections were again raised by the land owners that though ostensibly the purpose was a public purpose in truth it was a private purpose, namely, for the benefit of a company.
In cancellation of the first notification the Government issued another notification under section 6.
Dismissing the respondents ' writ petitions under Article 226 a single Judge of the High Court held that the industrial development of a particular area was in itself a public purpose and no further details need be given in the notifications.
On appeal, a Division Bench of the High Court held that although a declaration under section 6 was final and conclusive as to the need for acquisition and as to the purpose being a public purpose, the aggrieved party could challenge a declaration only on the ground of mala fides and colourable exercise of power and that in the instant case no such allegation had been made out.
The appeals were, however, allowed on the ground that the State Government failed to produce evidence that the land was being acquired for a public purpose and not for the benefit of a company.
Allowing the appeals.
^ HELD: The High Court erred in accepting the appeals in view of its finding that mala fides or colourable exercise of power on the part of the State Government had not been established.
It is well settled law that a declaration under section 6 of the Act shall be conclusive evidence that the land is needed for a public purpose, the only exception to this being that the declaration was issued mala fide or in colourable exercise of power.
The third notification 574 in this case had to be taken at its face value in so far as the purpose was concerned.
[577B; 578B] 2.
The burden of proving mala fides or colourable exercise of power is on the party claiming the benefit of the exception, namely the respondents.
This burden could not be held to have been discharged by a mere allegation in that behalf.
[578H] 3.
If the argument that it is for the State to satisfy the Court about the nature of the purpose for which the land is sought to be acquired is accepted the whole object of the provision under which the conclusive presumption has to be raised in regard to the nature of the purpose would be defeated.
It cannot, therefore, be held merely on the strength of the absence of production of documentary evidence by the State that the onus (which rested heavily on the respondents) to prove mala fides or colourable exercise of power on the part of the State Government has been discharged.
[578 H, 579 A B] 4.
The respondents have produced no material to show that the assertion about the public purpose as stated in the third notification was in correct for the reason that the acquired land was not suitable for any industry or that no industrial activity, except that by a company, had been undertaken in the neighbourhood of the acquired area.
There is a clear averment to the contrary by the State which was not controverted by the respondents and that cuts at the root of their plea of mala fides or colourable exercise of power.
[579 B C; E]
