Exercising the power of exemption conferred under rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, the Central Government by a notification dated January 5, 1957 exempted certain varieties of cotton fabrics from the whole of the excise duty leviable thereon.
Item 7 set out one of such varieties as under: "Cotton fabrics produced. powerlooms. provided that the number of powerlooms producing cotton fabrics in such factories does not exceed four.
" By a notification dated November 26, 1960 a proviso was added to this item stating that "this exemption shall not be applicable to a manufacturer who commences production for the first time on or after the December 1, 1960 by acquiring powerlooms from any other person who is or has been a licensee of a powerloom factory.
" From March 1, 1961 item 7 was substituted and from April 1, 1961 a proviso was added to item 7, the effect of both of which was that while from March 1, 1961 the benefit of exemption from excise duty was available only to those manufacturers who had not more than two powerlooms in their factories, from and after April 1, 1961 even this limited exemption was withdrawn from manufacturers who commenced production for the first time on or after April 1, 1961 by acquiring powerlooms from any person who was or had been a licensee of powerloom factory.
From March 18, 1961 a second proviso to item 7 was added which provides "where a person employs not more than four powerlooms and the said powerlooms are worked in not more than one shift no duty shall be payable in respect thereof".
From April 1, 1961 a third proviso was added stating "where a person commences manufacture of the said fabrics for the first time on or after April 1, 1961 by acquiring powerlooms from any other person who is or has been a licensee of powerloom factory the rate per shift per month per powerloom shall be the next higher rate if any".
The respondents had acquired powerlooms after April 1, 1961 from persons who were or had been licensees and were manufacturing cotton fabrics on those powerlooms prior to April 1, 1961.
They claimed that since each of them had not more than four powerlooms which worked in not more than one shift he was exempt from payment of excise duty by virtue of the second proviso to item 7.
The Superintendent of Central Excise on the other hand contended that the third proviso carved out an exception from the second proviso and since 514 each of the respondents commenced manufacture of cotton fabrics for the first time after April 1, 1961 he was not exempt from payment of excise duty but was liable to pay duty at the next higher rate provided in the amended notification of March 18, 1961.
Appeals of the respondents having been rejected by the Assistant Collector and the Collector they filed writs in the High Court challenging the levy of excise duty.
Their writ petitions were allowed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeals ^ HELD:(1) It is a well settled rule of interpretation applicable alike to the rule making authority as to the legislature that where there are two expressions which could have been used to convey a certain intention, but one of these expressions conveys that intention less clearly than the other, it is proper to conclude that if the draftsman used that one of the two expressions which would convey the intention less clearly, he does not intend to convey that intention at all.
[523 A] It is clear on a plain grammatical construction of the proviso under Item 7 of the Notification dated 5th January, 1957 that the prescription of the date 1st April, 1961 has reference only to commencement of production of the cotton fabrics and not to the acquisition of the powerlooms.
What is required is that the production of cotton fabrics must have been commenced by the manufacturer for the first time on or after 1st April, 1961 and not that the powerlooms also must have been acquired by him on or after that date.
[520 C D] 2 (a) Even though each of the respondents owned not more than four powerlooms he would be liable to pay excise duty at the next higher rate under the third proviso to the notification dated March 18, 1961, if he started manufacture of cotton fabrics on his powerlooms for the first time on or after April 1, 1961, irrespective whether he acquired the powerlooms from a licensee before or after that date.
[522 C D] (b) The exemption under item 7 is not applicable to a manufacturer who has commenced his production of cotton fabrics for the first time on or after April 1, 1961, by acquiring powerlooms from another person who is or has been a licensee of a powerloom factory.
Two conditions which must exist before the mischief of the proviso is attracted are: (1) the manufacturer must have commenced production of cotton fabrics for the first time on or after April 1, 1961 and (2) the powerlooms on which he manufactures cotton fabrics must have been acquired by him from a person who is or has been a licensee of a powerloom factory.
The event which attracts the applicability of the proviso is that the manufacturer should have commenced production of cotton fabrics on these powerlooms for the first time on or after April 1, 1961.
If this condition is satisfied the proviso comes into play and withdraws the exemption which would otherwise have been available to the manufacturer under item 7.
[519H 520B, E] (3) The language and structure of the third proviso being identical with the language and structure of the proviso under item 7 of the notification dated 5th January, 1957 the same view must govern the interpretation of the third proviso.
[521 E] 515 The third proviso on its proper interpretation, enacts a substantive provision for payment of excise duty at the next higher rate in the cases therein specified and this substantive provision overrides the second proviso which exempts a manufacturer employing not more than four powerlooms and working not more than one shift from payment of excise duty in those cases which do not fall within the third proviso and where a case, is covered by the third proviso the second proviso would be inapplicable and the manufacturer would be liable to pay excise duty at the next higher rate.
[522 A B]
