A deed of adoption was executed by one M on August 10, 1944 stating that he had adopted the appellant.
A suit to challenge this deed was filed contending that M was not in a fit state of mind when he executed the deed.
The suit was dismissed by the Trial Court and this order was confirmed by the District Court.
In second appeal the High Court set aside the judgments of the Courts below and decreed the suit.
Earlier M had executed another deed of adoption in favour of the appellant, but the Registrar refused to register that deed on the ground that the executant appeared to him to be a lunatic.
The matter was remanded by the Mahakma Khas to the Registrar with a direction that the executant be recalled and the question decided afresh.
The Registrar thereupon examined the executant and finding him unable to understand the simplest questions put to him, and giving wholly incorrect answers to elementary questions like whom he had adopted, reaffirmed his pre remand view and refused to register the deed.
A Suit was then brought by the appellant on September 11, 1940 for the compulsory registration of the aforesaid deed of adoption.
A written statement was filed on behalf of M admitting the appellant 's claim that he was validly adopted.
The authority of that admission having been challenged, the High Court, in revision, examined the matter further and directed that an appropriate issue has been framed on the question.
After the remand, the Joint Kotwal passed an order on January 4, 1944 holding M was not of sound mind and was incapable of protecting his interest in the suit.
The High Court agreed with the findings of the Joint Kotwal.
On appeal by special leave, and dismissing the appeal, it was, ^ HELD: (1) Apart from the bald assertion that the appellant was taken in adoption, the deed does not mention the year, the date or the place of adoption.
It does not either mention the names of persons who were present at the time of adoption.
In fact there is no evidence whatsoever to show when and where the adoption took place and even whether the necessary ceremonies were performed.
[597 C D] (2) The real drift of the plaint is that M was not in a fit state of mind at the relevant time, that no adoption could have taken place in fact and that, therefore, the deed of adoption cannot confer on the appellant the rights of an adopted son.
[597 E] 595 (3) The argument that M was in a fit state of mind when he executed the deed cannot be accepted.
Indeed the halting evidence of the doctor, one of the witnesses, throw a cloud on the mental capacity of M and renders it improbable that he could perform or authorise the performance of the act of adoption or that he could have executed it with an understanding mind.
His mental faculties were evidently too enfeebled to enable him to enter into a transaction which in law has a religious cum spiritual significance and which, in a wordly way, affects valuable rights to property.
[597 F H] (4) The trial court and the District Court wholly ignored the weight of prepondering circumstances on the record and allowed their judgments to be influenced by inconsequential matters.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in re appreciating the evidence and coming to its own independent conclusion on the basis of that evidence.
[H] (5) The situation here was of an exceptional character, where evidence which was incapable of supporting more than one conclusion was considered as justifying a conclusion which no reasonable Tribunal could rationally reach.
This judgment will not be a charter for interference by the High Courts with findings of facts recorded by the Final Court of facts.
[598 B C]
