The L.I.C. (respondent No. 1) purchased a building at a court auction.
The appellant was inducted as a tenant by the prior owner of the premises.
The L.l.
C. gave notice under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act directing the appellant to vacate the premises.
As the appellant did not vacate the premises the L.I.C. filed a complaint with the Estate Officer, L.I.C. (respondent No. 2) under the provisions of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised occupants) Act 1971, who issued a notice to the appellant under section 4(1) of the Act to show cause why the appellant be not evicted.
Before the Estate Officer the appellant raised preliminary objections which related to th equestion of jurisdiction of the Estate Officer to proceed under the Premises Act.
The Estate Officer decided the question against him and the High Court confirmed the order.
In appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended: (1) The appellant could not be described as an 'unauthorised occupant ' within the meaning of section 2(2)(g) of the 1971 Act because he had entered into possession of the premises long before they were purchased by the L.I.C.; (2)(i).
The Premises Act of 1971 which had been given retrospective effect from the 16th September, 1958 should be construed as a law having been passed in 1958 and so construed the Rent Act (The Delhi Rent Control Act) passed in 1959 over rides the Premises Act; (ii) The Rent Act which is a special law would override the Premises Act and (iii) The intention of the Legislature in passing the Rent Act as seen from section 3(a) was merely to exclude from its operation only premises belonging to the Government and if the intention was to exclude other premises belonging to corporate bodies or Corporations then section 3(a) would have been differently worded.
Apart from the Rent Act section, Section 19 of the which is also a Special Act applying only to such places which are declared to be slums under the Act, would override the provisions of both the Rent Act and the Premises Act.
499 Dismissing the Appeal: ^ HELD: (1)(a) The appellant was undoubtedly in unauthorised occupation of the premises.
[503 D] (b) Section 2(2)(g) does not use the word 'possession ' or the words 'entry into possession ' at any point of time at all.
The section merely requires occupation of any public premises.
Entry into possession connotes one single terminus, viz., the point of time when a person enters into possession or occupies the property whereas occupation is a continuous process which starts right from the point of time when the person enters into possession or occupies the premises and continues until he leaves the premises.
[502 G H] In the instant case the lease was determined by the landlord by a notice under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act.
Therefore, there can be no doubt that the appellant was in unauthorised occupation of the premises once the lease was determined.
[503 Cl Raj Kumar Devendra Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab and Ors. ; distinguished.
2(i) The Premises Act was passed in 1971 and came into force on 23rd August, 1971 that is long after the Rent Act was passed in 1959.
The mere fact that by virtue of a fiction the Premises Act was given retrospective effect from 1958 will not alter the date when the Premises Act was actually passed, that is August 23, 1971.
The Premises Act being subsequent to the Rent Act would naturally prevail over and override the provisions of the Rent Act.
[503 G] (ii) The scope and the object of the Premises Act is quite different from that of the Rent Act.
The Rent Act is of much wider application, inasmuch as it applies to all private premises, which do not fall within the limited exceptions indicated in section 2 of the Premises Act.
The object of the Rent Act is to afford special protection to all the tenants or private landlords who are neither a Corporation nor Government or Corporate Bodies.
Even under the Rent Act, a special category has been carved out by section 25B which provides for special procedure for eviction to landlords who require premises for their personal necessity.
Section 25B, therefore, becomes a special law within the Rent Act.
Therefore, the Premises Act as compared to the Rent Act, is a Special Act and overrides the provisions of the Rent Act.
[505 B C] Sarwan Singh & Anr.
vs Kasturi Lal ; & Shri Ram Narain vs The Simla Banking & Industrial Co. Ltd. ; referred to.
(iii) once the Premises Act becomes a Special Act dealing with the premises belonging to the Central Government, Corporations and other statutory bodies, the Rent Act stands superseded.
[505 F] 3.
Section 19 of the Slums Act shows that it is in direct conflict with the Premises Act which expressly provides for the forum for evicting persons in unauthorised occupation of premises which fell in section 2 of the Premises Act The Premises Act, being subsequent to the Slums Act, as amended in 1964, and again being a special Act having a very limited sphere, must necessarily override the Slums Act.
[506 D]
