The detenu was taken under detention on 4th June, 1980 by an order of detention dated 27th May, 1980.
The order of detention recited that with a view to preventing him from smuggling goods and abetting the smuggling of goods it was necessary to detain him.
After detention he was also served on the same day, the grounds of detention.
The grounds of detention referred to several documents and statements including two tape recorded conversations.
The detenu addressed a letter dated 6th June, 1980 asking for all statements, documents and material to enable him to make an effective representation against his detention.
The detenu also sent a representation dated 9th June, 1980 to the Deputy Secretary once again requesting him to supply immediately the documents etc.
relied upon in the grounds of detention and to furnish the transcripts of the tapes as also to produce the original tapes, so that he could prove that the voice recorded on the tapes was not his.
The detenu addressed another representation dated 26th June, 1980 to the Chairman of the Advisory Board, the Central Government and the Deputy Secretary to the State Government praying for revocation of the order of detention, wherein he pointed out that by his letters dated 5th, 9th and 14th June, 1980, he had requested for the tapes to be supplied to enable him to prove that the voice recorded on the tapes was not his and that this request had not been complied with and in the circumstances the hearing of the case before the Advisory Board would be futile.
Meanwhile the Investigating Officer of the Customs Department was deputed to the Central Prison alongwith the tapes, and the tapes were played in the presence of the detenu and the Deputy Superintendent of the Central Prison on 8th July, 1980.
The representations of the detenu were examined by the government, who by their letter dated 15th July, 1980 rejected the representations and declined to revoke the order of detention.
In the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the mother of the detenu it was contended: (1) that the detaining authority did not serve on the detenu alongwith the grounds of detention, copies of the statements, documents and tapes referred to in the grounds of detention and it could not, therefore, be said that the grounds of detention were duly served 641 on the detenu as required by sub section (3) of section 3 of the COFEPOSA Act and clause (5) of Article 22 of the Constitution, and (2) that the detaining authority did not supply copies of such statements, documents and materials until 11th July, 1980 and on that day also, what were supplied were merely copies of the statements and documents and not copies of the tapes which were supplied only on 20th July, 1980 and that this delay was wholly unjustified and the detenu was thus denied the earliest opportunity of making an effective representation and consequently the continued detention of the detenu was illegal and void.
Allowing the writ petition.
^ HELD: 1.
There was unreasonable delay on the part of the detaining authority in supplying to the detenu copies of all the relevant documents, and therefore his continued detention was illegal and void.
The detenu was entitled to be released forthwith from detention.
[654 F] 2.
The power of Preventive detention can be justified only in the interest, of public security and order and it is tolerated in a free society only as a necessary evil.
The power to detain without trial is an extraordinary power constituting encroachment on personal liberty and it is the duty of the courts to ensure that his power is exercised strictly in accordance with the requirements of the Constitution and the law, the courts always leaning in favour of upholding personal liberty.
[646 F] 3.
The Constitution has while conceding the power of preventive detention, provided procedural safeguards with a view to protecting the citizen against arbitrary and unjustified invasion of personal liberty and the courts have always zealously tried to uphold and enforce these safeguards.
[646 H] 4.
If the detaining authority wants to preventively detain a smuggler it can certainly do so, but only in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the law and if there is a breach of any such provision, the rule of law requires that the detenu must be set at liberty, howsoever wicked or mischievous he may be.
[647 B] 5.
Whenever a petition for a writ of habeas corpus has come up before this Court, it has almost invariably issued a rule calling upon the detaining authority to justify the detention and when a rule is issued, it is incumbent on the detaining authority to satisfy the court that the detention of the petitioner is legal and in conformity with the mandatory provisions of the law authorising such detention.
[647 G] Naranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh AIR 1971 SC 2215, Sheikh Hanif Gudma Majhi & Kamal Saha vs State of West Bengal , Dulal Roy vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan & Ors.
; , Nazamuddin vs The State of West Bengal ; , Mohd. Alam vs State of West Bengal ; , Khudiram Das vs State of West Bengal & Ors. ; , referred to.
On a proper construction of clause (5) of Article 22 read with section 3, sub section (3) of the COFEPOSA Act, it is necessary for the valid continuance of detention that subject to clause (6) of Article 22 copies of the documents, statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds of detention should be furnished to the detenu alongwith the grounds of detention or in any event not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, not later than fifteen days from the date of detention.
If this requirement of clause (5) of Article 22 read with section 3, sub section (3) 642 is not satisfied, the continued detention of the detenu would be illegal and void.
[650 H 651B] 7.
The right to be supplied copies of the documents, statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds of detention without any undue delay flows directly as a necessary corollary from the right conferred on the detenu to be afforded the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the detention, because unless the former right is available, the latter cannot be meaningfully exercised.
This would seem to be clear on a fair interpretation of clause (5) of Article 22.
[652 E F] Ramachandra A. Kamat vs Union of India ; referred to.
In the instant case the detenu asked for copies of the documents, statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds of detention by his letters dated 6th June, 1980 and 9th June, 1980 and he also complained about non supply of such copies in his representation dated 26th June, 1980 but it was only on 11th July, 1980 that such copies were supplied to him and even then the copies of the tapes were not furnished until 20th July, 1980.
There was thus a delay of more than one month in supply of these copies, and the burden of satisfactorily explaining this delay and showing that there was sufficient cause for it was on the detaining authority.
The delay of 12 days i.e. from 12th June, 1980 until 24th June, 1980 has not been satisfactorily explained either in the affidavit of the Deputy Secretary to the State Government or in any affidavit filed by the Assistant Collector of Customs.
There was, therefore, an unreasonable delay on the part of the detaining authority in supplying to the detenu copies of the documents, statements etc.
relied upon in the grounds of detention.
The continued detention of the detenu was accordingly illegal and void and he was entitled to be released forthwith from detention.
[652 H 653B, G; 654 F] 8.
The representation of the detenu dated 9th June, 1980 was received by the Deputy Secretary on 14th June, 1980 while the representation dated 26th June, 1980 was received on 30th June, 1980 and no decision was taken on these representations of the detenu until 14th July, 1980.
There is no explanation at all for this delay in any of the affidavits filed on behalf of the detaining authority.
This is sufficient to invalidate the continued detention of the detenu.
[654 655 C, G] 9.
The Customs Department has not filed a charge sheet against the detenu for prosecuting him in respect of the incidents referred to in the grounds of detention even though more than six months have passed.
There should be no unreasonable delay on the part of the Customs authorities in completing the investigation of the cases against the detenu and prosecuting him in the criminal courts if the evidence gathered by them in the course of the investigation justifies such a course.
[656 B C]
