Under section 2(i)(L) (before it was amended in 1976) of the , an article of food is deemed to be adulterated "if the quality of purity of the article falls below the prescribed standard or its constituents are present in quantities which are in excess of the prescribed limits of variability".
On November 1, 1969, sample of gingelly oil was purchased by the Municipal Food Inspector from the shop of the respondents.
After completing the necessary formalities, the Food Inspector arranged to send one part of the sample to the Public Analyst for analysis.
The Public Analyst analysed the sample on November 11, 1969 and reported that it contained 5.1% of Free Fatty Acid as against the permissible limit of 3%.
On receipt of the report, the respondents were prosecuted for offences under Section 16(1)(a)(i) read with Section 7(i) and 2(i)(L) of the .
At the trial, in pursuance of the respondents request, another sample was got analysed on February 6, 1970 by the Director, Central Food Laboratory.
According to his report, the gingelly oil contained 6.2% of the Free Fatty Acid and was therefore, adulterated.
The District Magistrate observing that the Free Fatty Acid had increased from 5.1% to 6.2% between November 11, 1969 and February 6, 1970 and it was therefore, likely that the Free Fatty Acid content in the oil might have similarly increased between November 1, 1969 when the sample was taken and November 11, 1969 when the sample was analysed by the Public Analyst, held that it was not possible to say that the prosecution had established that on the date when the sample was taken the Free Fatty Acid content of the oil exceed 3% and acquitted the respondents.
The order of acquittal was confirmed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court, it was, ^ HELD:1 (i) The judgments of the District Magistrate and the High Court are set aside.
The second respondent is convicted under Section 16(1)(a)(i) and sentenced to pay a fine.
[780C] (ii) There was no justification for the conclusion of the District Magistrate and the High Court that the Free Fatty Acid content of the oil on the date when the sample was taken might have been less than 3% and therefore not adulterated.
[780B] 775 In the instant case, the Public Analyst report had been superseded by the certificate of the Director, Central Food Laboratory, and the latter certificate had become conclusive evidence of the facts mentioned in it.
The sample, must therefore be held, to be adulterated.
There was nothing in the evidence, nor had anything been shown from any scientific work which would suggest that the Free Fatty Acid content would so rapidly increase in the space of about three months.
If it was less than 3% on November 1, 1969 when the sample was taken it could not have increased to 6.2% by February 6, 1970 when the sample was analysed by the Central Food Laboratory.
[777H, 778D] 2.
Gingelly (Til or Sesame) oil is a semi drying oil.
It is only after Prolonged exposure to air and light that there may be some discernible chemical changes in gingelly (Til or sesame) oil.
[779G] New Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol.
13 pages 526 527 referred to.
