The respondent assessee was a partner in the partnership firms of M/s. Malabar Tile Works and M/s. Malabar Plywood Works and alongwith her there were other partners including her husband and minor daughter.
In her returns for the assessment year 1964 65 for which the relevant accounting year was the calendar year ending 31st December, 1963, the assessee filed a return of income omitting the amounts representing the shares of her husband and minor daughter in the partnership firms from her income.
The Income Tax Officer, however, brought the amounts, namely, Rs. 59,506 to tax and referred the case for taking action under section 271(1)(c) of the Act to the Assistant Appellate Commissioner who imposed a penalty of namely, Rs. 7,000 on the assessee for having concealed her income.
In appeal the Tribunal set aside the order and the High Court on reference affirmed the Tribunal 's order.
Hence the appeal by Revenue to this Court after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The assessee, in view of the fact that the prescribed form for filing of returns under section 139 of the Act, prior to 31st March, 1972, did not contain separate column to show "income arising to spouse/minor child or any other person referred to in Chapter V of the Act", and in view of the decision of three Judges Bench reported in SC could not be said to have concealed her income by not disclosing in the return filed by her the amounts representing the shares of her husband and minor daughter in the two partnership firms.
[788B] (2) The term "his income" for the purpose of section 271(1)(c) of the Act, is "his income" which the assessee is liable to disclose for the purposes of assessment and yet fails to do so.
The return of income under section 139(1) of the Act is required to be filed in order to enable the Revenue Authorities to make a proper assessment of tax on the assessee.
A fortiorari, it follows that the assessee must disclose in the return every item of income which is liable to be taxed in his hands under sections 4 & 5 of the Act.
[785B; F H] 782 (3) The definition of "total income" in section 2(45), no doubt refers to section 5 which lays down that all the income profits and gains accrued or arisen to the assessee or received by or on behalf of the assessee shall be liable to be included in his total income but this provision is subject to the other provisions of the Act and therefore if the income of any other person is declared by any provision of the Act to be includible in computing the total income of the assessee, such income would form part of the total income exigible to tax under section 4 of the Act.
section 64(1) is one such provision which provides for inclusion of the income of certain other persons in computing the total income of the assessee.
[785F H] Section 64(1) makes it clear that though the share of the spouse or minor child in the profits of a partnership firm in which the assessee is a partner is not the income of the assessee but is the income of such spouse or minor child it is liable to be included in computing the total income of the assessee and it would be assessable to tax in the hands of the assessee.
The total income of the assessee chargeable to tax would include the amounts representing the shares of the spouse and minor child in the profits of the partnership firm.
Obviously the words "his income" in section 139 sub section
(1) must include every item of income which goes to make up his total income assessable under the Act.
The amounts representing the shares of the spouse and minor child in the profits of the partnership firm would be part of "his income" for the purpose of assessment to tax and would have to be shown in the return of income filed by him.
[786B D] (4) It is true that the form of the return prescribed by Rule 12 of the Income Tax Rules, 1962 which was in force during the relevant assessment year did not contain any separate column for showing the income of the spouse and minor child liable to be included in the total income of the assessee, but it did contain a Note stating that if the income of any other person is includible in the total income of the assessee under the provisions, inter alia, of section 64, such income should also be shown in the return under the appropriate head.
This Note clearly required the assessee to show in the return under the appropriate head of income, namely, "profits and gains of business or profession" the amounts representing the shares of the husband and minor daughter of the assessee in the profits of the two partnership firms.
The assessee however failed to disclose these amounts in the return submitted by her and there was plainly and manifestly a breach of the obligation imposed by section 139 sub section
(1) requiring the assessee to furnish a return of her income in the prescribed form.
To accept the contention that despite the Note the assessee was still not liable to show in the return the amounts representing the shares of her husband and minor daughter in the two partnership firms would render the Note meaningless and futile and turn it into a dead letter 783 and that would be contrary to all recognised canons of construction.
The assessee was guilty of concealment of this item of income which plainly attracted the applicability of section 271 sub section
(1) clause (c).
[786G 787D] V.D.M.RM.M.RM.
Muthiah Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income Tax, , doubted
