The respondent Bank terminated the services of the appellants on the ground that they could not pass the prescribed tests for their permanent absorption in its service.
On reference the Labour Court held that the Bank 's action in terminating their services (except in the case of two workmen) was in violation of section 25F of the and, therefore, was invalid and inoperative.
The Labour Court, however, refused to order their reinstatement with full back wages on the ground that reinstatement would have the effect of equating them with workmen who had qualified for permanent absorption by passing the test; instead it directed payment of compensation of six months ' salary in addition to retrenchment compensation.
In Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala it was held by this Court that the discharge of the workman for the reason that she did not pass the test which would have enabled her to be confirmed was retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) and therefore the requirement of section 25F had to be complied with.
The workman in that case was directed to be reinstated with full back wages.
The workmen claimed that their case being identical with this case, they should be reinstated with full back wages.
The Bank on the other hand contended that non compliance with the requirements of section 25F did not render the termination of their service void ab initio but made it invalid and inoperative and that the Court had full discretion to direct payment of suitable compensation instead of ordering reinstatement with full back wages.
In respect of two of the seven appellants, however, it was conceded before the Labour Court that these two employees worked in the Bank for a few days more than 240 days during the preceding 12 months and since they had 790 not been in the Bank 's employment for one year, there was no violation of section 25F.
But this concession was questioned before this Court in appeal and it was contended that there was non compliance with the requirements of section 25F.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: [per Krishna Iyer and Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.
Pathak, J. concurring] The five retrenched workmen should be reinstated with full back wages.
When an order terminating the services of a workman is struck down it is as if that order had never been passed and it must ordinarily lead to reinstatement of the workman with full backwages.
In cases where it is impossible or wholly inequitable vis a vis the employer and the worker to direct reinstatement with full back wages, as for instance, where the industry has closed down or where the industry is in severe financial straits, for to order reinstatement in such a case would place an impossible burden on the employer or where the workman had secured better or an alternative employment elsewhere and so on, there is a vestige of discretion left in the court to make appropriate orders.
Occasional hardship may be caused to the employer; but more often than not, far greater hardship is certain to be caused to the workman if the relief is denied than to the employer if the relief is granted.
[795B E] In the instant case there is no special impediment in the way of awarding the relief of reinstatement with back wages.
The apprehension of the Labour Court that reinstatement with full back wages would put these workmen on a par with those who were qualified for permanent absorption by passing the prescribed test and that would create dissatisfaction amongst the latter is unfounded because firstly these workmen can never be on par with the others since reinstatement would not qualify them for permanent absorption but they would continue to be temporary liable to be retrenched.
Secondly there is nothing to show that their reinstatement would cause dissatisfaction to anyone nor even that it would place an undue burden on the employer.
[795F G] Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala (1980) Vol.
II LLJ 72, applied, Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa & Ors.
; , M/s. Avon Services Production Agencies (P) Ltd. vs Industrial Tribunal, Haryana and Ors. ; , M/s. Swadesamitran Limited, Madras vs Their Workmen ; 156 and State Bank of India vs Shri N. Sundara Money ; @ 166 referred to.
To attempt to discern a distinction between "void ab initio" and "invalid and inoperative", even if it be possible to discover some razor 's edge distinction would be an unfruitful task because semantic luxuries are misplaced in the interpretation of 'bread and butter ' statutes.
Where legislation is designed to give relief against certain kinds of mischief, the Court is not to make inroads by making etymological excursions.
Whatever expression is used the workman and the employer primarily are concerned with the consequence of striking down the order of termination of the services of the workman.
[794H] The two other appellants were in much the same position as the five others.
The concession made before the Labour Court was apparently based on the decision of this Court in Sur Enamel & Stamping Works (P) Ltd. vs Their 791 Workmen ; which was a case before section 25B was recast by Act 36 of 1964.
The amendment Act 36 of 1964 has brought about a change in the law by repealing section 2(eee) (defining continuous service) and adding section 25B(2) which now begins with "where a workman is not in continuous service. . for a period of one year".
These changes are designed to provide that a workman who had actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of 12 months shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service for a period of one year.
It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 12 months.
[798F G] Pathak, J. concurring: The limited question for examination is whether the appellants should have been awarded reinstatement with back wages instead of the curtailed relief granted by the Labour Court.
The respondent bank having accepted that the termination of the services of the workmen amounted to retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) it is not necessary to invoke the rule laid down by this Court in Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala for the interpretation of section 2(oo).
[799G E] Ordinarily a workman who has been retrenched in contravention of the law is entitled to reinstatement with full back wages and that principle yields only where the justice of the case in the light of the particular facts indicates the desirability of a different relief.
It has not been shown in this case why the ordinary rule should not be applied.
[799 G H] Having regard to the simultaneous amendments introduced in the by Act 36 of 1964 it is no longer necessary for a workman to show that he has been in employment during a preceding period of twelve calendar months in order to qualify within the terms of section 25B.
It is sufficient for the purpose of section 25B(2)(a)(ii) that he has actually worked for not less than 240 days during the preceding period of 12 calendar months.
[800A C] Sur Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd. vs Their Workmen ; , 622 3, held inapplicable.
