The Karnataka Tax on Entry of Goods Into Local Areas for Consumption, Use or Sale therein Act 1979 was enacted by the State Legislature to levy tax on certain select goods at the time of their entry into a local area.
This tax was devised to off set the short fall in the funds of municipal and other local bodies by reason of the abolition of octroi which by experience was found to impede the development of trade and commerce.
Section 3 of the impugned Act provides that the tax shall be levied on entry of the scheduled goods into a local area for consumption, use or sale therein at such rate as may be specified by the State Government and different rates may be specified for different local areas.
By a notification issued under section 3 of the Act the State Government specified 27 local areas in the State which could levy the tax on scheduled goods and specified the rate of tax for each such local area therein.
The Scheduled goods are all varieties of textile; tobacco, sugar and the like.
Upholding the two principal contentions, among others, raised by the appellants in their writ petitions before the High Court that (i) section 3 does not empower the State Government to apply the provisions of the Act to such local areas only and to exclude other local areas and (ii) the levy of tax on all dealers irrespective of the value of scheduled goods brought by them into a local area without exempting petty dealers imposes an unreasonable restriction on the right to carry articles, the High Court struck down the Act as invalid.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: The express power of choosing and specifying different rates subject to maximum for different local areas is conferred on the State Government not by the expression 'such rate ' but by the expression 'rates ' with the adjectival clause 'different rates may be specified for different local areas '.
It was, therefore, not necessary to qualify the expression 'such rate ' again by the expression 'as may be specified by the State Government ' because that 824 is covered by the express power conferred by the expression 'different rates may be specified for different local areas '.
The use of article 'a ' before 'local area ' signifies not every local area but any local area.
[831C D] In re.
Sanders; ex parte Serqueant, Law Journal , The Queen vs Justices of Durham, [1895] 1 Q.B. 801, Coast Brick & Tile Works Ltd. & Ors.
vs Prem Chand Raichand & Anr.
[1967] 1 Appeal Cases 192 referred to.
Although, the taxing event is entry of scheduled goods in a local area, section 3 empowers the State Government to specify different rates of tax in respect of different scheduled goods for different local areas.
A local area means an area in a city governed by the Karnataka Municipalities Act or a municipal corporation governed by the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act.
The local areas vary immensely both in dimension, population, industrial growth, and the scale and kind of municipal services rendered by them.
If the argument that 'a local area ' should be interpreted to mean 'every local area ' is accepted it would be obligatory on the State Government to levy tax on entry of scheduled goods in every local area.
It would be unjust and inequitable to levy tax on entry of goods at the same rates for a big municipal corporation and a small municipal area, each of which does not stand comparison with the other.
The choice to select local areas is a necessary concomitant of a choice to select the rates which is a power conferred on the State Government.
The purpose underlying the statute, namely, to provide financial assistance to the municipalities would be better effectuated if the tax realised considerably outweighs the administrative cost in collection.
The High Court fell into an error because it adopted a literal, grammatical construction and overlooked the underlying object of the Act and the historical background in levying the tax.
[831C G; 832C E] There is no force in the contention that if the State Government is granted a choice in the matter of selection of local areas ipso facto the statute would be unconstitutional as being violative of Article 14.
It is a well accepted principle of constitutional law that there is always a presumption of constitutionality of a statute.
In the matter of taxing statutes the legislature which is competent to levy a tax, has full freedom to determine the articles, the manner and the rate of tax.
[832G H; 834E] Khyerbari Tea Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs The State of Assam ; and East India Tobacco Co. vs State of Andhra Pradesh ; , 409 referred to.
The High Court was wrong in its view that section 3 did not permit the State Government to pick and choose the local areas for the levy of tax.
In selecting the local areas and the rates of tax to be levied on different scheduled goods the State has adopted the criterion of population of a local area which undeniably is a reasonable criterion because the yield of the tax would be directly proportionate to the consumption of the goods in the local areas and the consumption of goods is directly related to the population within the local area.
[835F G] Non exemption of petty dealers from the operation of the Act does not lead to the conclusion that the impugned legislation constituted an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the petty dealers to carry on their trade or business.
If petty dealers were to be exempt, the criterion of turnover in the scheduled goods for classifying the petty dealers will have to be kept high in which event the big registered dealers could conveniently bring the scheduled goods into local areas in the name of petty dealers.
The taxing 825 event being entry of scheduled goods in a local area at the instance of a dealer, the volume or quantum of business of the dealer is not at all relevant.
Unlike under the old system of octroi where every importer was taxed, under the Act only a dealer, dealing in scheduled goods is required to pay the tax.
[838B C] If a State tax law accords identical treatment in the matter of levy and collection of taxes on the goods manufactured within the State and identical goods imported from outside the State, article 304(a) would be complied with.
There is an underlying assumption in Article 304(a) that such a tax when levied within the constraints of Article 304(a) would not be violative of Article 301 and the State Legislature has the power to levy such tax.
[841E] In the instant case the tax is non discriminatory in that it does not discriminate between scheduled goods manufactured within the State and those imported from outside the State.
A minor discrimination between two types of goods if any is hardly relevant for the purposes of Article 304(a).
Therefore, the impugned tax satisfies the requirements of Article 304(a).
[841F G] There is no evidence to show that the burden of tax would be so heavy as to constitute an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of trade and commerce.
Although, in theory the tax leviable is not a single point tax and becomes leviable at every point whenever the goods are taken from one local area to another and then on to yet another no attempt was made to substantiate how the goods are so successively moved because if they are taken for consumption or use in one place, there is no question of taking them from that local area to another local area and so on.
[842D G] Even if the tax, to some extent, imposes an economic impediment to the activity taxed that by itself is not sufficient to stigmatise the levy as unreasonable or not in public interest.
What is sought to be done is to impose a modest levy on certain goods at the time of their entry into a local area by removing the obnoxious features of octroi.
The tax is not intended to augment the finance of the local bodies but to compensate them for loss suffered by the abolition of the octroi.
[844A B] The requirements of the proviso to Article 304(b) are satisfied because the President accorded sanction to the impugned Act.
[844F]
