Allowing the appeal by special leave and answering against the assessee, the Court.
^ HELD: Per Bhagwati,J. (Concurring with Sen and Venkataramiah, JJ.) (1) The expression "Registered dealer" is used in section 8 (ii) in its definitional sense to mean a dealer registered under section 22 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act and it does not include a dealer under the Central Sales Tax Act.
[875A] (2) The object of section 8 is to prevent a multiple point taxation on goods specified in Schedule C and for imposition of single point tax on them under the Act.
If a dealer is registered only under the Central Act and not under the Bombay Act, it would mean that he is not liable to pay tax under the Bombay Act and in that event, even if he has sold goods specified in Schedule 'C ', to a registered dealer under an intra State sale, no tax would be payable by him on such sale and if the purchasing dealer is also to be exempt from tax in respect of re sale effected by him, the result would be that the goods would escape tax altogether and not suffer even single point tax.
That is not the intendment of the legislature in enacting section 8(ii); on the contrary it would frustrate the very object of that section.
The situation would be the same even where the sale effected by the dealer registered under the Central Act is an inter State sale.
That sale would undoubtedly be taxable under the Central Act but there is no reason why the Gujarat State would give exemption to re sale of goods in respect of which, at the time of the first sale tax has been levied under the Central Act of which the benefit has gone to another State.
Moreover, in such a case, the first sale being an inter State sale, would be taxable at a fixed concessional rate under section 8(1)(a) or at the rate of 7% or at a rate equal to or twice the rate applicable to the sale of such goods in the State of the selling dealer, under clause (a) or (b) of sub section (2) of section 8 of the Central Act and if that be so, it is difficult to understand why the Legislature should have insisted, for attracting the applicability of section 8(ii), that the goods re sold by the dealer should at the time of their first sale be goods specified in Schedule 'C '.
[873F G, 874C G] 871 (3) Sections 4 and 8(ii) of the Bombay Act are distinct and independent provisions operating on totally different areas.
The legal fiction in sub section (1) of section (4) is created for a specific purpose and it is limited by the terms of sub section (2) of section 4 and it cannot be projected in section 8(ii).
If a dealer is not registered under the Bombay Act, it could only be on the basis that he is not liable to pay tax under the Bombay Act, but even so, section 4 sub section (1) provides that if he is registered under the Central Act, he would be liable to pay tax under the Bombay Act in respect of the transactions of sale set out in that section.
This liability arises despite the fact that the dealer, not being liable to pay tax under section 3 of the Bombay Act, is not registered under that Act.
The dealer not being registered under the Bombay Act, the machinery of the Bombay Act would not of itself apply for the recovery of tax from him.
Section 4 sub section 2, therefore, enacts that every dealer who is liable to pay tax under sub section (1) shall, for the purpose of sections 32 to 38 and 46 to 48 be deemed to be a registered dealer.
Sections 32 to 38 and 46 to 48 are machinery sections and it is for the purpose of making the machinery of these sections applicable for recovery of the tax imposed on the dealer under sub section (1) of section 4 that an artificial fiction is created deeming the dealer to be a registered dealer, that is, a dealer registered under section 22 of the Bombay Act.
Per Sen, J. (On behalf of himself and Venkataramiah, J.).
(1) It is a well settled principle that when a word or phrase has been defined in the interpretation clause, prima facie that definition governs whenever that word or phrase is used in the body of the statute.
But where the context makes the definition clause inapplicable, a defined word when used in the body of the statute may have to be given a meaning different from that contained in the interpretation clause; all definitions given in an interpretation clause, are, therefore, normally, enacted subject to the usual qualification "unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context", or "unless the context otherwise requires".
Even in the absence of an express qualification to that effect such a qualification is always implied.
The expression "registered dealer" having been defined in section 2(25) of the Bombay Act as having a particular meaning, that is, a dealer registered under section 22 of the Act, it is that meaning alone which must be given to it in interpreting clause (ii) of section 8 of the Bombay Act unless there is anything repugnant to the context [880B D] There being no obscurity in the language of clause (ii) of section 8 of the Bombay Act, it is clear that no deduction is claimable in respect of re sales of goods purchased from a dealer registered under the Central Act, who is not a registered dealer within the meaning of section 2(25) of the Act.
It follows that the expression "registered dealer" in clause (ii) of section 8 of the Act must bear the meaning of that expression as given in section 2(25) of the Act.
If the meaning of the section is plain it is to be applied whatever the result, [879H 880A] (2) The meaning of a word or expression defined may have to be departed from on account of the subject or context in which the word had been used and that will be giving effect to the opening sentence in definition section, namely, "unless the context otherwise requires".
In view of this qualification, the Court has not only to look at the words but also to look at the context, the collocation and the object of such words relating to such matter and interpret the meaning intended to be conveyed by the use of the words in a particular section.
But where there is no obscurity in the language of the section, 872 there is no scope for the application of the rule ex visceribus actus.
This rule is never allowed to alter the meaning of what is of itself clear and explicit.
[881E G] Bywater vs Brandling, ; Rein vs Lane, and Jobbins vs Middlesex County Council, Craies, , held inapplicable.
(3) The provisions of section 4, sub section (3) of section 7 and clause (ii) of section 8 of the Bombay Act operate in three different fields.
While section 4 of the Act provides that a registered dealer under the Central Act who may not be liable to pay tax under section 3 of the Act may nevertheless in certain contingencies be liable to pay tax, sub section (3) of section 7 provides for the levy of a single point tax on sale in the course of inter State trade and commerce of declared goods, to bring the Act in conformity with clause (a) of section 15 of the Central Act.
The object and purpose of enacting the provisions of section 8 are entirely different, namely, to lay down the mode of computation of the turnover of sales or purchases of a registered dealer for the imposition of a tax.
Clause (ii) of section 8 allows for deduction of re sale from the turnover of such registered dealer when the goods are purchased from a registered dealer, that is, a dealer registered under section 22 of the Act.
In effect, section 8 deals with transactions of sale or purchase taking place within the State.
The disallowance of deduction claimed by the assessee under clause (ii) of section 8 of the Act, therefore, would not result in double taxation of the same goods.
[881H 882C, 883C] While it is true that the Baroda dealer being a dealer registered under section 7 of the Central Sales Tax Act, in the instant case, was in certain contingencies, liable to pay tax under section 4 of the Act, but that circumstance by itself would not make him a "registered dealer" within the meaning of section 2(25) of the Act.
If the legislature really intended that the expression "registered dealer" in clause (ii) of section 8 should take within its ambit a dealer registered under the Central Sales Tax Act, upon whom liability to pay sales tax is imposed by section 4 of the Bombay Act, it would have said so in the clear words section (2) of section 4.
The legal fiction in sub section
(2) of section 4 is created for a limited purpose, namely, to make section 4 a self contained code which not only imposes a charge of tax and lays down the rate structure, but also provides the machinery for assessment and recovery of tax and penalty.
The legal fiction contained in sub section
(2) of section 4 of the Act cannot be stretched any further.
[883D E, G]
