An exparte order holding the appellant guilty of certain offences under the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act and imposing penalty for such contravention was passed by the Director of Enforcement.
On completion of 45 days of the issue of the order within which period the penalty was required to be paid, a complaint was lodged with the Judicial Magistrate, 1st class alleging that even though a copy of the impugned order had been served on the appellant, he failed to deposit the penalty and, that, therefore, he was liable to be punished under section 23F of the Act.
Accepting the appellant 's plea that no copy of the impugned order having been served on him there was no ground to hold him guilty of contravention of section 23F the Magistrate acquitted him.
The Magistrate, at the same time, rejected the complainant 's contention that even assuming that the impugned order had not been received by the appellant he had come to know of it on the date he appeared before the Magistrate and when the charge had been framed against him and his failure to pay the penalty despite this knowledge was enough to attract the provisions of section 23F.
He held that these allegations were stated neither in the complaint nor in the charge and, therefore, the appellant could not be convicted.
Although the High Court, on appeal, upheld the finding of the Magistrate that the impugned order had not been served on the appellant it was of the view that since the appellant had come to know about the order then he appeared before the Magistrate but still had not paid the penalty within a reasonable time thereafter, he was liable to be punished under section 23F of the Act.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: The appellant had not committed any offence punishable under section 23F of the Act.
[993G] When the law lays down that non compliance with an order would expose The person against whom it is made to criminal liability, It is reasonable to hold that in the absence of proof of knowledge of the order no penal action H can be taken against him for non compliance with that order.
The information or knowledge which he may gather about such order in the course of criminal 988 proceedings instituted for non compliance with it cannot be a substitute for the knowledge of the order, which should ordinarily precede the institution of such proceedings.
The High Court was, therefore, in error in the circumstances of the case in setting aside the order of acquittal passed by the Magistrate and in finding the appellant guilty of the offence complained of.
[992H] The rules framed under the Act set out the procedure to be followed by the Director in holding an enquiry under section 23D of the Act.
Although, there is no rule requiring a person against whom an order is made to appear before the Director on the date of pronouncement of his order, rule 5 of the Rules requires that a copy of the order passed under rule 3(7) should be supplied free of charge to the person against whom the order is made.
In the absence of a provision requiring the service of a notice on such a person informing him that the order would be pronounced on a specified future date, the only date on which the order can be deemed to have been effectively made is the date on which he gets knowledge of the order either by supply of a copy of the order or by any other means.
The period of limitation to appeal cannot be computed from a date earlier than the date on which the aggrieved party has knowledge of the order.
In the absence of proof of knowledge of the order either by supply of its copy or in any other manner the person failing to pay the penalty cannot be proceeded against under section 23F. [991H, 992F] In the instant case the Magistrate and the High Court refused to accept the plea of the Director that a copy of the impugned order had been served on the appellant.
Neither on the date of the complaint nor on the date on which process was issued by the Magistrate had the appellant knowledge of the order imposing the penalty; nor did the charge state that the impugned order had been communicated to him and that he was being tried for non compliance with that order.
