The appellant a widow and defendants nos.
1 and 2 were her husband 's cousins.
They were in joint possession of the plots in dispute, being co bhumidars.
The parties had a joint Khewat upto 1359 Fasli.
The plaintiff filed a suit for joint possession over her share contending that she was living with her sons at Lucknow and defendants were looking after the agricultural land and groves and that she was given her share by the defendant from time to time.
She also went to the village from time to time and got her share.
She alleged that the defendants assured her that her share would be properly looked after and protected by them.
The plaintiff further alleged that it was only 3 years before the suit that she came to know that her name had been deleted from the Khewat, and the entire property was mutated in the consolidation of holding proceedings, in the name of defendants of which she was never informed.
The defendants contested the suit on the grounds that, they were in separate occupation of the land in dispute, the plots in dispute were occupied by Adhivasi who acquired the Sirdar rights under the U. P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950, the plaintiff lost her title by operation of law, and denied the allegation of fraud.
The trial court dismissed the suit but on appeal the District Judge decreed the suit for joint possession in favour of the plaintiff in respect of two plots of the land.
The High Court accepted the appeal of the defendants.
Allowing the appeal this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The grounds on which the High Court reversed the decision of the District Judge are not sustainable in law and the judgment of the High Court cannot be allowed to stand.
[869F] 2.
Another fact which emerges from the admitted position is that if defendants 1 and 2 were co bhumidhars with the plaintiff in the Khewat and had also sirdari tenants under them, how could the sirdari tenants occupy the land of one of the co sharers leaving the defendants alone so that the plots were reallotted to them.
[867C] 864 3.
It is well settled that mere non participation in the rent and profits of the land of a co sharer does not amount to an ouster so as to give title by adverse possession to the other co sharer in possession.
Even if this fact be admitted, then the legal position would be that defendants nos.
1 and 2 being co sharers of the plaintiff, would become constructive trustees on behalf of the plaintiff and the right of the plaintiff would be deemed to be protected by the trustees.
[867D] In the instant case it is manifest that the position of the defendants apart, from being in the nature of constructive trustees, would be in law the possession of the plaintiff.
[867E] 4.(i) The finding of the District Judge that a planned fraud was made to drop the appellant 's name from the revenue records was a clear finding of fact and even if it was wrong (though it is absolutely correct) it was not open to the High Court to interfere with the finding of fact in second appeal.
[868B] 4.(ii) The High Court proceeded on the basis that there was nothing to show that any fraud was practised upon the consolidation authorities so as to make the order a nullity.
The High Court here completely misunderstood the case made out by the plaintiff.
[868G] 5.
The finding of fact of the District Judge that there was no evidence on the record to prove that the plaintiff was not given any share out of the produce and, therefore, the conclusion that the plaintiff should be deemed to be ousted from possession, was binding in second appeal.
[868C D] 6.
The High Court committed an error of record because the clear evidence of the appellant is to the effect that she was not at all informed about the consolidation proceedings and was assured by the defendants that they would take proper care of her share in any proceedings that may be instituted.
[868F] 7.
It is well settled that unless there is an express provision in the statute barring a suit on the basis of title, the courts will not easily infer a bar of suit to establish the title of the parties.
[869B] Suba Singh vs Mahendra Singh and Ors.
A.I.R. 1974 section C. 1657 referred to.
