The Central Secretariat Service (Amendment) Rules 1979 which inserted sub rule (2a) below sub rule (2) of Rule 12 of the Rules provided for the holding of a limited departmental competitive examination, including a statement of the conditions of eligibility and indicating how the selection would take place on such examination.
The next higher category in the Central Secretariat Service above the Section officers ' Grade consists of Grade I posts.
Recruitment to the Grade I posts are made under Rule 12 of the Central Secretariat Service Rules.
For the purpose of such promotion a select list is prepared.
Pursuant to an office Memorandum issued by the Department on 20th July, 1974, 15%, and 7%, of the promotion posts stand reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes candidates respectively.
The petitioners were permanent Section officers in the Central Secretariat Service and officiating as Under Secretaries in different Ministries.
They alongwith several other officials were included in the field of selection for the purpose of drawing up the select list for the year 1977 for promotion to Grade I posts.
Twenty seven vacancies reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, remained unfilled because no candidate belonging to those categories was found suitable.
For the purpose of filling those reserved vacancies, the Government of India decided to hold a limited departmental competitive examination confined to members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The petitioners argued that (i) the reservation of vacancies for members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by the office Memorandum dated 20th July, 1974 was invalid (ii) the newly enacted sub rule (2a) of Rule 12, in the Central Secretariat Service Rules and the related regulations were invalid and the rule operated prospectively only and could not affect the 27 vacancies to be filled in the select list of 1977.
The Respondents took a preliminary objection that it was not a contention raised in the writ petitions and should not be allowed to be raised for the first time by way of oral submission.
Dismissing the petition.
^ HELD: 1.
The entire scope of the petitions is limited to challenging the validity and application of the Central Secretariat Service (Amendment) Rules, 1979 and the consequent regulations for holding a limited departmental competitive examination.
No relief has been sought for quashing the office Memorandum dated 20th July, 1974.
No ground has been taken in the writ petitions assailing the validity of the office Memorandum.
The Courts should 1185 ordinarily insist on the parties being confined to their specific written pleadings and should not be permitted to deviate from them by way of modification or supplementation except through the well known process of formally applying for amendment.
It is not that justice should be available to only those who approach the court confined in a straight jacket; but there is a procedure known to the law, and long established by codified practice and good reason, for seeking amendment of the pleadings.
[1189D F] If undue laxity and a too easy informality is permitted to enter the proceedings of a court, it will not be long before a contemptuous familiarity assails its institutional dignity and ushers in chaos and confusion undermining its effectiveness.
[1189 F G] Oral submission raising new points for the first time tend to do grave injury to a contesting party by depriving it of the opportunity, to which the principles of natural justice held it entitled, of adequately preparing its response.
[1189G H] Whether or not reserved vacancies should be dereserved is a matter falling primarily within the administrative discretion of the Government.
There is no right in candidates seeking to fill vacancies belonging to the general category to insist on dereservation of reserved vacancies so long as it is possible in law to fill the reserved vacancies.
If at all, a claim in that behalf can arise only if no valid arrangement can be made for filling the reserved vacancies and dereservation is called for by reason of the prohibition, in clause (v) of paragraph 2 of the office memorandum dated 20th July, 1974, against the carry forward of reservations from year to year in the event of an adequate number of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates not being available in any particular year.
Before reaching this extremity, the Government acts wholly within its power in adopting an alternative arrangement for filling the reserved vacancies.
Dereservation as a process should be resorted to only when it is not reasonably possible, within the contemplation of law, to fill the reserved vacancies.
The process of dereservation would otherwise be antagonistic to the principle embodied in Article 16(4) and Article 46 of the Constitution.
[1190G F] 3.
Once a decision has been taken to reserve vacancies for a backward class of citizens, the programming effected to that end should not be disturbed unless the avenues for fulfilling it have been explored and have failed.
It is only reasonable that the Government should dereserve the vacancies in view of the prohibition against carrying them forward to the next year.
[1190 G H, 1191B] 4.
The question of holding the examination arises only, as sub rule (2a) of rule 12 declares that when the reserved vacancies cannot be filled because eligible officers from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are not available through the original process.
Resort to the further process arises because of the constitutional mandate in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes because reserved vacancies must be filled if that is possible.
It has not been shown that the general category vacancies have remained unfilled for want of suitable candidates.
No need has arisen of being compelled to resort to a further process of selection in regard to such vacancies.
There is no requirement in law that the select list pertaining to a particular year must be finalized within that year.
[1191 E G, 1192 B] It is open to the Government to complete the process of selection and finalise it after the expiry of that year.
It seems that when the Government found that suitable candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 1186 were not available for inclusion in the field of selection, it decided to consider the advisability of adopting some other mode of filling the reserved vacancies.
The select list for 1977, which included already ninety one names of officers appointed to the general category vacancies, was held in abeyance for the purpose of filling the twenty seven reserved vacancies.
After discussion with the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission and consideration of the alternatives before it the Government decided on holding a limited departmental competitive examination.
As long as the select list was not declared final, no officer could claim any right.
[1192B E] 6.
It is now well accepted, and has been affirmed by successive decisions of this Court, that relaxed eligibility criteria would be justified in the case of candidates of backward classes.
The principle finds expression also in the original rule 12 of the Central Secretariat Service Rules.
The record indicates that the lower eligibility standard was decided on after consultation with the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission.
[1192 GH, 1193A] General Manager, Southern Railway vs Rangachari, ; M. R. Balaji vs State of Mysore [1963] Supply.
1 S.C.R. 434 State of Kerala vs N. M. Thomas. , affirmed.
