Dismissing the appeal by special leave, the Court ^ HELD: (1) A bare reading of sections 68A to contained in Chapter IV A, which was added to the Act by Central Act 100 of 1956, makes it clear that they provide for nationalisation of road transport services.
However, such nationalisation, in view of the provisions of section 68C, is not nationalisation for nationalisation 's sake but nationalisation with a view to the achievement of certain specified objects.
Unless a scheme conforms to the two conditions referred to in section 68C, namely, (a) the S.T.U. is competent to prepare and publish a scheme under section 68C only after it has formed the opinion that it is necessary in the public interest that road transport services covered by the scheme should be run and operated by itself, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons or otherwise; and (b) the necessity for the road transport services to be run and operated by the S.T.U. must flow, in its opinion, from the purpose of providing ar.
efficient, adequate, economical and properly coordinated road transport service, it will fall outside the ambit of section 68C. [1012A, 1013H, 1014A C] Section 68D gives the right to certain persons, associations and authorities to file objections to a scheme published under section 68C within the specified period of thirty days of its publication and also lays down the procedure for the hearing and disposal of such objections by the State Government.
The procedure provided in section 68D is designed to (a) enable parties affected by the scheme to point out flaws therein; (b) enable the State Government to find out which flaws, if any, the scheme suffers from, and (c) enable the State Government either to remedy the flaws by a suitable modification of the scheme or to rescind the scheme altogether.
Under section 68(2), every objector or his representatives and the representatives of the S.T.U. have to be given an opportunity of being heard in the matter and it is only thereafter that the State Government has to exercise its power to approve or modify the scheme, which power includes the power not to approve the scheme at all and to drop it in its entirety.
[1014D F] Malik Ram vs State of Rajasthan, ; at 981, followed.
1006 Section 68D does not specify the type of objections envisaged by it but then their purpose being to point out flaws in the scheme they must be confined to the matters covered by section 68C.
If the opinion forming the basis of the scheme does not suffer from errors such as may render it abnoxious to the dictates of section 68C and on the other hand, conforms to the conditions laid down in that section, the scheme would be unobjectionable.
Objections may thus be made to show: (a) that it is not necessary in the public interest for the concerned road transport services to be operated by the S.T.U.; (b) that it is not necessary in the public interest that such services be taken over by the S.T.U. to the complete exclusion (if such exclusion is envisaged by the scheme) of other persons and that their partial exclusion would suffice; (c) that it is not necessary in the public interest that such services shall be taken over by the S.T.U. even to the partial exclusion of others; (d) that the scheme is not calculated to provide an efficient road transport service; (e) that the scheme would not provide an adequate road transport service; (f) that the road transport service envisaged by the scheme would not be economical; or (g) that the road transport service provided for by the scheme would suffer from lack of proper coordination.
[1014H, 1015A E] Objections falling outside these seven categories would not be admissible inasmuch as they would not have anything to do with any of the conditions which a scheme must satisfy in order to be covered by section 68C. [1015E F] 2.
In order to find out if the scheme fulfils the requirements of section 68C a comparison of the attributes of the two services, such as quality, capacity, financial implications and coordination would certainly fall within the scope of the inquiry to be conducted by the State Government, although a comparison would not be permissible for the sole purpose of finding out whether the private operators should be given a preference over the State Transport Undertaking.
If such a comparison as held to be permissible is ruled out, the result would be to shut out from the enquiry held by the State Government under section 68D most of the material relevant for determination of the validity of the scheme a result contemplated neither by section 68D nor by the decision of this Court in ; [1018A C] Objections calculated to show that a scheme does not provide a road transport service which can be considered efficient, adequate.
economical o} properly coordinated would certainly lie; and the adjectives "efficient", "adequate", "economical" and "properly coordinated are not absolute but more or less comparative terms.
[1017E F1].
Capital Multi Purpose Co operative Society, Bhopal and others vs The State of Madhya Pradesh and others; , , explained.
Objections of a "personal" nature may be of two types.
(i) those challenging the scheme on the ground that it harms an existing operator and, (ii) those which indicate the details of the services afforded by an existing operator for the purpose of showing that service envisaged by the scheme would in comparison not be efficient, adequate, etc.
Objections of the second type would be admissible, while those of the first type, would be wholly irrelevant to the determination of the validity of the scheme in view of the postulates of section 68C and would, therefore, be inadmissible.
[1018E G] Gullapalli Nageswara Rao and others vs Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation and Another, [1959] Suppl.
1 S.C.R. 319, distinguished.
1007 4.
It is true that the State Government was acting in the discharge of its quasi judicial functions and it could devise its own procedure (in the absence of express provisions to the contrary) so that its functions could be effectively discharged.
Further, when the statute gives the power to the State Government to afford to the objectors a reasonable opportunity of being heard and to take evidence, oral as well as documentary, in support of their objections, the power to send letters of request to witnesses to appear and give evidence or to produce documents is inherent in the situation and needs no statutory sanction, although the power to enforce their attendance or compel them to produce documents is lacking on account of absence of conferment thereof by a statute.
[1021D F] Nehru Motor Transport Co operative Society Limited vs The State of Rajasthan, [1964] 1 S.C.R. 220, followed.
Sub rule (5) of rule 5 of Uttar Pradesh State Transport Services (Development) Rules, 1958 serves a salutary purpose and, that is, that the inquiring authority may shut out all evidence which is sought to be brought on the record but which is either irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible.
[1022G H, 1023A] 6.
In the instant case, no right of the appellants can be said to be infringed when their applications for summoning witnesses and production of documents were rejected by the State Government and the rejection is not illegal.
[1022E F] Capital Multi Purpose Co operative Society, Bhopal and Others vs The State of Madhya Pradesh and Others, ; ; applied.
