In a letter addressed to one of the Judges of this Court (V. R. Krishna Iyer, J.) the petitioner complained that he had been illegally detained under section 110, Cr. P. C.
In response to this Court 's notice the Superintendent of Sub Jail stated that the petitioner was "a well known habitual prisoner" of the Kerala State and was known as "thief Gopalan".
In his reply the detenu stated that being unable to see or hear because of his extreme old age of 71 years he was staying in his house in his native place and that one night a policeman took him from his house in a van to the police station saying that he had to inquire something from him and after putting him in the lock up for 10 days produced him before the Court as a person having been arrested the previous night.
He further stated that the charge against him was that on the night patrol one night a policeman found him hiding in a verandah of a shop and that on being asked his name and address he gave one name first and another name a little later and that on inquiry it was found that he was an ex criminal not to be let free.
Allowing the petition.
^ HELD: In the interests of justice proceedings against the petitioner must be dropped.
Section 110 cannot be permitted to pick up the homeless and the have nots as it did under British subjection because today to be poor is not a crime in this country.
[1274F] Article 21 insists that no man shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established by law.
In Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 1 SCC 248 this Court in clearest terms strengthened the rule of law vis a vis the personal liberty by insisting on the procedure contemplated by article 21 having to be fair and reasonable not vagarious, vague and arbitrary.
[1274G] The constitutional survival of section 110 depends on its obedience to article 21.
Words of wide import, vague amplitude and far too generalised to be safe in the hands of the Police cannot be constitutionalised in the context of article 21 unless read down to be as a fair and reasonable legislation with reverence for human rights.
A glance at section 110 shows that only a narrow signification can be attached to the words in clauses (a) to (g) namely "by habit a robber", "by habit a receiver of stolen property", "habitually protects or harbours thieves", "habitually commits or attempts to commit or abets the commission of . " "is so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community '.
Expressions like these cannot be flung in the face of a man with laxity of semantics.
The Court must insist on specificity of facts and be satisfied that one swallow 1272 does not make a summer and a consistent course of conduct convincing enough to draw the rigorous inference that by confirmed habit which is second nature the counter petitioner is sure to commit the offences mentioned if he is not kept captive.
Preventive sections privative of freedom, if incautiously proved by indolent judicial processes, may do deeper injury.
They will have the effect of detention of one who has not been held guilty of a crime and carry with it the judicial imprimatur, to boot.
To call a man dangerous is itself dangerous; to call a man desperate is to affix a desperate adjective to stigmatise a person as hazardous to the community is itself a judicial hazard unless compulsive testimony carrying credence is abundantly available.
[1275 G H, 1276 E G]
