Dismissing the writ petitions but partly allowing, the Court ^ HELD: By Iyer, J. (on behalf of Y. V. Chandrachud, C.J., P. N. Bhagwati. J. and himself) 1.
Section 433A of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code as introduced With effect from 18 12 1978 is constitutionally valid.
May be, penologically the prolonged terms prescribed by the Section is supererogative [1248 C D] 2.
Section 433A is supreme over the Remission Rules and short sentencing, statutes made by the various States.
[1248 D] 3.
All remissions and short sentencing passed under Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution are valid but release with follow in life sentence case only on Government making an order en masse or individually, in that behalf [124D E] 4.
Section 432 and section 433 of the Code are not a manifestation of Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution but a separate, though similar, power and section 433A, by nullifying wholly or partially these prior provisions does not violate or detract from the full operation of the constitutional power to pardon, commute and the like.
[1248 E F] 5.
Section 433A of the Code does not contravene the provisions of Article 20(1) of the Constitution.
[1248G] 6.
Imprisonment for life lasts until the last breath and whatever the length of remissions earned, the prisoner can claim release only if the remaining sentence is remitted by Government.
[1248 G] Gopal Vinayak Godse vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., [19611 3 S.C.R. 440, reiterated .
1197 7.
Section 433A, in both its limbs (i.e. both types of life imprisonment specified in it), is prospective in effect.
The mandatory minimum of 14 years actual imprisonment will not operate against those whose cases were decided by trial court before the 18th December, 1978, directly or retroactively as explained in the judgment when section 433A came into force.
All 'lifers ' whose conviction by the court of first instance was entered prior to that date are entitled to consideration by Government for release on the strength of earned remissions although a release can take place only it Government makes an order to that effect.
It follows by the same logic, that short sentencing legislations if any, will entitle a prisoner to claim release thereunder if his conviction by the court of first instance was before section 433A was brought into effect.
[1248 H, 1249 A] 8.
The power under Articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution can be exercised by the Central and the State Governments, not by the President or Governor on their own.
The advice of the appropriate Government binds the Head of the State.
No separate order for each individual case is necessary but any general order made must be clear enough to identify the group of cases and indicate the application of mind to the whole group.
[1249 D] 9.
Considerations for exercise of power under Articles 72/161 may be myriad and their occasions protean, and are left to the appropriate Government, by no consideration nor occasion can be wholly irrelevant, irrational, discriminatory or mala fide.
Only in these rare cases will the court examine the exercise.
[1249 D E] 10.
Although the remission rules or short sentencing provisions proprio vigore may not apply as against section 433A. if the Government, Central or State, guides itself by the self same rules or schemes in the exercise of its constitutional power.
Until fresh rules are made in keeping with experience gathered, current social conditions and accepted penological thinking.
the present remission and release schemes may usefully be taken as guidelines under Articles 72/161 and orders for release passed.
Government cannot be faulted, if in some intractably savage delinquents, section 433A is itself treated as a guideline for exercise of Articles 72/161.
[1249E G] 11.
The U.P. Prisoners ' Release on Probation Act, 1938 enabling limited enlargement under licence will be effective as legislatively sanctioned imprisonment of a loose and liberal type and such licensed enlargement will toe reckoned for the purpose of the 14 year duration.
Similar other statutes and rules will enjoy similar efficacy.
[1249 G H] 12.
Penal humanitarianism and rehabilitative desideratum warrant liberal paroles.
subject to security safeguards, and other humanizing strategies for inmates so that the dignity and worth of the human person are not desecrated by making mass jails anthropoid zoos.
Human rights awareness must infuse institutional reform and search for alternatives.
[1250 A B] 13.
Law in action fulfils itself not by declaration alone and needs the wings of communication to the target community.
So, the whole judgment well translated in the language of the State, must be kept prominently in each ward and made available to the inmate, in the jail library.
[1250B C] 14.
Section 433A does not forbid parole or other release within the 14 year span .
So to interpret the Section as to intensify inner tension and taboo intermissions of freedom is to do violence to language and liberty.
[1250 C D] 1198 15.
Parliament has the legislative competency to enact the provisions in section 433A of Criminal Procedure Code.
[1214F] It is trite law that the Lists in the Seventh Schedule broadly delineate the rubrics of legislation and must be interpreted liberally.
Article 246(2) gives power to Parliament to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerate ed in List III.
Entries 1 and 2 in List 111 (especially Entry 2) are abundantly comprehensive to cover legislation such as is contained in section 433A, which merely enacts a rider, as it were, to sections 432 and 433(a).
A legislation on the topic of "Prisons and Prisoners" cannot be read into section 433A.
On the other hand, section 433A sets a lower limit to the execution of punishment provided by the Penal Code and is appropriately placed in the Chapter on "Execution and Sentences" in the Procedure Code.
Once the irrefutable position that the execution, remission and commutation of sentences primarily fall, as in the earlier 1898 Code, within the 1973 Procedure Code (Chapter XXIII) is accepted, section 433A can be rightly assigned to Entry 2 in List III as a cognate provision integral to remission and commutation, as it sets limits to the power conferred by sections 432 and 433.
This limited prescription as a proviso m, the earlier prescription relates to execution of sentence, not conditions in prison or regulation of prisoner 's life.
The distinction between prisons and prisoners on the one hand and sentences and their execution, remission and commutation on the other, is fine but real.
To bastardize section 433A as outside the legitimacy of Entry 2 in list III is to breach all canons of constitutional interpretation of legislative list [1214B F] 15.
(i) The power of the State to enact the laws of remissions and short sentencing under Entry 4 of List 11 is subject to Articles 246(1) and (2) and so parliamentary legislation prevails over State legislation.
Moreover, Article 254 resolves the conflict in favour of parliamentary legislation.
If a State intends to legislate under Entry 2 of list III such law can prevail in that State as against a parliamentary legislation only if Presidential assent has been obtained in terms of Article 254(2).
In the present case, section 433A must hold its sway over any State legislation even regarding "prisons and prisoners", if its provisions are repugnant to the Central law.
[1214G, 1215 B C] 15 (ii).
Remission schemes do not upset sentences, but merely provide re wards and remissions for in prison good conduct and the like If the sentence is life imprisonment remissions, as such cannot help.
If the sentence is for a fixed term, remissions may help, but section 433A does not come in the way.
Thus incompatibility between section 433A and remission provisions exists.
[1215 C D] 16.
The fasciculus of clauses (sections 432, 433 and 433A), read as a package, makes it clear that while the Code does confer wide powers of remission and commutation or sentences, it emphatically intends to carve out an extreme category from the broad generosity of such executive power.
The non obtained clause, in terms, excludes section 432 and the whole mandate cf the rest of the Section necessarily subjects the operation of section 433(a) to a serious restriction.
This embargo directs that commutation in such cases shall not reduce the actual duration of imprisonment below 14 years.
Section 431 does declare emphatically an imperative intent to keep imprisoned for at least 14 years those who fall within the sinister categories spelt out in the operative part of section 433A. [1216 B C] 1199 It is elementary that a non obstante tail should not wag a statutory dog.
A non obstante Clause cannot whittle down the wide import of the principal part.
The enacting part is Clear and the non obstante clause cannot cut down its scope.[1217 A B] Aswini Kumar Ghose and Another vs Aravinda loose & Another; , , followed.
To read down section 433A to give overriding effect to the Remission Rules of the State would render the purposeful exercise a ludicrous futility.
If "Laws suffer from the disease of Language", courts must cure the patient.
not kill him.
, "Notwithstanding the "notwithstanding. " in section 433A, the Remission Rules and like provisions stand excluded so far as "lifers" punished for capital offences are concerned.
[1217D E] 17.
Sentencing is a judicial function but the execution of the sentence.
after the courts pronouncement, is ordinarily a matter for the Executive under the Procedure Code, going by Entry 2 in List 111 of the Seventh Schedule.
Once a sentence has been imposed, the only way to terminate it before the stipulated term is by action under sections 432/433 of the Code or Articles 72/161.
And if the latter power under the Constitution is not invoked, the only source of salvation is the play of power under sections 432 and 433(a) so far as a 'lifer ' is concerned.
No release by reduction or remission of sentence is possible under the corpus juris as it stands, in any other way.
The legislative power of the state under Entry 4 of List 11, even if it be stretched to snapping point, an deal only with Prisons and Prisoners, never with truncation of judicial sentences.
Remissions by way of reward or otherwise cannot cut down the sentence as such and cannot grant final exit passport for the prisoner except by Government action under section 432(1).
The topic of Prisons and Prisoners does not cover release by way of reduction of the sentence itself.
That belongs to Criminal Procedure in Entry 2 c f List 111 although when the sentence is for a fixed term and remission plus the period undergone equal that term the prisoner may win his freedom.
Any amount of remission to result in manumission requires action under section 432(1), read with the Remission Rules.
That is why Parliament, tracing the single source of remission of sentence to Section 43 ', blocked it by the non obstante clause.
No remission, however long.
can set the prisoner free at the instance of the State, before the judicial sentence has run out, save by action under r the constitutional power or under section 432.
So read, section 433A achieves what it wants arrest the release of certain classes of "lifers" before a certain period, by blocking of section 432.
[1217 G H, 1218 A E] Sentencing is a judicial function and whatever may be done in the matter of executing that sentence in the shape of remitting.
commuting or otherwise abbreviating, the Executive cannot alter the sentence itself.
Remission cannot detract from the quantum or quality of sentence or its direct and side effects except to the extent of entitling the prisoner to premature freedom if the deduction following upon the remission has that arithmetic effect.
The nature of a life sentence is incarceration until death, judicial sentence of imprisonment for life cannot be in jeopardy merely because of long accumulation of remissions.
Release would follow only upon an order under section 401 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898 (corresponding to section 432 of the 1973 Coded by the appropriate Government or on a clemency order in exercise of power under Article 72 or 161 of the Constitution.
[1218 F &, 1219H. 1220A, E F] Sarat Chandra Rabha and Ors.
vs Khagendranath Nath & Ors. ; ; Gopal VinayaK Godse vs State of Maharashtra & Ors. ; , referred to.
1200 18.
Section 433A escapes the Exclusion of section 5 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
A thing is specific if it is explicit.
It need not be "express".
What is precise, exact, definite and explicit, is specific.
Sometimes, what is specific may also be special but yet they are distinct in semantics.
From this angle the Criminal Procedure Code is a general Code.
The remission rules are special laws but section 433A is a specific, explicit, definite provision dealing with a particular situation or narrow class of cases.
as distinguished from the general run of cases covered by section 432 Crl.
P.C. Section 433A picks out of a mass of imprisonment cases a specific class of life imprisonment cases and subjects it explicitly to a particularised treatment.
Therefore, section 433A applies in preference to any special or local law because section 5 expressly, declares that specific provisions, if any, to the contrary will prevail over any special or local law.
[1225 G H, 1226 A C] Hakim Khuda Yar vs Emperor A.I.R. 1940 Lah. ]29; Baldeo Bikram Sardar & Ors.
vs Emperor A.I.R. 1941 Bom.
146, dissented from.
In Re Net Book Agreement 1957 [1962] 3 All E.R. QBD 751, quoted with approval.
It is trite law that civilised criminal jurisprudence interdicts retroactive impost of heavier suffering by a later law.
Ordinarily, a criminal legislation must be so interpreted as to speak futuristically.
While there is no vested right for any convict who has received a judicial sentence to contend that the penalty should be softened and that the law which compels the penalty to be carried out hl full cannot apply to him, it is the function of the court to adopt a liberal construction when dealing with a criminal statute in the ordinary course if things.
This humanely inspired canon, not applicable to certain terribly antisocial categories may legitimately be applied to section 433A. (The sound rationale is that expectations of convicted citizens of regaining freedom on existing legal practices should not be frustrated by subsequent legislation or practice unless the language is beyond doubt).
Liberality in ascertaining the sense may ordinarily err on the side of liberty where the quantum of deprivation of freedom is in issue.
In short, the benefit of doubt, other things being equal, must go to the citizen in penal statute.
[1236 A D] The plain meaning of ' is" and "has been" is "is" and "has been ' only and, therefore, these expressions refer lo "after this Section comes into force".
"Is" and "has" are not words which are weighed in the scale of grammar nicely enough in this Section and, therefore, over stress on the present tense and the present perfect tense may not be a clear indicator.
The general rule bearing on ordinary penal statutes in their construction must govern this.
[1236 F, G, H, 1237 A] Boucher Pierre Andre vs Supdt.
Central Jail, Tihar.
[1975] I S.C.R. 192 at 1 95, followed.
When a person is convicted in appeal, it follows that the appellate court has exercised its power in the place of the original court and the guilt, conviction and sentence must be substituted for and shall have retroactive effect from the date of judgment of the trial court.
The appellate conviction must relate back to the date of the trial court 's verdict and substitute it.
In this view, even if the appellate court reverses an earlier acquittal rendered before section 433A came into force but allows the appeal and convicts the accused after section 433A came into force, such persons will also be entitled to the benefit of the remission system prevailing prior to section 433A on the basis 1201 which has been explained.
An appeal is a continuation of an appellate judgment as a replacement of the original judgment.
[1237D F] 21.
The President is symbolic, the Central Government is the reality even as the Governor is the formal head and sole repository of the executive power but is incapable of acting except on, and according to, the advice of his council of ministers.
The upshot is that the State Government, whether the Governor.
likes it or not, can advise and not under Article 161, the Governor being bound by that advice.
The action of commutation and release can thus be pursuant to a governmental decision and the order may issue even withhold the Governor 's approval although, under the Rules of Business and as a matter of constitutional courtesy, it is obligation that the signature of the Governor should authorise the pardon, commutation or release.
The position is substantially the same regarding the President.
It is not open either to the President or the Governor to take independent decision or direct release or refuse release of any one of their own choice.
It is fundamental to the Westminster system that the Cabinet rules and the Queen reigns.
The President and the Governor, be they ever so high in textual terminology, are but functional euphemisms promptly acting on and only on the advice of the Council of Ministers save in a narrow area of power.
So, even without reference to Article 367(1) and sections 3(8)(b) and 3(60)(b) of the , that in the matter of exercise of the powers under Articles 72 and 161, the two highest dignitaries in our constitutional scheme act and must act not on their own judgment but in accordance with the aid and advice of the ministers.
Article 74, after the 42nd Amendment silences speculation and obligates compliance.
The Governor vis a vis his Cabinet is no higher than the President save and narrow area which does not include Article 161.
The constitutional conclusion is that the Governor is but a shorthand expression for the State Government and the President is an abbreviation for the Central Government.
[1239 C H, 1240A B] Shamsher Singh & Anr, vs State of Punjab, ; , applied.
Victimology, a burgeoning branch of humane criminal justice, must find fulfillment, not through barbarity but by.
compulsory recoupment by the wrong doer of the damage inflicted, not by giving more pain to the offender but by lessening the loss of the forlorn.
The State itself may have its strategy of alleviating hardships of victims as part of Article 41.
So the mandatory minimum in section 433A cannot be linked up with the distress of the dependants [1251 B C] Observations: 1.
Parliamentary taciturnity does not preclude forensic examination about legislative competency.
Nor does it relieve the Supreme Court as sentinel on the qui vive, from defending fundamental rights against legislative aggression, if any flagrant excess were clearly made out.
[1211 F G] 2.
Courts cannot abdicate constitutional obligations even if Parliament be pachydermic and politicians indifferent, with great respect, ordinarily they are not.
indeed, Judges must go further, on account of their accountability to the Constitution and the country and clarify that where constitutional liberties are imperilled judges cannot be non aligned.
But where counterfeit constitutional I claims are pressed with forensic fervour courts do not readily oblige by consenting to be stampeded.
Justice is made of sterner stuff, though its core is like "the gentle rain from heaven" being interlaced with mercy.
11213 F Hl 1202 Per Fazal Ali, J. (Concurring) 1.
Section 433A of the Code is constitutionally valid Section 433A is actually a social piece of legislation which by one stroke seeks to prevent dangerous criminals from repeating offences and on the other protects the society from harm and distress caused to innocent persons.
[1256 B] 2.
The dominant purpose and the avowed object of the legislature in introducing section 433A in the Code of Criminal Procedure unmistakably seems to be to secure a deterrent punishment for heinous offences committed in a dastardly, brutal or cruel fashion or offences committed against the defence or security of the country.
[1251E F] Section 433A has advisedly been enacted to apply to a very small sphere and includes within its ambit only offences under sections 121, 132.
302., 303.
, 396 etc., of the Indian Penal Code, that is to say, only those offence, where death or life imprisonment are the penalties but instead of death life imprisonment is given or where a sentence of death is commuted to that of life imprisonment.
Section 433A when it confines its application only to these categories of offences which are heinous and amount to a callous outrage on humanity, has taken care of the fact that a sentence out of proportion of the crime is extremely repugnant to the social sentiments of a civilized society.
[1252 D E, 1253 H, 1254 A B] 3.
The deterrent punishment prevents occurrence of offences by (i) making it impossible or difficult for an offender to break the law again,(ii) by deterring not only the offenders but also others from committing offences, and (iii) punishment or for that matter a punishment in the form of a long term imprisonment may be a means to changing a person 's character or personality so that out of some motivation or reasons of a personal or general nature, the offender might obey the law.
[1254G H, 1255A] The Parliament in its wisdom chose to act in order to prevent criminals committing heinous crimes from being released through easy remissions or substituted form of punishments without undergoing at least a minimum period of imprisonment of fourteen years which may in fact act as a sufficient deterrent which may prevent criminals from committing offences.
[1256 E F] 4.
No doubt, the reformative form of punishment on principle, is in fact the prime need of the hour, but before it can succeed people must be properly educated and realise the futility of committing crimes.
[1255 E F] In the present distressed and disturbed atmosphere if deterrent punishment is not resorted to, there will be complete chaos in the entire country and criminals will be let loose endangering the lives of thousands of innocent people of our country.
In spite of all the resources at its commands, it will be difficult for the State to protect or guarantee the life and liberty of all the citizens, if criminals are let loose and deterrent punishment is either abolished or mitigated.
Secondly, while reformation of the criminal is only one side of the picture, rehabilitation of the victims and granting relief from the tortures and suffering which are caused to them as a result of the offences committed by the criminals is a factor which seems to have been completely overlooked while defending the cause of the criminals for abolishing deterrent sentences [1256H, 1257 A B] 5.
A person who has deprived another person completely of his liberty for ever and has endangered the liberty of his family has no right to ask the court to uphold his liberty.
Liberty is not a one sided concepts nor does Article 21 of the Constitution contemplate such a concept.
If a person commits 1203 a criminal offence and punishment has been given to him by a procedure established by law which is free and fair and where the accused has been fully heard, no question of violation of Article 21 arises when the question of punishment is being considered.
Even so, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1973 do provide an opportunity to the offender, after his guilt is proved to show circumstances under which an appropriate sentence could be imposed on him.
These guarantees sufficiently comply with the provisions of Article 21.
Thus, while considering the problem of penology courts should not overlook the plight of victimology and the sufferings of the people who die, suffer or are maimed at the hands of criminals.
[1257C E] 6.
In cases where section 433A applies, no question of reduction of sentence arises at all unless the President of India or the Governor choose to exercise their wide powers under Article 72 or Article 161 of the Constitution which also have to be exercised according to sound legal principles.
Any reduction or modification in the deterrent punishment would far from reforming the criminal be counter productive.
[1257 F G] 7.
Parliament by enacting section 433A has rejected the reformative character of punishment in respect of offences contemplated by it, for the time being in view of the prevailing conditions in our country.
It is well settled that the legislature understands the needs and requirements of its people much better than the courts because the Parliament consists of the elected representatives of the people and if the Parliament decides to enact a legislation for the benefit of the people, such a legislation must be meaningfully construed and given effect to so as to subserve the purpose for which it is meant.
[1257 G H, 1258 A B] 8.
There is no real inconsistency between section 433A and Articles ?2 and 161 of the Constitution of India.
[1258E] Doubtless, the President of India under Article 72 and the State Government under Article 161 have absolute and unfettered powers to grant pardon, reprieves, remissions, etc.
This power can neither be altered, modified or interfered with by any statutory provision.
But, the fact remains that higher the power, the more cautious would be its exercise.
This is particularly so because the present enactment has been passed by the Parliament on being sponsored by the Central Government itself.
It is, therefore, manifest that while exercising the powers under the aforesaid Articles of the Constitution neither the President, who acts on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
nor the State Government is likely to overlook the object, spirit and philosophy of section 433A so as to create a conflict between the legislative intent and the executive power.
It cannot be doubted as a proposition of law that where a power is vested in a very high authority, it must be presumed that the said authority would act properly and carefully after an objective consideration of all the aspects of the matter.
[1258 B D] Per Koshal, J. (Generally concurring) 1.
The contention that the main object of every punishment must be reformation of the offender and that the other objects deterrence, prevention and retribution should be relegated to the background and be brought into play only incidentally is not correct for three reasons: (i) There is no evidence that all or most of the criminals who are punished are amenable to re formation.
The matter has been the subject of social debate and so far as one can judge, will continue to remain at that level in the foreseeable future; (ii) The question as to which of the various objects of punishment should be the basis 1204 of a penal provision has, in the very nature of things, to be left to the Legislature and it is not for the courts to say which of them shall be given priority, preponderance or predominance.
As it is , the choice must be that of the legislature and not that of the court and it is not for the latter to advise the legislature which particular object shall be kept in focus in a particular situation.
Nor is it open to the courts to be persuaded by their own ideas about the propriety of a particular purpose being achieved by a piece of penal legislation, while judging its constitutionality.
A contrary proposition would mean the stepping of the judiciary into the field of the legislature which is not permissible.
It is thus outside the scope of the inquiry undertaken by this Court into the vires of the provisions contained in section 433A to find out the extent to which the object of reformation is sought to be achieved thereby, the opinion of great thinkers, jurists, politicians and saints (as to what the basis of a penal provision should be) notwithstanding; (iii) A careful study of the Penal Code brings out clearly that the severity of each.
punishment sanctioned by the law is directly proportional to the seriousness of the offence for which it is awarded.
This is strongly indicative of reformation not being the foremost object sought to be achieved by the penal provisions adopted by the legislature.
A person who has committed murder in the heat of passion may not repeat his act at all later in life and the reformation process in his case need not be time consuming.
On the other hand, a thief may take long to shed the propensity to deprive others of their good money.
If the reformative aspect of punishment were to be given priority and predominance in every case the murderer may deserve, in a given set of circumstances, no more than a six months ' period of incarceration while a thief may have to be trained into better ways of life from the social point of view over a long period, and the death penalty, the vires of which has been recently upheld by a majority of four in a five Judges Bench of this Court in Bachan Singh and others vs State of Punjab and others, , would have to be exterminated from Indian criminal law.
The argument based on the object of reformation having to be in the forefront of the legislative purposes behind punishment is, therefore, fallacious.
[1259B D, G H, 1260A H, 1261 A]
