Exercising power under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution (which empowers the Governor to make rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State) the Governor of Punjab, in consultation with the Punjab High Court, framed the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963.
The rules provide for the direct recruitment as well as appointment by promotion from the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial branch).
Under rule 8(2), two third of the total number of cadre posts have to be manned by promoted officers and one third by direct recruits.
Under rule 10(1) direct recruits have to remain on probation for two years provided that the Government may, in exceptional circumstances, reduce the period of probation in consultation with the High Court.
The period of probation of an officer can be extended by the Governor beyond the period of two years in consultation with the High Court but not so as to exceed a total period of three years.
Rule 10(2) empowers the Governor to confirm in consultation with the High Court a direct recruit on a cadre post with effect from a date not earlier than the date on which he completes the period of probation.
Rule 12 (now in force in Haryana) provides that the seniority of direct recruits and promoted officers shall be determined with reference to the respective dates of their confirmation.
Under the Punjab Rules as amended retrospectively with effect from April 9, 1976 'cadre post ' means a permanent as well as a temporary post in the service.
The inter se seniority of the members of the service is to be deter mined by the length of continuous service on a post in the service irrespective of the date of confirmation.
The three petitioners in the Haryana writ petitions were selected for recruitment to the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) in a competitive examination and after the formation of the State of Haryana, they were promoted in an officiating capacity to the Haryana Superior Judicial Service in 1967 and 1968.
Respondent No. 3 who was a direct recruit to the Haryana Superior Judicial Service was appointed as a District and Sessions Judge on July 7, 1025 1970 and was confirmed in that post on July 7, 1972 on the completion of A two year probationary period.
The three petitioners were confirmed as District and Sessions Judges with effect from July 8, 1972.
In the case of judicial officers of Punjab, although there were ten vacancies in the quota of promoted officers and an equal number of promoted officers were officiating for more than three years as Additional District and Sessions Judges, the High Court did not confirm the promotees in those vacancies but confirmed the promotees and the direct recruits by applying the rule of rotational Six direct recruits were given prior dates of confirmation in comparison with the promotees, as a result of which the confirmation of eight promotees was postponed.
In the case of some direct recruits confirmation was given within a period of one year and four months though the period of probation was two years.
Rule 12 was amended retrospectively from April 9, 1976 by which seniority was to be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in the service irrespective of the date of confirmation Rejecting the plea of one of the direct recruits that the rules not only required the application of a rule of quota at the time of appointment but also required the application of a rule of rotation at the time of confirmation, the High Court held that rules 8 and 12 were independent of each other, that rotational system could not be implicitly read in the quota rule provided for by rule 8 and that members of the Superior Judicial Service were entitled to claim seniority strictly in accordance with the provisions of rule 12.
The promotees complained that this decision rendered by the High Court in its judicial capacity was not being followed by the High Court in the discharge of its administrative duties and that seniority of the promotees and direct recruits must be fixed without applying the rule of rotation at the time of confirmation.
It was also stated that after the amendment of rule 12 in 1976 although two vacancies of District and Sessions Judges arose on each of these occasions the High Court promoted a direct recruit treating the date of his confirmation as the criterion of seniority.
It was contended on behalf of the promotees in Haryana that the control which the High Court exercises under article 235 over the subordinate judiciary does not include the power to make rules regulating the condition of service of judicial officers but that since the power conferred on the Governor under the proviso to article 309 to make rules is legislative in nature the principle of independence of judiciary is not in any manner violated when the Governor makes the rules.
On the other hand it was contended on behalf of the High Court that the control over the subordinate judiciary vested in the High Court by article 235 being exclusive in nature, the power to frame rules in regard to the seniority of judicial officers must reside in the High Court and not in the Governor.
It was contended on behalf of the promotees that the quota of 2: 1 provided for by rule 8 is applicable only at the time of initial recruitment and that there was no warrant for extending the application of that rule at the time of confirmation.
Partly allowing the Petitions; ^ HELD: There is no force in the contention that the Governor has no power to make rules of seniority of District and Sessions Judges.
[1058B] 1026 On a plain reading of articles 235 and 309 of the Constitution it is clear that the power to frame rules regarding seniority of officers in the judicial service of the State is vested in the Governor and not in the High Court.
The first part of article 235 vests the control over District Courts and courts subordinate thereto in the High Court.
But the second part of that Article says that nothing in the article shall be construed as taking away from any person belonging to the judicial service of the State any right of appeal which he may have under the law regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service prescribed under such law.
Thus, article 235 itself defines the outer limits of the High Court 's power of control over the District Courts and courts subordinate thereto.
In the first place, in the exercise of its control over the District Courts and subordinate courts it is not open to the High Court to deny to a member of the subordinate judicial service of the State the right of appeal given to him by the law which regulates the conditions of his service.
Secondly, the High Court cannot, in the exercise of its power of control, deal with such person otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service which are prescribed by such law.
[1052C] There is no power in the High Court to pass a law though rules made by the High Court in the exercise of power conferred upon it in that behalf may have the force of law.
Law which the second part of article 235 speaks of is law made by the Legislature.
The clear meaning, therefore, of the second part of article 235 is that the power of control vested in the High Court by the first part will not deprive a judicial officer of the rights conferred upon him by a law made by the Legislature regulating his conditions of service.
[1052G H] Article 235 does not confer upon the High Courts the power to make rules relating to conditions of service of judicial officers attached to District Courts and the courts subordinate thereto.
Whenever it was intended to confer on any authority the power to make any special provision or rules including rules relating to conditions of service, the Constitution has stated so in express terms.
For example the provisions contained in Articles 225, 227(2) & (3) and 229(1) & (2) confer powers on the High Court to frame rules for certain specific purposes.
article 229(2) which is directly in point provides that subject to the provisions of any law made by Legislature of the State the conditions of service of officers of a High Court shall be made by the High Court.
The framers of the Constitution would not have failed to incorporate a similar provision in article 235 if it was intended that the High Courts should have the power to make rules regulating the conditions of service of judicial officers in the subordinate judiciary.
[1053B F] The power of control vested in the High Court by article 235 is expressly made subject to the law which the State Legislature may pass for regulating the recruitment and service conditions of judicial officers of the State.
The framers of the Constitution did not regard the power of the State Legislature to pass laws regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of judicial officers as an infringement of the independence of the judiciary.
The mere powers to pass such a law is not violative of the control vested in the High Court over the State judiciary.
[1053H; 1054C] In order that there may be no vacuum until the passing of a law by the Legislature on the subject, the Constitution has made provision under the proviso to article 309 that until the State Legislature passes a law on the 1027 particular subject, it shall be competent to the Governor of the State to A make rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of the judicial officers of the State.
The power exercised by the Governor under the proviso is thus a power which the Legislature is competent to exercise but has in fact not yet exercised.
It partakes of the characteristics of the legislative, not executive, power.
It is legislative power.
[1054D F] That the Governor possesses legislative power under the Constitution is incontrovertible.
Just as under article 213 the Governor substitutes tor the Legislature because the Legislature is in recess so under the proviso to article 309 he substitutes for the Legislature because the Legislature has not yet exercised its power to pass an appropriate law on the subject.
[1054G and 1055B C] It is true that the power conferred by Article 309 is subject to the provisions of the Constitution but it is fallacious for that reason to contend that the Governor cannot frame rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of the Judicial officers of the State.
Firstly, the power of control conferred upon High Courts by the first part of Article 235 is expressly made subject, by the second part of that Article, to laws regulating conditions of service of its Judicial officers.
Secondly, the Governor, in terms equally express, is given the power by the proviso to Article 309 to frame rules on the subject.
[1055B C] A combined reading of articles 235 and 309 will yield the result that though the control over the subordinate courts is vested in the High Court the appropriate Legislature and until that Legislature acts the Governor of the State has the power to make rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of judicial officers of the State.
The power of the Legislature or of the Governor thus to legislate is subject to all other provisions of the Constitution like articles 14 and 16.
[1055D E] The second part of article 235 recognises the legislative power to provide for recruitment and the conditions of service of the judicial officers of the State.
The substantive provision of article 309, including its proviso, fixes the location of the power.
The opening words of article 309 limit the amplitude of that power.
[1055F] Seniority is undoubtedly an important condition of service.
The control vested in the High Court by the first part of article 235 is, therefore subject to any law regulating seniority as envisaged by the second part of that article.
The power to make such law is vested by article 309 in the Legislature and until it acts, in the Governor.
Whether it is the Legislature which passes an Act or the Governor who makes rules regulating seniority, the end product is law within the meaning of second part of article 235.
The Legislatures of Punjab and Haryana not having passed an Act regulating seniority of the respective State judicial officers, the Governors of the two States have the power to frame rules for that purpose under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution Such rules are subject to the provisions of the Constitution and to the provisions of any Act which the appropriate Legislature may pass on the subject.
[1055G H] The law passed by the Legislature or the rules made by the Governor can provide for general or abstract rules of seniority leaving it to the High Court to apply them to each individual case as and when the occasion arises.
The power to legislate on seniority being subject to all other provisions of the Constitution cannot be exercised in a manner which will affect or be detrimental to the control vested in the High Court by article 235.
[1056B C] 1028 Though the Legislature or the Governor has the power to regulate seniority of judicial officers by laying down rules of general application, that power cannot be exercised in a manner which will lead to interference with the control vested in the High Court by the first part of article 235.
In a word, the application of law governing seniority must be left to the High Court.
The determination of seniority of each individual judicial officer is a matter which indubitably falls within the area of control of the High Court over the district courts and the courts subordinate thereto.
For the same reason, though rules of recruitment can provide for a period of probation, the question whether a particular judicial officer has satisfactorily completed his probation or not is a matter which is exclusively in the domain or the High Court to decide.
[1056E F]] The independence of the judiciary has to be preserved.
at all costs.
But at the same time the Legislature or the Governor cannot be deprived of their legitimate legislative powers under article 309.
That power is subject to all other provisions of the Constitution which means that the power cannot be exercised in a manner which will lead to the violation of articles 14 or 16 or the pervasive ambit of the first part of article 235.
Since the power conferred by article 309 is not absolute or untrammeled it will be wrong to test the validity of that power on the anvil of its possible abuse.
[1057 A B] High Court of Punjab and Haryana vs State of Haryana, , Union of India vs Justice section H. Sheth, ; , A. P. High Court vs Krishnamurthy, & State of Bihar vs Madan Mohan Prasad, ; , referred to.
Rule 8 as its very heading shows, provides for a distinct condition of ser vice with reference to a specific point of time, namely "recruitment to service".
The language of the rule also indicates that the operation of this rule is confined to the stage of initial recruitment to the service either by promotion or by direct appointment from the Bar.
[1063F] The reservation contemplated by rule 8 is intended to be made at the stage of initial appointment only by reserving two third of the total number of posts in the cadre for promotees and one third for direct recruits.
A post which falls vacant in the quota of promotees cannot be filed by the confirmation of a direct recruit therein nor indeed can a promotee be confirmed in a post which is within the quota of direct recruits.
[1063H] If this be the true construction of rule 8 the method of confirmation by rotation of direct recruits and promotees, regardless of whether the vacancy assigned to the particular officer falls within the quota of the class to which he belongs will be in contravention of that rule.
[1064B] 'Appointment ' is not a continuous process.
The process of appointment is complete as soon as a person is initially recruited to the service either by promotion or by direct recruitment and confirmation is not a part of the process of appointment.
"Recruitment to the service" is a matter which falls within the power of the Governor under article 233 while "confirmation" is a matter of 'control ' vesting in the High Court under article 235.
The superimposition of rule 8, which fixes the quota at the stage of recruitment on the rules relating to confirmation and seniority is, therefore, contrary to the basic constitutional concepts governing judicial service.
[1064C D] 1029 The rule of rota cannot be read into the rule of quota.
In other words the ratio of 2: 1 shall have to be applied at the stage of recruitment but cannot on the language of the relevant rules be applied at the stage of confirmation.
[1066B] A K. Subraman vs Union of India, [1975] 2 SCR 979, N.K. Chauhan vs State of Gujarat, ; referred to.
Paramjit Singh Sandhu vs Ram Rakha, ; held inapplicable.
The High Court was not justified in applying tho rule of rotation at the time of confirmation of the members of the superior judicial service who were appointed to that service by promotion and by direct recruitment.
In the discharge of its administrative functions the High Court could not have failed to follow a judgment of its own special bench consisting of five Judges.
[1066C D] High Court of Punjab and Haryana vs State of Haryana, ; , referred to.
On a proper interpretation of the rules, promotees are entitled to be confirmed in the vacancies which are available within their quota of two third, whether or not one third of the vacancies are occupied by confirmed direct recruits.
Similarly direct recruits are entitled to be confirmed in vacancies which are available within their quota of one third whether or not two third of the vacancies are occupied by confirmed promotees.
[1067D E] The fairness which articles 14 and 16 postulate is that it a promotee is otherwise fit for confirmation and a vacancy falling within the quota of promotees is available in which he can be confirmed, his confirmation ought not to be postponed until a direct recruit, whether yet appointed or not, completes his period of probation and thereupon becomes eligible for confirmation.
The adoption of this principle in the matter of confirmation will not, in practice, give any undue advantage to the promotees.
[1067D E].
In so far as the confirmation of respondents 6, 7 and 8 is concerned, in the absence of exceptional circumstances justifying the reduction of their normal probationary period of two years, the order of the High Court confirming he three respondents before they were normally due for confirmation cannot be upheld.
The order is in clear violation of the guarantee of equal opportunity, by the petitioners were prejudiced and must for that reason be sel aside.
[1067G H] The power conferred by the proviso to rule 10(1) on the Governor is ex facie bad because such a power directly impinges upon the control vested in the High Court by article 235 of the Constitution.
If at all any authority could exercise such a power, it is the High Court and not the Governor.
The rules must now be understood to mean that the High Court and not the Governor has the power of confirmation, that the normal period of probation of direct recruits is two years and that unless there are exceptional circumstances in regard to each individual case, a direct recruit cannot be confirmed from a date earlier than the date on which he has satisfactorily completed his probation of two years.
The High Court is not free to fix any period of probation as it likes or to reduce the period of two years at its will and pleasure.
[1068B E] As regards The power of the Governor to amend a rule with retrospective effect, since he exercises a legislative power under proviso to article 309 it is open to him to give retrospective effect to the rules made under that provision.
But the date from which the rules are made to operate must be shown to bear 1030 either from the face of the rules or by extrinsic evidence reasonable nexus with the provisions contained in the rules, especially when the retrospective effect extends over a long period.
In the instant case rule 12 which was amended retrospectively from April 9, 1976 by a notification dated December 31, 1976 is invalid because no such nexus is shown to exist.
[1068F H]
