The assessee is a Private Limited Company, carrying on business of mining iron ore and selling it in the export market after dressing, washing, screening and blending it.
The extraction of iron ore in some of the mines is carried on by mechanised process and at others by manual labour.
The entire activity of the assessee consisted of seven different operations, one following upon the other, namely.
(i) extraction of ore from the mine; (ii) conveying the ore to the dressing plant; (iii) washing, screening and dressing the ore; (iv) conveying of the ore from the mine site, to the river side; (v) transport of the ore from the river side to the harbour by means of barges; (vi) stacking of the ore at the harbour in different stock piles according to its physical and chemical composition; and (vii) blending of the ore from different stock piles with a view to producing ore of the required specifications and loading it into the ship by means of the Mechanised Ore Handling Plant.
Under Section 8(1)(b) of the the assessee would be liable to pay, in respect of goods purchased for use "in the manufacture or processing of goods for sale in mining", a lower rate of sales tax at 3% of his turnover, if it is granted, under section 7(3), a Certificate of Registration by Sales Tax Officer specifying the class or classes of goods for the purpose of sub section (1) of section 8 read with Rule 13.
The assessee, therefore, made an application to the Sales Tax Officer for inclusion of 36 items of goods in the certificate of registration on the ground that these items of goods were being purchased by it for use in mining ore and processing it for sale in the export market, and hence they were goods falling within section 8(3)(b) of the Act and Rule 13.
The Sales Tax Officer granted certificate only in respect of 11 items and disallowed 25 items.
In revision, the Assistant Commissioner, Sales Tax, took the same view of the Sales Tax 272 A Officer, reviewed all the 25 items disallowed and found that six more items to be eligible for certification.
The further revision before the Government carried by the assessee failed.
Thereupon the assessee filed a writ petition in the court of Judicial Commissioner, Goa.
The Judicial Commissioner agreed with the views of the Sales Tax Authorities but on his scrutiny found that 4 more items, out of 19 items rejected, to be eligible for certification.
Hence, the appeals by special leave, one by the assessee in respect of all the 15 items and another by the Union of India regarding the 4 items found to be in order by the Judicial Commissioner.
Allowing the appeal of the assessee, dismissing the appeal of Union of India and remitting the matter to the Tax Authorities for further scrutiny of the 14 items pressed by the assessee, the Court ^ HELD: (I) Applying the test laid down in M/s. Pio Food Packers [1980] 3 SCR p. 1271, namely, "Does the processing of the original commodity bring into existence a commercially different and distinct commodity ?", it is clear that the blending of different qualities of ore possessing different chemical and physical composition so as to produce ore of the contractual specifications cannot be said to involve the process of manufacture, since the ore that is produced cannot be regarded as a commercially new and distinct commodity from the ore of different specifications blended together.
What is produced as a result of blending is commercially the same article, namely, ore, though with different specifications than the ore which is blended and hence it cannot be said that any process of manufacture is involved in blending of c re.
[279G, 280B D] The Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax vs
Pio Food Packers, [1980] 3 SCR p. 1271, applied.
(2) Where any commodity is subjected to a process or treatment with a view to its "development of preparation for the market".
it would amount to processing of the commodity within the meaning of sec.
8(3)(b) and Rule 13.
The nature and extent of processing may vary from case to case; in one case the processing may be slight and in another it may be extensive; but with each process suffered, the commodity would experience a change.
What is necessary in order characterize an operation as "processing" is that the commodity must, as a result of the operation, experience some change.
In this sense word "processing" in section 8(3) (b) and Rule 13 should be understood as it has not been defined in the Act.
[280E, G H, 281A B] Om Prakash Gupta vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, 16 Sales Tax Cases 935 (Cal.), approved.
(3) The blending of ore in the course of loading through the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant amounted to "processing" of ore within the meaning o section 8(3)(b) and Rule 13 and the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant fell within the description of "machinery, plant, equipment" used in the processing of ore for sale.
Therefore, if any items of goods were purchased by the assessee as being intended for use as "machinery, plant, equipment.
tools, spare parts, stores, accessories, fuel or lubricants" for the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant, they would be eligible for inclusion in the Certificate of Registration of the assessee.
[282X 283A B] 273 Diverse quantities of ore possessing different chemical and physical compositions are blended together to produce ore of the requisite chemical and physical composition demanded by the foreign purchaser and obviously as a result of this blending, the quantities of ore mixed together in the course of loading through the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant experience change in their respective chemical and physical compositions, because what is produced by such blending is ore of a different chemical and physical composition.
When the chemical and physical composition of each kind of ore which goes into the blending is changed, there can be no doubt that the operation of blending would amount to "processing" of ore within the meaning of sec.
8(3)(b) and Rule 13.
It is no doubt true that the blending of ore of diverse physical and chemical composition is carried out by the simple act of physically mixing different quantities of such ore on the conveyor belt of the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant.
But it is immaterial as to how the blending is done and what process is utilised for the purpose of blending.
What is material to consider is whether the different quantities of ore which are blended together in the course of loading through the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant undergo any change in their physical and chemical composition as a result of blending.
Whatever be the means employed for the purpose of carrying out the operation, it is the effect of the operation on the commodity that is material for the purpose of determining whether the operation constitutes "processing".
[281B E, 212G H] Nilgiri Ceylon Tea Supplying Co. vs State of Bombay, 10 Sales Tax Cases 500 (Bom.) overruled.
The machinery, vehicles, barges and other items of goods purchased by the assessee for use in carrying the mined ore from the mining site to the river side and from the river side to the Marmagoa harbour fall within the description of goods intended for use in processing of ore for sale within the meaning of sec.
8(3)(b) and Rule 13.
If any of these items of goods are purchased by the assessee as being intended for use as "machinery, plant, equipment, tools, spare parts, stores, accessories, fuel or lubricants" in carrying the mined ore from the mining site to the river side and from the river side to the Marmagoa harbour, they would qualify for inclusion in the Certificate of Registration.
[285D E] F The process of mining comes to an end when ore is extracted from the mines, washed, screened and dressed in the dressing plant and stacked at the mining site and the goods purchased by the assessee for use in the subsequent operations could not therefore be regarded as goods purchased for use "in mining".
The requirement of sec.
8(3) (b) and Rule 13 is that the goods must be purchased for use "in mining" and not use "in the business of mining".
It is only the items of goods purchased by the assessee for use in the actual mining operation which are eligible for inclusion in the certificate of registration under this head and these would not include good purchased by the assessee for use in the operations subsequent to the stacking of the ore at the mining site.
[283C E] Where a dealer is engaged both in mining operation as also in processing the mined ore for sale, the two processes being inter dependent, it would be essential for carrying on the operation of processing that the ore should 274 be carried from the mining site, mined ore for sale, the two processes being inter dependent, it would be essential for carrying on the operation of processing that the ore should be carried from the mining site where the mining operation comes to an end to the place where the processing is carried on and that would clearly be an integral part of the operation of processing and if any machinery, vehicles, barges and other items of goods are used for carrying the ore from the mining site to the place of processing, they would clearly be goods used in processing of ore for sale.
In the present case, the mining of ore is done by the assessee with a view to processing the milled ore through the Mechanical Ore Handling Plant at the Marmagoa harbour and the entire operation of mining ore and processing the mined ore is one integrated process of which transportation of the mined ore from the mining site to the Marmagoa harbour is an essential part.
[284A D] Indian Copper Corporation Ltd. vs Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, 15 STC 259 (SC), followed.
