The Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965 by sub section (2) of section 51 provides that every person qualified to, be elected as a Councillor under section 15 shall be qualified for election as President.
Section 16(1)(a) provides that no person shall be qualified to become a Councillor whether by election, co option or nomination, if he had been convicted by a Court for any offence the maximum punishment for which is imprisonment for a term of two years or more and sentenced to imprisonment for any term, unless a period of five years, or such lesser period as the Sate Government may allow, has elapsed since his release.
The appellant stood for election to the office of President of the Municipal Council, filed his nomination paper on 21st October 1974, and was declared elected at the election held on 17th November, 1974.
The first respondent filed an election petition before the District Judge challenging the election alleging that the appellant had been convicted on 26th December, 1973 nuder section 16 of the and sentenced to undergo imprisonment till the rising of the court and to pay a fine of Rs. 200/ and that by virtue of section 51(2) read with section 16(1)(a) of the Act the appellant was not qualified for election as President of the Municipal Council.
During the pendency of the election petition the Sate Government made an order dated 20th November 1975 under clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 16, declaring that the disqualification incurred by the appellant 'should remain in force for a period of six months only from his release on 26th December, 1973 '.
The District Judge allowed the election petition and the election of the appellant was set aside.
The appellant filed a writ petition, which was dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended that the order dated 20th November, 1975 made by the State Government was retrospective in operation and consequently removed the disqualification imposed on the appellant on the date he filed his nomination paper.
267 Dismissing the appeal ^ HELD: ( 1 ) The appellant does not benefit from the order of the State Government insofar as his election as President in 1974 is concerned.
[270 A] (2) By virtue of clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 16, the State Government had been empowered to substitute a shorter period of disqualification.
A modification of the normal operation of the statute by the State Government is contemplated.
Such Q modification to be retrospective must indicate clearly that it is so.
[269 E F] In the instant case, disqualification was incurred by the appellant on 26th December, 1973 when he was convicted and sentenced, and the disqualification was in force when he stood for election.
The date when the disqualification for five years was incurred is the relevant date, the subsequent operation is the consequence of the incurring of the disqualification.
If the order was to be beneficial to the appellant, it should have been made retrospective from the date when the disqualification was incurred.
On the plain language, it must be read as an order reducing the period of disqualification to six months, due to be applied to a disqualification arising after the date when the order was made.
[296 G H]
