The appellant was a voter in the Constituency from which the Respondent was elected as a member of the State Legislative Assembly.
His nomination paper was rejected by the Returning Officer on the ground that it was filed beyond the time prescribed for filing nomination paper and that he had not made and subscribed an oath on it, as required by law.
In his petition before the High Court the appellant contended that (1) the filing of nomination paper late by 10 minutes could not be a ground for rejecting the nomination paper and it was not a defect of substantial character within the meaning of section 36(4) of the Act, (2) the allegation that he had filed to make and subscribe the oath before the Returning officer as required by article 173 of the Constitution was not true and (3) the respondent was guilty of corrupt practice of bribery.
The High Court rejecting all the contentions, dismissed the petition.
Dismissing the appeal, this court ^ HELD : 1(a) It is the requirement of law that the Returning officer should mention the time of presentation of the nomination papers.
The endorsement by the Returning officer shows that the nomination paper was presented on May 18, 1977 at 15.10 by the proposer, and that the endorsement to that effect was duly signed by the Returning officer.
[504 E F] (b) It is not correct to say that the delay in presentation of the nomination paper was not a ground for its rejection as it was not a defect of substantial character within the meaning of Section 36(4) of the Representation of the People Act.
In the face of the clear requirement of section 36(2)(b) of the Act, any other view would make the requirement for the presentation of the nomination paper before the last date and within the specified period of time, unworkable for it will not then be possible to draw a line upto which the delay in the delivery of the nomination papers could be condoned.
If the requirement of the law in that respect is not observed, and its breach is considered to be a defect which was not of a substantial character it may be permissible to go to the extent of arguing that the nomination paper may be filed even upto the date and time fixed for the scrutiny of the nominations.
That would not only cause administrative inconvenience but put the other candidate to a serious disadvantage for they would not be able to prepare themselves for any objection they may like to raise to the validity of the nomination, at the time of scrutiny of the nominations.
[505 H, 506 A C] 502 (c) The requirement that the nomination papers shall be delivered between the hours of eleven O 'clock in the forenoon and three O 'clock in the afternoon is mandatory and the Returning officer has no option but to reject the nomination paper as required by Section 36(2) of thee Act.
[505 G H] (2) The trial court held that the oath ar affirmation which was required to be made or subscribed by the candidate had not been made and subscribed at the time of the presentation of the nomination papers.
As the appellant was not able to produce the certificate of his making and subscribing the oath or affirmation before the Returning officer thereafter, in the manner alleged by him, there is nothing wrong with the view taken by the trial court that he did not really do so [508 A B, D E] (3) It is an essential ingredient of the definition of corrupt practice of "bribery" that the gift, offer or promise should be by the candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his Election Agent.
The trial court rightly took the view that it was necessary for the purpose of proving the corrupt practice of bribery to establish that there was an element of "bargaining" in what the respondent was alleged to have done for two villages.
When the element of bargain was completely absent from the allegation against the respondent, the trial court was justified in holding that the alleged corrup practice had not been established.
[809G, 510H, 511A, D E] Ghasi Ram vs Dal Singh and others ; , Amir Chand vs Surendra Lal Jha and others , Om Prabha Jain vs Abnash Chand and another ; ; Bhanu Kumar Shastri vs Mohan Lal Sukhadia and others ; ; Chaitanya Kumar Adatiya vs Smt.
Sushila Dixit and others , referred to.
