The respondents were the successful bidders at an auction of forest coupes in the State of Bihar.
As they defaulted in making the security deposit in respect of three coupes, the agreements with them were determined by the Conservator of Forests.
The respondents thereupon filed a writ petition in the Calcutta High Court instead of in the Patna High Court and followed it up with several applications one after another both in the Calcutta and Patna High Courts towards the forest department from preventing unauthorised removal of forest produce by the respondents.
Vexed by the manner in which the respondent was filing repeated applications and procuring orders of a learned single judge of the High Court necessitating the filing of as many appeals to the Division Bench, the State of Bihar moved an application for committing the respondents for contempt of court, alleging that, by their conduct the respondents were obstructing the administration of justice and interfering with the due course of judicial proceedings.
The Patna High Court held that the respondent 's conduct was most unscrupulous and that there was gross abuse of the process of the Court, which could in certain circumstances amount to contempt of Court.
However, the High Court dismissed the application on the ground that it was barred by limitation as it was filed beyond the period of one year prescribed by section 20 of the Contempt of Courts Act.
The High Court held, on a reading of the contempt application that the material allegation in regard to the contempt committed by the respondents was that relating to the filing of the application dated April 7, 1971 before the single judge of the Calcutta High Court to circumvent and nullify the order dated March 29, 1971 of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court.
As the contempt application dated 18 7 73 in OCM 7/73 was filed more than a year later, it was timeshared.
In regard to the allegation relating to the filing of the petition dated December 14, 1972, the High Court observed that there was no specific allegation that any contempt of court was committed by the filing of this application.
Though the respondents tendered an unconditional apology, its acceptance was not considered as the application was found to be beyond time.
Hence the appeal under section 19 of the .
Allowing the State appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Every abuse of process of the court may not necessarily amount to contempt of Court.
Abuse of process of the Court calculated to hamper the due course of a judicial proceeding or the orderly administration of justice is a contempt of Court.
[1178A B] 2.
It may be that certain minor abuses of the process of the court may be suitably dealt with as between the parties by striking out pleadings under the 1173 provisions of order 6, Rule 16 C.P.C. or in some other manner.
But on the other hand, it may be necessary to punish as a contempt, a course of conduct which abuses and makes a mockery of the judicial process and which thus extends its pernicious influence beyond the parties to the action and affects the interest of the public in the administration of Justice.
[1178B C] 3.
The public have an interest, an abiding and a real interest and a vital stake, in the effective and orderly administration of justice, because, unless justice is so administered, there is the peril of all rights and liberties perishing.
The Court has the duty of protecting the interest of the public in the administration of justice and, so, it is entrusted with the power to commit for contempt of Court, not in order to protect the dignity of the Court against insult or injury as the expression "Contempt of Court" may seem to suggest, but to protect and to vindicate the right of the public that administration of justice shall not be prevented, prejudiced, obstructed or interfered with.
[1178C E] Offutt vs U.S.p.11, quoted with approval.
It is not necessary that every allegation made should be followed then and there by the statement that the allegation established a contempt of Court Paragraph 29 of the application to commit the respondents for Contempt expressly referred to the application dated December 14, 1972 and paragraph 31 state that all the facts and circumstances enumerated in the petition established that the respondents were obstructing and interfering with the due course of administration of justice.
[1180F H] In the instant case: (a) the respondents began the "game" by filing an application under article 226 of the Constitution of India in the Calcutta High Court, whereas in the normal course one would expect such an application to be filed in the Patna High Court within whose jurisdiction the subject matter of dispute was situate.
A justifiable prima facie inference from this circumstance may be that the application was not bonafide but intended to harass and oppress the opposite party.
[1179C E] (b) Thereafter application after application was filed before the learned single Judge, everyone of them designed to circumvent, defect or nullify the effect of the orders of the Division Benches of the Calcutta High Court and Patna High Court.
The order of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court directing the respondents to furnish security in a sum of Rs. 1,55,000/ was never complied with.
The order of the Division Bench of the Patna High Court directing the respondents to furnish security of immovable property in a sum of Rs. 75,000/ and to deposit in cash or furnish bank guarantee in a sum of Rs. 50,000/ was also never complied with.
Instead, an order was obtained from the single Judge of the Calcutta High Court restraining the State of Bihar from continuing the money suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Palamau.
When this order was set aside by the Division Bench, an attempt was made to circumvent all earlier orders by obtaining an order of the single Judge that they may be allowed to deposit a sum of Rs. 60,000/ in cash and permitted to remove the stock from the forest Coupes.
When the State of Bihar moved the learned Subordinate Judge, Palamau for a direction to auction the attached stock, the respondents moved an application on December 14, 1972, and obtained an order from the Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court staying the proceedings in the 1174 money suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Palamau.
In considering the question whether the filing of the application dated December 14, 1972, amounts to a Contempt of Court, the Court must take into account the whole course of the continuing contumacious conduct of the respondents from the beginning of the 'game '.
Clearly, not a single application made to the Single Judge was bonafide.
Every application was a daring 'raid ' on the Court and each was an abuse of the process of the Court.
The application dated December 14, 1972 praying that the proceedings in the money suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge should be stayed was made despite the fact that earlier, on January 10, 1972 the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court had expressly permitted the proceedings in the money suit to go on.
The application of the respondents clearly showed that they were intent upon obstructing the due course of the proceedings in the money suit in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Palamau and to obstruct the administration of justice by abusing the process of the Court.
[1179GH, 1180A E] (c) The application dated December 14, 1972 was an abuse of process of the Court, calculated to obstruct the due course of a judicial proceeding and the administration of justice and was therefore, a criminal contempt of Court; [1180H, 1181A] (d) though the respondents had expressed an unconditional apology to the Patna High Court, the conduct of the respondents is so reprehensible as to warrant condemnation by the imposition of a sentence.
[1181A]
