Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) It is a well known rule of statutory construction that a Tribunal or body should be considered to be endowed with such ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary to discharge its functions effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties.
In a case of this nature, the Tribunal should be considered as invested with such incidental or ancillary powers unless there is any indication in the statute to the contrary.
The words "shall follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other authority may think fit" in sub section (1) of section 11 of the Industrial Disputes Act are of the widest amplitude and confer ample power upon the Tribunal and other authorities to devise such procedure as the justice of the case demands.
The discretion thus conferred on these authorities to determine the procedure as they may think fit, however, is subject to the rules made by the 'appropriate Government ' in this behalf.
Nevertheless, all these authorities being quasi judicial in nature objectively determining matters referred to them, have to exercise their discretion in a judicial manner, without caprice, and according to the general principles of law and rules of natural justice.
[344 E F, H, 345A, C, F] (2) Where a party is prevented from appearing at the hearing due to a sufficient cause and is faced with an ex parte award, it is as if the party is visited with an award without a notice of the proceedings.
Where the Tribunal proceeds to make an award without notice to a party, the award is nothing but a nullity.
In such circumstances, the Tribunal has not only the power but also the duty to set aside the ex parte award and to direct the matter to be heard afresh.
Further, Rules 22 and 24(b) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957 make it clear that the Tribunal was competent to entertain an application to set aside an ex parte award.
[346 C E] (3) Merely because the ex parte award was based on the statement of the manager of the appellant, the order setting aside the ex parte award, in fact, does not amount to review.
The expression "review" is used in two distinct senses, namely, (i) a procedural review which is either inherent or implied in a court or Tribunal to set aside a palpably erroneous order passed under a 342 misapprehension by it, and (ii) a review on merits when the error sought to be corrected is one of law and is apparent on the face of the record.
When a review is sought due to a procedural defect, the inadvertent error committed by the Tribunal must be corrected ex debito justitiae to prevent the abuse of its process, and such power inheres in every court or Tribunal.
[347 B C, E G] Narshi Thakershi vs Pradvumansinghji, A.I.R. , distinguished.
(4) The Tribunal had not become functus officio and, therefore, had the jurisdiction to set aside the ex parte award.
To contend that the Central Government alone could set aside the ex parte award is not correct.
Under section 17 A an award becomes enforceable on the expiry of 30 days from the date of its publication under section 17.
The proceedings with regard to a reference under section 10 of the Act are, therefore, not deemed to be concluded until the expiry of 30 days from the publication of the award.
Till then the Tribunal retains jurisdiction over the dispute referred to it for adjudication and upto that date it has the power to entertain an application in connection with such dispute.
That stage is not reached till the award becomes enforceable under section 17 A. [347 G, 348 A B] (5) The jurisdiction of the Tribunal had to be seen on the date of the application made to it and not the date on which it passed the impugned order.
There is no finality attached to an ex parte award because it is always subject to its being set aside on sufficient cause being shown.
The Tribunal had the power to deal with an application properly made before it for setting aside the ex parte award and pass suitable orders.
[348 D E]
