The Tamil Nadu Industrial Establishment (National and Festival Holidays) Act, 1958 was a legislation intended to provide for national and festival holidays in industrial establishments in the State of Tamil Nadu.
Section 3 of the Act provides that every employee in an industrial establishment shall be entitled to four national and five festival holidays in each calender year.
Sub section (1) of section 5 provides that `notwithstanding any contract to the contrary every employee shall be paid wages for each of the holidays allowed to him under section 3.
Sub section (2) of section 5 confers upon the employer the right to call upon the workmen to come and work on such holidays on the fulfilment of the conditions set out therein The appellant was an industrial establishment owning textile mills in the State of Tamil Nadu.
In respect of a claim for bonus for the year 1974 75 there was a dispute between the management and its workmen.
This resulted in a strike by the workmen, from January 21, 1976 to February 5, 1976 which was called off by the workmen on February 6, 1976.
The management paid the workmen wages for the month of January 1976 after excluding therefrom the wages payable for the period of strike during January namely January 21 to January 31, 1976.
The Management having withheld the wages payable for January 26, 1976 the first respondent addressed a communication stating that in view of section 5 of the Act payment of wages for January 26, 1976 had to be made.
The management challenged the order by a Writ Petition in the High Court.
The High Court held that having regard to the provisions contained in sections and sub section (I) of section 5 of the Act, the appellant was bound to pay the workmen wages for January 26, 1976 even though the workmen were on strike on that date and dismissed the Writ Petition Allowing the appeal to this Court ^ HELD: (1) The liability of the Management to pay wages for the national and festival holidays under section 3 read with sub section (1) of section 5 of the Act is subject to the rights under sub section (2) of section 5 of the Act to call upon the workmen to come and work on such holidays.
303 (2) The construction placed by the High Court on sub Section (2) of section 5 of the Act cannot be accepted.
Under the scheme of the Act the workmen are entitled to wages for the national and festival holidays under section 3 read with sub section (I) of section 5, but this right of theirs ' is subject to the right of management given under sub section (2) of section 5 to call upon the workmen to come and work on such holidays.
Any other construction would make the provision contained in sub section (2) of section 5 wholly nugatory.
[308H; 309A] (3) Both sub sections (1) and (2) of section 5 contain non obstante clauses.
While the non obstante clause in sub section (I) of section 5 gives to the workmen the right to claim wages for the national or festival holidays `notwithstanding any contract to the contrary ' the non obstante clause in sub section (2) of section 5 subordinates the right of the workmen to claim wages for the national or festival holidays `notwithstanding anything contained in section 3.
sub sections (1) and (2) of section 5 have been enacted with separate and distinct objects and they operate on different planes.
[306H; 307A] Vasudevan, R.M.S. Union vs Lotus Mills Ltd. [1977] II LLJ 483 overruled.
(4) It would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case whether or not wages become payable in the context of strike.
When a Strike is neither illegal being not in contravention of any statutory provision, nor unjustified having been lodged as a protest against the unreasonable attitude of the management, there is no reason to deprive the workmen of their wages.
[309B] Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. vs Workers of the Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. ; and Management of Chandramalai Estate, Ernakulam vs Its Workmen ; referred to.
In the instant case the workmen went on strike without serving a notice under section 22 of the Industrial Dispute Act 1947.
That being so the strike resorted to by the workmen was wholly unjustified if not illegal.
When the workmen themselves brought about a situation by going on a strike they cannot be permitted to claim wages under sub section (1) of section 5 of the Act since the management were deprived of their right under sub section (2) of section 5 of the Act.
[309E]
