In a petition under article 32 of the Constitution the petitioner detenu complained that though the grounds of detention were served on the detenu on the date of arrest (October 20, 1980) the materials and documents on which the order of detention was based were not supplied to him till November 5, 1980 and that his representation dated November 18, 1980 was disposed of nearly a month later (December 15, 1980) and that the failure on the part of the detaining authority to supply the requisite documents and materials and the unexplained delay in the disposal of the representation constituted violation of the safeguards contained in Art, 22(5) of the Constitution which vitiated the order of detention.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: It is well settled that the law of preventive detention has to satisfy a two fold test: (1) that the protection and the guarantee afforded under article 22(5) of the Constitution are complied with, and (2) that the procedure is just and reasonable.
[463G] Before an "effective representation" could be made by the detenu he must be supplied with the documents and materials which form the basis of the grounds of detention and unless this is done there could be no question of making any representation, much less an "effective representation" against the order of detention.
The documents and materials relied upon in the order of detention form an integral part of the grounds and must be supplied to the detenu pari passu the grounds of detention.
[461B] Smt.
Icchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India & Ors. ; and Smt.
Shalini Soni & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; referred to.
If procedure under article 21 has to be reasonable, fair and just, then the words 'effective representation ' appearing in article 22(5) must be construed so as to provide a real and meaningful opportunity to the detenu to explain his case to the detaining authority in his representation.
If the words 'effective representation ' are interpreted in an artificial or fanciful manner, then it would defeat the very object not only of article 22(5) but also of article 21 of the Constitution.
It is settled law that it is of the utmost importance that all the necessary safeguards laid down by the Constitution under article 21 or article 22(5) should be complied with fully and strictly and any departure from any of the safeguards would vitiate the order of detention.
[463E F] Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 2 SCR 621 referred to.
460 In the instant case not only were the documents and materials not supplied to the detenu alongwith the order of detention but there had been an unexplained delay of about 25 days in disposing of the representation of the detenu.
[465B] [Despite repeated warnings by this Court the detaining authorities do not care to comply with the spirit and tenor of the safeguards contained in article 22(5) of the Constitution.
There should be no difficulty in keeping copies of the documents and materials referred to in the order of detention and supplying them to the detenu along with the order of detention.
This dereliction on the part of the detaining authorities results in the release of persons indulging in such anti national activities as smuggling though on merits the detentions in suitable cases may be justified.]
