Dismissing the appeal and maintaining the conviction and sentences of the appellants, the Court ^ HELD:(1) It is well settled that where the inference of guilt of an accused person is to be drawn from circumstantial evidence only, those circumstances must, in the first place, be cogently established.
Further, those circumstances should be of a definite tendency pointing towards the guilt of the accused, and in their totality, must unerringly lead to the conclusion that within all human probability, the offence was committed by the accused and none else.
In the instant case, the following circumstances had been correctly found to have been established by the prosecution: (i) Rama Nand accused had a strong motive to murder his wife, Sumitra.
(ii) Sumitra was last seen alive with Rama Nand, appellant in the family house at Jherwin on the night between 13th and 14th May, 1972.
(iii) (a) Rama Nand and the other co accused falsely gave out that she had committed suicide by jumping into the river.
They 'planted ' a Salwar and a pair of shoes on the bank of the Sutlaj and gave out that they belonged to the deceased, and Shish Ram lodged a false report with the police to the effect that she had committed suicide by jumping into the river.
The Salwar and the shoes, which had been 'planted ' there to manufacture false clues by the accused, did not belong to Sumitra, and the accused falsely asserted that whose articles belong to the deceased.
(b) The story given out by the accused persons that upto 11 a.m. on May 14, 1972, Sumitra was planting chillies along with Sheela and other members of the family of the accused, was false.
(iv) The gold chain (exhibit P 1) and the watch (exhibit P 2) which Sumitra used to wear on her person all the 24 hours, and the clothes (exhibit P 5 to P 10) which she had on her person and the basket (exhibit P 11) and umbrella (exhibit P 12) which she was carrying when on the evening of May 13, 1972 she came to house of the accused at Jherwin, were recovered from the house of the accused.
(v) Some days after the occurrence, one Paranda was found from the jungle near this village.
There was a bunch of hair in the plated tail of this Paranda.
The tail appeared to have been cut.
These hair sticking in the paranda and those found entangled in the Dupatta of the deceased were according to the Forensic Expert of one and the same person.
(vi) A legless decomposed corpse was recovered from the Sutlej near village Randol in a mutilated condition.
But its identity [451G H, 452A E, 453A B] (2) Even on the assumption that the dead body of the victim was not found, circumstances (i) to (v) mentioned above in their cumulative effect includably and rationally compel the conclusion that Sumitra had died and it was Rama 445 Nand accused who had intentionally caused her death.
Ordinarily, the recovery of the dead body of the victim or a vital part of it, bearing marks of violence is sufficient proof of homicidal death of the victim.
Even so, discovery of the dead body of the victim bearing physical evidence of violence, has never been considered as the only mode of proving the corpus delicti in murder.
Indeed very many cases are of such a nature where the discovery of the dead body is impossible.
A blind adherence to this old doctrine of Sir Mathew Hale that "for a conviction of murder atleast the body was found dead" would open the door wide open for many a heinous murderer to escape with impunity simply because they were a cunning and clever enough to destroy the body of their victim.
In the context of our law, Hale 's enunciation has to be interpreted no more than emphasising that where the dead body of the victim in a murder case is not found, other cogent and satisfactory proof of homicidal death of the victim must be adduced by the prosecution.
Such proof may be the direct ocular account of an eye witness, or by circumstantial evidence, or by both.
But where the fact of corpus delicti, i.e. 'homicidal death ' is sought to be established by circumstantial evidence alone, the circumstances must be of a clinching and definitive character unerringly leading to the inference that the victim concerned has met a homicidal death.
Even so, this principle of caution cannot be pushed too far as requiring absolute proof.
Perfect proof is seldom to be had in this imperfect world, and absolute certainty is a myth.
That is why under Section 3, Evidence Act, a fact is said to be "proved", if the Court considering the matters before it, considers its existence so probable that a prudent man ought.
under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon the supposition that it exists.
The corpus delicti or the fact of homicidal death, therefore, can be proved by telling and inculpating circumstances which definitely lead to the conclusion that within all human probability, the victim has been murdered by the accused concerned.
[457 D H, 458A D]
