Section 14 of the Official Secrets Act provides that in addition to and without prejudice to any powers which a Court may possess to order the exclusion of the public from any proceedings if, in the course of proceedings before a Court against any person for an offence under this Act, the prosecution makes an application that publication of any evidence to be given would be prejudicial to the safety of the State.
The Court may make an order prohibiting the publication of evidence to be given or of any statement to be made in the course of proceedings if it is of opinion that the proceedings would be prejudicial to the safety of the State.
On the allegation that the accused had passed on some military secrets to the enemy resulting in serious detriment to the safety and security of the country the accused were charge sheeted under sections 3, 9 and 10 of the Act.
During the commitment inquiry the prosecution prayed that the accused should not be allowed to have access to or be given copies of statements of witnesses recorded by the Magistrate.
The defence lawyers were allowed to take notes of the statements of witnesses.
When the Magistrate asked the defence lawyers to produce their note books for perusal, they claimed privilege under section 126 of the Evidence Act on the ground that they contained certain instructions given to them by the accused which amounted to privileged communication and that for this reason they could not be looked into by the Court.
The Magistrate upheld the objection.
Purporting to follow one of its earlier decisions the High Court in a revision filed by the State held that the Magistrate should have taken legal action against the lawyer for flouting its order by not producing the note books on the ground of privilege.
It also held that in view of the provisions of section 14 of the Act not only could the public be excluded from the hearing but even the statements of witnesses recorded by the Court could not be made available to the accused or his counsel.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that the opening words of section 14 really amounted to a non obstante clause overriding the provisions of all Acts including the Code of Criminal Procedure and the mode of trial contemplated by section 14 would take precedence over the mode of trial provided by section 251 A 662 or section 252 of the Code and (2) the Magistrate could not only hold the proceedings in camera but could exclude publication of any evidence, including the right of accused to get notes of the statements recorded during the police investigation or during inquiry or trial.
^ HELD: The opening words of section 14 "in addition and without prejudice to any powers which a Court may possess" clearly reveal that the intention of the legislature was to give only an enabling additional power to the Court regarding holding of the proceedings in camera.
The legislature never intended that the inherent powers possessed by the Court to hold the proceedings in camera in suitable cases should in any way be affected by section 14.
The intention was merely to give an additional power to strengthen the hands of the Court for holding the proceedings in camera where the necessities of the situation demanded.
[669F H] It is well settled that a non obstante clause has the effect of overriding the provisions of a law or of the law in which the said clause is inserted.
The non obstante clause cannot reasonably be read as overriding anything contained in any relevant existing law which is inconsistent with the new enactment.
Normally a non obstante clause is always expressed in a negative form i.e. by using the words "notwithstanding anything contained" or "anything contained in previous law shall not affect the provisions of a particular Act" and so on.
[670B E] In the instant case the words "in addition and without prejudice to any powers" cannot be construed to be a non obstante clause at all so as to override other provisions of the Act or those of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[670E] Aswini Kumar Ghosh & Anr.
vs Arabinda Bose & Anr. ; referred to.
Interpretation of Statutes, Vepa P. Sarathi, 2nd Edn.
referred to.
Section 14 not only confers powers on a Court for holding the proceedings in camera but also to exclude publication of any evidence which includes the right of the accused to get copies of the statements recorded during police investigation or during the inquiry or during trial.
[670G] The right to obtain copies of statements of witnesses recorded by the police is a very valuable right because without having those statements in his possession, it would be difficult for the accused to defend himself effectively.
If an accused is not supplied either the statements recorded by the police or the statements of witnesses recorded at the inquiry or the trial he cannot defend himself and instruct his lawyer to cross examine the witnesses successfully and effectively so as to disprove the prosecution case.
[671D E] Section 14, therefore.
could never have intended to take away or deprive an accused of this valuable right which has been conferred on him by the Criminal Law of the land.
The first part of the section does not prohibit or exclude giving to an accused person copies of the statements of witnesses either during police investigation or in court but is mentioned merely as a motive or reason for holding proceedings in camera.
The entire sentence starting from "application is made by the prosecution on the ground that the publication of any evidence to be given or of any statement to be made in the course of the 663 proceedings would be prejudicial to the safety of the State" that all or any portion of the public should be excluded during any part of the hearing has to be read conjunctively as one composite sentence and there is no warrant for truncating it into two separate parts dealing with different subject matters.
The words 'publication of any evidence ' do not indicate that the accused should not be allowed access to the evidence recorded by the Court: they are merely made to highlight the ground for holding the proceedings in camera because if public are allowed to be present during the hearing the evidence which is recorded in their presence will amount to publication and it is in that sense alone that the word publication has been used in section 14.
[671F H] If it is held that section 14, by using the word 'publication ' deprives an accused of getting any copies of the statement of witnesses or of the judgment under section 548 of the Code of Criminal Procedure or Criminal Rules of Practice framed by the High Court then it would be difficult to uphold the constitutional validity of section 14 because in that event the procedure would become extremely unreasonable, harsh and prejudicial to the accused as a result of which the case would have been tried according to a procedure which was not in consonance with the provisions of article 21 of the Constitution.
[672G H] The apprehension that if the accused was allowed access to copies of statements recorded by the police or the Magistrate it would amount to publication, is not well founded.
Under the provisions of section 5 of the Act, any person who is found in possession or control of any document or information and makes it public would also be deemed to have committed an offence under that section and would be prosecuted and liable to a heavy penalty.
This prohibits even the lawyers from disclosing the evidence outside the Court.
[673B C] In the instant case the Magistrate was fully justified in not compelling the lawyer to surrender his register which contained a part of the privileged communication and even if the lawyer had taken down the evidence in extenso for the limited purpose of using it to defend the accused or cross examine the witnesses, he could not be prevented from doing so, nor does section 14 contemplate or envisage such a course of action.
[673E F] The Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal vs Satyen Bhowmik & Ors., , overruled.
Anthony Allen Fletcher vs State 78 Calcutta Weekly Notes 313 approved.
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra
