By an order made on March 20, 1976 the Kerala State Government declared that raw cashewnut was an essential article under section 2(a) of the Kerala Essential Articles Control (Temporary Powers) Act, 1961 and thereafter promulgated the Kerala Raw Cashewnuts (Procurement and Distribution) Order 1977 under section 3 thereof, regulating the procurement and distribution of raw cashewnuts in the State of Kerala.
The expression "essential article" is defined in section 2(a) of the Kerala Act as "an article (not being an essential commodity as defined in the ) which may be declared by the Government by a notified order to be an essential article".
Under Section 2(a) (v) of the essential commodity means "foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils.
" In their petitions under article 32 of the Constitution the petitioners who were engaged in the processing of raw cashewnuts urged that raw cashewnut being a foodstuff, which was an essential commodity under the Central Act, the State Government could not make a declaration that it was an essential article under section 2(a) of the State Act and that for this reason the declaration and the impugned order were ultra vires the State Act.
On behalf of the State Government it was contended that the expression "foodstuffs" meant only those articles which could be directly consumed without any kind of processing since the order regulated only the procurement and distribution of raw cashewnuts which were used as industrial raw material, they could not be called foodstuffs in the strict sense and were not an "essential commodity" within the meaning of that term under the Central Act.
Allowing the petitions, ^ HELD: Raw cashewnut is a foodstuff under section 2(a)(v) of the Central Act and hence cannot be declared as an essential article under section 2(a) of the Kerala Act.
No order could therefore be made by the State Government under section 3 thereof in respect of raw cashewnuts.
Therefore the declaration made by the State Government to the effect that raw cashewnut is an essential article under the Kerala Act and the impugned order made thereunder are liable to be quashed.
[694 B C] The words in parenthesis in section 2(a) of the State Act make it clear that the State Government can declare as an essential article under the State Act 677 only an article which is not an essential commodity under the Central Act.
It is a well known rule of interpretation that associated words take their meaning from one another and that is the meaning of the rule of statutory construction noscitur a sociis.
When the term 'foodstuffs ' is associated with edible oilseeds which have to be processed before the oil in them can be consumed, it is appropriate to interpret 'foodstuffs ' in the wider sense as including all articles of food which may be consumed by human beings after processing.
[687 C] Having regard to the fact that the object of the Central Act is to regulate production, supply and distribution of essential commodities amongst the people, the expression 'foodstuffs ' should be given a wider meaning as including even raw materials which ultimately result in edible articles.
[687 D E] The dictionary meaning of 'foodstuff ' is 'a substance with food value ' and 'the raw material of food before or after processing '.
Therefore 'foodstuff ' need not necessarily mean only the final food product which is consumed.
It also includes raw food articles which may, after processing, be used as food by human beings.[688 F] State of Bombay vs Virkumar Gulabchand Shah ; and Tika Ramji & Ors. etc.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. ; at 418 referred to.
Although as a result of large exports of cashewnut it is now in short supply and its price is beyond the reach of the common man, it is an article of food eaten in raw form and is used in various preparations.
It is eaten in all parts of the country though it is grown in a few States.
It is exported as foodstuff.
It is, therefore, a foodstuff and must be classified as an essential commodity.
[692 M G] There is no substance in the argument that cashewnuts can be treated as an essential article only for the purposes of export and not an essential commodity under the Central Act.
The Central Government can make an Order under the Central Act even when an essential commodity is used for industrial purposes or for purposes of export.
Essential commodities do not cease to be essential commodities under the Central Act merely because they are exported after they are processed in India.
[693 B] The argument that so long as the Central Government had not made an order in respect of raw cashewnuts the State Government can pass an order is not available in the circumstances by reason of the definition of essential article in the Kerela Act.
[693 E]
