The appellant had been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment exceeding two years by the Sessions Judge, Delhi, on February 26/27, 1979.
By his Order dated February 27, 1979, passed under section 389(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Sessions Judge who had convicted the appellant suspended the execution of the sentence to afford the appellant time to file an appeal.
On March 21, 1979 the High Court of Delhi admitted his appeal and by an order of the same date directed that his sentence shall remain suspended provided the appellant furnished a personal bond and surety in the amount of Rs. 5,000/ to the satisfaction of the Sessions Judge, which was complied with.
The respondent and the appellant contested the election as rival candidates to the Lok Sabha from No. 18 Mahasamund Parliamentary Constituency in Madhya Pradesh.
The last date for filing nominations was December 7, 1979.
The scrutiny of the nomination papers took place on December 11, 1979.
The Returning Officer by his Order dated December 11, 1979 rejected the objection of the respondent that the appellant was disqualified from being chosen as a candidate in view of sub section (2) of section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and accepted the appellant 's nomination as valid.
The result of the election was declared on January 7, 1980.
The election result was notified on January 10, 1980.
The appellant was declared elected and the respondent was defeated.
Thereafter, on February 18, 1980 the respondent filed an election petition 1 of 1980 in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh to get the election of the appellant declared void under section 100(1)(a) and 100(1)(b)(i) of the Act challenging that at the date of the election including the date of the scrutiny of the nomination papers the appellant was disqualified by virtue of section 8(2) of the Act from being chosen as candidate on account of his aforesaid conviction and sentence.
The appellant 's appeal pending in the High Court was transferred to the Supreme Court under the .
The Supreme Court by its judgment dated April 11, 1980 allowed the appeal set aside the conviction and sentence of the appellant and acquitted him of charges against him.
Subsequent 638 to this decision of the Supreme Court, by its judgment dated September 5, 1980 the High Court of Madhya Pradesh allowed the election petition with costs and declared the appellant 's election to be void on the ground contained in section 100(1)(d)(i) of the Act, hence the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1).
Abiding by the principle of stare decisis and following the ratio decidendi of Manni Lal 's case; , , the acquittal of the appellant in appeal prior to the pronouncement of the judgment of the High Court in the election petition had the result of wiping out his disqualification as completely and effectively as if it did not exist at any time including the date of the scrutiny of the nomination papers and that his nomination paper was properly accepted by the Returning Officer.
[660B C] Manani Lal vs Shri Parmai Lal & Ors. ; , applied (2) An order of acquittal particularly one passed on merits wipes off the conviction and sentence for all purposes, and as effectively as if it had never been passed.
An order of acquittal annulling or voiding a conviction operates from nativity.
[654B] Manni Lal vs Shri Parmai Lal & Ors.
, ; ; Dilip Kumar Sharma & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , followed.
(3) The ratio decidendi logically deducible from Manni Lal 's case is that if the successful candidate is disqualified for being chosen, at the date of his election or at any earlier stage of any step in the election process on account of his conviction and sentence exceeding two years ' imprisonment, but his conviction and sentence are set aside and he is acquitted on appeal before the pronouncement of judgment in the election petition pending against him, his disqualification is annulled rendered non est with retroactive force from its very inception, and the challenge to his election on the ground that he was so disqualified is no longer sustainable.
[656D E] (4) A plain reading of section 100(1) of the Act shows that it can be conveniently divided into two parts.
Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of the sub section fall in the first part and clause (d) along with its sub clauses falls in the second part.
The distinction between clauses (a), (b) and (c) in the first part and clause (d) in the second part lies in the fact that whereas on proof of any of the grounds mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c), the election has to be declared void without any further requirement, in a case falling under clause (d) the election cannot be declared void merely on proof of any of the grounds mentioned in its sub clauses, unless it is further proved "that the result of the election in so far as it concerns the returned candidate has been materially affected".
The expression "any nomination" occurring in sub clause (i) of clause (d) in the second part may include nomination of a returned candidate as well; but in the case of a returned candidate whose nomination has been improperly accepted, the effect on the result of the election so far as it concerns him, is obvious.
However, if the election is challenged on the ground that the nomination of a candidate, other than the returned candidate, has been improperly accepted, the petitioner in order to succeed will be required to prove under clause (d)(i) in addition to improper acceptance the further fact that thereby 639 the result of the election so far as it concerns the returned candidate has been materially affected.
[651H 652D] Clause (a) of sub section (1) requires that the disqualification or lack of qualification of the returned candidate is to be judged with reference to "the date of his election", which date, according to section 67A is "the date on which a candidate is declared by the returning officer under the provisions of section 53 or section 66, to be elected to a House of Parliament or of the Legislature of a State".
But, the word "disqualified" used in clause (a) is capable of an expensive construction also, which may extend the scope of the inquiry under this clause to all the earlier steps in the election process.
Section 7(b) defines "disqualified" to mean "disqualified for being chosen as and for being, a member of either House of Parliament etc.
" The words "for being chosen" in that definition have been interpreted by the Supreme Court in Chatturbhuj 's case; , , to include the whole "series of steps starting with the nomination and ending with the announcement of the election.
It follows that if a disqualification attaches to a candidate at any one of these stages he cannot be chosen." But this definition of "disqualified" is in terms of section 7(b) meant for Chapter III, in Part II of the Act; while section 100 falls in Chapter III of Part VI.
If the expression "for being chosen" which is a central limb of the definition of "disqualified", is given such an extensive interpretation which will bring in its train the whole series of steps and earlier stages in the election process commencing with the filing of the nominations, it will be repugnant to the context and inconsistent with "the date of his election".
Such a construction which will introduce disharmony and inconsistency between the various limbs of clause (a) has to be eschewed.
In the context of clause (a), therefore, the ambit of the words "for being chosen" in the definition of "disqualified" has to be restricted to "the date of his election" i.e. declaration of the result of the election under section 53 or section 66, and such date is to be the focal point of time in an inquiry under this clause.
[652H 653D] In contrast with clause (a), in a case falling under clause (d)(i) of section 100, if an objection is taken before the Returning Officer against the nomination of any candidate on the ground of his being not qualified, or being disqualified for being chosen the crucial date as per section 36(2)(a) with reference to which the existence or non existence of such disqualification is to be enquired into is the date of scrutiny of the nomination of the candidate.
[653C] Assuming that technically, the election petitioner 's case that survives is one under clause (d)(i), and not under clause (a) of section 100(1).
Even so, the fact remains that, in substance, the election of the appellant is being challenged on the ground that on account of his conviction and sentence exceeding two years, the appellant was under Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution read with section 8(2) and 36(2)(a) of the Act, disqualified for being chosen to fill the seat concerned.
Such being the real ground of challenge, apart from sub clause (i), sub clause (iv) of clause (d) of section 100(1) will also be attracted, because the phrase "non compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act etc.
" according to the decision of this Court in Durga Shankar Mehta 's case is wide enough to cover a case where the improper acceptance or rejection of the nomination is challenged on the ground of the candidate being disqualified for being chosen.
[653E G] 640 Durga Shanker Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh & Ors.
[1955] 1 SCR 267 and Chatturbhuj Vithaldas Jasani vs Nareshwar Parashram Ors., , followed.
(a) It is true that in order to adjudicate upon the validity of the challenge in the appellant 's election under clause (d) (i) of section 100(1), what was required to be determined by the High Court was whether the nomination of the appellant was properly or improperly accepted by the Returning Officer.
But, in order to determine this question, it was necessary for the High Court to decide, as a preliminary step, whether the appellant was disqualified, at the date of scrutiny of the nomination papers, for if he was disqualified, his nomination could not be said to have been properly accepted by the Returning Officer and if, on the other hand, he was not disqualified, his nomination would have to be regarded as properly accepted by the Returning Officer.
The primary question before the High Court therefore, was whether or not the appellant was disqualified at the date of scrutiny of the nomination papers and it is difficult to see how the determination of this question could be made on any principle other than that governing the determination of a similar question under clause (a) of section 100(1).
If, as laid down in Manni Lal 's case, the returned candidate cannot be said to be disqualified at the date of the election, if before or during the pendency of the election petition in the High Court his conviction is set aside and he is acquitted by the appellate court, on the application of the same principle, that, in like circumstances, the returned candidate cannot be said to be disqualified at the date of scrutiny of the nomination papers.
On this view, the appellant could not be said to be disqualified on the date of scrutiny of the nomination paper since his conviction was set aside in appeal by this Court and if that be so, the conclusion must inevitably follow that the nomination of the appellant was properly accepted by the Returning Officer.
The position is analogous to that arising where a case is decided by a Tribunal on the basis of the law then prevailing and subsequently the law is amended with retrospective effect and it is then held by the High Court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction that the order of the Tribunal discloses an error of law apparent on the face of the record, even though having regard to the law as it then existed, the Tribunal was quite correct in deciding the case in the manner it did.
[656C H] Venkatachalam vs Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Company Limited, ; , referred to.
