The prosecution alleged that when the appellant, a motor car driver who was living as a tenant in the out house of the bungalow belonging to the family of the deceased, developed a fancy for the sister of the deceased.
His overtures created resentment in the family and the deceased took upon himself the task of preventing the appellant from pursuing his sister.
The appellant 's effort to take custody of the deceased 's sister through legal proceedings had failed; sometime later on a complaint to the police that the appellant had been making indecent overtures towards her he was arrested.
A day before the day of the occurrence the appellant was alleged to have threatened to kill the deceased if he opposed his (appellant 's) marriage with his sister.
It was further alleged that while the deceased was returning home on his scooter after leaving his sister in the school where she was working as a teacher, the appellant fired a shot at him with a pistol at which the deceased fell dead instantaneously.
He was convicted under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to death.
The order of conviction and sentence was confirmed by the High Court.
On the question of sentence ^ HELD: 1.
The Sessions Court and the High Court were right in convicting the appellant under section 302 I.P.C. [779 G] (a) The mere circumstance that two or more courts have taken the same view of facts does not shut out all further inquiry into the correctness of that view.
Concurrence is not an insurance against the charge of perversity though a strong case has to be made out in order to support the charge that findings of fact recorded by more than one court are perverse.
The merit of the normal rule that concurrent findings ought not to be reviewed by this Court consists in the assumption that it is not likely that two or more tribunals would come to the same conclusion unless it is a just and fair conclusion to come to.
[718 E G] 2.
While dealing with the question of sentence for the offence of murder, the normal sentence is the sentence of life imprisonment and not of death.
If in a same conclusion unless it is a just and fair conclusion to come to.
[778 E G] 772 balances do not choose to reveal the whole truth the Court while dealing with the question of sentence has to step in interstitially and take into account all reasonable possibilities having regard to the normal and natural course of human affairs.
In the instant case it would be unsafe, on the evidence on record, to sentence the appellant to the extreme penalty of death.
[780 H] The appellant, a poor motor car driver, must have been offended enormously when the deceased abused him that he was a man of two paise worth and that if he attempted to marry his sister he would break his hands and feet and that his poverty was being put up as the reason why his sister would not be allowed to marry him.
The dispute thus assumed proportions of a fued over social status.
The poor man was fretting that the rich man 's daughter would not be allowed to marry him for the mere reason that he did not belong to an equal class of society.
The appellant, rightly or wrongly, believed that the girl was not unwilling to marry him.
The incident of the previous evening could not be considered as affording "sudden" provocation to the appellant for the crime committed by him on the following morning.
It cannot reduce the offence of murder into a lesser offence, but the mental turmoil and the sense of being socially wronged through which the appellant was passing could not be overlooked while deciding the appropriate sentence.
[780 B D] Secondly the fact that, apart from the gun shot wound, the deceased had no other injury on his person except an abrasion on the left side of the chest evidently caused by the gun shot itself coupled with the fact that the scooter was found "standing" on the road showed that the deceased stopped on seeing the appellant and that there was an exchange of hot words between them culminating in the murder.
But since in the present case a part of the crucial evidence had been screened from the Court 's scrutiny the possibility of an altercation between the appellant and the deceased cannot reasonably be excluded.
[780 F H] (3) The evidence of the defence witnesses has failed to establish the alibi of the appellants.
The plea of alibi postulates the physical impossibility of the presence of the accused at the scene of offence by reason of his presence at another place.
The plea therefore succeeds only if it is shown that the accused was so far away at the relevant time that he could not be present at the place where the crime was committed.
But in the present case the evidence of the defence witnesses, accepting it at its face value, is consistent with the appellant 's presence at the factory at the appointed hour and half an hour later at the scene of offence.
So short is the distance between the two points.
[778 H; 779 D]
