The appellant a private company was carrying on the business of manufacture and sale of artificial marbles and tiles.
In or about 1957 the company moved the Government for acquiring additional land for purposes of the company and the Government on January 7, 1958 issued a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, which was followed by a separate notice by the Land Acquisition officer acquiring the land in dispute.
This was followed by another notification under section 6 of the Act which was served on the respondent on January 25, 1960.
The purpose of the acquisition was mentioned in the notification, as "public purposes for which the land is needed for Himalayan Tiles and Marble (Pvt) Ltd." The acquisition proceedings culminated in an award made under section 12 of the Act on April 11, 1961, which was published in the State Gazette on April 18, 1961.
On December 11, 1961 a letter was written on behalf of the Government informing the owner of the acquired land that possession would be taken on or about the 12th of January, 1962.
The first respondent in his writ petition to the High Court, contended that the Government was not competent to acquire the land for purposes of a private company which could not be said to be a public purpose under section 4 of the Act and prayed that the entire land acquisition proceedings should be quashed.
A Single Judge of the High Court accepted the plea, allowed the writ petition and quashed the land acquisition proceedings along with the notifications.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Letters Patent Bench which confirmed the view of the Single Judge and dismissed the appeal on the ground that the appellant had no locus standi to file the appeal, as it was not 'a person interested ' within the meaning of section 18(1) of the Act.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (1) the Letters Patent Bench of the High Court was wrong in holding that the appellant was not 'a person interested ' and therefore had no locus standi to file an appeal, and (2) in view of the various amendments in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 particularly in sections 40 and 41 it could not be said that the acquisition under section 4 was ultra vires of the Act.
236 Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1(i) The appellant was undoubtedly 'a person interested ' as contemplated by section 18(1) of the Act.
The High Court committed an error in throwing out the appeal of the appellant on the ground that it had no locus standi to file an appeal before the Bench.
[243F] (ii) The 'definition of 'a person interested ' given in Section 18 is an inclusive definition and must be liberally construed so as to embrace all persons who may be directly or indirectly interested either in the title to the land or in the quantum of compensation.
[240D] In the instant case, the lands were actually acquired for the purpose of the Company and once the land vested in the Government, after acquisition, it stood transferred to the Company under the agreement entered into between the Company and the Government.
Thus it cannot be said that the Company had no claim or title to the land at all.
Secondly, since under the agreement the Company had to pay the compensation, it was most certainly interested in seeing that a proper quantum of compensation was fixed so that the Company may not have to pay a very heavy amount of money.
For this purpose, the Company could undoubtedly appear and adduce evidence on the question of the quantum of compensation.
[240E F] (iii) The preponderance of judicial opinion seems to favour the view that the definition of person interested must be liberally construed so as to include a body, local authority, or a company for whose benefit the land is acquired and who is bound under an agreement to pay the compensation.
This view accords with the principles of equity, justice and good conscience.
[243 B] (iv) The view taken by the Orissa High Court or even by the Calcutta High Court that a company, Local authority or a person for whose benefit the land is acquired is not an interested person is not correct.
Such a person is vitally interested both in the title to the property as also in the compensation to be paid thereof because both these factors concern its future course of action and if decided against him seriously prejudice his rights.
[243E] Sunder Lal vs Paramsukhdas ; referred to; The Hindustan Sanitryware and Industries Ltd. Bahadurgarh & Anr.
vs The State of Haryana & Ors A.I.R. [1972] Punjab & Haryana 59, M. Kurpuswami vs The Special Tahsildar (L.A.) II Industrial Estate Ambathur at Saidapet, Madras {1967] approved; Comilla Electric Supply Ltd. vs East Bengal Bank Ltd. Comilla & ors.
A.I.R. [1939] Calcutta 669; State of orissa through the Land Acquisition Collector, Sambalpur vs Amarandra Pratap Singh & Anr.
A.I.R. [1967] orissa, 180 over ruled.
2(i) The properties not having vested in the Government the acquisition was not complete and its invalidity could not be cured by section 7 of the amendment Act.
[246 G] (ii) The basis of the decision in R. L. Arora vs State of U. P. [1962] Supp. 2 SCR 149 was removed by the .
By virtue of Section 7 of the amending Act, retrospective effect was given to the amendment superseding any judgment, decree or order passed before July 20, 1962.
The validity of the amending Act was upheld in R. L. Arora vs State of Uttar Pradesh ; [239 A, E] (iii) Even under section 7 of the amending Act, an acquisition made by a company prior to July 20, 1962 must fulfil the following conditions: (a) that 237 the land has been acquired and is vested in Government, (b) that the acquisition has been made under Clauses (a) and (b) or section 41, (c) that every such acquisition and any proceeding, order etc.
shall be deemed always as valid as if the provisions of sections 40 and 41 of the Act, as amended by the amending Act, were in force at all material times; and (d) that by virtue of section 7 validity to the acquisition is given to all actions taken in connection there with in spite of any judgment, decree or order of any court to the contrary.
[244F H] In the instant case the first condition that there must be a complete acquisition before section 7 could validate the same has not been fulfilled at all.
[245A] (iv) Until the possession of the entire land acquired was taken by the Government, the acquisition could not be a complete acquisition so as to attract the operation of section 7 of the amending Act.
[246H 247A] In the instant case the appellant did not appear before the Single Judge in the writ petition filed by the. respondents and the petition was contested only by the State.
Perhaps the appellant may have thought that as his interests were fully safeguarded lay the Government, it was not necessary for it at that stage to appear before the High Court.
The pleas of both the parties taken together clearly show that the entire possession of the property did not pass to the Government and thus no title vested, in the Government despite the notification acquiring the land.
[246F G]
