The Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act 1963 provides for the regulation of the marketing of agricultural produce in market areas to be established therefor in the State, Market Committees to be constituted for purposes connected with such markets, establishment of Market Fund for purposes of the Market Committees, and for purposes connected with these matters.
Section 3 empowers the Government by a notification to be published in the Official Gazette, to declare its intention of regulating the marketing of such agricultural produce in such areas as may be specified and section 4 provides that the marketing of the agricultural produce shall be regulated under the Act in the area specified in the notification.
Section(1) provides a principal market for every market area and one or more subsidiary markets, and section 5(2) empowers the Director to establish the principal market for the marketing of specified agricultural produce.
Section 6 provides that no person shall use any place in the market area for the marketing of the declared agricultural produce or operate in the market area or in any market therein as a trader, commission agent, broker, processor, weighman, measurer, surveyor, warehouseman or in any other capacity in relation to the marketing of the declared agricultural produce, on and after the date on which the declaration under section 4(1) is made.
Section 6(2) provides that section 6(1) shall not apply to sales by retail, sales by an agriculturist who sells his own produce; and sales by a person to another for the latter 's personal consumption.
The Maharashtra Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Rules, 1963 were promulgated pursuant to the power conferred by section 60 of the Act.
Rule 5 provides that no person shall market any declared agricultural produce in any place in a market area other than the principal market or subsidiary 867 market established therein.
The proviso to the rule enables the Director of Marketing to authorise a Market Committee to permit a trader or commission agent to market declared agricultural produce or to permit any other market functionary to operate at any place within the market area as may be mentioned by the Market Committee in the licence granted to such trader.
The petitioners who were wholesale traders in onions and potatoes in their writ petitions to the Supreme Court assailed the notices requiring them to carry on business in regulated agricultural produce in the market yard at the specified areas of the State, and at no other place, contending that: (1) the 1963 Act, did not invest the Director of Marketing or the Market Committee with any power to compel a trader to transfer this activity from a previously existing market to a principal or subsidiary market established under section 5 of the Act (2) Rule 5 was inconsistent with section 6 and therefore ultra vires.
(3) The Bombay Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939 and the Agricultural Produce Marketing Acts of other States such as Karnataka provided or indicated by an express provision that once a market was established it was not permissible to market or trade outside the market and that the absence of such an express provision in the 1963 Act showed that no such ban was contemplated by the Act.
(4) The transactions between trader and trader and transactions by which the agricultural produce was imported into the market area from outside the market areas were outside the purview of the Act and if section 5 and rule 5 were intended to cover such transactions also they were invalid.
(5) The statue itself imposed and provided for stringent supervision and control, sufficient to regulate transactions between traders and traders, that it was superfluous to insist that such transactions do take place in the market only.
(6) Section 6 of the Act made a distinction between (a) the use of any place in the market area for the marketing of the declared agricultural produce, and (b) the operation in the market areas or in any market therein as a trader, commission agent, broker etc.
in relation to the marketing of agricultural produce and that the distinction was in reality a distinction between a sale by a producer to a trader and a subsequent sale by a trader to a trader, and consequently the ban imposed by Rule 5 applied only to a sale of the agricultural produce by a producer to a trader.
(7) Section 13(1A) which declared the area comprising greater Bombay a market area for the purposes of the Act was invalid as it was wholly unreasonable to constitute such a large area into a single market area.
(8) when a market yard was disestablished at one place and established at another place it was the duty of the concerned authority to invite and hear objections and failing to do so, was a violation of the principles of natural justice and the notification establishing the market yard elsewhere was bad.
Dismissing the writ petitions and appeals: ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The power conferred by section 5 of the Act to establish a principal market or a subsidiary market carries with it the power to disestablish such market.
Section 5 of the Act, read with sections 14 and 21 of the Maharashtra General Clauses Act vest enough power in the Director to close an existing market and establish it elsewhere.
The repealed Act of 1939 also empowered the State Government to declare any market area to be a principal market yard for the area.
The power to issue notifications, orders etc.
includes 868 the power to exercise in like manner to add to, amend, vary or rescind any notification, order, rule etc.
Any other construction would frustrate the object of the legislation.
[880 A C, 881 C, D] Bapubhai Ratanchand Shah vs State of Bombay LVII 1955 Bom.
L.R. p. 892, 903 904, approved.
(ii) Rule 5 is not ultra vires.
If for the more effective regulation of marketing it is thought that all marketing operations in respect of declared agricultural produce should be carried on only in the principal and subsidiary markets established under the Act, it cannot be said that a rule made for that purpose is beyond the competence of the rule making authority under the Act.
[881G, 882C] (iii) The submission that all regulatory measures contemplated by the Act and the Rules may be enforced equally effectively wherever business in agricultural produce is carried on in the market area outside the principal and subsidiary markets as within the principal and subsidiary markets is without force.
If that is done, the regulation will very soon be reduced to a farce.
The Market Committee will be forced to employ an unduly large number of officers.
The producer 's interest will not be properly served because a producer will not be able to deal face to face with several traders and would have little chance of obtaining the best price for his produce.
This cannot happen if he is persuaded to take his produce to the place of business of an individual trader outside the principal or subsidiary market.
There is a greater possibility of abuse and greater likelihood of the object of the Act being frustrated.
Fair price to the agriculturist will soon be a mirage and the evil sought to be prevented will persist.
[882 E H] Kewal Krishan Puri & Anr.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
[1979] 3 S.C.R. p. 1217, 1247, referred to. 2.
There can be no question of any inconsistency between section 6 and rule 5.
Section 6 is applicable to both the situations before and after the establishment of markets, and is expressly declared to be subject to the rules providing for regulating the marketing of agricultural produce in the market area by stipulating that the marketing shall be carried on in the market established in the market area.
[883F, D E] 3.
The rule prescribing that no marketing operation in any declared agricultural produce shall be carried on outside the principal or subsidiary markets is consistent and in consonance with the scheme of the Act and is within the competence of the rule making authority and is reasonable.
Absence of an express provision in the Act to the effect that once a market is established it was not permissible to market or trade in agricultural produce outside the market itself merely means that greater latitude is given to the rule making authority to introduce regulation of marketing by stages and to ban all marketing activity outside the market.
This cannot lead to the inference that the rule making authority has no power to make a rule banning marketing activity 869 outside the market once the market is established even when such a ban is found to be necessary.
[884 B, 883 H 884 A] 4.
(i) The assumption that the Act was conceived in the interest of the agriculturists only and intended for their sole benefit is not well founded.
One of the principal objects sought to be achieved by the Act is the securing of a fair price to the agriculturist for his produce by the elimination of middlemen and other detracting factors.
But that is not the only object.
The Act is intended to regulate marketing of agricultural and certain other produce.
The marketing of agricultural produce is not confined to the first transaction of sale by the producer to the trader but must necessarily include all subsequent transactions in the course of the movement of the commodity into the ultimate hands of the consumer so long, of course, as the commodity retains its original character as agricultural produce.
While middlemen are sought to be eliminated, it is wrong to view the Act as one aimed at legitimate and genuine traders.[884D F] (ii) Promotion of grading, standardisation of agricultural produce, weighment, the provision for settlement of disputes arising out of transactions connected with the marketing of agricultural produce and ancillary matters are as much to the benefit of the producer as the consumer.
Clearly therefore the regulation of marketing contemplated by the Act involves benefits to the traders too in a large way.
Regulation of marketing of agricultural produce, if confined to the sales by producers within the marketing area to traders, will very soon lead to circumvention in the guise of sales by traders to traders or import of agricultural produce from outside the market area to within the market area.
[884G 885B] 5.
(i) It is not correct to say that the statute itself imposed and provided for such stringent supervision, and control sufficient and more, to regulate transactions between traders and traders, that it was superfluous to insist that such transactions do take place in the market only.
The other supervisory measures in the Act cannot be said to be sufficient to make it unnecessary for the traders to move their places of business into the market.
No amount of supervision may be as effective as when all the transactions take place within the market.
Nor is effective supervision at all possible if traders are dispersed all over the market area.
The rendering of services to the traders also will be far easier.
Therefore, localising marketing is helpful and necessary for regulation and control and for providing facilities.
[887E 888A] (ii) The requirement that the locus of transactions of sale and purchase of agricultural produce, including those between trade and trader, should be in the market cannot be said to be harsh or an excessive restriction on the Fundamental Right to carry on trade.
[888B] 6.
The proviso to rule 5 speaks of operating at any place within the market area by a trader, commission agent or other market functionary after obtaining a licence while the main provision refers to the marketing of declared agricultural produce at any place in the market area.
It cannot be contended that the proviso is unrelated to the main provision.
According 870 to ordinary canons of construction the proper function of a proviso is to accept and deal with a case which would otherwise fall within the general language of the main enactment.
[888F G] 7.
There was nothing unreal and unreasonable in establishing a single market for a large area.
It had become imperative in the public interest that the markets should be shifted from their former place to the new area.
The present village was chosen because it was free from congestion, conveniently located near another trunk road.
A railway line linking with both the Western Railway and the Central Railway and so on.
There is, therefore, nothing unreasonable in the statutory declaration of Greater Bombay and Turbhe Village as a market area; nor in the establishment of a single market in Turbhe Village for the entire market area.
[889B E] 8.
Where a market yard was disestablished at one place and established at another place, no exercise of a judicial or quasi judicial function is involved.
All that is involved is the declaration by a notification of the Government that a certain place shall be a principal market yard for a market area, upon which declaration certain statutory provisions at once spring into action and certain consequences prescribed by statute follow forthwith.
The making of the declaration in this context is an act legislative in character and does not obligate the observance of the rules of natural justice.
[891C F] Baits vs Lord Hailsham & Tulsipur Sugar Co. vs Notified Area Committee ; referred to.
The seeming confusion in the large number of notifications issued by the Government from time to time was not the result of any arbitrary or erratic action on the part of the Government but was the result of a desire to accommodate the traders as much as possible.
The old markets had existed from ancient days and it had become necessary to establish modern market yards with conveniences and facilities.
When this was sought to be done there were representations by the traders and the Government thought that it was advisable to give the traders sufficient time to enable them to prepare themselves to move into the new market yards.
The notifications establishing new market yards were therefore, cancelled and the old markets were allowed to function for sometime.
Later when the time was thought to be ripe, notifications establishing new market yards were once again issued.
[893 F, D E]
