Man Mohan Tuli, appellant in C.A. 2004/80, is the owner of a piece of land situate on the Grand Trunk Road near the sixth milestone as one goes from Delhi to Ghaziabad.
Appellant Tuli has constructed various buildings on his land for use as godowns and has rented them out to various transport companies engaged in bringing goods from other States and storing them before their transhipment to Delhi and other States beyond Delhi.
The trucks carrying the goods for various destinations pass along the G.T. Road and move into Tuli 's land.
After the trucks enter the land, the goods are unloaded into the godowns, sorted out and reloaded into the respective trucks meant for various destinations.
Thereafter, the trucks move out of the land and, passing through the Union Territory of Delhi after crossing the border line, proceed to their destinations.
The Municipal Corporation of Delhi by its Orders dated May 23, 1975 and July 7, 1975 directed that a Terminal Tax post be set up at the entrance to Tuli 's land in order to collect terminal tax on goods carried into that land.
A writ was filed before the High Court by the owners of transport companies as also by Tuli for quashing the orders of the Corporation seeking to levy Terminal Tax on the goods which were not meant for Delhi but for places beyond Delhi.
The High Court held that the Corporation was legally entitled to levy Terminal Tax at the point of territory of the Union Territory of Delhi even though the goods were sorted out in the godown of Tuli, resorted out and re loaded since as they while passing through the territory of Delhi undoubtedly entered the said territory.
Hence the appeals by special leave by appellant Tuli and others.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It is well settled that taxing statutes must be strictly interpreted giving every benefit of doubt to the tax payer.
A Terminal Tax could be levied only by the Corporation or the State which is the final destination of the goods sent from any other area.
A Terminal Tax signifies that there must be a terminus for the journey of the goods.
Terminus means the point to which main action tends, goal, end, finishing point, the point at which something comes to an end.
[899 D, 901 B D] 2.1 From a consideration of the decided cases of the Supreme Court, the following propositions emerge: (i) Terminal tax and octroi are similar kinds of levies which are closely interlinked with (a) destination of the goods (b) the user in the local area 895 on arrival of the goods.
Where the goods merely pass through a local area without being consumed therein the mere fact that the transport carrying the goods halt within the local area for transhipment or allied purposes would not justify the levy of either the terminal tax or octroi duty.
This is because the halting of the goods is only for an incidental purpose to effectuate the journey of the goods to the final destination by unloading, sorting and reloading them at a particular place.
[803 A C] (ii) There is a very thin margin of difference between a terminal tax and octroi.
In the case of the former (terminal tax) the goods reach their final destination and their entry into the area of destination immediately, attracts, payment of terminal tax irrespective of their user.
In the case of octroi, however, the tax is levied on goods for their use and consumption.
[903 D E] (iii) But at the same time, the goods while halting at a local area should leave for their destination within a reasonable time which may depend on circumstances of each case and if the goods are kept within the area for such a long and indefinite period that the purpose of reaching the final destination lying in a dicerent area is frustrated or defeated, they may be exigible to terminal tax.
[903 E F] (iv) Where the goods enter into a local area which is also the destination of the goods either temporarily or otherwise, the terminal tax would be leviable.
For instance, if A consigns goods from Patna in Bihar to Delhi in the name of X and X after having received the goods at Delhi rebooks or reloads the same on a transport for Chandigarh in the name of Y, terminal tax would be leviable by the Corporation at Delhi because the destination of the goods in the first instance was Delhi and that by itself would attract the imposition of terminal tax.
The fact that X rebooks them to Chandigarh would not make any difference because the act of rebooking by X at Delhi would constitute a fresh transaction by which the goods after having been carried into Delhi are further exported to Chandigarh.
On the other hand, when there is one continuous journey of the goods from Patna to Chandigarh without any break, the final destination would be Chandigarh even though the goods may have to be halted in Delhi for the purpose of unloading, sorting and reloading and may have to be kept in Delhi for a reosonable time.
In such a case terminal tax would not be exigible.
[903 G H, 904 A C] Punjab Flour & General Mills vs Lahore Corporation, ; The Central India Spinning & Weaving & Manufacturing Co. Ltd., The Empress Mills, Nagpur vs The Municipal Committee, Wardha, ; ; Bangalore Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co. Ltd. Bangalore vs Corporation of the City of Bangalore, ; Diamond Sugar Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Co. India Ltd. vs The Belgaum Borough Municipality, [1963] Supp. 2 SCR 216; Khyerbari Tea Co. Ltd. Champlain Realty Co. vs Town of Brattleboro, 67 L. Ed.
U.S. 309, quoted with approval.
896 2.2.
What would be a reasonable time for interpretation of the goods or halting, in the instant case, at the godown of Tuli, will naturally depend upon the special features or circumstances of each case, namely, the nature of the goods, the time taken in loading, sorting and unloading, the obstacles or difficulties which may be faced by the transporters and similar other factors.
Normally, a time of two to three days or even a week should be sufficient to clear the goods for its journey to the ultimate destination.
It may sometimes happen that goods may have to be kept in the godowns in the territory of Delhi for circumstances, beyond the control of the consignee or the consignor, for example, a garnishee order.
In considering what is reasonable time these circumstances would have to be taken into consideration.
[906 H, 907 A C] 2.3.
Rule 26 of the Terminal Tax Rules will have to be interpreted on the footing that section 178 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 does not contemplate levy of terminal tax for goods meant for destinations other than Delhi.
The word "immediately" appearing in Rule 26 has to be liberally construed so as to imply a reasonable period and if the export is delayed the rules may apply if a reasonable explanation has been given.
So far as rules regarding taking of passes, etc., at the barrier are concerned they would, of course, apply but subject to the conditions under which terminal tax can be imposed under section 178 of the Act which is the main charging section.
[907 C E] Amti Banaspati Co. Ltd vs The Union of India I.L.R. 1973 Delhi 237, distinguished.
