The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 permitted a tenant (land holder) to get the land cultivated by a bargadar, on the basis that the bargadar would share tho produce, and the Act contained provisions for enforcement of the right of the tenant to get such share.
Section 17 permitted the tenant to terminate the cultivation of the land by a bargadar and resume possession for his own cultivation on certain contingencies, one of them being that he requires it bona fide for personal cultivation.
The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 provided for the reduction in the ceiling area of the tenant, and incorporated sub sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 20B of the 1955 Act, which provided that where the bargadar had voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the cultivation of the land, the facility of cultivating the land personally by the tenant should be denied to him.
The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act 1977 inserted a Proviso and an Explanation to clause (8) of section 2 of the 1955 Act, which provided that a person or member of his family should reside in the greater part of the year in the locality where the land is situated and the principal source of his in come is derived from the land and that 'family ' shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of section 14.
The petitioners in their writ petitions to this Court assailed: (1) The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 as also amendments made to the said Act upto 1977, contending that the 1955 Act was constitutionally invalid and that the Amendment Act of 1972 was in the nature of a Ceiling Act prescribing a particular ceiling for the area of the land which should be retained by the tenant and that sub sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 20B of the 1955 Act were violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, as being discriminatory and arbitrary Once the tenant was given the right of personal cultivation and was permitted to get the land cultivated by a bargadar on the basis that the bargadar would share the produce, there was no warrant for not allowing the tenant to resume the land where a bargadar had voluntarily surrendered or abandoned the land and to deny the right of cultivating the land personally by the tenant, and (2) the Proviso 951 and the Explanation to section 2 of the 1955 Act deprive the petitioners of their rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(e) and (g) of the constitution in as much as it prevents them from either going to or residing in any other place in India and places a serious curb on their right to carry on an occupation other than agriculture.
On behalf of the respondents it was submitted that the rigour of sub sections (3) and (4) can be softened if clause (d) of section 17 is read down and interpreted in a way as to permit a tenant to resume the land under clause (d) of section 17 if the bargadar voluntarily surrenders or abandons the land.
Dismissing the writ petitions: ^ HELD: 1 (i).
The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 including the Amendment Act of 1972 and the proviso introduced by the Amendment Act of 1977 are constitutionally valid.
[961 G] In the instant case the 1955 Act and the Amendment Act of 1972 having been added to the Ninth Schedule as Entry Nos. 60 and 81 prior to April 24, 1973, are immune from challenge as being violative of Part III of the Constitution.
[954 A] Waman Rao & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., AIR 1981 SC 271, referred to.
(ii) Clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub section (1) of section 17 of the 1955 Act are the only grounds on which a tenant can get the land back for his personal cultivation.
The contingency where the bargadar voluntarily surrenders or abandons the land is neither mentioned, nor directly or indirectly contemplated by them.
The contention of the respondent cannot be accepted for it would introduce something into section 17 which is not there and this is diametrically opposed to the well known canons of interpretation.
[956 D E] (iii) There is no logical justification for the provisions of sub sections (3) and (4) of section 20B. When once the cultivator chooses to bring a bargadar on the land the interest of the bargadar is protected and has been made heritable.
But when the bargadar on his own volition surrenders or abandons the land, there is no reason why the tenant should not be allowed to resume cultivation and instead be compelled to get the land cultivated by some other person nominated by the authority concerned under section 49 of the 1955 Act.
This provision, therefore, appears to be extremely harsh and works serious injustice to the rights of the tenants particularly after the ceiling area of the tenant has been considerably reduced by the Amendment Act of 1972.
[956 E G] (iv) Though the provisions of sub sections (3), (4) and (5) of section 20B a perilously border on arbitrariness and amount to serious curbs on the fundamental right of the cultivator to pursue his occupation, they cannot be struck down because they are contained in the Amendment Act of 1972 which has been placed in the Ninth Schedule prior to April 24, 1973.
It will, however, be for the legislature which is the best judge of the needs of its people to give, a suitable relief to the tenant and soften the rigours of these harsh provisions.
[957 C D] (2) The object of the proviso is to safeguard the interest of the tenant himself so that he may give wholehearted attention to the personal cultivation of 952 the land.
The proviso does not debar him from following any other occupation but once a tenant wants to have the land to himself for personal cultivation he must elect whether to pursue the profession of cultivation or some other occupation.
Thus, even though there is some amount of restriction both on the right of the petitioners to reside or follow any other occupation, such a restriction cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
[958 C, E F] In the instant case the restriction does not amount to complete deprivation of the right of the tenant to reside elsewhere because the words for the greater part of the year ' leave sufficient scope to the tenant to reside elsewhere for a part of the year if he so desires.
It is not necessary that the tenant should himself reside in the village for the greater part of the year.
It is sufficient if any member of the family which includes his wife, unmarried adult, married adult, minor son and so on remains in the village.
This would amount to substantial compliance of the conditions of the proviso.
The restriction, therefore, is partial and in public interest.
[958 G, 959 D] (3) Whenever a complaint of violation of fundamental rights is made the court has to determine whether or not the restrictions imposed contain the quality of reasonableness.
In assessing these factors a doctrinaire approach should not be made but the essential facts and realities of life have to be duly considered.
Our Constitution aims at building up a socialist state and the establishment of an egalitarian society and if reasonable restrictions are placed on the fundamental rights in public interest, they can be fully justified in law.
[959 F G] State of Madras vs V.G. Row, ; , referred to.
(4) As the proviso operates equally to all the tenants governed by it no question of discrimination arises.
[961 F]
