The appellant was employed in the State Bank of Patiala, The Mall, Patiala from July 13, 1973 till August 21, 1974, when her services were terminated.
Despite some breaks in service for a few days, the appellant had admittedly worked for 240 days in the year preceding August 21, 1974.
According to the workman, the termination of her service was "retrenchment" within the meaning of that expression in Section 2(OO) of the , since it did not fall within any of the excepted cases mentioned in Section 2(OO).
Since there was "retrenchment", it was bad for non compliance with the provisions of section 25 F of the .
On the other hand, the contention of the management was that the termination of services was not due to discharge of surplus labour.
It was due to the failure of the workman to pass the test which would have enabled him to be confirmed in the service.
Therefore, it was not retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(OO) of the .
The Presiding Officer, Central Government, Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, accepted the management 's contention and decided against the workman appellant.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (i) The discharge of the workman on the ground that she did not pass the test which would have enabled him to be confirmed was "retrenchment" within the meaning of section 2(OO) and, therefore, the requirements of section 25F had to be complied with.
[892 F G] (ii) Section 2(OO) of the uses a wide language particularly the words "termination. for any reason whatsoever".
The definition "retrenchment" expressly excludes termination of service as a "punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action".
It does not include, voluntary retrenchment of the workman or retrenchment of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation or termination of the service of the workman on the ground of continuous ill health.
The Legislature took special care to mention that these were not included within the meaning of "termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever".
This emphasises the broad interpretation to be given to the expression "retrenchment".
[887 E H, 888 A] 2.
If due weight is given to the words "the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever" and if the words 'for any reason whatsoever" are understood to mean what they plainly say, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the expression 'retrenchment ' must include every termination of the service of a workman by an act of the employer.
The underlying assumption, of course, is that the undertaking is running as an under 885 taking and the employer continues as an employer but where either on account of transfer of the undertaking or on account of the closure of the undertaking the basic assumption disappears, there can be no question of 'retrenchment ' within the meaning of the definition contained in section 2(OO) of the Act.
[888 A C] Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla vs A.D. Divakar [1957] SCR 121: applied.
By introducing section 25 FF and Section 25 FFF, Parliament treated the termination of the service of a workman on the transfer or closure of an undertaking as "deemed retrenchment".
The effect was that every case of termination of service by act or employer even if such termination was a consequence of transfer or closure of the undertaking was to be treated as 'retrenchment ' for the purposes of notice, compensation etc.
" The expression "termination of service for any reason whatsoever" now covers every kind of termination of service except those not expressly included in section 25F or not expressly provided or by other provisions of the Act as 25 FF And 25 FFF.
[888 C F] 4.
The manifest object of Section 25 FF and section 25 FFF is to so compensate the workman for loss of employment as to provide him the wherewithal to subsist until he finds fresh employment.
The non inclusion of 'voluntary retirement of the workmen, retirement of workmen, on reaching the age of superannuation, termination of the service of a workman, on the ground af continued ill health ' in the definition of 'retrenchment ' clearly indicate and emphasise the true object of 25F, 25 FF and 25 FFF and the nature of the compensation provided by those provisions." [888 F H] Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd. vs The Workman ; followed.
The submission that notwithstanding the comprehensive language of the definition of retrenchment ' in section 2(OO) the expression continues to retain its original meaning, namely, discharge from service on account of surplus age is not correct.
It cannot be assumed that Parliament was undertaking an exercise in futility to give a long winded definition merely to say that the expression means what it always meant.
[889 D E] Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla vs A.D. Divakar [1957] SCR 121, Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court Orissa & Ors. ; State Bank of India vs Shri N. Sundaramoney ; Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs Shambunath Mukherjee & Ors.
; ; explained and followed.
Management of M/s Willcose Buckwell India Ltd. vs Jagannath & Ors.
AIR 1974 S.C. 1164; Employees in Relation vs Digmoden Colliery vs Their Workmen ; ; distinguished.
L. Robert D 'Souza vs Executive Engineer, Southern Railway and Anr.
(1979) KLJ Kerala 211; The Managing Director, National Garage vs J. Gonsalves (1962) KLJ 56.
Goodlas Nerolac Paints vs Chief Commissioner, Delhi ; Rajasthan State Electricity Board vs Labour Court ; over ruled.
