The appellant Ram Chander and Mange were tried by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jind, for the murder of Dunni.
Both were convicted under section 302 read with section 34 Indian Penal Code and sentenced to imprisonment for life.
On appeal the High Court acquitted Mange but confirmed the conviction and sentence of Ram Chander.
In appeal by special leave it was contended that the conviction and sentence were vitiated as the principle of fair trial was abandoned by the Sessions Judge who rebuked the witnesses and threatened them with prosecution for perjury and based his conviction on such extorted evidence.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
If a Criminal Court is to be an effective instrument in dispensing justice, the presiding judge must cease to be a spectator and a mere recording machine.
He must become a participant in the trial by evincing intelligent active interest by putting questions to witnesses in order to ascertain the truth.
The Court has wide powers and must actively participate in the trial to elicit the truth and to protect the weak and the innocent.
It is the duty of a judge to discover the truth and for that purpose he may "ask any question, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties, about any fact, relevant or irrelevant".
But this he must do, without unduly trespassing upon the functions of the public prosecutor and the defence counsel, without any hint of partisanship and without appearing to frighten, coerce, confuse, intimidate or bully witnesses.
He must take the prosecution and the defence with him.
The Court.
the prosecution and the defence must work as a team whose goal is justice, a team whose captain is the judge.
The judge, "like the conductor of a choir, must, by force of personality, induce his team to work in harmony; subdue the raucous, encourage the timid, conspire with the young, flatter and old.
" F] Sessions Judge, Nellore vs Intna Ramana Reddy and Anr.
, I.L.R. , approved.
Jones vs National Coal Board, ; , quoted with approval.
In the instant case, the questions put by the learned Sessions Judge, particularly the threats held out to the witnesses that if they changed their statements they would involve themselves in prosecution for perjury were certainly intimidating, coming as they did from the presiding judge.
In an effort to compel 13 the witnesses to speak what he thought must be truth, the learned Sessions Judge, very wrongly, firmly rebuked them and virtually threatened them with prosecutions for perjury.
He left his seat and entered the ring.
The principle of "fair trial" was abandoned.
[19 F H] 2.
The Evidence Act contains detailed provisions dealing with statements of persons who cannot be called as witnesses and former statements of persons who are called as witnesses.
These provisions would appear to become redundant if the evidence of a witness is to be tested and accepted or rejected with reference to the former statement of another witness on the ground that such former statement renders the evidence highly probable or improbable.
Even assuming that under certain circumstances it is permissible to use the first information report under the first part of section 11 there is in the present case no question of invoking the first part of section 11, which is inapplicable since the first information report is now not sought to be used as being inconsistent with the prosecution case.
Nor can first information report be used by resort to the second part of section 11.
[20 H 21 A; 20 F G] Ram Kumar Pande vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, ; @ 522, discussed.
