The appellant was inducted in the year 1964 as a tenant of the suit premises on an yearly rental payable by December 31, every year.
Since the appellant did not pay the rent for the years 1965, 1966 a combined notice dated November 9, 1966 demanding payment of arrears and seeking ejectment on termination of tenancy, was sent by registered post by the respondents.
The appellant refused to receive the notice on November 10, 1966.
On his failure to comply with the requisitions contained in the notice, the respondents filed a suit against the appellant seeking eviction as well as recovery of rents and mensne profits.
Having lost before the trial court and the first appellate court, the respondents came up before the High Court in second appeal.
The High Court accepted the finding of fact recorded by the first appellate court that there was service of the notice on the appellant by refusal and held that when notice was tendered to the tenant and when the latter refused to accept the same know ledge of the contents of the notice must be imputed to him.
The High Court allowed the landlords ' appeal and granted three months time to the appellant to vacate the shop.
Hence, the tenant 's appeal after obtaining special leave from this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (By majority) Per Tulzapurkar, J. (On behalf of A. P. Sen, J. and himself).
The presumptions that are raised under section 27 of the and section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, make it clear that, when service is effected by refusal of a postal communication, the addressee must be imputed with the knowledge of the contents thereof.
[971 E F] 1:2.
Before the knowledge of the contents of the notice could be imputed, it is not necessary that the sealed envelope must be opened and read by the addressee or when the addressee happens to be an illiterate person the contend should be read over to him by the post man or someone else.
Such things do not occur when the addressee is determined to decline to accept the sealed envelope.
[971 D E] 963 Vaman Vithal Kulkarni and Ors.
vs Khanderao Ram Rao Sholapurkar, , explained and dissented from.
Mahboob Bi vs Alvala Lachmiah, A.I.R. 1964 A.P. 324, held inapplicable.
Shri Nath and another vs Smt.
Saraswati Devi Jaiswal, A.I.R. 1964 All. 52; Fanni Lal vs Smt.
Chironja, ; Ganga Ram vs Smt.
Phulwati, ; Kodali Bapayya and Ors.
vs Yadavalli Venkataratnam and Ors., A.I.R. 1953 Mad. 884, approved.
Harihar Banerji and Ors.
vs Ramshashi Roy and Ors., A.I.R. 1918 P.C. 102, referred to.
The suit under section 14(1) of the U.P. Cantonment (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act (Central Act X of 1952), in the instant case was maintainable.
Under section 14(1) of the Central Act, which in pari materia with section 3(1) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947, permission of the District Magistrate was required if the landlord sought eviction of the tenant on any ground other than those specified in clauses (a) to (f) and not when it was sought on any of the grounds specified in clauses (a) to (f).
[973 E P] Bhagwan Dass vs Paras Nath, ; , followed.
All the courts rightly dealt with the matter as being governed by the U.P. Cantonments (Control of Rent & Eviction) Act, X of 1952 a Central Act and not by U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 much less by the later U.P. (Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972.
[966 E F] Per Desai.
J. Contra.
Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972 is a socially beneficient statute and should be construed according to well recognised canons of construction.
The words used in the statute, if they are plain and unambiguous must be applied as they stand, however, strongly it may be suspected that the result does not represent the real intention of the legislature.
However, if two constructions are possible and legitimate ambiguity arises from the language employed that which enlarges the protection of a socially beneficient statute rather than one which restricts it should be preferred and adopted.
In other words the construction which would be more consistent with the policy and attainment of the legislation which is to protect the possession of the tenant unless the landlord establishes a ground for eviction should be preferred.
Further where two constructions are possible the one which would accord with reason and justice must be preferred.
[975 G H, 976 A, D, G] Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Hinchy, , H. L. at 767= (1960) 1 All India Reports 505 at 512; River Wear Commissioners vs Adamson, & 765, quoted with approval.
Mohd. Shafi vs Additional District & Sessions Judge (VII), Allahabad and Others, ; Gurucharan Singh vs Kamla Singh & Ors.
; ; H. H. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao Jivaji Rao Scindia Bahadur of Gwalior & Ors.
vs Union of India & Another, [1971] 1 S.C.C. 85, reiterated.
964 2:1.
The substitution of the expression, "arrears of rent for not less than four months" in sub clause (a) of sub section (2) of section 20 of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972 is a contemporaneous legislative exposition bringing out clearly the legislative intention that the landlord would be entitled to evict the tenant if the rent is in arrears for not less than four months.
Before the landlord can commence action under sub clause (a): (i) the tenant must have committed default in Payment of rent for a period of four months, and (ii) a notice has to be served, giving the tenant locus poeniteniae to repair the default within month.
[978 B C] 2:2.
Two ingredients emerge from the expression "the tenant is in arrears of rent for not less than four months": (i) that the rent is payable by month and (ii) the tenant has committed default in payment of rent for four different months and that this default subsists and continues on the date when the land lord invokes the provision of clause (a) and proceeds to serve a notice of demand.
Again, if within a period of one month from the date of receipt of notice, the tenant pays up the arrears of rent he does not lose the protection of the Rent Act.
[978 G H 979] 2:3.
It is implicit in the expression "the tenant is in arrears of rent for not less than four months" that the legislature clearly intended to cover those cases Of default in payment of rent under clause (a) where the contract of lease provided for payment of rent every month meaning thereby that the unit for liability to pay rent is one month and secondly the tenant has committed default on four different occasions of four different months or four different units agreed upon for payment of rent and that too after the liability to pay the same has accepted.
[979 A C] 2:4.
Section 20(2)(a) of the Rent Act, 1972 does not attract cases where the landlords accept rent on an yearly basis.
The language of the section does not admit of a construction, namely, that even if the rent is payable by year, once the year is over and a period of four months has elapsed he could be said to be "a tenant in arrears, of rent for not less than four months".
In the instant case, the parties are ad idem that the rent is payable by year at the rate of Rs. 100/ per annum.
In such a case it could not be said that this tenant was in arrears of rent for not less than four months.
His case would not be covered by section 20(2) of the Rent Act and, therefore, the landlord would not be entitled to a decree for eviction on this ground and that was the sole ground on which eviction has been ordered.
[980 C D, 981 A B] 3.
The amended section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code restricted the jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain a second appeal only if the High Court was satisfied that the case involved a substantial question of law.
Sub section G(4) cast a duty on the court to formulate such substantial question of law and the appeal has to be heard on the question so formulated.
It would also be open to the respondent at the hearing of he appeal to contend that the case does not involve such a question.
Thus, the High Court ordinarily cannot and did not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact arrived at by the courts below.
[981 G H, 982 A] In the facts of this case, there was a concurrent finding that the statutory notice as required by section 20(2)(a) was not served upon the tenant and, therefore, the High Court was in error in interfering with this finding of fact.
[982 B C] 965 R. Ramachandran Ayyar vs Ramalingam Chettiar, ; Mst.
Durga Chaudhrain vs Jawahar Choudhary, 1890 LR 17 IA, 122; Goppulal vs Dwarkadhishji, [1969] 3 S.C.R. 989, reiterated.
Mere refusal of a registered letter would not permit a presumption to be raised that not only the service was legal, but the refusal was the conscious act flowing from the knowledge of the contents of the letter.
[987 C] 4:2.
This concept that the registered envelope properly addressed and returned with an endorsement of refusal must permit a rebuttable presumption that the addressee refused it with the knowledge of the contents is wholly borrowed from the western jurisprudence.
Not considering the specific Indian conditions and the approach of rural Indian to registered letters, but merely going in with the technical rules of Evidence Act would cause more harm and lead to injustice through law.
[985 G H, 986 A] 4:3.
The Rent Act does not seek to evict a mere defaulter.
That is why a provision for notice has been made.
If even after notice the default continues, the tenant can be condemned as willful defaulter.
He could not be dubbed guilty of conscious, willful, contumacious, intentional conduct even when he did not know what was in the registered env`elope.
It would be atrocious to impute any such knowledge to a person who has merely been guilty of refusing to accept the registered notice.
Where service of notice is a condition precedent, a dubious service held established by examining the postman who must be delivering hundreds of postal envelopes and who is ready to go to the witness box after a long interval to say that he offered the envelope to the addressee and he refused to accept the same, would be travesty of justice.
And if this condition precedent is not fully satisfied, the subsequent conduct cannot be said to be willful.
[987 E G] Fannilal vs Smt.
Chironja, (1972) All.
Law J. 499 (D.B.) dissented to.
Appabhai Motibhai vs Laxmichand Zaverchand & Co., A.I.R. 1954 Bom.
159, held inapplicable.
Mahboob Bi vs Alvala Lachmiah, A.I.R. 1964 A.P. 314; Amarjit Singh Bedi vs Lachman Das; Waman Vithal Kulkarni & Others vs Khandera Ram Rao Sholapurkar, A.I.R. 1935 Bom.
247, quoted with approval.
The argument that it would be impossible to serve the notice as statutorily prescribed, once it is held that no knowledge of the contents of the refused letter could be imputed to the tenant, is incorrect.
The notice is required to be served in the manner prescribed by section 106 of Transfer of Property Act which, inter alia, provides for affixing a copy of the notice on the premises in possession of the tenant.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the approach of the Court would render it impossible for the landlord to meet with the statutory requirement of service of notice before commencing the action for eviction [1988 C] 966
