The respondent, in the first instance, was appointed as a casual labourer for a month but was continued against an existing vacancy.
He was later appointed as a labourer in a regular cadre in an existing vacancy.
Sometime later he was promoted and appointed as Ammunition Repair Labourer, Grade II.
Three years thereafter his services were terminated.
In a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the respondent impugned the order of termination of his services on the ground that he was appointed permanently to the post of Ammunition Repair Labourer Grade II and that the termination of his services, when juniors were retained in service, was discriminatory and was in contravention of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The appellant contended before the High Court that the term "regular cadre" did not imply as in other instances in the employment of government a substantive post, but that the post in the regular cadre is a purely temporary one.
A single Judge of the High Court rejected the respondent 's claim that he was appointed permanently to the post but held that since persons junior to him had been retained in service, termination of his services without assigning any reason was discriminatory and, therefore, the order was bad in law.
Agreeing with the view of the single Judge a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appellant 's appeal.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: A perusal of the file relating to the termination of the services of the respondent shows that the decision to terminate his services had been taken at the highest level on the ground of his unsuitability in relation to the post held by him and that it was not by way of any punishment and no stigma was attached to the respondent by reason of the termination of his services.
[172 G H] The well settled position in law in this regard is that (i) if the services of a temporary government servant are terminated in accordance with the conditions of his service on the ground of unsatisfactory conduct or his un 166 suitability for the job and/or for his work being unsatisfactory or for a like reason which marks him off in a class apart from other temporary servants who have been retained in service, there is no question of the applicability of Article 16; (ii) where the services of a temporary government servant or a probationer government servant are terminated by an order which does not ex facie disclose any stigma or penal consequences against the government servant and is merely a termination order simpliciter there is no case ordinarily for assuming that it is anything but what it purports to be; (iii) before Article 16 is held to have been violated by some action there must be a clear demonstration of discrimination between one government servant and another similarly placed, which cannot be reasonably explained except on an assumption or demonstration of "malice in law" or "malice in fact".
Acting on legally extraneous or obviously misconceived grounds of action would be a case of "malice in law"; (iv) it is open to the employer to terminate the services of a temporary employee on probation at any time before he was confirmed if the employer was satisfied that he was not suitable for being retained in service.
[E 169 D; 170 C; 171 C; 172 B] In the instant case the respondent was a temporary government servant.
No stigma is attached to the termination of his services.
His services had been terminated for unsuitability in relation to the post held by him.
[171 F G]
