The Industrial Tribunal, Ahmedabad, on a dispute referred to it under section 10(2) of the took up for consideration four demands for basic wages and adjustment, dearness allowance, gratuity and retrospectivity of the demands of the workmen.
The Tribunal gave its award on 30th of November 1971 which was published on 20th January, 1972 in the Maharashtra Government Gazette.
The appellant company, feeling aggrieved by the award, filed in the Supreme Court a petition for special leave to appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.
Pursuant to a notice, the respondent workmen put in appearance and filed a counter affidavit.
After some arguments the appellant Company at its request was permitted to withdraw the leave petition as per the order of the Court dated 21st of August, 1972 which reads: "Upon hearing counsel the Court allowed the special leave petition to be withdrawn".
Four days thereafter the company filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court challenging the award.
The petition was virtually based on the same facts and grounds as were taken in the special leave petition before the Supreme Court.
The learned single Judge who heard the petition determined the circumstances on the basis of the respective affidavits filed by the parties in which the company unconditionally withdrew its special leave petition and in view of those circumstances equated the withdrawal of the leave petition with the dismissal of the same.
Relying on Vasant Vithal Palse and Ors.
vs The Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd. and Anr. , a decision of that court, the learned Judge dismissed the writ petition in limine.
A Letters Patent Appeal against the said order of dismissal also met the same fate.
However, a petition under Article 133 of the Constitution for a certificate of fitness to appeal to the Supreme Court was accepted by the said Division Bench and a certificate was granted and hence the appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1. Permission to withdraw a special leave petition cannot be equated with an order of dismissal.
If a non speaking order of dismissal cannot operate as res judicata for entertaining a fresh writ petition on the same facts and grounds taken in the special leave petition, an order permitting the withdrawal of the writ petition for the same reason cannot so operate.
[219B,222C D] 214 Workmen of Cochin Port Trust vs Board of Trustees of Cochin Port Trust and Anr., ; , followed.
Punjab Beverages Pvt. Ltd. vs Suresh Chand and Anr.
, ; ; Hoshnak Singh vs Union of India and Ors., ; ; Daryao and Ors.
vs The State of U.P. and Ors., ; , discussed.
Vasant Vithal Palse and Ors, v The Indian Hume Pipe Co. Ltd. and Anr.
, ; Management of Western India Match Co. Ltd., Madras vs The Industrial Tribunul, Madras and Anr.
A.I.R. 1958 Mad. 398, distinguished.
The order of a court has to be read as it is.
If the Supreme Court intended to dismiss the petition at the threshold.
it could have said so explicitly.
In the absence of any indication in the order itself, it will not be proper to enter into the arena of conjecture and to come to a conclusion on the basis of extraneous evidence that the Supreme Court intended to reject the leave petition.
If the Order of the Supreme Court is read as it is there is not the slightest doubt that the Supreme Court had allowed the company to withdraw the leave petition, in the instant case.
The approach of the High Court in having perused the affidavits filed by the parties to know the circumstances under which the leave petition was withdrawn is not correct.
[217 C D]
