Sub section 6 of section 5 of the U.P. Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 as it stood at the relevant time provided that in determining the ceiling area any transfer of land made after January, 24, 1971 should be ignored and not taken into account.
Clause (b) of the proviso to sub section 6 which carves out an exception states that the sub section shall not apply to a transfer proved to the satisfaction of the Prescribed Authority to be in good faith and for adequate consideration under an irrevocable instrument.
Explanation II to this proviso places the burden of proof that a case fell within clause (b) of the proviso is on the party claiming its benefit.
On January 28, 1972 the donor gifted away certain lands in favour of his grand daughter, the appellant, daughter of a pre deceased son.
The gift having been made after the prescribed date, the Prescribed Authority ignored the gift for purposes of section 5 (6) of the Act.
On appeal, the District Judge gave a finding in favour of the appellant holding that the gift was bona fide having regard to the circumstances in which it was made and that it could not be held invalid merely because it was executed after the due date of January 24, 1971.
Purporting to follow one of its earlier decisions, the High Court held that a gift not being a transfer for consideration, had to be ignored under the provisions of the Act and that a gift being a gratuitous transfer made out of love and affection fell outside the purview of clause (b) of the proviso.
On behalf of the appellant it was contended that a gift could not be said to be a transfer without consideration because even love and affection may 240 provide sufficient consideration and hence the condition regarding adequate consideration would not apply to a gift.
Dismissing the appeal ^ HELD: It is a well settled rule of construction of statutes that where the definition of a word has not been given in an enactment it must be construed in its popular sense if it is a word of every day use, that is, the sense in which people conversant with the subject matter with which it deals would attribute to it.
Similarly if the language used is clear and explicit, the provision cannot be reduced to a nullity by reading into it a meaning which it does not carry.
[246B] In the instant case therefore, the word "transfer" being a term of well known legal significance with well ascertained incidents the legislature did not consider it necessary to define it separately.
It is used in the sense in which it is used in the Transfer of Property Act.
[245 G] C.I.T., Andhra Pradesh vs M/s. Taj Mahal Hotel, Secunderabad and Union of India vs Sankal Chand Himatlal Sheth and Anr. ; applied.
Keats vs Lewis referred to.
A conspectus of the meaning of the term "gift" is that it is a transfer which does not contain an element of consideration in any shape or form.
Where in respect of a gift there is a benefit measurable in terms of money the transaction ceases to be a gift and assumes a different colour.
Yet another salient feature of a gift is that love, affection and many other factors may constitute the motive for the gift and may enter into the intention of the donor making a gift, but none of these can be held to be legal consideration, as understood by law.
[251 G H; 252F] "Consideration" means a reasonable equivalent or other valuable benefit passed on by the promisor to the promisee or by the transferor to the transferee.
When the term consideration is qualified by the word "adequate" it makes it sufficient and valuable having regard to the facts, circumstances and necessities of the case.
[251 F] The word "transfer for adequate consideration" used in clause (b) of the proviso excludes a transaction, which is in the nature of a gift and which is without consideration.
[252 E] The argument that if the legislature intended to exclude gifts clause (b) of the proviso would have expressly said so and by not excluding it must be deemed to have included a gift is without force particularly in the face of the clear and unambiguous language of the proviso.
Every legislature has its own technical device to express its intendment.
Express exclusion is not the only method of conveying the legislative intent there may be other methods or devices by which a legislature expresses its intent; namely, by using expressions, which would exclude a particular transaction by necessary intendment.
This is what is done in enacting clause (b) of the proviso.
[252 G H] 241 The legislature has made its intention clear that a gift is excluded by qualifying the word "consideration" with the adjective "adequate".
[252 H] By using the word "adequate" to qualify the word "consideration" the legislature has ruled out gifts from the ambit of clause (b) of the proviso.
[253 C] The words "adequate consideration" clearly postulate that consideration must be capable of being measured in terms of money, having regard to the market price of the property, the value that it may fetch if sold, the value of similar lands situate in the vicinity and so on.
[253 B] The argument that since in the case of a gift there is no question of consideration, the words for "adequate consideration" in the 3rd part of clause (b) of the proviso are inapplicable and should, therefore, be ignored is opposed to the well known rule of interpretation that Courts, while interpreting statutes, must not legislate.
A legislature does not use words without any intention and every word used by the legislature must be given its due import.
The intention of the legislature in using the words "adequate consideration" is to exclude any transaction which is not for adequate consideration.
Even if a sale is bona fide if to but consideration is inadequate, the transaction would fall beyond the protection of clause (b) of the proviso.
[253 E F] Debi Saran Koiri and Anr.
vs Nandlal Chaubey and Ors.
A.I.R. 1929 Patna 591 and Kulasekaraperumal vs Pathakutty Thalevanar and Ors.
A.I.R. 1961 Madras 405 approved, The words "adequate consideration" carry a well known legal significance and, therefore, convey the same meaning and import in whichever statute they are used unless a contrary intention appears from the language employed by the legislature in a particular Act.
[256 E F] Tulsidas Kilachand vs The Commissioner of Income tax Bombay City I, ; , referred to Fateh Mohammed vs District Judge [Civil Writ Petition No. 915 of 1975, decided on 10 7 78] overruled.
An explanation merely widens the scope of the main section and is not meant to carve out a particular exception to the main section.
The words admission, acknowledgment, relinquishment or declaration used in Explanation I, do not absolve the party concerned from proving that the transfer should be executed in good faith and for adequate consideration.
[256 E F] However laudable the object of the donor in gifting the property to his grand daughter (particularly in the circumstances of this case) may be and whatever hardship might ensue to the donee by applying the provision, the gift fails if it does not fulfil the other essential requirements of the section.
The act was enacted to implement one of the Directives contained in Part IV of the Constitution and if in this process a few individuals suffer that cannot be helped, for, individual interests must yield to the larger interests of the community.
[258 D F] 242
