The assessees (respondents) are the owners of rice mills and are registered dealers under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957.
In the course of their business, they purchase paddy and after milling paddy, sell the resultant rice.
During the assessment years, the assessees purchased paddy from agriculturists who were not liable to pay sales tax.
The assessing authority under the Act levied on the assessee in each of these cases purchase tax on the purchase turnover of paddy under section 6(i) of the Act.
The appeals filed by the assessees were dismissed by the Appellate Authority except the one, holding that the conversion of paddy into rice did not involve any manufacturing process and that the purchase turnovers of paddy in those cases were not liable to tax under section 6(i) of the Act.
In the case of the other assessee, the Tribunal held that the turn over was liable to be taxed as he had manufactured milled rice out of the paddy purchased by him.
The appellant filed revision petitions in the High Court and the assessee filed revision petition in the last case.
The High Court after holding that the turn overs in question were not liable to tax under section 6(i) of the Act dismissed the petitions filed by the appellant and allowed the petition of the last assessee.
The High Court granted a certificate of fitness to this Court.
The appellant argued that the sale price of paddy which is a taxable commodity having not been subjected to tax under section 5, the assessees were liable to tax under section 6(i) of the Act as they had consumed it in the manufacture of rice which was a different commodity for sale.
The respondent argued that they had not consumed paddy when they produced rice from it by merely carrying out the process of dehusking at their mills.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) Paddy and rice are two distinct commodities.
The milling of paddy involves a manufacturing process.
[284 B] (ii) The levy in question is not impermissible even though paddy and rice are liable to be taxed at a single point, as in fact there is no double taxation on the same commodity.
[286 F G] 281 Ganesh Trading Co. Karnal vs State of Haryana and Anr.
32 S.T.C. 623, Babu Ram Jagdish Kumar and Co. vs The State of Punjab and Anr.
44 S.T.C. 159 affirmed.
Consumption in the true economic sense does not mean only use of goods in the production of consumer goods or final utilisation of consumer goods by consumers involving activities like eating of food, drinking of beverages, wearing of clothes or using of an automobile by its owner for domestic purposes.
A manufacturer also consumes commodities which are ordinarily called raw materials when he produces semi finished goods which have to undergo further processes of production before they can be transformed into consumer goods.
At every such intermediate stage of production, some utility or value is added to goods which are used as raw materials and at every such stage the raw materials are consumed.
[284 D E] 3.
At every stage of production there is consumption of goods even though at the end of it there may not be final consumption of goods but only production of goods with higher utility which may be used in further productive processes.
[285 B B] M/s.
Anwar Khan Mahboob Co. vs The State of Bombay and Ors.
at pp.
715 716; Economics (Tenth Edition 1976) at page 168 by Professor Paul A. Samuelson, referred to.
In the instant case, the assessees had consumed that paddy purchased by them when they converted it into rice which is commercially a different commodity for sale.
The case of assessees therefore, squarely falls under section 6(i) the Act.
[286 C] State of Tamil Nadu vs M. K. N. Kandaswami etc.
; , Ganesh Prasad Dixit vs Commissioner of Sales Tax ; , referred to.
