The appellants who were displaced persons were allotted land which was entered as sailab land in the revenue records and they became the owners of these lands.
After the coming into force of the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953, the Revenue Authorities proceeded to determine the permissible area of the land of the appellants under section 2(3).
They allowed 50 standard acres of land to each of the appellants and declared the balance as surplus land.
The appellants claimed that the lands allotted to them as displaced persons fell in a portion of District Karnal which was sailab and adna sailab and according to the classification made under the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Rules, 1953 they did not carry any valuation.
The Collector dismissed their application.
The Commissioner dismissed their appeals holding that the Collector was right in treating the surplus area as an unirrigated areas and valuing the same at nine annas per standard acre.
A single Judge accepting the contention of the appellant in his writ petition set aside the orders of the Revenue Court.
The Financial Commissioner filed an appeal which was allowed by the Division Bench and the writ petition was dismissed.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that (1) whereas sub section (5) of section 2 of the Act directed the Government to frame Rules after considering the quantity of the yield and quality of soil, in the Rules framed by the Government the main guide lines laid down by sub section(5) were not followed, and the classification made by the Rules under Annexure 'A ' was arbitrary without determining the quantity of the yield and quality of the soil, and (2) that even if the classification made in Annexure 'A ' was valid, the Revenue Courts as also the High Courts committed an error of law in misconstruing the classification and in arbitrarily placing the surplus area in the category of unirrigated land.
331 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1(i) The view of the single Judge is not in consonance with the scheme and spirit of the Rules framed under the Act and is based on a wrong interpretation of the nature, extent and ambit of the classification made in Annexure 'A '.
The classification is in accordance with provisions of sub section (5) of section 2 of the Act and is, therefore, constitutionally valid.
[337 E F, G] (ii) The Land Resettlement Manual prepared in 1952 by Tarlok Singh shows that the classification has been made in a very scientific manner after taking into consideration all the relevant factors.
The Punjab Settlement Manual (4th Edition) prepared by Sir James M. Douie though possessing unimpeachable authenticity was made long ago and since then there have been great changes resulting from various steps taken by the Government for improving the nature and character of the land and the irrigation facilities.
Even so, the classification made by Sir James Douie has been adhered to broadly and basically by Tarlok Singh in his Manual which forms the pivotal foundation for the schedule containing Annexure 'A ' framed under the Rules.
[335H 336 C] (iii) The classifications of land like barani, sailab, abi, nehri, chahi etc.
are clearly mentioned in the Punjab Settlement Manual.
The Rule Making Authority has not in any way either departed from the principles mentioned in sub section(5) of section 2 of the Act or violated the guidelines contained therein, nor could it be said that the classification made under the Rules has not been made according to the quantity of yield or the quality of the soil.
[336 C, D E] (iv) If the dominant object of the act was to take over the surplus area according to the formula contained in various provisions of the Act particularly sub sections (3) and (5) of section 2, there is no material on the record to show that the Rules do not fulfil or carry out the object contained in the Act.
[336 G] Jagir Singh and Ors.
vs The State of Punjab and Ors., 44 (1965) Lahore Law Times 143, approved.
2.(i) There was no error in the classification made by the revenue authorities.
So far as Karnal District was concerned, there was no sailab land at the time when the Rules were framed and the classification was made.
Even if the land in question could be treated as sailab and equated with the land in Sonepat then the valuation would have been at 12 annas which could be more deterimental to the interest of the appellants.
The Collector and the Commissioner have rightly treated the land as unirrigated which is the lowest category and whose valuation is given as nine annas per acre.
[338C, B] (ii) The three categories given in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Rule 2 do not cover the land of the appellants which is sailab or adna sailab and therefore, they cannot be given the benefit of any of these three sub clauses of the proviso.
[339 A]
