In exercise of their powers under sub section (3) of section 5 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, the State Government by its Notification dated August 2, 1976 directed inclusion, in Sunam Municipality, of eight local areas including Moranwali Gram Panchayat, which challenged the validity of the said notification by a writ petition filed before the High Court and obtained stay of operation.
Under the Election Rules of 1952 and the Delimitation of Wards of Municipalities Rules, 1972, whenever there is a change in the limits of the municipality the State Government cannot proceed to hold election of councillors without delimitation of the municipality into wards.
However, since proviso to subsection 3 of section 13 of the Act, inserted by Punjab Act 18 of 1978 as amended by Punjab Act 2 of 1979 made it obligatory for the state Government to hold the election before June 30, 1979, along with those of the 42 other municipalities the election of the councillors of the Sunam Municipality was also held on June 10, 1979 on the basis of the old municipal limits, that is, from the existing 15 wards.
On June 23, 1979 the appellants who seek to represent about 1,000 voters from the local areas newly added to the municipal limits, filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the election as null and void on the ground that there was no delimitation of wards and no fresh electoral rolls were prepared.
The High Court by its order dated July 10, 1979 declined to set aside the elections held, but directed that the local areas be given representation under sub section(5) 341 of section 5 of the Act.
Hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The State Government without reconstituting a municipality into new wards cannot proceed to hold an election of councillors, when there is an extension of the municipal limits.
[346 C] 2.
The whole purpose of delimitation of municipality into wards is to ensure that every citizen should get a fair representation in them municipalities.
When a municipality in reconstituted by the inclusion of any local area within the limits of a municipality under sub section (3) of section 5 or by the exclusion of any local area from the limits of a municipality under section 7, that is, when there is an alteration of the limits of the municipality, there must of necessity be a division of the reconstituted municipality into new wards without which the elections cannot be held.
There can be no disenfranchisement of part of the electorate of a municipality.
[345 C D] 3.
But, in the instant case, the said principle could not be applied due to the stay order passed by single Judge of the Punjab High Court which was in force from August 2, 1978 to October 23, 1978 and thereafter till April 1, 1980 consequent to the order of stay of dispossession by the Division Bench, dated December 19, 1978 in the Letters Patent Appeal preferred by the Gram Panchayat, Moranwali.
When a local area sought to be brought within the limits of the municipality by the issue of a notification under sub section (3) of section 5 was kept out of such limits by reason of the stay order passed by the Division Bench there could, obviously, be no delimitation of the municipality into new wards.
[346 C, D; 347 B, A] 4.
To contend that with the dismissal of the writ petition on October 23, 1978, the impugned notification was brought into effect and therefore, the State Government could not proceed with election without delimitation of wards and preparation of fresh electoral rolls is incorrect.
It is equally incorrect to say that with the vacation of the stay by the dismissal of the Letters Patent Appeal on April 1, 1980 the whole election would be invalidated.
The Election held on June 10, 1979 were valid and the councillors elected are entitled to run their full term of five years as provided in section 13.
The State Government acted with the best of intentions in deciding to hold the elections.
The State Government had no other alternative but to hold the election of the councillors on the basis of the existing limits of the municipality, that is, from the existing 15 wards due to the amendment of proviso to subsection (3) of section 13 of the Act by Punjab Act 2 of 1979 which made it obligatory for the State Government to hold the elections before June 30 1979.
[347 E,D] Bhaichandbhai Maganlal Shah vs The State of Gujarat and Ors., , approved. 6.
In view of the fact that a large number of inhabitants of the local areas brought within the municipal limits under sub section (3) of section 5 of the Act, 342 who were otherwise eligible to be enrolled as voters but for the stay by the High Court, have thereby been deprived not only of their valuable right to vote at the election but also the right to contest as a candidate for election as a councillor from any of the wards of the municipality or to the office of the President or the Vice President, the Court directed; (1) that the local areas included in the municipality should be formed into a ward or wards and representation given to them under sub section (5) of section 5 of the Act; (ii) that the term of the councillors so elected from such local areas shall be co terminus with the term of the councillors already elected from the existing 15 wards and (iii) that this shall be a purely interim arrangement necessitated by the somewhat unfortunate stay order passed by the High Court and that obviously it cannot extend beyond the term of the present council.
[347 G, 348 B]
