As part of a measure to mop up unaccounted money on which no income tax had been paid, an incentive scheme was prepared by the Government under which a person disclosing such income was required to pay a specified rate of tax without attracting the penal provisions of the Income Tax Act.
Section 68 of the Finance Act, 1965 provided that a person making voluntary disclosure of his income in accordance with the provisions of the section would be charged income tax at a specified rate notwithstanding anything contained in the Income Tax Act.
The assessee had a large sum of such unaccounted money in his possession.
Without allocating the total sum amongst the different assessment years, he declared that he had a sum of Rs. 7 lakhs in his possession which was earned by him during the assessment years 1957 58 to 1964 65.
Income Tax in respect of this income computed in accordance with section 68 of the Finance Act was paid by him.
In the wealth tax returns filed by him in response to the notice issued by the Wealth Tax officer for re assessment consequent on the disclosure of his wealth the assessee claimed deductions of income tax paid under section 68 of the Finance Act.
But the Wealth Tax officer disallowed the claim holding that since the assessee had not shown the liability to pay income tax in his balance sheets for the respective years the deductions claimed by him could not be allowed in any of the assessment years.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the assessee 's appeal.
The Tribunal, on the other hand, held that the liability constituted a "debt owed" because in truth and substance, it was a liability under the Income Tax Act, 1922 or 1961 and not a new liability created by the Finance Act, 1965.
On reference the High Court held in favour of the Revenue on the ground that section 68 of the Finance Act enacted a new charge of tax on an ad hoc 403 basis on disclosed income and, therefore, it was not a "debt owed" which could be allowed as a deduction under the Wealth Tax Act.
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended that since the tax paid by the assessee under the voluntary disclosure scheme was in discharge of a liability created for the first time by the Finance Act, 1965 it was not an allowable deduction under the Wealth Tax Act.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The assessee was entitled to claim deduction of income tax paid on the amounts added to his total wealth under section 2 (m) of the Wealth Tax Act in the course of the assessment proceedings.
[418 B] C 1.
Merely because the amounts were disclosed in a declaration under section 68 of the Finance Act, they did not cease to be incomes not already charged to income tax.
Although the Finance Act merely levied a fixed rate of tax in respect of all the income disclosed without allowing deductions, exemptions and such other allowances which are allowable under the Income Tax Acts, its function was no more than that of an annual Finance Act despite the fact that it made certain alterations in regard to the filing of declaration and computation of taxable income.
[414 G H] 2.
The nature of the declaration which was dependent on the volition of the declaring and the fact that the liability to tax the amount was contingent upon the willingness of the declaring to disclose the amount would not make a difference because such voluntary disclosure, even in the absence of section 68, would have exposed the assesseee to assessment or reassessment.
The voluntary character of the declaration cannot alter the character of the tax.
[415 A B] 3.
The true position is that the amount declared has the liability to pay income tax embedded in it on the valuation date but only the ascertainment of that liability is postponed to a future date.
[417 C] In the instant case its determination was allowed to be done in accordance with the provisions of section 68.
Even though this section was a complete code in itself it was only a scheme which provided a method for the liquidation of an already existing income tax liability which was present on the relevant valuation date.
[417 D] 4.
Nor did the absence of allocation of the amount disclosed amongst different assessment years detract the tax from being called a tax on income because such allocation would not achieve any additional purpose in the scheme of section 68 This section is in the nature of a package deal.
The net result achieved was that the declarant was treated as having discharged all his liability in respect of such income under the income tax law.
[415E] 404 5.
The finding of the High Court that section 68 created a fresh charge is incompatible with the foundation of the very reassessment proceedings under section 17 of the Wealth Tax Act.
[415 H] 6.
Moreover section 68, at more than one place stated that what was pay able was income tax which clearly showed that what was payable under the section was income tax.
[412 B C] C.I.T. vs Khalau Makanji Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd., Madurai District Central Cooperative Bank Ltd. vs Third I.T.O. , distinguished.
C. K. Bahu Naidu vs Wealth Tax Officer, ; C. Ii T vs GirdhariLal, ; C.W.T. vs B.K Sharma, ; C.W.T. vs Bansidhar Poddar.
; D.C. Shah vs C.W.T., ; Bhagwandas Jain vs Addl.
C.W.T. and Bhagwanidas Binani vs C.W.T., , approved.
