The appellants are partners of a firm of Solicitors at Calcutta and they had been engaged by a German Corporation to act on its behalf in three suits pending before the High Court at Calcutta.
A firm of Solicitors in London, namely M/s. Ashurst, Morris, Crisp & Co., which was also acting on behalf of the German Corporation instructed the appellants to retain Mr. Blanco White Q.C., a resident of the United Kingdom, who was a barrister having considerable practice in the branch of patent law, to argue the case in the aforesaid three suits.
The appellants did not deliver any briefs to him and also did not pay or undertake any obligation to pay any fees for his services The briefs had been earlier delivered by the London Solicitors.
Mr. Blanco White left India on February 17, 1970 after arguing the cases for 13 days commencing from January 27, 1970 to February 16, 1970, without making any arrangement regarding the payment of the Income Tax on the fees earned by him.
The Income Tax Officer informed the appellants that he proposed to proceed against them under section 163(1) of the Act treating them as the agents of Mr. Blanco White on the ground that the income arising out of professional charges had arisen on account of the business connection that existed between the appellants and Mr. Blanco White.
Thereafter the appellants challenged the said order of the Income Tax Officer by filing a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court of Calcutta.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the petition on the ground that it was a premature one taking the view that the question whether the case came within the purview of section 163(1) of the Act had to be determined after ascertainment of facts by the Income tax officer.
The appeal preferred by the appellants was dismissed by a Division Bench holding (a) there was business connection (directly or indirectly through correspondence) between the appellants ' firm and their non resident British Counsel Mr. Blanco White and that an agency could very well be said to have been established between them; (b) there was business connection between them and (c) income did either accrue or arise to Mr. Blanco White in India.
However, the Division Bench granted certificate to the appellants under Article 133 of the Constitution and hence the appeal.
388 Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
From the facts and other material on record there was connection between the appellants and Mr. Blanco White.
The said connection cannot also be termed as a casual one having regard to the period over which it had existed.
It was real and intimate and Mr. Blanco White earned the fees for arguing the case in India only through the said connection.
From the year 1965 there was correspondence between the appellants and the London Solicitors who in their turn had engaged Mr. Blanco White in connection with the suits in question Mr. Blanco White appeared before the High Court along with Indian counsel engaged by the appellants, though with the leave of the Court granted presumably under section 37 of the Advocates Act, 1951.
Mr. Blanco White could appear only with the consent of the appellants who were the Solicitors on record.
[398 A F] Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab vs R.D. Aggarwal and Co. and Anr., , applied .
2 It is incorrect to suggest that it was the intention of the Parliament to exclude non residents engaged in learned professions from the operation of section 9(1).
The words in section 9(1) and section 163 are comprehensive enough to include all heads of income mentioned in section 14 of the Act.
[393 D].
The expression "business" does not necessarily mean trade or manufacture only it is being used as including within its scope professions, vocations, and callings from a fairly long time.
From section 2(b) of the , it is clear that the "business is one of wide import and it means an activity carried on continuously and systematically by a person by the application of his labour or skill with a view to earning an income.
In the context in which the expression "business connection" is used in section 9(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 there is no warrant for giving a restricted meaning to it excluding "professional connection" from its scope.
[400 B D, 401 A B] Commissioner of income Tax, Bombay vs Currimbhoy Ebrahim and Sons Ltd., ; Christopher Barker and Sons vs Commissioner of Inland Revenue, at page 228 and Commissioner of Inland Revenue vs Marine Steam Turbine Company Limited, , quoted with approval .
In the instant case, (a) it cannot be said that since Mr. Blanco White could not appear as counsel as of right either under the Advocates Act or under the Calcutta High Court Original Side Rules, he could not be treated as having any business connection with the appellants; (b) since Mr. Blanco White appeared along with the Indian counsel engaged by the appellants and the appellants continued to represent the German Corporation when Mr. Blanco White argued the case before the High Court, it cannot be said that Mr. White was a stranger to the appellants; (c) the appellants may not have engaged him to argue the case but, they allowed him at the request of the London Solicitors to argue the case and willingly co operated with him in doing so; (d) the appellants may not have undertaken to pay Mr. White 's fees but he could not have argued and earned the fees without associating himself with the appellants.
The fact that Mr. Blanco White being a barrister could not file a 389 suit to recover the fees would not make any difference; and (e) that it is seen from the correspondence that Mr. Blanco White has earned the fees amounting to Pounds 2200 with refreshers at the rate of Pounds 220 per day, for the work done in India.
Therefore.
the appellants are liable to tax agents of Mr. Blanco White under section 153(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
[401 B E]
