Respondents 1 and 2 are the brother 's sons of Respondent No. 3.
These respondents commenced an action for ejectment of the appellant from a shop under section 11(1)(c) & (d) of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947, alleging that the respondents in good faith required possession of the shop for opening an office and a clinic by the first respondent who had become a qualified medical practitioner, and that there was default in payment of rent for a period of three months i.e. September, October and November, 1972.
The appellant contested the suit for eviction contending that he did not commit default in payment of rent for the three months and that the same was paid but no receipt was passed and that as the respondents were avoiding the statutory liability of passing the receipt acknowledging payment of rent, the appellant was forced to send the rent by money order from December, 1972 and he sent the same month after month, and therefore, he could not be dubbed a defaulter.
The ground for personal requirement was controverted contending that the property belonged to a firm, and therefore, the same cannot be claimed for the use of any one partner for his business other than the business of the firm.
It was further contended that the respondents also owned a number of houses and their requirement for Respondent No. 1 was incorrect and unwarranted.
The Trial Court held against the appellant both on the question of default in payment of rent and personal requirement and ordered eviction.
The appellant preferred an appeal and when the appeal was pending before the appellate authority, he moved an application under Order 41, Rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure contending that there had been a partition of the properties amongst the members of the firm and the suit shop had been allotted 368 to one 'P ' who was neither a plaintiff nor a party to the proceedings and if the shop belonged to him as an exclusive owner, the respondents and especially respondent No. 1 could not seek to evict the appellant for his personal requirement of the suit shop.
The appellate judge holding that the respondents were accepted by the appellant as the landlords of the suit shop, the subsequent partition decree would not help the appellant and agreeing with the finding of the Trial Court that there was default in payment of rent for a period of three months, he dismissed the appeal.
The second appeal to the High Court by the appellant was dismissed, holding that the appellant had not moved the first appellate court with a proper application under order 41, rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure and as there was no such application on the record of the case the contention could not be entertained, and that the appellant did not challenge the finding of the courts on the question of default in payment of rent.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant that: (1) the High Court was in error in rejecting the contention of the appellant that the ground of personal requirement was no more available to the respondents in view of the partition decree because not only the landlord must prove his requirement at the commencement of the action but the landlord for whose requirement the action is commenced must show that his requirement continues throughout the course of proceedings and that he had a subsisting interest in the premises of which possession is sought for his own use, (2) the High Court was in error in observing that in the absence of a proper application under order 41, rule 27 the Court could not entertain the contention thereby sought to be raised, and that the finding that the appellant was in default in payment of rent for a period of two months was not questioned before it.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The decree of the High Court and the first appellate court are set aside and the case remanded to the first appellate court, which after granting the application under order 41, rule 27, and taking the certified copy of the decree in the partition suit on record and after giving an opportunity to the parties to lead any additional evidence should decide, whether the partition decree transfers the suit shop to 'P ' exclusively and whether the respondents can maintain the action and are entitled to evict the appellant on the ground of personal requirement of respondent No. 1 and or on the ground of default.
[385 G 386 B] 2.
The expression 'landlord ' which has been defined in section 2(d) of the Rent Act is an inclusive definition couched in very wide language.
This wide amplitude of the expression has however been cut down by the explanation appended to sub clause (c) of sub section (1) of section 11.
The person claiming possession on the ground of his reasonable requirement of the leased building must show that he is a landlord in the sense that he is the owner of the building and has a right to occupy the same in his own right.
A mere rent collector, though may be included in the expression landlord in its wide amplitude cannot be treated as landlord for the purposes of section 11(1)(c).
[376 G 378 B] 369 3.
The legislature by restricting the meaning of the expression 'landlord ' for the purpose of Section 11(1)(c), manifested its intention namely that landlord alone can sue for eviction on the ground of his personal requirement if he is one who has a right against the whole world to occupy the building himself and exclude any one holding a title lesser than his own.
Such landlord who is an owner and who would have a right to occupy the building in his own right, can seek possession for his own use.
A rent collector or an agent is not entitled to occupy the house in his own right.
Even if such a person be a lessor and, therefore, a landlord within the expanded inclusive definition of the expression landlord, nonetheless he cannot seek to evict the tenant on the ground that he wants to personally occupy the house.
He cannot claim such a right against the real owner and as a necessary corollary he cannot seek to evict the tenant on the ground that he wants possession of the premises for his own occupation.
[378 C, G] In the instant case the application for additional evidence was filed after the arguments were concluded.
The Judge had no objection in treating it to be one under Or 41 rule 27, took it on record and examined it on merits.
The High Court was clearly in error in ignoring the evidence in second appeal on a technical consideration that a proper application under order 41, rule 27, was not placed before the first appellate court.
C, 375 A B] In the instant case, there was a proper and regular application to meet with the requirements of order 41, rule 27, CPC for additional evidence inviting the court 's attention to a subsequent event of vital importance cutting at the root of the plaintiff 's right to continue the action.
Coupled with it, there was evidence in the form of a certified copy of the decree in a partition suit showing that the respondents even if they had some shade of title to commence action, they having lost all interest in the property and the property having become one of exclusive ownership of a person not a party to the proceedings were no more entitled to continue the proceedings for their own benefit.
Both the lower appellate court and the High Court were clearly in error in ignoring this vital piece of evidence which goes to the root of the matter and which would non suit the respondents.
[381 C, G] Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs The Motor & General Traders, ; and Lachmeshwar Prasad Shukul vs Keshwar Lal Chaudhri, , referred to.
The time honoured notion that the right of re entry is unfettered and that the owner landlord is the sold judge of his requirement has been made to yield to the needs of the society which had to enact the Rent Acts specifically devised to curb and fetter the unrestricted right of re entry and to provide that only on proving some enabling grounds set out in the rent Act the landlord can re enter.
One such ground is of personal requirement of landlord.
When examining a case of personal requirement, if it is pointed out that there is some vacant premises with the landlord which he can conveniently occupy, the element of need in his requirement would be absent.
To reject this aspect by saying that the landlord has an unfettered right to choose the premises is to negative the very raison de 'etre of the Rent Act.
If it is shown by the tenant that the landlord has some other vacant premises in his possession, that by itself may not be sufficient to negative the landlord 's claim but in such a situation the court would expect the landlord to establish that the premises which is vacant is not suitable 370 for the purpose of his occupation or for the purpose for which he requires the premises in respect of which the action is commenced in the Court.
To say that the landlord has an unfettered right to choose whatever premises he wants and that too irrespective of the fact that he has some vacant premises in possession which he would not occupy and try to seek to remove the tenant would be unsupported by the Rent Act.
This approach would put a premium on the landlord 's greed to throw out tenants paying lower rent in the name of personal occupation and rent out the premises in his possession at the market rate.
To curb this very tendency the Rent Act was enacted, and, therefore, it becomes the duty of the Court administering the Rent Act to bear in mind the object and intendment of the legislature in enacting the same.
The Court must understand and appreciate the relationship between legal rules and one of the necessities of life shelter.
[383 C 384 A] In the instant case there are some recitals in the judgment of the High Court which show (i) that certain aspects have been disposed of cursorily, lacking precision, and (ii) that a tenant who examined as many as eight witnesses including himself to prove that the rent was paid and who specifically pleaded that fact in reply to the notice served by the landlords and who meticulously fought his case, by making an application for additional evidence at the appellate stage would not give up the contention and if he had in fact given it up there was no justification for still taking the matter to the highest court.
The subsequent event of partition of the properties have a direct impact on the title of the landlord respondents to evict the appellant on the ground of non payment of rent.
A remand of the case is therefore inevitable.
[384 G 385 B, G]
