Respondent Kalki alias Kali and her husband Amara (along with four other co accused) were charged, convicted under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced to life imprisonment.
While Kalki was also convicted and sentenced under section 148 I.P.C. for two years ' rigorous imprisonment, the other five accused were convicted and sentenced under section 147 I.P.C. for rigorous imprisonment for a period of one and a half years.
In appeal the High Court of Rajasthan acquitted all of them on the grounds (i) that P.W. 1, the widow of the deceased "is. . a highly interested witness, inasmuch as, she is the wife of the deceased and there was an enmity between the deceased and the accused on account of the dispute about the agricultural land" and (ii) "that there are material discrepancies in her statement".
This Court granted special leave to appeal only against Kalki and her husband and refused it as against the four.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
It is true that in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution the Supreme Court normally does not interfere with findings of facts arrived at by the High Court.
But when it appears that the findings of facts arrived at are bordering on perversity and have resulted in miscarriage of justice, the Court will not decline to quash such findings to prevent miscarriage of justice.
[507 F G] 2.
Material discrepancies are those which are not normal, and not expected of a normal person.
In the depositions of witnesses there are always some normal discrepancies however honest and truthful the witnesses may be.
These discrepancies are due to normal errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of the occurrence, and the like.
There are no material discrepancies in the evidence of P.W. 1 so as to reject the evidence in its entirety.
[507 D E] 3.
"Related" is not equivalent to "interested".
A witness may be called "interested" only when he or she derives some benefit from the result of a 505 litigation; in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing an accused person punished.
A witness who is a natural one and is the only possible eye witness in the circumstances of a case cannot be said to be "interested".
In the instant case.
P.W. 1 had no interest in protecting the real culprit, and falsely implicating the respondents.
[507 A B]
