The appellants in both the appeals were convicted of certain offences by two District Judges. ' By the time the appeals went up for hearing to the High Court, the appointment of the two District Judges was quashed by this Court as being in violation of Article 233 of the Constitution.
The appellants contended before the High Court that having regard to the fact that the Supreme Court had quashed the appointment of District Judges, the judgments rendered by them in these two cases became void.
The High Court, rejecting the contention, held that since the District Judges held office under lawful authority, the judgments rendered by them during the tenure of their office were valid and that in any event the validity of the judgments could not be questioned in collateral proceedings.
In appeal to this Court it was contended that trial by a Sessions Judge appointed in violation of Article 233 was not a trial by a Sessions Judge duly appointed to exercise jurisdiction in a Court of Sessions under section 9, Cr.
P.C. and that the appellants ' liberty was being taken away otherwise than in accordance with the procedure established by law and that the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 would be a surpluses if the de facto doctrine was applied to judgments rendered by persons appointed as District Judges contrary to the provisions of Article 233 of the Constitution Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: The two Judges who gave the judgments in the two cases were not usurpers or intruders but were persons who discharged the functions and duties of Judges under colour of lawful authority.
So long as an office is validity created it matters not that the incumbent was not validity appointed.
A person appointed to a post of Sessions Judge would be exercising jurisdiction in the 475 Court of Session and his judgments and orders would be those of that court and would continue to be valid notwithstanding that his appointment to such court might be declared invalid.
On that account alone it cannot be said that the procedure prescribed by law had not been followed.
[487 E F] Milward vs Thatsher ; @ 87, Seaddling vs Lorant ; , re.
James (An Insolvent) , Norton vs Shelby Counrty Law Ed. 178; referred to.
The doctrine of de facto envisages that acts permitted de facto by the officers within the scope of their assumed official authority, in the interest of the public or third persons and not for their own benefit, are generally as valid and binding as if they were the acts of officers de jure [478 H] The de facto doctrine is founded on good sense, sound policy and practical expedience.
It is aimed at the prevention of public and private mischief and protection of public and private interest.
It avoids endless confusion and needless chaos.
An illegal appointment may be set aside and a proper appointment may be made but the acts of those who hold office de facto are not so easily undone.
They may have lasting repercussions and confusing sequels if attempted to be undone.
[479 B] Pulin Behari vs King Emperor [1912] 15 Cal Law Journal 517 @ 574, Immedisetti Ramkrishnaiah Sons vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr AIR 1976 A.P 193; referred to.
A defective appointment of a de facto judge cannot be permitted to be questioned in a litigation between two private litigants.
If this were not so, so soon as a Judge pronounces a judgment litigation may be commenced for a declaration that the judgment was void because the judge was no judge.
To question a Judge 's appointment in an appeal against his judgment is such a collateral attack.
[485 B C] The de facto doctrine saves acts done by a Judge whose appointment has later been declared void, from being invalidated.
The doctrine is recognised in Article 71(2) (which declares that acts done by the President in the exercise of his powers shall not be invalidated by reason of the election being declared void) and section 107(2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (which provides that acts of a reason participating as member of Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be declared invalid by reason of his election being declared void).
The doctrine, therefore, is no stranger to the Constitution and the laws.
[485 E F] The Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 is an instance where the de facto doctrine was applied to remove and taint of illegality being attributed to the judgments or orders passed by District Judges appointed before 1966 otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of Articles 233 and 235 of the Constitution and which appointments were declared invalid by this Court in Chandra Mohan vs State of U.P., [485 H] 476 It is not a necessary inference from the Twentieth Amendment That but for that amendment the judgments, decrees etc.
Of those District Judges would have been void.
As a general rule Parliament may be presumed not to make superfluous legislation.
But This presumption is not a strong presumption in that it is not uncommon to find statutes containing provisions introduced because abundas cautela non nocet (there is no harm in being cautious).
[486 C D] The statutory reiteration of the law, a clear judicial pronouncement on a subject notwithstanding, only leads to the inference that The statute making body, though mindful of the real state of the law, was acting under the influence of excessive caution.
The Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 is one such instance.
[486 E F]
