Exercising power under section 49(2) of the Gujarat Sales Tax Act, 1969, the State Government exempted the entire tax payable on sale of goods (other than prohibited goods) by a registered dealer to an electrical undertaking, certified for the purposes by the Commissioner; if the electrical undertaking, furnished to the selling dealer a certificate in the requisite form that the goods purchased were required for the generation or distribution of electricity by the undertaking.
But according to section 16 or the Act where a dealer has purchased any taxable goods under a certificate given by him under section 13 and has used the goods for a purpose contrary to such certificate, such dealer becomes liable to pay tax on the purchase price of the goods.
The appellants who were recognised dealers purchased raw materials of taxable goods from registered dealers by furnishing a certificate in Form 19 by reason of which no sales tax had been paid by them.
After manufacturing the goods with raw materials,, they sold part of the manufactured goods to an electrical undertaking in the State against 'C ' forms to claim exemption from tax on them by virtue of a notification issued under section 49(2) of the Act.
No tax had been paid on sales effected by them in favour of the electrical undertaking.
On the ground that the undertaking furnished in form 19 had been violated, the Sales Tax officer levied purchase tax under section 16 on the raw materials purchased by the appellants.
The appellants were unsuccessful in their appeals before the Assistant Commissioner as well as before the Sales Tax Tribunal.
The High Court answered the references against the assessees and in favour of the Revenue.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants (1) that the goods manufactured by them not having been goods the sale or purchase of which had been exempted from tax by inclusion in Schedule I they could not be treated as having infringed the terms of Form No. 19 notwithstanding the fact that particular sales made by them to the electrical undertaking were exempted from payment of tax (2) the condition in form 19 became satisfied immediately on the 436 goods being manufactured by the appellants as at that stage the goods were really taxable and that a subsequent event of sale to the electrical undertaking could not be considered as a violation of the said condition and (3) in a transaction of sale if the sale was exempted from tax it could not be said that the purchase was also exempted.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) The expression "taxable goods '.
defined in section 2(33) of the Act means goods other than those on the sales or purchase of which no tax is payable under section 5 and section 49 or a notification issued thereunder.
By this definition the dichotomy that existed between "taxable goods" and "taxable events" in the now repealed Act (The Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 which was in force in the State before the present Act) had been given a go by.
It may be that section 5 and Schedule I refer to goods only but section 49 deals with only taxable events which result in the exemption from payment of tax on the happening of the conditions mentioned therein or in the notification even though the good in question do not come under Schedule 1.
[446 F H] (2) To find out whether the goods are taxable goods or not one has to wait till the disposal of the goods by the dealer in view of the definition of the said expression which takes away goods sold under circumstances attracting section 49 from the scope of the meaning of that expression.
[447 A] (3) If the sale is exempt from tax under section 49 the goods sold would not be taxable good.
[447 B]
