The appellant filed a suit for recovery of certain amounts due from the first respondent company.
By the time the suit came up for hearing the first respondent company was superseded and an Administrator was appointed.
The suit was compromised and a consent decree was passed, the company being held liable and directed to make payment of Rs. 2.85 lakhs with interest at 6% from the date of the decree.
The first respondent company received a sum of about Rs. 15 lakhs from the Custodian of Enemy Property as compensation in respect of certain Cotton mills owned by it.
The third respondent was appointed a receiver in respect of this amount and he deposited a sum of Rs. 8 lakhs of the compensation amount into a fixed deposit account with a Bank.
The decretal amount having become due and payable the appellant by an order dated April 12, 1978 obtained an interim attachment of the money in the fixed deposit account of the bank, which was confirmed by order dated April 24, 1978 on May 4, 1978 upon a petition by the appellant, the Court directed the receiver, 3rd respondent to pay the decretal amount to the appellant out of the amount in the fixed deposit account of the judgment debtor with the Bank.
As this order was not implemented, the appellant again moved the Court and by its order dated the May 24.
1978 the Court directed the receiver to pay the amount to the decree holder and the Bank, the keeper of the fixed deposit account of the receiver was also put under an obligation not to raise any objection on the receiver withdrawing the money and paying the same to the decree holder.
These directions not being obeyed, the appellant moved the Court for holding the third respondent receiver and the fourth respondent Bank in contempt and for passing appropriate orders for punishing them for contempt.
Respondents 5 and 6 were in the meanwhile appointed as joint receivers.
A solemn undertaking was given by the Bank to the Court that the decretal amount would be paid.
In view of the undertaking the Court did not pass any orders on the contempt application.
On March 7, 1980 the Court declined to grant the prayer for discharge of the receiver 3rd respondent and directed that the balance after payment of the decretal amount in the fixed deposit account will be held by the receiver.
The Court however at the instance of the joint receivers Respondents 5 and 6 stayed the order for a fortnight.
450 Three appeals were filed against the order dated March 7, 1980.
Two appeals were preferred by the Ist respondent company and one appeal was preferred by 2nd respondent, State of West Bengal.
In the appeals preferred by the Ist respondent company the High Court by its order dated March 27, 1980 granted ad interim stay in the matter, by directing that the Bank would not disburse any amount in respect of the fixed deposit account and by issuing an injunction restraining the appellant from obtaining any payment.
Allowing the appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: The order made by the Division Bench on March 27, 1983 and continued on September 9, 1980 are set aside.
The order dated May 4, 1978 and May 24, 1979 as also the undertaking given by the Manager of the 4th respondent Bank through its Counsel on June 7, 1979 would be revived and would be effective and will have to be implemented.
The 4th Respondent Bank will pay the decretal amount to the appellant, the appellant shall pass a receipt acknowledging receipt and the liability of the 4th Respondent company to the 3rd Respondent receiver shall thereupon stand discharged.
Before the amount is paid, the appellant shall give security to the satisfaction of the High Court and also an undertaking on affidavit that in the event of the appeals being allowed, the appellant shall deposit the said amount with the High Court within one month from the date of the order of the appellate Bench.
[459 C F] 2.
This Court ordinarily does not interfere with interim orders unless and until manifest injustice convulsively shakes it.
[455 E] In the instant case the interim order made by the Division Bench on September 9, 1980 confirming the ad interim order dated March 7, 1980 has to be interfered to a limited extent to avoid the impression that the Court 's process can be lightly trifled with.
[458 H] 3.
Failure to comply with the Court 's mandatory directions led the appellant to file a petition for contempt.
The alleged contemners impleaded were Ist respondent company and the 4th respondent Bank.
At the hearing, counsel for the 4th respondent unreservedly agreed to comply with the order of the Court.
It was because the Bank unreservedly and unconditionally agreed and undertook to pay up the amount that the motion for taking action in contempt was discharged by the Court.
[457 E, H] 4.
The order dated June 7,1979 is not a fresh order on merits.
It was merely an implementation of the order dated May 24, 1979 which appears to have become final and binding.
[158 A] 5.
The three appeals were preferred against the order dated March 7, 1980.
That order had nothing to do with the order dated May 24, 1979 or the order dated June 7, 1979.
At any rate, the order dated May 24, 1979 appears to have become final.
[458 D]
