The appellant was employed with the respondent as Salesman at its Delhi Sales Depot on a salary of Rs. 520/ per month from 8th December, 1973.
His service was abruptly terminated by letter dated 12th October, 1974 with effect from 19th October, 1974.
Consequent upon his termination, an industrial dispute was raised and referred to the Labour Court, Delhi, on 24th April, 1976.
The Labour Court, on evaluation of evidence both oral and documentary, held that the termination of the service was in accordance with the standing orders justifying the removal of the employee on unsuccessful probation during the initial or extended period of probation and, therefore, the termination would not constitute retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) read with section 25F of the Industrial Dispute Act.
The Labour Court accordingly held that the termination was neither illegal nor improper nor unjustified and the claim of the appellant was negatived.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The termination of service of the appellant was ab initio void and inoperative.
His case not being covered by any of the excepted or excluded categories referred to under section 2(oo) and he has rendered continuous service for one year, the termination of his service would constitute retrenchment.
The pre condition for a valid retrenchment has not been satisfied in this case and therefore he will be entitled to all benefits including back wages etc.
(534F G, 535 C D) 2.
Where the termination is illegal especially where there is an ineffective order of retrenchment, there is neither termination nor cessation of service and a declaration follows that the workmen concerned continues to be in service with all consequential benefits.
It is no doubt true that the Supreme Court had held that before granting reinstatement the court must weigh all the facts and exercise discretion properly whether to grant reinstatement or to award compensation.
519 Here, no case has been made out for departure from the normally accepted approach of the courts in the field of social justice.
(535A C) Ruby General Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Chopra (P.P.), (1970) 2 Labour Law Journal, 63 and Hindustan Steel Ltd., Rourkela vs A.K. Roy and Others, ; , referred to.
Niceties and semantics apart, termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever in section 2(oo) of the Industrial Dispute Act, would constitute retrenchment except in cases excepted in the section itself.
The excepted or excluded cases are where termination is by way of punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, voluntary retirement of the workman, retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf, and termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued illhealth.
(524 E F) 3:2.
It was not open to the Labour Court to record a finding that the service of the appellant was terminated during the period of probation on account of his unsatisfactory work which did not improve in spite of repeated warnings when there was not even a whisper of any period of probation in the appointment order or in the rules.
The termination of service being, for a reason other than the excepted category, it would indisputably be retrenchment within the meaning of section 2(oo) of the Industrial Dispute Act.(523 G H, 524A, 525Z) Pipraich Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Pipraich Sugar Mills Mazdoor Union, ; Hariprasad Shivshankar Shukla v, A. D. Divikar, [1957] S.C.R. 121; State of Bombay and Ors.
vs The Hospital Mazdoor Sabha and Ors. ; at 872; State Bank of India vs N. Sundara Money, ; ; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Orissa and Ors., ; ; Santosh Gupta vs State Bank of Patiala, and Delhi Cloth and General Mills Ltd. vs Shambhu Nath Mukerjee, ; , explained and followed.
Before a workman can complain of retrenchment being not in consonance with section 25F of the Industrial Dispute Act, he has to show that he has been in continuous service for not less than one year under that employer who has retrenched him from service.
(529 C) 5:1.
The language employed in sub sections (1) and (2) of section 25B does not admit of any dichotomy, namely, (a) sub section (1) providing for uninterrupted service and (b) sub section (2) comprehending a case where the workman is in continuous service.
Sub sections (1) and (2) introduce a deeming fiction as to in what circumstances a workman could be said to be in continuous service for the purposes of Chapter V A. (530 G H) 5:2.
Sub section (1) provides deeming fiction in that where a workman is in service for a certain period for that period even if service is interrupted on account of sickness or authorised leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal or a lockout or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the 520 part of the workman.
Sub section (1) mandates that interruptions therein indicated are to be ignored meaning thereby that on account of such cessation an interrupted service shall be deemed to be uninterrupted and such uninterrupted service shall for the purposes of Chapter V A be deemed to be continuous service.
(530H, 531A, C D) 5:3.
Sub section (2) incorporates another deeming fiction for an entirely different situation.
It is not necessary for the purposes of sub section (2) (a) that the workman should be in service for a period of one year.
If he is in service for a period of one year and that if that service is continuous service within the meaning of sub section (1) his case would be governed by sub section (1) and his case need not be covered by sub section (2).
Sub section (2) envisages a situation not governed by sub section (1).
And sub section (2) provides for a fiction to treat a workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered service for a period of 240 days during the period of 12 calendar months counting backwards and just proceeding the relevant date being date of retrenchment.
(531D E. 532A B) Both on principle and on precedent section 25B(2) comprehends the situation where workman is not in employment for a period of 12 calendar months but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of 12 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date that is the date of retrenchment, if he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter V A.
In the instant case, the appellant 's case indisputably falls within section 25 B(2) (a) and he shall be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of Chapter V A. (534B D) Sur Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd. vs Their Workmen, ; explained and distinguished.
Surendra Kumar and Ors.
vs Central Government Industrial cum Labour Court, New Delhi and Another, ; followed.
