The assessee was incorporated as a Private Limited Company in March, 1947 with G as its Managing Director and it took over the business of the trading company carried on by 'D ' in Delhi.
D was the brother in law of G and was placed in charge of the management of the business of the Delhi Branch of the assessee and he was paid a salary of Rs. 1000 per month, commission at the rate of 1 per cent on the sales of the Delhi Branch and bonus equivalent to three months salary.
The assessments of the assessee for the years 1949 50 to 1959 60 were finalised on the basis of the decisions of the Income Tax Tribunal and the amounts paid to the Managing Director and the other Directors including D by way of salary, commission and bonus were allowed in full as permissible deductions and so was the interest paid on the credit balances in their respective accounts.
On the 28th March, 1968, the Income Tax Officer issued a notice under Section 148 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 seeking to reopen the assessment of the assessee for the assessment year 1959 60 on the ground that the income of the assessee had escaped assessment at the time of the original assessment.
The Income Tax Officer, however, did not state the reasons which had led to the belief that the income of the assessee had escaped assessment by reason of omission or failure to disclose material facts nor did he give any reasons though requested by the assessee.
The assessee 's writ petition challenging the validity of the notice was allowed by a Single Judge and the notice issued by the Income Tax Officer was quashed.
It was held that there was no omission or failure on the part of the 565 assessee to disclose material facts relating to his assessment and that there was no reason to believe that any part of the income of the assessee had escaped assessment at the time of the original assessment by reason of wrong allowance of the remuneration paid to D as a permissible deduction.
The Division Bench allowed the appeal, holding that the Income Tax Officer had reason to believe that the remuneration paid to D had been wrongly allowed as a permissible deduction by reason of omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose the material facts and the notice issued by the Income Tax Officer was justified.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) Neither of the two conditions necessary for attracting the applicability of Section 147(a), was satisfied.
The notice issued by the Income Tax Officer is therefore without jurisdiction.
[574 G] (ii) It is not possible to sustain the conclusion that the assessee omitted or failed to disclose fully and truly any material facts relating to his assessment.
[574 F] 2.
(i) Before the Income Tax Officer can assume jurisdiction to issue notice under Section 147(a), two distinct conditions must be satisfied.
First, he must have reason to believe that the income of the assessee has escaped assessment and secondly, he must have reason to believe that such escapement is by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment.
If either of these conditions is not fulfilled, the notice issued by the Income Tax Officer would be without jurisdiction.
[571 F] (ii) The important words under Section 147(a) are "has reason to believe" and these words are stronger than the words "is satisfied.".
The belief entertained by the Income Tax Officer must not be arbitrary or irrational.
It must be reasonable or in other words it must be based on reasons which are relevant and material.
The Court, cannot investigate into the adequacy or sufficiency of the reasons which have weighed with the Income Tax Officer, in coming to the belief, but the Court can examine whether the reasons are relevant and have a bearing on the matters in regard to which he is required to entertain the belief before he can issue notice under Section 147(a).
If there is no rational and intelligible nexus between the reasons and the belief, so that, on such reasons, no one properly instructed on facts and law could reasonably entertain the belief, the conclusion would be inescapable that the Income Tax Officer could not have reason to believe that any part of the income of the assessee had escaped assessment and such escapement was by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts and the notice issued by him would be liable to be struck down as invalid.
[571 G 572 C] 3.
Even a close relative who is in management and charge of a business on a full time basis is entitled to be paid remuneration and, in fact, it would be wholly unreasonable to expect him to work free of charge.
[573 C] 566 In the instant case D was the brother in law of G the Managing Director of the assessee but this circumstance cannot lead to an inference that the payment of remuneration to D who was solely managing and looking after the business of the Delhi Bench of the assessee was sham and bogus.
There is nothing unusual in D giving a loan to his brother in law, the Managing Director or making gifts to the son, wife and daughter in law of the Managing Director who were his close relatives.
Any inference that the payment of remuneration to D was sham and bogus cannot be drawn merely from the manner in which he expended the amount of remuneration received by him, particularly when the persons to whom he gave a loan and made gifts were his close relatives.
[573 E 574 B] 4.
The statements of account of D with the assessee for the relevant accounting year as also the previous years were with the Income Tax Officer at the time of the original assessment and these statements of account clearly showed that out of the amount of remuneration credited to his account, he had made gifts to the sons of G on 31st July, 1957 and given a loan to G on the 25th August, 1958 and the Income Tax Officer was fully aware that G was the Managing Director of the assessee.
The assessee could not therefore be said to be under an obligation to disclose to the Income Tax Officer in the course of its assessment as to how the director who was in sole charge of the management of the business of the assessee, and who was being paid remuneration for the services rendered by him to the assessee, had utilised the amount of remuneration received by him.
[574 C F]
