The respondent landlord filed two eviction suits for recovery of possession of a non residential building which were in occupation of a firm Goraldas Parmanand and the appellant tenant.
The portion occupied by the appellant including the frontage was 7x22.
In the view of the fact that the landlord obtained eviction order against the firm Goraldas Parmanand on the ground that the building was required for the purpose of reconstruction and repairs and also for bona fide requirement, in the later eviction suit filed against the appellant, in para 4 of the plaint the landlord stated that he was in possession of a major portion of the non residential building which he obtained from the firm M/s. Goraldas Parmanand.
The appellant contested the eviction suit filed against him on the ground, (a) that the premises was not in dilapidated condition and did not, therefore, need reconstruction and repairs and (b) that the landlord in view of his own admission in the plaint at para 4 has a reasonable suitable non residential accommodation of his own and therefore cannot claim his eviction under section (12)(1)(f) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961.
The trial court rejected the tenant 's pleas and passed an eviction order.
In appeal the first appellate court, while confirming the finding of the trial court that the building was in a dilapidated condition and required re construction and repairs, held that even though the landlord obtained a decree against the firm Goraldas Parmanand, he had not got actual possession, as the litigation was still pending and, therefore, the plaintiff 's requirements of the whole building was established.
In the second appeal before the High Court, an application under Order VI, Rule 17, Code of Civil Procedure, was made praying for an amendment to the written statement alleging that the firm Goraldas Parmanand has vacated the entire portion of the premises in his possession and the plaintiff landlord has obtained actual possession of a major portion of the building and if this aspect was taken into consideration the plaintiff landlord would not be entitled to a decree for eviction under section 12(1)(f) of the Act.
The High Court rejected 606 the application observing that the adjoining portion occupied by firm Goraldas Parmanand was vacated by the firm as for back as in the year 1972 and, therefore, the application for amendment filed 3 1/2 years after the filing of the second appeal must be rejected.
Further it was of the view that the definition of "tenant" in the Madhya Pradesh Act would not enable a tenant, though in possession but against whom a decree or order for eviction has been made, to invite the court to take notice of events subsequent to the passing of the decree for eviction by the trial court.
The High Court, accordingly confirmed the decree for eviction hence, the appeal by the tenant after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the matter to the first appellate court with directions, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Before an allegation of fact to obtain the relief required is permitted to be proved, the law of pleadings require that such facts have to be alleged and must be put in issue.
Any amount of proof offered without pleadings is generally of no relevance.
In order to be able to seek eviction of a tenant under section 12(1)(f) of the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961, the landlord has to allege and establish (i) that he bonafide requires the accommodation let to the tenant for non residential purposes for the purpose of continuing or starting his business and (ii) that he has no other reasonably suitable non residential accommodation of his own in his occupation in the city or the town concerned.
The burden to establish both the requirements of section 12(1)(f) is squarely on the landlord.
[610 H, 611 A, 612 D and F] 2.
The application under Order VI Rule 17, Civil Procedure Code, in view of the averments in the written statement is wholly superfluous.
However, in view of the pleadings in the instant case, it must be granted because "the burden of proof of establishing that the landlord was not in possession of a reasonably suitable accommodation in the same town was on the plaintiff" it was wrongly rejected by the High Court on untenable ground that the defendant appellant was guilty of delay and laches ignoring incontrovertible admitted position which would non suit the respondent plaintiff.
[613 E G] 3:1.
The definition of expression "tenant" in the Madhya Pradesh Accommodation Control Act, 1961 excludes from its operation a person in possession against whom any order or decree for eviction has been made.
The decree means the decree of the final court.
This is so because once an appeal against decree or order of eviction is preferred, the appeal is a continuation of suit.
[615 C, 616 B] 3:2.
When an action is brought by the landlord under Rent Restriction Act for eviction on the ground of personal requirement, his need must not only be shown to exist at the date of the suit, but must exist on the date of appellate decree, or the date when a higher court deals with the matter.
During the progress and passage of proceeding from court to court if subsequent events occur which if noticed would non suit the plaintiff.
the court has to examine and evaluate the same and mould the decree accordingly.
The tenant is entitled to show that the need or requirement no more exists by pointing out such subsequent events, to the court including the appellate court.
Otherwise the landlord would 607 derive an unfair advantage, and it would be against the spirit or intendment of Rent Restriction Act which was enacted to fetter the unfettered right of re entry.
In such a situation it would be incorrect to say that as decree or order for eviction is passed against the tenant he cannot invite the court to take into consideration subsequent events.
But the tenant can be precluded from so contending when decree or order for eviction has become final.
[616 C G] Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu vs The Motor and General Traders, ; , followed.
Taramal vs Laxman Sewak and Ors., 1971 Madhya Pradesh Law Journal p. 888, overruled.
In the instant case; (i) relying on the admission of the plaintiff himself that he has in his possession a shop admeasuring 18/x68 plus 7/x68 forming part of the same building and his failure to state that the space with 18 frontage is neither suitable not reasonably suitable nor sufficient for starting his business as Chemist and Druggist, the plaintiff 's suit for eviction on the ground mentioned in section 12(1)(f) of the Madhya Pradesh Act must fail; (ii) the finding of the courts below that the respondent requires possession of the whole of the building including the one occupied by the tenant for starting his business as Chemist and Druggist as also for his residence is vitiated beyond repair.
The observation of the High Court that the remaining portion of the premises would be used by the landlord for his residence and even though the portion utilised for the purpose of running the business would be smaller compared to the one to be utilised for the residence it would still not be violative of sub section (7) of section 12 because such a composite user would not radically change the purpose for which the accommodation was let, is contrary to records and pleadings.
[618 B C, D F, 619 B C] 4:1.
In order to obtain possession under section 12(1)(h) of the Madhya Pradesh Act the landlord has to establish his bonafide requirement of the accommodation in possession of the tenant for the purpose of building or rebuilding or making thereto any substantial additions or alterations and must further show that such building or re building or alterations cannot be carried out without the accommodation being vacated.
If the landlord succeeds in his prayer for possession on the ground mentioned in section 12(1)(h), it would be necessary for the court to give appropriate directions under section 18 of the Act.
[619 F G, Here, as the matter has not been examined from this angle by any court, even though the litigation is pending for a long time, the case requires to be remanded to the first appellate court to ascertain: (i) whether the landlord is interested in re constructing that portion of the building which is in possession of the tenant as demised premises; (ii) whether the landlord would be in a position to reconstruct the building in his possession without the tenant being required to vacate the demised premises and (iii) if the first two queries are answered in favour of the landlord, what should be the appropriate directions to be given in favour of the tenant as enjoined by section 18 of the Act.
[621 C F] 608 Per Pathak, J. (Concurring) 1.
In a proceeding for the ejectment of a tenant on the ground of personal requirement under a statute controlling the eviction of tenants, unless the statute prescribes the contrary the requirement must continue to exist on the date when the proceeding is finally disposed of, either in appeal or revision, by the relevant authority.
Here, the High Court should have allowed the application for amendment of the written statement under Order VI Rule 17, Civil Procedure Code.
[624 E F] 2.
Before the need for personal residence can be held proved, several considerations need to be proved under section 12(1)(e) of the Act.
The omission to draw the attention of the High Court to the fact that the need for personal residence was never pleaded in the plaint led the High Court to fall into error in taking this element into account.
[625 B C] Per Contra: 3:1.
In the instant case, it is clear from the concurrent findings of the courts below that (a) the respondent has made out his case under section 12 (1)(h) of the Act that he requires the building including the portion occupied by the appellants for the re construction of the front portion and repairs to the rear portion and that necessitates that the appellants vacate their accommodation and (b) the respondent needs a portion of the building for starting the business of a medicine shop.
[625 E G] 3:2.
Whether or not the shop should be located in the front portion of the building and what should be the dimensions of the proposed Chemist and Druggist shop will turn on the evidence adduced by the parties in that behalf, Giving a finding on this point, in the circumstances of this case, is pre eminently a task to be entrusted to a subordinate court.
The questions for consideration by the appellate court are: (i) what should be the location of the shop and what should be the dimensions in the matter and (ii) availability of the benefit under section 18 of the Act to the appellants.
[625 D E]
