The Aviation Research Centre was a temporary and ad hoc organisation set up in 1962 for carrying out the work of collecting intelligence by the use of highly sophisticated techniques.
For manning this Task Force, persons with experience in the specialised nature of the work were taken on deputation basis from different sources, such as the Intelligence Bureau, the Departments of Defence Science, Wireless Planning 'and Coordination, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation and the Police Cadres of different States and they were grouped together to form the ARC.
To supplement the man power some persons were also directly recruited to the organisation on a purely ad hoc basis.
The ARC organisation was initially treated as an extension of the Intelligence Bureau.
In February 1965, it was brought under the control of the Director General of Security.
The administrative control over the organisation which was originally vested in the Ministry of External Affairs and later with the Prime Minister 's Secretariat was transferred to the Cabinet Secretariat in 1965.
The sanction for continuance of the temporary organisation was accorded by the Government from year to year till the year 1971 when a decision was taken by the Government to make the ARC a permanent Department.
The finalisation of the principles to be adopted for constitution of the new permanent Department took considerable time and it was only on April 26, 1976 that the President of India promulgated the Aviation Research Centre (Technical) Service Rules ]976 providing for tho constitution of a new service the Aviation Research Centre (Technical) Service.
876 Rule 6 of the said Rules dealt with the initial constitution of the new ARC permanent Service and provided that all persons holding, as on the appoint ed day, any one of the categories of posts specified in rule 4, whether in a permanent or temporary or officiating capacity or on deputation basis, shall be eligible for appointment to the service at the initial constitution thereof.
Rule 7 laid down the principles to be applied for fixation, of seniority of those appointed to the various posts at the time of its initial constitution, while Rule 8 dealt with the filling up of vacancies in various grades remaining unfilled immediately after the initial constitution of the service and all vacancies that may subsequently arise in the Department.
Rule 12 provided that in regard to matters not specifically covered by the rules or by order issued by the Government, the members of the service shall be governed by general rules, regulations and orders applicable to persons belonging to the corresponding Central Civil Service.
The petitioners, who were persons recruited directly to the ARC organisation during the period between 1965 and 1971 challenged in their writ petition, the validity of the promotion given to respondent nos.
8 to 67 from the year 1968 onwards officers whose services were borrowed on deputation.
They contended that the deputationists were occupying the posts in the Department only on an ad hoc basis and such ad hoc appointees who were having the benefit of lien in their parent departments and were getting promotions in those departments had no claim whatever to seniority or promotions in the borrowing department viz.
A.R.C. They also assailed the Aviation Research Centre (Technical) Service Rules as conferring arbitrary powers on the controlling authority to equate the ad hoc service rendered by the deputationists in the ARC with the regular service rendered by persons like the petitioners who had been directly recruited to the Department on a regular basis which resulted in permanently blocking all the future chances of the petitioners in matters of promotion and other service benefits.
The Rules were highly arbitrary and infringed Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution since it was based on illegal treatment of unequals as equals by equating persons functioning on a mere ad hoc basis with those holding posts in the organisation on a regular basis.
Rule 6(2) conferred arbitrary and unfettered powers on the Screening Committee and suffered from the vice of excessive delegation.
Rule 7 in so far as it empowered the Department to reckon the seniority of the deputationists by giving them the benefit of the ad hoc service rendered by them in the ARC as well as the prior service put in by them in their parent departments was arbitrary.
Rule 8(1) enabled the deputationists to consolidate the illegal advantage gained by them at the initial constitution by further promotions/appointments to still higher posts in the ARC, and by specifying the method of recruitment to the various posts in the Service and fixing a quota as between the vacancies to be filled up by promotions and those to be filled up by direct recruitment/deputation or re employment in Schedule II of the rules, the deputationists have been treated on a par with regular departmental personnel and this involved a clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was further contended that the position of the deputationists being that of persons permanently transferred from the parent departments to the ARC, under Article 26 of the Civil Service Regulations, such persons appointed by transfer shall be ranked below all the direct recruits as well as the promotees already functioning in the Department and the seniority list dated November 6, 1978 having been drawn up in contravention of the aforesaid principle laid down in Article 26, the said list should be declared to be illegal and void.
877 The case of the petitioners was resisted by respondent No. 1, who contended that the appointments made by direct recruitment were merely temporary and ad hoc in character.
While the deputationists were persons with rich experience and long years of service, the direct recruits were inexperienced and new to the job.
The delay in promulgation of the rules was due to the fact that because of the special features of the Department and the sensitive nature of the functions to be discharged by it, various circumstances and factors had to be taken into account before the draft rules were finally cleared by the several Ministries concerned.
There is no principle of law prohibiting the absorption in a newly constituted Department of persons who are functioning on deputation in a temporary organisation which was later constituted into a permanent service.
The Service Rules extend equal treatment to all categories of employees who were in position on the crucial date viz., April 26, 1976 in the matter of absorption as well as determination of seniority at the initial constitution, irrespective of whether they were direct recruits or deputationists.
The Screening Committee prepared the seniority List of the persons found suitable for absorption in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 6(2) read with Rule 7.
The Rules cannot be said to be arbitrary or violative of the principles of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16.
Dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD: l(i) A party seeking the intervention and aid of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of his fundamental rights, should exercise due diligence and approach this Court within a reasonable time after the cause of action arises and if there has been undue delay or laches on his part, this Court has the undoubted discretion to deny him relief.
[900 H 901 A] (ii) The challenge raised by the petitioners against the validity of the promotions given to respondent nos.
8 to 67 during the period between 1968 and 1975 is liable to be rejected on the preliminary ground that it is most highly belated.
There is no valid explanation from the petitioners as to why they did not approach this Court within a reasonable time after those promotions were made.
This writ petition has been filed only in the year 1979 and after such a long lapse of time the petitioners cannot be permitted to assail before this Court the promotions that were effected during the years 1968 to ]975.
[900 F G] (iii) There is also no satisfactory explanation from the petitioners as to why no action at all was taken to challenge the validity of the promotions given to respondents nos.
8 to 67 for a period of nearly seven years subsequent to the judgment of the High Court in 1972.
[901 F] Rabindra Nath Bose and ors.
vs Union of India and ors ; referred to.
So long as there was no regular cadre and hierarchy of posts and no rules laying down the mode of appointment/promotion to those posts, it was perfectly open to the Government to fill up the posts by securing the services of persons who in its opinion were by virtu.
Of their experience and qualifications, best suited for being on trusted with the specialised kinds of functions attached to the various posts.
[902 E] 878 In the instant case the petitioners had been appointed as ACIOs II only on a temporary and ad hoc basis.
Such appointments did not confer on them any rights even to the posts of DFOs.
It had also been categorically made clear to them in the letters containing the offers of appointment that such appointments will not confer on them any right to be permanently absorbed in the post if and when it was made permanent.
There was also not even any executive order or administrative instruction declaring the post of DFO as the feeder category for appointment to the higher posts.
The petitioners, therefore, had no legal right or claim for being appointed by promotion to the higher posts of ACIO I (FO), ATO, etc.
[902 F G] 3(i) When a new service is proposed to be constituted by the Government, it is fully within the competence of the Government to decide as a matter of policy the sources from which the personnel required for manning the service are to be drawn.
[903 F] (ii) It is in the exercise of the said power, that provision has been made by sub rule (1) of Rule 6, that all the persons who, as on the appointed day, were already working in the ARC organisation on a temporary and ad hoc basis and had thereby acquired valuable experience in the specialised kinds of work would be eligible for appointment to the new service at the stage of its initial constitution.
Equal opportunity was given to all to get permanently appointed in the new ARC (Technical) Service subject to their being found fit by the Screening Committee under sub rule (2) of Rule 6.
The provision cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 and 16.
[903 G, 904 A] 4(i) The provision for Constitution of a Screening Committee for adjudging the suitability of the persons in the field of eligibility for permanent appointment to the service is absolutely reasonable.
[904 D] (ii) The power conferred on the controlling authority to issue general or special instructions to a Screening Committee is really in the nature of a safeguard for ensuring that the rules relating to the initial constitution of the service were applied fairly and justly.
The controlling authority is the "Secretary Department of Cabinet Affairs".
When supervisory powers are entrusted to such a high and responsible official, it is reasonable to assume that they will be exercised fairly and judiciously and not arbitrarily.
The contention that the provisions of sub rule (2) of Rule 6 suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or excessive delegation therefore, fails.
[904 E] 5(i) When recruitment to the new Service was being made from two different classes of sources, it was necessary for the Government to evolve a fair and reasonable principle for regulating the inter se seniority of the personnel appointed to a new Department.
What has been done under Rule 6 is to give credit to the full length of continuous service put in by all the appointees in the concerned grade, whether such service was rendered in the temporary ARC organisation or in other departments of the Government.
The criterion applied, namely the quantum of previous experience possessed by the appointees measured in terms of the length of continuous service put in by them in the concerned or equivalent grade is perfectly relevant to the purpose underlying the framing of tho rule.
The principle laid down in rule 6(2) for determination of 879 inter se seniority was quite reasonable and fair and did not involve any arbitrary or unfair discrimination against the petitioners.
[905 C E] In the instant case while the petitioners had no substantive lien in respect of or title to any post in any department, the deputationists were having a lien on the posts held by them in their parent departments.
The petitioners, therefore, formed a different class consisting of persons who were virtually being recruited for the first time into regular Government service, as distinct from respondents 8 to 67 who had been holding posts in their parent departments for several years on regular basis who formed a separate class.
[905 B] 6.
The provisions contained in Rule 7 that the seniority of persons appointed on permanent basis in each grade at the initial constitution of the service shall be in the order in which they are shown in the relevant list prepared by the Screening Committee in accordance with the provisions of Rule 6 was upheld as perfectly valid and constitutional.
[905 F G] 7.
At the time of constituting a new service and laying down the mode of appointment to the various posts it is fully within the powers of the President of India to prescribe the methods by which vacancies arising in the different categories of posts in the department should be filled up.
In the instant case this is precisely what has been done by Rule 8 and the provisions of Schedule II.
[906 B] 8.
The draft rules were prepared by the Directorate of ARC and submitted to the Government in 1972 itself but on a detailed scrutiny being made it was found that the said draft required substantial modification in several respects.
Revised rules were, therefore, drafted and submitted to the Government late in 1974.
The time taken in finalising the rules was due to the fact that intensive examination of all the relevant aspects had to be done by the various concerned Ministries before the draft rules could be finally approved and issued.
The plea of malafides put forward by the petitioners is not established.
[906 H 907 B] 9.
Article 26(7)(iii) of the Civil Services Regulations applies to cases "where a person is appointed by transfer in accordance with a provision in the recruitment rules providing for such transfer in the event of non availability of candidates by direct recruitment or promotion".
The absorption of the erstwhile deputationists in the ARC (Technical) Service at the time of its initial constitution was not by such transfer.
The provisions of Article 26(7)(iii) are, therefore not attracted.
[909 F G] 10.
The provisions of Rule 6(3) and Rule 7 will be strictly conformed, to both in letter as well as in spirit, by respondents nos.
1 to 7.
In case it is found on examination that the ranking assigned to any of the petitioners in the impugned seniority list dated November 6, 1978 is not consistent with the principles laid down in the aforementioned rule, necessary action should be immediately taken to rectify the said defect.
If the promotional chances of any of the petitioners have been adversely affected by reason of any defect in the seniority list, such promotions should also be reviewed after following the requisite procedure.
The petitioners may bring to the notice of the first respondent specific instances, if any, of deviation from the principles enunciated in Rule 6(3) and Rule 7 resulting in incorrect assignment of seniority and rank by sub 880 mitting representations.
Such representations, if received, will be duly examined and appropriate orders passed thereon as expeditiously as possible.
[910 F 911 A]
