Two Trade Unions of Workmen function at appellant 's factory.
The State Government made a reference under the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947 for adjudication of an Industrial Dispute between the appellant and its workmen regarding their demands.
A joint charter of Demands was later submitted by the Unions raising certain other demands.
On behalf of one of the union a negotiation committee was formed composed of some of the office bearers of that union to participate in the negotiations for a settlement.
Ultimately a memorandum of settlement was signed.
The members of the negotiation committee of aforesaid union who happened to be office bearers of that union signed the settlement for their union.
The settlement covered the disputes mentioned in the reference and also certain other disputes between the management and workmen.
A joint petition for passing an award in terms of the settlement was filed before the tribunal.
A few days later the executive committee of the aforesaid Union rejected the agreement on the ground that the agreement had given rise to discontent among a section of the workers whose problems had not been satisfactorily solved.
The question was whether the agreement was a settlement within the meaning of section 2(p) of the from which the Union could not resile.
30 The Tribunal by its award held that the agreement was not a settlement within the meaning of section 2(p) of the Act.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
It was argued on behalf of the appellants that as the agreement was signed in the manner prescribed by rule 62(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes (Bombay) Rules, 1957 and as the requirements of rule 62(4) have been complied with, the agreement must be accepted as a settlement within the meaning of section 2(p) of the , and as such was binding on the Union under Section 18(1) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
In this case it has been found that the office bearers who signed the agreement were not competent to enter into a settlement with the company and as such it cannot be said that an agreement was reached between the employer and the workmen represented by the Union.
[35 E F] 2.
What is binding as a settlement under section 18 (1) of the is an agreement between the employer and workmen and the Tribunal found that there was no agreement between the Management and the Union.
[35 E F] Workmen of M/s Delhi Cloth & General Mills vs Management of M/s Delhi Cloth & General Mills ; referred to.
The procedure prescribed by either rule 58 of the Central Rules or Rule 62 of the Bombay Rules pre supposes the existence of a valid settlement.
But neither rule 58 of the Central Rules nor rule 62 of the Bombay Rules contains anything to suggest that any officer of a trade union who is entitled to sign a settlement reached between the parties must be deemed to have had the authority to enter into the settlement.
Rule 62 only prescribes the form of memorandum of settlement and by whom it should be signed and the question whether the procedure has been complied with will arise only if there is in existence a valid settlement.
[36 F H] The Sirsilk Ltd. and others vs Govt.
of Andhra Pradesh 31 Hindustan Housing Factory Ltd. vs Hindustan Housing Factory Employees ' Union & Others approved.
