The appellant company carries on the business of manufacturing tyres, tubes and several other products in Bombay.
The workmen in the company 's tyre curing department adopted a deliberate "go slow" policy resulting in fall in production.
On September 14, 1967 the management put up a notice asking the workmen to desist from continuing with the go slow tactics.
The notice, however, had no effect and from October 4, 1967 the workmen in the tyre curing department went on a strike.
Between October 27 and 31, 1967 the management issued chargesheets to 102 workmen alleging that they had resorted to wilful go slow.
The workmen refrained from participating in the inquiries conducted by three inquiry officers and the inquiry reports went against the workmen.
The management accepted the findings of the inquiry officers and dismissed the workmen other than those who were "protected workmen" as defined in the explanation to section 33 (3) (b) of the ; an application was made under the said provision for permission to dismiss the "protected workmen".
As a reference concerning an earlier dispute was pending before the Tribunal, an application was also made under section 33 (2) (b) of the Act for approval of the action of the management in dismissing the workmen.
Subsequently, on April 17, 1968 the parties reached a settlement.
Under the settlement the strike was withdrawn, the dispute concerning the dismissal of the workmen was referred for adjudication by a joint application made by the parties under section 10 (2) of the Act, and 76 of the dismissed workmen were re employed till the disposal of the adjudication by the Industrial Tribunal.
The demand set out in para 1 (A) of the Schedule to the order of reference relates to 25 workmen who were not reinstated and demand in para 1 (B) of the Schedule relates to the 76 workmen who were temporarily reinstated.
Following a further settlement all the 76 workmen mentioned in para 1 (B) were taken back and made permanent and the demand set out in Para 1 (B) was allowed to be withdrawn as not pressed by the award dated January 10, 1973.
In the meantime, 21 13 out of the 25 workmen covered by demand 1 (A) also reached a settlement with the management and withdrew the dispute relating to them.
The dispute on which the impugned award was made was thus restricted to demand in para 1 (A) concerning 12 workmen only out of 25.
The Tribunal by its award dated December 9, 1976 directed the company to reinstate these 12 workmen on the ground, inter alia, that they were denied for no valid reason the same treatment meted out to 76 other workmen and that the management was thus guilty of discrimination and unfair labour practice.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal in part and remitting the case to the Industrial Tribunal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The Tribunal travelled outside its jurisdiction in recording a finding of unfair labour practice and discrimination.
In this case, the points of dispute were specified in the Schedule to the order of reference, and the Tribunal was, therefore, required to confine its adjudication to those points and matters that were incidental to them.
From a reading of demands 1 (A) and 1 (B) as a whole it is clear that the demand for reinstatement in respect of both groups of workmen as made arises on the alleged invalidity of the action taken by the management in dismissing these workmen.
The issue of unfair labour practice or discrimination by reason of subsequent reinstatement on a permanent basis of some and not all the 25 workmen was not a matter referred to the Tribunal for adjudication, nor it can be said to be in any way connected with or incidental to the right of reinstatement claimed by the 101 workmen from the date of their dismissal.
The fairness of subsequent absorption of some workmen is a matter quite irrelevant for judging the validity of the earlier dismissal of these workmen along with others; it is an entirely separate and independent question.
The Tribunal also did not frame an issue on the alleged discrimination.
[26 H 27 A; 26 F G] 2.
It is settled law now that when no inquiry has been held or the inquiry held has not been proper, the Tribunal has jurisdiction to allow the management to lead evidence to justify the action taken.
Normally the inquiry by the management starts by issuing the charge sheet to the workmen proposed to be discharged or dismissed.
In a case where the charge sheet is vague it must be held that there has been no proper inquiry.
[27 B D] In the instant case, having found that proper charge sheet has not been served on the workmen, the Tribunal was entitled to ask the parties to lead evidence to enable the Tribunal to decide the merits of the dispute.
The order directing reinstatement of the 12 workmen without a consideration of the merits of the case cannot be sustained.
D] M/s. Bharat Suger Mills Ltd. vs Shri Jai Singh and others, at 690 and Management of Ritz Theatre (P) Ltd. vs Its Workmen, ; at 468, followed.
