To regulate the allotment of indigenous art silk yarn, the Government of India constituted the Art Silk Yarn Distribution Committee which issued allotment cards to individual weavers.
Under the terms of the card without waiting for the allottee to approach the manufacturer the manufacturer had to offer the allottee art silk yarn within seven days of the date of allocation of the card and within a period of 21 days from the date of allocation of the card, a firm contract for the supply of yarn was to be completed.
The appellant, a manufacturer of art silk yarn with its factory in the State of Tamil Nadu, supplied yarn to cardholders in the States of Maharshtra and Gujarat by delivering the goods at Bombay through its selling agent at that place.
On the question of exigibility of the goods to Central Sales tax the appellant claimed that since the goods were despatched to Bombay at the request of the agent and not as a result of any sale in favour of the purchaser the sale had taken place at Bombay, and secondly since the movement of goods from the State of Tamil Nadu to Bombay was not connected with the sales the sales were not inter State sales within the meaning of section 3 (a) of the Central Sales Tax Act.
This claim was rejected by the Joint Commercial Tax Officer and his order was upheld at the different stages of appeal.
The High Court dismissed the appellant 's revision petitions.
On the question whether the sales were inter State sales, the Court ^ HELD: The goods having been despatched from one State to another pursuant to a contract of sale that came into existence directly between the buyer and seller within a few days after the date of the allocation card, the sale was an inter State sale.
To constitute an inter State sale within the meaning of section 3(a) of the Central Sales Tax Act there must co exist a sale of the goods and movement of 45 goods from one State to another under the contract of sale.
Where there is a link between a contract of sale and movement of goods from one State to another pursuant to the contract of sale, interposition of an agent ought not to alter the inter State character of the sale.
[49 F] In the instant case the card contemplated a contract of sale to be completed within 21 days of the date of its issue.
The agent requested the appellant to despatch certain number of cases to a purchaser and that was done.
These facts cumulatively suggest that the goods had been 'transported from the factory in Tamil Nadu to Bombay for being delivered to the purchaser as a result of contract of sale established in accordance with the terms of the allocation card.
[49 G 50 B;E] The fact that actual sale pursuant to the said contract had taken place subsequently does not militate against the transaction being treated as an inter State sale under section 3(a) because the movement of goods delivered to the buyer was occasioned by the contract of sale brought into existence under the terms of the allocation card.
[51 E] The authorities below have found, on the basis of the terms of the allocation card and other material on record, that there was a contract of sale within the stipulated time between the parties.
[51 G] English Electric Company of India Ltd. vs The Deputy Commercial Tax Officer & Ors., (1976) 38 S.T.C. 475, followed.
Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes.
Jamshedpur & Anr.
(1970) 26 S.T.C. 354 and Kelvinator of India Ltd. vs State of Haryana (1973) 32 S.T.C. 629, held inapplicable.
