The appellant, a partnership firm, was assessed by the Sales Tax Officer, who estimated the turnover for the Calendar year 1971, and for the first six months of the year 1972 and made two orders of assessment dated 26 March 1973 under section 33 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 levying Sales Tax and penalty.
Against the assessment and penalty orders for the two periods, the appellant appealed under clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 55 of the Act to the Assistant Commissioner.
By a common order dated 29th September, 1973 the Assistant Commissioner reduced the quantum of the turnover and, consequently, the tax liability for each of the periods.
Not fully satisfied by the relief granted, the appellant proceeded in second appeal to the Sales Tax Tribunal on 8th December, 1973.
During the pendency of the appeals before the Tribunal, the Deputy Commissioner, issued two notices to the appellant on 24th April, 1974 requiring it to show cause why the appellate orders dated 29th September, 1973 passed by the Assistant Commissioner should not be revised under section 57 of the Act.
The appellant objected to the exercise of revisional power by the Deputy Commissioner during the pendency of the appeals before the Tribunal.
On 12th September 1975 the Deputy Commissioner rejected the objection.
Against the order of rejection the appellant filed two appeals before the Tribunal, and by its order dated 27th October, 1977 the Tribunal dismissed the appeals.
The Tribunal took the view that its deciding those appeals would result in nullifying the revisional power vested in the Deputy Commissioner.
The two second appeals filed by the appellant against the appellate orders dated 19th September, 1973 passed by the Assistant Commissioner were adjourned.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court against the order of the Deputy Commissioner dated 12th September, 1975 rejecting its preliminary objection and also against the order passed by the Tribunal on 27th October, 1977 dismissing his appeals as well as the notices issued by the Deputy Commissioner on 24th April, 1974 in the purported exercise of his revisional power, contending that the Commissioner of Sales Tax could not exercise his revisional power against the appellate order of the Assistant Commissioner when a second appeal against that order was pending before the Tribunal.
98 The High Court rejected the appellant 's contention observing that as the statute did not provide any other forum or jurisdiction for protecting the interests of the Revenue, it was always open to the Commissioner to interfere in revision with an order prejudicial to the Revenue notwithstanding that such order may be already under appeal before the Tribunal.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
It is not open to the Commissioner to invoke his power under clause (a) of sub section (1) of section 57 and summon the record of an order over which the Tribunal has already assumed appellate jurisdiction.
The subordinate status of the Commissioner precludes that.
[102 G] 2.
An assessment order under the Bombay Sales Tax Act is appealable under section 55 of the Act.
When the order is made by the Sales Tax Officer an appeal goes to the Assistant Commissioner.
If the order is made by the Assistant Commissioner an appeal goes to the Commissioner and if it has been made by the Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner or Additional Commissioner an appeal lies before the Tribunal.
Sub section (2) of section 55 provides for a second appeal against the appellate order of the Assistant Commissioner.
The second appeal lies at the option of the appellant to the Commissioner or the Tribunal.
The Tribunal exercises appellate jurisdiction by way of second appeal in respect of an assessment order made by the Sales Tax Officer.
It also exercises by way of first appeal, appellate jurisdiction over an assessment order made by the Commissioner.
It is at the apex of the appellate hierarchy, the Sales Tax Officer, the Assistant Commissioner and the Commissioner all of them being, subordinate to it.
[101 C E] 3.
While the Commissioner exercises revisional jurisdiction over an order passed by any officer or person subordinate to him, the Tribunal is the revisional authority over an order of the Commissioner.
The Act constitutes the Tribunal an appellate as well as a revisional authority over the Commissioner.
In quasi judicial matters the Commissioner is therefore subordinate to the Tribunal.
[102 D] 4.
The Tribunal is the supreme appellate and revisional authority under the statute.
It cannot be divested of its jurisdiction to decide on the correctness of an order, it cannot be frustrated in the exercise of that jurisdiction, merely, because a subordinate authority, the Commissioner, has also been vested with jurisdiction over that order.
Unless the statute plainly provides to the contrary that appears to be incontrovertible.
[102 F] 5.
The High Court was in error in concluding that the power to enhance an assessment can be discovered only in the revisional jurisdiction of the Commissioner and nowhere else.
[104 H 105 A] 6.
In a second appeal under sub section (2) of section 55 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the Tribunal has power to enhance the assessment.
That being so, it is open to the Revenue to invoke that power in a pending second appeal filed by the dealer before the Tribunal.
[104 G] 7.
The Commissioner being a subordinate authority to the Tribunal cannot interfere with an order pending in appeal before the Tribunal, especially when 99 the interest of the Revenue is protected by the power of enhancement vested in the Tribunal while disposing of a second appeal filed by a dealer.
[105 G] Commissioner of Sales Tax vs Motor and Machinery Manufacturers Ltd., (1976) 38 STC 78 over ruled.
Commissioner of Income Tax vs Amritlal Bhogilal distinguished.
Ramlal Onkarmal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Assam , Kelpunj Enterprises vs Commissioner of Income Tax Kerala.
, Russell Properties (P.) Ltd. vs A. Chowdhury, inapplicable.
