The husband of the petitioner was detained by the State Government under section 3(1) of the with a view to prevent him from smuggling goods and abetting the smuggling of goods.
His representation to the State Government was rejected.
The Advisory Board informed him by a letter that the Board had reported to the Government advising them that there was sufficient material to justify his detention.
In the writ petition filed in this Court it was contended on behalf of the detenu: (1) although it was the Government that was required by section 8(b) of the COFEPOSA to make the reference to the Advisory Board, it was not the Government but one of its subordinate officer that had made the reference, and that this departure from the prescribed procedural requirement had made the continued detention of the detenu for any period longer than the five weeks mentioned in section 8(b) illegal; (2) the representation was disposed of by the Minister of State of Home Affairs of the State Government without any authority to do so; (3) the detenu was not permitted to be represented by a lawyer despite his request that he might be allowed to engage the services of a lawyer before the Advisory Board; (4) there was a non application of the mind of the detaining authority first in making the 139 order of detention and later in considering the representation of the detenu; and (5) that it was the Assistant Secretary to the State Government who signed at the bottom of the grounds that he thought it was against the public interest to disclose the source of intelligence and the facts contained therein.
In the connected writ petition, only the first two of the aforestated contentions were raised.
Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.(i) The order of detention has not to specify the proposed period of detention at that stage.
Within five days of the detention, detenu is required to be furnished with the grounds of detention so as to enable him to make a representation to the detaining authority.
(Article 22(5) of the Constitution and section 3(3), COFEPOSA).
Thereafter, within three months from the date of detention, the Advisory Board has to report on the sufficiency of cause for such detention.
This is a constitutional mandate (Article 22(4) of the Constitution).
In order to enable the Advisory Board to discharge its constitutional obligation the Government is required to make a reference to the Advisory Board within five weeks from the date of detention.
(Section 8(b) of COFEPOSA).
The Advisory Board in its turn is charged with the task of submitting a report within eleven weeks from the date of detention, specifying its opinion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned (Section 8(c) COFEPOSA).
The period of eleven weeks is to enable compliance with the Constitutional time limit of three months.
On receipt of the report the Government has to revoke the detention, if the Board has reported that there is no sufficient cause for the detention or, to confirm the order of detention and specify the period of detention if the Board has reported there is sufficient cause for the detention.
(Section 8(f) COFEPOSA).
In the meanwhile at any time the Central Government in any case, and the State Government if the order of detention was made by the State Government or by an Officer of the State Government, are entitled to revoke the order of detention.
[144 C G] (ii) There is no constitutional or statutory obligation on any one, until after the report of the Advisory Board is received to decide finally or tentatively upon the period of detention.
The initial compulsion on the detaining authority before making an order of detention is to arrive at the satisfaction that it is necessary to detain the person concerned with a view to preventing him from acting in a certain manner or with a view to preventing him from committing certain acts.
The obligation to specify the period of detention is upon the appropriate Government and that has to be done at the final stage, after consideration of the report of the Advisory Board.
There is no intermediate stage at which any tentative conclusion is to be arrived at by the Government regarding the period of detention though, at any and every stage, the Government has the full liberty to revoke the order of detention.
[144 H 145 C] (iii) The act of making a reference to the Advisory Board is a mechanical or ministerial act involving no exercise of discretion, though of course the Government is at the stage, as at all other stages at liberty to revoke the order of detention.
The prescription of five weeks in section 8(b) of the 140 COFEPOSA for the making of a reference to the Advisory Board is with a view to enable the fulfilment of the constitutional requirement of Article 22(4) and not with a view to imposing an obligation upon the Government to consider the question of the length of detention and arrive at a tentative conclusion even at that stage.
[145 D] 2.(i) The Maharashtra Government Rules of Business made by the Governor in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 166(2) and (3) of the Constitution provides by Rule 6 that the Chief Minister and a Minister in consultation with the Chief Minister may allot to a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister any business appertaining to a Department or a part of a Department.
The Standing Order made by the Chief Minister of Maharashtra and Minister for Home directs allotment of the business appertaining to "All cases of and the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities . . .
Maharashtra Detention Order, 1974 and all other matters arising under the provisions of the said Act and the said Order. .and any other orders issued under this Act, except. ." to the Minister of State for Home.
The Minister of State for Home Affairs was therefore entitled to deal with the representation of the detenu.
[145 H, F G; 146 A] (ii) Governmental business can never get through if the same individual has to act for the Government at every stage of a proceeding or transaction, however, advantageous it may be to do so.
Nor can it be said that it would be to the advantage of the detenu to have the matter dealt with by the same individual at all stages.
It may perhaps be to the advantage of the detenu if fresh minds are brought to bear upon the question at different stages.
There is therefore no substance in the suggestion that the representation of the detenu should have been considered by the very individual who had exercised his mind at the initial stage of making the order of detention.
[146 D, B] 3.
While section 8(e) disentitles a detenu from claiming as of right to be represented by a lawyer, it does not disentitle him from making a request for the services of a lawyer.
The importance of legal assistance can never be over stated and adequate legal assistance may be essential for the protection of the Fundamental Right to life and personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution and the Right to be heard given to a detenu by section 8(e) of COFEPOSA.
These rights may be jeopardised and reduced to mere nothings without adequate legal assistance.
That would depend on the facts of each individual case, in the light of the intricacies of the problems involved and other relevant factors.
Therefore, where a detenu makes a request for legal assistance, his request would have to be considered on its own merit in each individual case.
[146 H 147 C] In the instant case, the State Government merely informed the detenu that he had no statutory right to be represented by a lawyer before the Advisory Board.
Since it was for the Advisory Board and not for the Government to afford legal assistance to the detenu the latter, when he was produced before the Advisory Board, could have, if he was so minded, made a request to the Advisory Board for permission to be represented by a lawyer.
He preferred not to do so.
The detenu was, therefore, not wrongfully denied the assistance of 141 counsel as to the conclusion that procedural fairness, a part of the Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution was denied to him.
[147 D E] 4.
A reading of the grounds of detention reveals that all that was said was that the documents received by post at the time of search pertained to an order dated 29.11.1980 and not that there was any admission by the detenu that there was ever an order dated 29.11.1980.
[147 H] 5.
The mistake that it was only the Assistant Secretary of the State Government who signed at the bottom of the grounds that it was against the public interest to disclose the source of intelligence was explained by the respondents as a clerical mistake, and was later rectified by making suitable corrections.
[148 C E]
