On May 13, 1972 the Reserve Bank of India, Bombay issued Administration Circular No. 8 introducing a revised scheme for promotion of employees as staff officers Grade A. Feeling that the aforesaid Circular adversely affected them, the stenographers filed a writ petition in the Andhra Pradesh High Court challenging its validity, Their grievance was that by the said circular No. 8 they were placed en bloc below the clerks which made their chances of promotion illusory.
On March 5, 1973 the Andhra Pradesh High Court dismissed the writ petition, but made certain recommendations to avoid frustration and dissatisfaction among the stenographers.
In 1973 charters of demands were submitted to the Reserve Bank of India by the employees ' associations.
On January 23, 1976 the Bank issued Administration Circular No. 5 modifying Circular No. 8 to remedy the alleged adverse effect suffered by stenographers as a result of Circular No. 8.
On June 16, 1979, the Central Government in exercise of powers conferred by section 7B of the constituted a National Industrial Tribunal with head quarters at Bombay and referred to it for adjudication an industrial dispute existing between the Reserve Bank of India and their Class III workmen.
The dispute as described in the Schedule to the order of reference related to "specific matters. . pertaining to Class III workmen" enumerated in the Schedule.
The Schedule listed 35 matters in all, item No. 12 of which is described as "promotion".
During the pendency of the reference, on October 10, 1979 the Reserve Bank of India issued Administration Circular No. 6 introducing certain change in the scheme of promotion set out in circular No. 8 by relaxing certain conditions of eligibility for the personal assistants, stenographers, tellers and the clerical staff.
Feeling aggrieved, some clerks (Grade I) who were empanelled for promotion to the post of Staff Officer Grade A after passing the test, filed two complaints before the National Tribunal under section 33A of the Industrial Dispute Act alleging (i) that as a result of Circular No. 6 many who could not have been considered for promotion in preference to the complainants had Circular No. 8 been in force, would now be entitled to a higher preference, 108 and (ii) that the alterations made during the pendency of the reference before the National Tribunal amounted to changing their conditions of service to their prejudice in violation of section 33 (1) (a) of the inasmuch as their chances of promotion would recede.
The National Tribunal by its award dated September 3, 1980 disposed of these two complaints holding that the Reserve Bank of India had changed to the prejudice of the complainants their conditions of service by modifying the existing scheme of promotion during the pendency of a reference before the Tribunal and thereby contravened the provisions of section 33 (1) (a).
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Allowing the appeals and dismissing the complaints, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
The order of reference did not require the Tribunal to adjudicate on all possible matters relating to promotion.
The Tribunal should have defined the area of the dispute referred to it for adjudication before proceeding to consider whether the promotional scheme set out in Circular No. 6 could be said to be connected with that dispute.
[117 G H] 1 : 2.
Item No. 12 of the Schedule annexed to the order of reference is described as "promotion".
Demand No. 19 in the Charter of Demands presented by the All India Reserve Bank Employees Association mentions "promotional avenues", but the matters specified under the head "promotional avenues" relate to the creation of more promotional posts and the upgrading of certain posts.
Demand No. 19 does not thus relate to the promotional scheme in question.
Demand No. 27 of the Charter of Demands submitted by the All India Reserve Bank Workers Organisation is described as "promotional policy" and all that is said in the charter of demands is that the matters "should be discussed and finalised on the basis of prerequisites of promotional policy submitted in 1969".
Demand No. 27 could, therefore, have no connection with the promotional scheme set out in Circular No. 6 issued in 1979.
[116 C E] 1: 3.
Under section 10 (1A) the Central Government could refer to the National Tribunal an existing or an apprehended dispute; the order or reference in this case shows that it was not an apprehended dispute but an industrial dispute that "exists between the employers in relation to the Reserve Bank of India and their class III workmen in respect of the matters specified in the schedule" annexed to the order which was referred to the Tribunal for adjudication.
As section 10 (1A) expressly says, any matter appearing to be connected or relevant to the existing or apprehended dispute can also be referred to the National Tribunal for adjudication, but obviously unless it is determined what the dispute was that has been referred for adjudication, it is not possible to say whether a particular matter is connected with it.
[117 C E] 2: 1.
What circular No. 6 did was to relax for stenographers and personal assistants the conditions they had to satisfy to be able to sit for the test.
It they passed the test, they would get into the panel along with employees belonging to the clerical cadre who also had passed the test.
Vacancies in the posts of staff officer Grade A are filled by recruiting employees from the panel.
The panel is a permanent one.
Alterations of the conditions of the eligibility governing employees belonging to a particular cadre can amount to changing the conditions of service of employees who belonged another cadre, assuming for the present 109 that the said conditions were conditions of service.
The changes introduced in respect of the stenographers and personal assistants may have an impact on the promotional prospects of employees from another cadre who are already in the panel or even of those who were expecting to be included in the panel, but this would not amount to changing their conditions of service.
The conditions of service of an employee cannot include an implied right to prevent the employer from altering the conditions of service of other employees.
In a given case such alteration may be inequitable, and a way may be found in the to redress the grievance of the employees affected thereby.
[118 B F] 2: 2.
It was competent for the Bank to introduce a combined promotional scheme for the clerical staff, stenographers, and personal assistants and the Bank was not bound to wait until all employees belonging to the clerical cadre whose names were already in the panel when Circular No. 6 was introduced had been promoted as staff officers Grade A.
There was no such assurance given by the Bank when it introduced Circular No. 8.
The Bank did not undertake that it would not take any step to change the conditions of the stenographers and the personal assistants were required to satisfy to be able to appear in the test until all the clerks already empanelled were promoted.
Circular No. 6 cannot therefore be assailed on the ground that it was introduced when some employees belonging to the clerical grade whose names were already in the panel remained to be promoted.
[121 B E] Being in the panel in any particular year does not ensure a fixed place in the panel for an employee until he is promoted.
The right the complainants now claim is based on the change in the conditions of service of the stenographers made to their detriment earlier.
[121 E F] Reserve Bank of India vs N.C. Paliwal ; , followed.
It is well settled that a rule which affects the promotion of a person relates to his condition of service but this is not so if what is affected is a chance of promotion only.
Though a right to be considered for promotion is a condition of service, mere chances of promotion are not and that a rule which merely affects chances of promotion cannot be regarded as varying a condition of service.
[121 G H, 122 A, C D] The fact that as a result of the changes made by Circular No. 6 the complainants lost a few places in the panel affects their chances of promotion but not the right to be considered for promotion.
That being so, it cannot be said that the alterations made by Circular No. 6 amount to changing the conditions of service of the complainants; the grievance made by the complainants does not therefore appear to have any basis.
[122 G H, 123 A B] Mohd. Shujat Ali and others etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
; , ; State of Mysore vs G.B. Purohit, C.A. 2281 of 1965 decided on 25 1 1967 (S.C.) unreported, applied.
