In his suit under section 13(1)(g) of Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 seeking the eviction of the respondent defendant from the suit premises, the plaintiff appellant claimed that after having been displaced from Uganda on account of political upheaval in that country he intended to settle down in his native town and that therefore, he reasonably and bonafide required the suit premises under the defendant 's occupation for setting up his business.
In replication the defendant claimed that he, a man of slender means, had built up his goodwill by running a business from the premises over the years and his eviction from the premises would put greater hardship on him than on the plaintiff.
In support of his case he pleaded that section 13(2) of the Act makes it incumbent on the Court to refrain from passing an order of eviction under section 13(1)(g) if it is satisfied that it causes greater hardship to the tenant than to the landlord.
The court of first instance, and in appeal the District Judge, negatived the defendant 's claim of comparative hardship to him because the defendant himself was not in actual possession of the premises but had in fact inducted another person who had his own business elsewhere in the town but used the suit premises as a mere godown.
On appeal the High Court declined to pass an order of eviction under section 13(1)(g).
It held that the defendant, who in his old age was receiving some maintenance from the licensee for the use of the premises, would be deprived of his only source of livelihood were he evicted from the premises and that secondly the fact that the plaintiff had gone back to Uganda showed that he was not sure whether to settle down in India or go back to Uganda.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: Section 13(2) seeks to strike a just balance between the landlord and tenant.
In considering the question of greater hardship the Court would have to take into account the circumstances which would tilt the balance of hardship either way.
The existence of alternative accommodation on both sides is an important though not a decisive factor.
On the terms of section 13(2) 154 the question whether or not there would be greater hardship to the tenant by passing the decree cannot turn on mere burden of proof but the parties must lead evidence.
[157 A D] The High Court erred in non suiting the plaintiff.
There is enough evidence to show that he came from Uganda as a result of political upheaval in that country, that he had considerable business experience in that country and that he had the requisite wherewithal to carry on business.
In contrast the defendant was not in actual possession of the suit premises but had given possession of the premises to another person who had a separate shop of his own, who only used the premises as his godown.
The mere circumstance that the defendant was aged and infirm and that the licensee paid him some amount regularly would not imply that a decree under section 13(1)(g) would cause greater hardship to the defendant.
Section 13(2) would have been relevant had the defendant himself been in possession of the premises.
In any event the defendant having died the question of greater hardship to him under section 13(2) would not arise.
[158 A F] Although the jurisdiction exercisable by the High Court under the Act is wider than its jurisdiction under section 115 C.P.C. its revisional jurisdiction under the Act could only be exercised for the limited purpose of satisfying itself that the decision of the Courts below was according to law.
So long as the finding of the Courts below was not perverse or erroneous the High Court cannot, on a reappraisal of the evidence, substitute its own finding for the one reached by the Courts below.
[157 E F] In dealing with the question of comparative hardship the Court is only concerned with the hardship of the landlord and the tenant but not of a complete stranger.
[157 F G]
