In a suit for partition of immovable property filed in the Court of Munsiff Parappanangadi in the year 1938 that Court passed a preliminary decree for partition on the 18th February, 1940.
The parties to the suit took no further interest in the matter for more than two decades.
In the meantime according to the order of the High Court of Kerala dated December 22, 1956 refining the territorial limits of the Courts of Munsiffs functioning in district Calicut, of which the Court of Munsiff at Parappanangadi was one, the suit property came under the territorial jurisdiction of the Munsiff 's Court at Manjeri.
The plaintiff on the 18th January, 1966 filed an application praying that a final decree the suit be passed.
Defendant No. 12 immediately took an objection that the Manjeri Court had no territorial jurisdiction to hear the application and that the matter should have been agitated in the Court of Munsiff at Parappanagadi.
The objection was overruled by the Manjeri Court which proceeded to partition the property metes and bounds and ultimately passed a final decree in that behalf on 9th July, 1968.
An appeal filed against the final decree by defendant No. 12 failed, but he succeeded before learned single Judge of the Kerala High Court who ruled that it was only the Parappanangadi Court that had the territorial jurisdiction to entertain the application and the final decree was set aside.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
In order that an objection to the place of suing may be entertained by any appellate or revisional Court, the fulfilment of the following three conditions is essential, according to the provisions contained in sub section (1) of section 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure: (i) The objection was taken in the Court of first instance; (ii) it was taken at the earliest possible opportunity and in case where issues are settled, at or before such settlement; (iii) there has been a consequent failure of justice.
[185 F G] 1:2.
In the present case conditions Nos. 1 and 2 are no doubt fully satisfied; but before the two appellate Courts below could allow the objection to be taken, it was further necessary that a case of failure of justice on account of the place suing having been wrongly selected was made out.
Since the respondents failed to point out even before this Court that a failure of justice had occurred by reason 184 of Manjeri having been chosen as the place of suing, the provisions of sub section (1) of section 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure made it imperative for the District Court and the High Court not to entertain the objection, whether or not it was otherwise well founded.
[185 H, 186 A C]
