One Hasnain Mukhtar Hussain Lakdawala was detained by the Government of Maharashtra by an order of detention dated 31st December, 1980 passed under section 3(1) of COFEPOSA, 1974.
The order of detention was served on the detenu on 17th January, 1981 along with a communication dated 31st December, 1980 and a letter dated 7th January, 1981 was also served enclosing copies of the documents relied upon in the grounds of detention.
A letter dated 6th February, 1981 along with nine copies of the representation to be made by the detenu sent by the detenu 's advocate to the Superintendent, Bombay Central Prison, though handed over to the detenu by the prison authorities on the same day was carried by the detenu to the Nasik Road Central Prison to which he was shifted on that day.
The requisite copies of the representation duly signed by the detenu were forwarded to the Government and the Chairman of the Advisory Board on 10th February, 1981.
The State Government, however, rejected the representation by its letter dated 25th February, 1981.
A copy of the representation sent to the Central Government was also rejected on 26th February 1981.
In the meantime, the case of the detenu was referred to the Advisory Board and on 11th March 1981, when the detenu was called for an oral hearing, the detenu handed over four copies of a further representation dated 11th March 1981, praying for revocation of the detention order.
The Advisory Board consi dered the case and by its report dated 12th March 1981 advised the State Government that there was sufficient cause for the detention of the detenu, and through its letter dated 16th March, 1981 apprised the detenu 's advocate of the position.
The State Government thereafter confirmed the order of detention.
Hence the writ petition by the detenu 's wife.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1:1.
There was no constitutional or legal infirmity in the representation of the detenu having been considered by the Minister of State for Home.
[294 B] 1:2.
The only requirement of Article 22(5) of the Constitution is that the representation of detenu must be considered by the detaining authority which in 289 the present case was the State Government and this requirement was clearly satisfied, because when the Minister of State for Home considered the representation and rejected it, he was acting for the State Government and the consideration and rejection of the representation was by the State Government.
[293 G] 1:3.
There is no requirement express or implied in any provision of COFEPOSA that the same person who acts for the State Government in making the order of detention must also consider the representation of detenu.
More over, it would really be to the advantage of the detenu, if his representation is not considered by the same individual but fresh mind is brought to bear upon it.
[293 H 294 B] In view of the clear provisions of Rule IS of the Rules of Business of the Government of Maharashtra, clauses 4 to 6 of the Instructions issued by the Governor thereunder and the two standing orders dated 18th July 1980 it was immaterial, whether P.V. Nayak considered the representation and disposed it of, or the Minister of State for Home did so, since both had authority to act for the State Government and whatever be the instrumentality, it would be the State Government which would be considering and dealing with the representation [292 D H; 293 F] Smt.
Kavita vs State of Maharashtra, [1982] I S.C.R. 138, followed.
The State Government did not commit any breach of its constitutional or legal obligation in making a reference to the Advisory Board without first determining the period for which the detenu was to be detained.
[296 G] 2:2.
It is not at all necessary for the detaining authority to apply its mind and consider at the time of passing the order of detention or before making a reference to the Advisory Board, as to what shall be the period of detention and whether the detention is to be continued beyond a period of three months or not.
The only inhibition on the detaining authority is that it cannot lawfully continue the detention for a period longer than three months unless the Advisory Board has, before the expiration of the period of three months, reported that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such detention.
[296 E F] 2:3.
The requirement of clause (4) of Article 22 of the Constitution is satisfied by the enactment of section 8(b) of the COFEPOSA.
This provision for reference to the Advisory Board is not confined to cases where the detaining authority has already come to a decision that the detention shall be continued for a period longer than three months.
It applies equally where the detaining authority has not yet made up its mind as to how long the detention shall continue or even where the detention is to continue for a period of three months or less.
Whenever any order of detention is made, whether the detention is to continue for a period longer than three months or a period of three months or less or the detaining authority has not yet applied its mind and determined how long the detention shall be continued, the appropriate Government is bound within five weeks from the date of detention to make a reference to the Advisory Board and if it fails to do so, the continuance of the detention after the expiration of the period of five weeks should be rendered invalid.
The Advisory Board is, in every such case where a reference is made, required to submit its report 290 within eleven weeks from the date of detention and if it reports that there is in its opinion no sufficient cause for detention, the detaining authority is bound to release the detenu forthwith, even though a period of three months may not have expired since the date of detention.
This is a safeguard provided by the COFEPOSA, which is applicable in all cases of detention, whether the detention is to be continued beyond a period of three months or not and whether or not the detaining authority has applied its mind and determined, before making a reference to the Advisory Board, as to what shall be the period of detention.
[295 F 296 E] 3.
The State Government, in the instant case, cannot be said to be guilty of any unreasonable delay, at any stage, in considering the representation of the detenu.
[297D, 299 B, D]
