On being selected by a Selection Committee constituted under the Indian Police Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1955 the appellant, a Deputy Superintendent of Police prior to 13th April, 1960, was promoted as Superintendent of Police.
In September, 1963, purporting to act under regulation 5 of the Regulations, the Selection Committee recommended his supersession, along with some others, on the ground that the Committee considered that the records of "the officers were not such as to justify their appointment to the Indian Police Service at this stage".
He was reverted in September.
Before the High Court the appellant contended that the Selection Committee 's failure to specify the reasons for his supersession, in contravention of the Regulations, rendered the list non est.
This plea was rejected.
Allowing the appeal: ^ HELD: The Select List reverting the appellant to a lower post prepared in accordance with the recommendations of the Selection Committee contravened the mandate in sub regulation (5) of Regulation 5.
[358 G] Regulation 5(5) imposed a mandatory duty upon the Selection Committee to record its reasons for the proposed supersession.
In the context of the protection conferred on public servants by articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution it was incumbent on the Selection Committee to have stated reasons in a manner which would disclose how the record of each officer superseded stood in relation to the records of others who were to be preferred.
This is the only visible safeguard against possible injustice and arbitrariness in making selections.
Had that been done it would have been possible to correlate facts on service records considered by the Selection Committee with the conclusions reached.
[358 C] 354 Reasons which are the links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based and the actual conclusions disclose how the mind is applied to the subject matter for a decision, They should reveal a rational nexus between the facts considered and the conclusions reached.
[358 E] Union of India vs Mohan Lal Capoor & Ors., ; ; applied.
