Pursuant to the Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules made by the Governor of Rajasthan in consultation with the Rajasthan Public Service Commission and the High Court of Rajasthan, the Rajasthan Public Service Commission held a competitive examination for recruitment of Munsifs.
The competitive examination consisted of a written examination with two papers in law carrying 100 marks each and two papers, one in Hindi and the other in English, each carrying SO marks and a viva voce examination carrying 100 marks.
The viva voce examination was conducted by a Board consisting of Hon 'ble Mr Justice P. D. Kudal, Judge, Rajasthan High Court, Shri Hari Dutt Gupta, Chairman, Rajasthan Public Service Commission, Adaviappa, Member, Rajasthan Public Service Commission and an expert.
The expert Member was either Dr. I.C. Saxena, or Shri Kagzi or Shri Jallan who sat by rotation.
Out of the 39 candidates (respondents 3 to 41) who were selected for appointment, one belonged to the scheduled caste and the rest belonged to the general category.
The last of the candidates belonging to the general category who was selected for appointment obtained a total of 190 marks in the examination, 135 in the written examination and 55 in the viva voce.
The petitioner who obtained a total of 189 marks, 159 in the written test and 30 in the viva voce was not selected for appointment.
Hence the writ petition, by the petitioner contending: (a) the allocation of so high percentage of marks for the interview test introduced an irredeemable element of arbitrariness so as to offend Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; (b) awarding of marks in the interview test in a single lot instead of sub dividing and awarding marks separately under various heads for the various matters tested in the interview was bad in law.
Dismissing the writ petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The object of any process of selection for entry into a public service is to secure the best and tho most suitable person for the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism.
Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public service.
[324 C D] 321 1:2.
While a written examination assesses a candidate 's knowledge and intellectual ability, an interview test is valuable to assess a candidate 's overall intellectual and personal qualities.
While a written examination has certain distinct advantages over the interview test there are yet no written test: which can evaluate a candidate 's initiative, alertness resourcefulness, dependableness, co operativeness, capacity for clear and logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and dealing with others, adaptability, judgement, ability to make decision, ability to lead, intellectual and moral integrity.
Some of these qualities may be evaluated, perhaps with some degree of error, by an interview test, much depending on the constitution of the interview Board.
Thus the written examination assesses the man 's intellect and the interview test the man himself and "the twain shall meet" for a proper selection.
[325 C E, 326 F] 2.
As regards the weight to be attached respectively to the written test and the oral test, there cannot be any rule of thumb regarding the precise weight to be given.
It must vary from service to service according to the requirements of the service, the minimum qualifications, prescribed, the age group from which the selection is to be made, the body to which the task of holding the interview test is proposed to be entrusted and a host of other factors.
It is a matter for determination by experts and for research.
It is not for courts to pronounce upon it unless exaggerated weight has been given with proven or obvious oblique motives.
[326 F. 327 C D] Periakaruppan vs State Tamil Nadu, [1971] 2 S.C.R. and Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujlb Sehravardi & Ors., A.I.R. 1981 S.C. 487, explained.
Ordinarily recruitment to public services is regulated by rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution and courts would be usurping a function which is not theirs, if they try to redetermine the appropriate method of selection and the relative weight to be attached to the various tests.
If the courts do that, they will be rewriting the rules but, however, courts would interfere certainly in cases of proven or obvious oblique motives.
[330 C D] In the instant case, the selection cannot ba struck down on the ground that more than due weightage was given to the interview test: (a) The Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules have been made by the Governor of Rajasthan in consultation with the High Court of Rajasthan and the Rajasthan Public Service Commission.
Both are well acquainted with the particular needs of their State and the people.
If the Governor, in consultation with the High Court and the Public Service Commission of the State makes rules stipulating seventy five per cent of the marks for the written examination and twenty five per cent for the interview test, Courts have no basis on which to say that twenty five per cent for the interview test is on the high side; (b) the interview test is generally conducted and was, in the present case, conducted by a body consisting of a Judge of the High Court, the Chairman and a member of the Public Service Commission and a special invitee expert, and as such no legitimate grievance or hint of arbitrariness could be made against this body; (c) the candidates expected to offer themselves for selection are not raw graduates freshly out of college but are persons who have already received a certain amount of professional training.
The source material is such that some weightage must be given to the interview test 322 and (d) the marks obtained by the candidates at the written examination were not made available to the members of the interviewing Board either before or at the time of the interview.
[327 E H, 328 A C] 4.
Courts cannot sit in judgment over the methods of marking employed by interviewing bodies unless, it is proven or obvious that the method of marking was chosen with oblique motive.
In the instant case, the Rajasthan Judicial Rules generally indicate the criteria to be considered in the interview test without dividing the interview test into distinct sub tests.
It is for the interviewing body to take a general decision whether to allocate marks under different heads or to award marks in a single lot.
The award of marks under different heads may lead to a distorted picture of the candidate on occasions.
On the other hand, the totality of the impression created by the candidate on the interviewing body may give a more accurate picture of the candidate 's personality.
[328 D G] Periakaruppan vs State of Tamil Nadu, [1971] 2 S.C.R. 430 and Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sheravardi and Ors., ; , discussed and distinguished.
