In a suit for specific performance of an agreement to sell filed on the original side of the Bombay High Court the plaintiff (appellant) prayed for certain interim reliefs.
A single Judge of the High Court dismissed the application.
A Division Bench of the High Court, on appeal by the plaintiff, held that the appeal was not maintainable on the ground that the impugned order of the single Judge was not a 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that since the trial Judge is governed by the procedure prescribed by the Code of Civil Procedure, by virtue of the provisions of section 104 read with Order 43 Rule (1) the impugned order is appealable to a larger Bench; (2) assuming that the Letters Patent was a special law, section 104 read with Order 43 is in no way inconsistent with clause 15 of the Letters Patent; (3) even if section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1 does not apply an order refusing to appoint a receiver or to grant injunction has the attributes of finality and, therefore, amounts to a judgment ' within the meaning of Letters Patent.
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: (per Fazal Ali and A. Varadarajan, JJ.) (Amarendra Nath Sen, J. concurring.) Since the Order of the trial Judge was one refusing appointment of a receiver and grant of ad interim injunction, it is a 'judgment ' within the meaning of the Letters Patent both because order 43 rule 1 applies to internal appeals in the High Court, and such an order even on merits contains the quality of finality and would be a judgment within the meaning of clause 15 of Letters Patent.
Hence an appeal is maintainable to the Division Bench.
The Division Bench was in error in dismissing the appeal without deciding it on merits.
[259 F G] 188 There is no inconsistency between section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1, C.P.C. and appeals under Letters Patent.
There is nothing to show that Letters Patent in any way excludes or overrides the application of section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1 or that these provisions do not apply to internal appeals within the High Court.
[237 E F] Code of Civil Procedure 1877, by sections 588 and 589, did not make any distinction between appeals to the High Court from the District Court and internal appeals to the High Court under Letters Patent.
Notwithstanding the clear enunciation of law by the Privy Council that section 588 did not affect nor was it inconsistent with the provisions of Letters Patent and that, therefore, orders of a trial Judge which fall beyond section 588 could be appealable to a larger bench under the Letters Patent if its orders amounted to a 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent, there was a serious controversy among the High Courts on this question.
Section 104 of the C.P.C., 1908 made it clear that appeals against orders mentioned in Order 43 Rule 1 were not in any way inconsistent with the Letters Patent but merely provide additional remedy by allowing appeals against miscellaneous orders passed by the trial Judge to a larger bench.
[205 E G] In dealing with a suit the trial Judge has to follow the procedure prescribed by the Code.
It is indisputable that any final judgment passed by the trial Judge amounts to a decree and under the provisions of the Letters Patent an appeal lies to a larger bench.
Letters Patent itself does not define the term 'judgment ' and has advisedly not used the word 'decree ' in respect of a judgment given by the trial Judge.
[206 B D] Section 5 of the Code empowers the State Government to apply the provisions of the Code where any enactment is silent as to its applicability.
Section 5 makes clear that, excepting the Revenue Courts, all other Civil Courts would normally be governed by the provisions of the Code in the matter of procedure.[206H,207A] Section 4 of the Code which provides that in the absence of any specific provision to the contrary the provisions of the Code do not limit or affect any special or local law, is not applicable in the instant case because even if the Letters Patent is deemed to be a special law within the meaning of this section the provisions of section 104 do not seek to limit or affect the provisions of the Letters Patent.
[207 B C] By force of section 104 all appeals, as indicated in the various clauses of Order 43 Rule 1, would lie to the appellate court.
In short a combined reading of the various provisions of the Code leads to the conclusion that section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1 clearly applies to proceedings before a trial Judge of the High Court.
[207 H; 209 B] In the instant case, therefore, section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1 does not in any way abridge or interfere with or curb the powers conferred on the trial Judge by clause 15 of Letters Patent.
They only give an additional remedy by way of appeal from the orders of the trial Judge to a larger bench.
That being so there is no force in the respondent 's argument that these provisions do not apply to internal appeals in the High Court.
[209 D E] 189 Hurrish Chunder Chowdry vs Kali Sundari Debia, 10 I.A. 4, Mt. Sabitri Thakurain vs Savi & Anr.
A.I.R. 1921 P.C. 80, Union of India vs Mohindra Supply Co., ; and Shankarlal Aggarwal & Ors.
vs Shankarlal Poddar & Ors. , referred to.
A number of enactments, as for example, section 202 of the and section 39 of the Arbitration Act widen, rather than limit, the original jurisdiction of the High Court by conferring additional or supplementary remedy by way of appeal to a Division Bench from the judgment of a single Judge.
On a parity of reasoning, therefore, section 104 read with Order 43 Rule 1 expressly authorises and creates a forum for appeal against orders falling under the various clauses of Order 43 Rule 1 to a larger bench of the High Court without disturbing, interfering with or over riding the Letters Patent jurisdiction.
[211 B C] Dayabhai Jiwandas & Ors.
vs A.M.M. Murugappa Chettiar, I.L.R. 13 Rangoon 457, Sonbai vs Ahmedbhai Habibhai [1872] 9 Bom.
HC Reports.
398, Rajagopal & Ors.
(in Re. LPA 8 of Mad. 447, Ruldu Singh vs Sanwal Singh Lahore 188, Lea Badin vs Upendra Mohan Roy Chaudhary & Ors. , Mathura Sundari Dassi vs Haran Chandra Shaha & Ors.
A.I.R. 1916 Cal.
361 Abdul Samad & Ors.
vs The State of J & K. A.I.R. 1969 J&K 52, and Kumar Gangadhar Bagla vs Kanti Chunder Mukerjee & Anr., , approved.
Ram Sarup vs Kaniz Ummehani, ILR 1937 All.
386 over ruled.
Assuming that Order 43 Rule 1 does not apply to Letters Patent appeals the principles governing these provisions would apply by process of analogy.
The provisions of Order 43 Rule 1 possess the traits, trappings and qualities and characteristics of a final order.
Although the word 'judgment ' has not been defined in the Letters Patent but whatever test may be applied the order passed by the trial Judge appealed against must have the traits and trappings of finality.
The appealable orders indicated in the various clauses of Order 43 Rule 1 are matters of moment deciding valuable rights of the parties and are in the nature of final orders so as to fall within the definition of 'judgment '.
[237G; 225 E F] Radhey Shyam vs Shyam Behari Singh ; referred to.
Pandy Walad Dagadu Mahar & Anr.
vs Jamnadas Chotumal Marwadi, ; Vaman Ravi Kulkarni vs Nagesh Vishnu Joshi & Ors, A.I.R. 1940 Bom. 216; Vishnu Pratap & Ors.
vs Smt.
Revati Devi & Ors.
A.I.R. 1953 All.
647; Madhukar Trimbaklal vs Shri Sati Godawari Upasani Maharaj of Sakori & Ors. ; Ratanlal Jankidas Agarwal vs Gajadhar & Ors.; A.I.R. 1949 Nagpur 188; Beads Factory & Anr.
vs Shri Dhar & Ors.
A.I.R. 1960 All. 692; J. K. Chemicals Ltd. vs Kreba & Co.; A.I.R. 1967 Bom.
56, overruled.
Having regard to the nature of the orders contemplated in the various clauses of Order 43 Rule 1 which purport to decide valuable rights of the parties in the ancillary proceedings even though the suit is kept alive these orders possess the attributes or characteristics of finality so as to be judgments within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
They are therefore, appealable to a larger 190 bench.
The concept of the Letters Patent governing only the internal appeals in the High Courts and the Code of Civil Procedure having no application to such appeals is based on a serious misconception of the legal position.
[237H 238A B] The question to be decided in this case which is a vexed and controversial one is as to what is the real concept and purport of the word 'judgment ' used in the Letters Patent.
The meaning of the word 'judgment ' has been the subject matter of conflicting decisions of the various High Courts raging for almost a century and over which despite the length of time no unanimity had been reached and it is high time that this controversy should be settled once and for all as far as possible.
[238 E F] Out of the numerous authorities cited three leading judgments have spelt out certain tests for determining as to when an order passed by a trial Judge can be said to be a 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent and we are inclined to agree generally with the tests laid down in these cases though some of the tests laid down are far too wide and may not be correct.
[238 G H] While the view taken in the Justices of the Peace for Calcutta vs The Oriental Gas Company (VIII Bengal L.R. 433) is much too strict, the one taken in T. V. Tuljaram Row vs M.K.R.V. Alagappa Chettiar (ILR 35 Madras 1) is much too wide.
The correct test seems to lie somewhere in between the tests laid down in these cases.
Similarly the full Bench decision in Manohar Damodar Bhoot vs Baliram Ganpat Bhoot (AIR 1952 Nagpur 357) pithily described the essential requisites and the exact meaning of the word 'judgment ' as used in the Letters Patent.
The pointed observations made in this case try to synthesize the conflicting views taken by the Calcutta and Madras High Courts.
They represent the true scope and import of the word 'judgment ' as used in the Letters Patent.
[The Court reviewed the entire case law on the subject laying down various tests to determine what a judgment is.] The test for determining as to when an order passed by a trial Judge can be said to be a 'judgment ' within the meaning of the Letters Patent are: (1) Where an order, which is the foundation of the jurisdiction of the Court or one which goes to the root of the action, is passed against a particular party, it amounts to a judgment.
[248 B C] Asrumati Debi vs Kumar Rupendra Deb Raikot ; (2) An order dismissing an application for review would be appealable under the Letters Patent being a judgment, though it is not made appealable under Order 43 rule 1.
[249 B] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Dr. Vijay Anand Maharaj ; (3) The which confers original jurisdiction on the trial Judge expressly makes an order passed by the trial Judge under section 202 appealable and, therefore, any order passed under that section would be appealable under the and is, therefore, a judgment.
[249 C D] 191 Shankarlal Aggarwal vs Shankerlal Poddar (4) Whenever a trial Judge decides a controversy which effects valuable rights of one of the parties it is a judgment within the meaning of the Letters Patent.
[249 H] Radhey Shyam vs Shyam Behari Singh ; (5) Where an order passed by the trial Judge allowing amendment of the plaint, takes away from the defendant the defence of immunity from any liability by reason of limitation, it is a judgment within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
[250 A B] Shanti Kumar R. Canji vs The Home Insurance Co. of New York ; (6) Clause 15 of the Letters Patent does not define the term 'judgment '.
The Letters Patent is a special law which carves out its own sphere and it would not be possible to project the definition of the word 'judgment ' as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure.
Letters Patent were drafted long before the Code of Civil Procedure of 1882 was enacted.
The word 'judgment ' used in the Letters Patent does not mean a 'judgment ' as defined in the Code.
At the same time it does not include every possible order final, preliminary or interlocutory passed by a Judge of the High Court.
[251 D E] Mt. Shahzadi Begum vs Alak Nath & Ors.
A.I.R. 1935 All 628.
Under the Code of Civil Procedure a judgment consists of reasons and grounds for a decree passed by a Court.
As a judgment constitutes the reasons for the decree, it follows as a matter of course that the judgment must be a formal adjudication which conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy.
The concept of a judgment as defined in the Code seems to be rather narrow and the limitations engrafted by section 2(2) cannot be physically imported into the definition of the word 'judgment ' as used in clause 15 of the Letters Patent because the Letters Patent has advisedly not used the terms 'order ' or 'decree ' anywhere.
The intention of the givers of the Letters Patent was that the word 'judgment ' should receive a much wider and more liberal interpretation than the word 'judgment ' used in the Code of Civil Procedure.
At the same time, it cannot be said that any order passed by a trial Judge would amount to a judgment; otherwise there will be no end to the number of orders which would be appealable under the Letters Patent.
The word 'judgment ' has a concept of finality in a broader and not a narrower sense.
[2 52 G H; 253 A C] A judgment can be of three kinds: (1) A final judgment: A judgment, which decides all the questions or issues in controversy so far as the trial Judge is concerned and leaves nothing else to be decided is a final judgment.
This would mean that by virtue of the judgment, the suit or action brought by the plaintiff is dismissed or decreed in part or in full.
Such an order passed by the trial Judge is a judgment within the 192 meaning of the Letters Patent and amounts to a decree so that an appeal would lie from such a judgment to a Division Bench.
[254 D E] (2) A preliminary judgment: A preliminary judgment may be of two forms: (i) where the trial Judge by an order dismisses the suit without going into the merits of the suit but only on a preliminary objection raised by the defendant or the party opposing on the ground that the suit is not maintainable.
Since the suit is finally decided one way or the other, the order passed by the trial judge would be a 'judgment ' finally deciding the cause so far as the trial Judge is concerned and, therefore, appealable to a larger bench; (ii) where the trial Judge passes an order after hearing the preliminary objections raised by the defendant relating to the maintainability of the suit as for example, bar of jurisdiction, res judicata, a manifest defect in the suit, absence of notice under section 80 and the like.
An order of the trial Judge rejecting these objections adversely affects a valuable right of the defendant who, if his objections were held to be valid, is entitled to get the suit dismissed on preliminary grounds.
Such an order, though it keeps the suit alive, decides an important aspect of the trial which affects a vital right of the defendant and must, therefore, be construed to be a judgment so as to be appealable to a larger bench.
[254 F H; 255 A B] (3) Intermediary or Interlocutory judgment: Most of the interlocutory orders which contain the quality of finality are clearly specified in clause (a) to (w) of Order 43 Rule 1.
They are judgments within the meaning of the Letters Patent and, therefore, appealable.
There may also be interlocutory orders not covered by Order 43 Rule 1 but possessing the characteristics and trappings of finality because they adversely affect a valuable right of the party or decide an important aspect of the trial in an ancillary proceeding.
Before such an order can be a judgment the adverse effect on the party concerned must be direct and immediate rather than indirect or remote.
Thus when an order vitally affects a valuable right of the defendant it will be a judgment within the meaning of Letters Patent so as to be appealable to a larger bench.
[255 C E; 256 A] Every interlocutory order cannot be regarded as a judgment but only those orders would be judgments which decide matters of moment or affect vital and valuable rights of the parties and which work serious injustice to the party concerned.
[256 H 257 A] The following considerations should prevail with the Court in deciding whether or not an order is a judgment: (1) The trial Judge being a senior court with vast experience of various branches of law occupying a very high status, should be trusted to pass discretionary or interlocutory orders with due regard to the well settled principles of civil justice.
Thus any discretion exercised or routine orders passed by the trial Judge in the course of the suit which may cause some inconvenience or, to some extent, prejudice one party or the other cannot be treated as a judgment.[258D E] (2) An interlocutory order, in order to be a judgment, must contain the traits and trappings of finality either when the order decides the question in controversy in ancillary proceeding or in the suit itself or in a part of the proceedings.
[258 G] 193 It is not the form of adjudication which has to be seen but its actual effects on the suit or proceedings.
[243 H] If irrespective of the form of the suit or proceeding, the order impugned puts an end to the suit or proceeding it doubtless amounts to a judgment.
[244A] If the effect of the order, if not complied with, is to terminate the proceedings, the said order would amount to a judgment.
[244 B] An order in an independent proceeding which is ancillary to the suit, (not being a step towards judgment) but is designed to render the judgment effectively can also be termed as judgment within the meaning of the Letters Patent.
[244C] An order may be a judgment even if it does not affect the merits of the suit or proceedings or does not determine any rights in question raised in the suit or proceedings.
[244 D E] An adjudication based on a refusal to exercise discretion, the effect of which is to dispose of the suit, so far as that particular adjudication is concerned, would amount to a judgment within the meaning of the Letters Patent.
[244 E F] Some illustrations of interlocutory orders which may be treated as judgments may be stated thus: (1) An order granting leave to amend the plaint by introducing a new cause of action which completely alters the nature of the suit and takes away a vested right of limitation or any other valuable right accrued to the defendant.
[258 B C] (2) An order rejecting the plaint.
[258 C] (3) An order refusing leave to defend the suit in an action under Order 37, Code of Civil Procedure.
[258 C] (4) An order rescinding leave to the trial Judge granted by him under clause 12 of the Letters Patent.
[258 D] (5) An order deciding a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the suit on the ground of limitation, absence of notice under section 80, bar against competency of the suit against the defendant even though the suit is kept alive.
[258 D E] (6) An order rejecting an application for a judgment on admission under Order 12 Rule 6.
[258 E F] (7) An order refusing to add necessary parties in a suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[258 F] (8) An order varying or amending a decree.
[258 F G] (9) An order refusing leave to sue in forma pauperis.
[258 F G] (10) An order granting review.
[258 F G] 194 (11) An order allowing withdrawal of the suit with liberty to file a fresh one.
[258 G H] (12) An order holding that the defendants are not agriculturists within the meaning of the special law.
[258 G H] (13) An order staying or refusing to stay a suit under section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
[258 H] (14) An order granting or refusing to stay execution of the decree.
[259A] (15) An order deciding payment of court fee against the plaintiff.
[259 B] (per Amarendra Nath Sen J concurring) On a plain reading and proper construction of the various provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, section 104 of the Code applies to the original side of the High Court of Bombay and the impugned order of the single Judge is appealable to a Division Bench under this section read with Order 43 thereof.
[279 H; 280 A] The right of appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent is in no way curtailed or affected by section 104.
By virtue of the provisions of section 104(1) a litigant enjoys the right of preferring an appeal in respect of various orders mentioned therein, even though such orders may or may not be appealable under clause 15 of the Letters Patent as a judgment and the right of appeal under clause 15 remains clearly unimpaired.
[275 E G] The argument of the respondent, based mainly on the provisions of sections 3 and 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure that even if various other provisions of the Code apply to the Bombay High Court, including its original side, the provisions of section 104 read with Order 43 could not apply to the original side of a Chartered High Court because the jurisdiction conferred by clause 15 of the Letters Patent is a special jurisdiction is without force.
[267 B C] That by virtue of section 1 (which provides for territorial extent of the operation of the Code) the Civil Procedure Code applies to the State of Maharashtra cannot be disputed.
[268 E F] Section 3 which deals with subordination of Courts to the High Court has no bearing on the point in issue and does not create any bar to the competence and maintainability of an appeal from an order passed by a single Judge on the original side if the order is otherwise appealable.
While dealing with any matter on the original side of the High Court a single Judge is in no way subordinate to the High Court.
Nor again, could there be a question of his being a subordinate to the Division Bench which hears an appeal from his judgment.
If any order passed by him on the original side is a 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of the Letters Patent an appeal lies to a Division Bench.
[272 E G] Similarly there is no force in the argument that since section 104 and Order 43 of the Code affect the special jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under 195 clause 15 of Letters Patent these provisions are not applicable to the present case.
[273 C D] Section 4 of the Code cannot be said to be in conflict with the provisions of clause 15; nor can it be said that it limits or otherwise affects the power and jurisdiction of the High Court under clause 15.
[274 A B] Section 4 provides that nothing in the Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law in force or any special jurisdiction conferred by or under any law for the time being in force.
Clause 15 confers on the litigant a right to prefer an appeal from the court of original jurisdiction to the High Court in its appellate jurisdiction.
It confers a right of appeal from a judgment of any Judge on the original side to the High Court.
Though this clause is a special provision it cannot be said that it is intended to lay down that no appeal would lie from an order of a single Judge on the original side even if specific provision is made in any statute making the order appealable.
By virtue of this provision any order considered to be a judgment would be appealable.
If a statute confers on the litigant right of appeal, it cannot be said that such provision would affect the special provisions of clause 15.
This special power is in no way affected and is fully retained.
In addition, the High Court may be competent to entertain other appeals by virtue of specific statutory provisions.
[273 C H: 274 A] On the contrary, the Code contains specific provisions indicating cases in which its provisions are or are not applicable, as for example section 5, which makes specific provision regarding the nature and manner of applicability of the Code to revenue courts.
Sections 116 to 120 clearly indicate that section 104 and order 43 apply to the original side of the High Court.
Section 104 and Order 43 which is attracted by section 104, clearly provide that an appeal shall lie from the orders mentioned in rule 1 of Order 43.
The impugned order is one such order and is clearly appealable.
When the legislature conferred such a right on the litigant a Court would be slow to deprive him of the statutory right merely on the ground that the order had been passed by a single Judge on the original side of the High Court.
[274 B E] Section 104 recognises that, apart from the orders made appealable under the Code, there may be other orders appealable by any law for the time being in force.
It further provides that no appeal will lie from any orders other than orders expressly provided in the Code or by any other law in force.
The right of appeal against a judgment of a single Judge on the original side under clause 15 is a right conferred by "any other law in force".
[275 C E] Union of India vs Mohindra Supply Co. ; and Mt. Savitri Thakurain vs Savi and Anr.
referred to.
Mathura Sundari Dassi vs Haran Chandra Shaha, A.I.R. and Lea Badin vs Upendra Mohan Roy Choudhary, A.I.R. 1935 Cal.
35 approved.
Vaman Raoji Kulkarni vs Nagesh Vishnu Joshi, A.I.R. overruled.
Hurrish Chander Chowdhry vs Kali Sundari Debia, 10 I.A. 4, held in applicable.
196 Unless a right is conferred on him by law, a litigant does not have an inherent right of appeal.
An order appealable under the C.P.C. or any other statute becomes appealable because the concerned statute confers a right of appeal on the litigant.
But yet such an order may or may not be appealable as 'judgment ' under clause 15 of the Letters Patent.
An order appealable under clause 15 as a 'judgment ' becomes appealable because the Letters Patent confers the right of appeal against such order as 'judgment '.
Similarly an order appealable under the Letters Patent may or may not be appealable under the Code.
[281 C E] The Letters Patent, by clause 15, confers a right of appeal against a 'judgment ' and therefore an order which satisfies the requirements of 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 becomes appealable.
What kind of order will constitute a 'judgment ' within the meaning of this clause and become appealable as such must necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and on the nature and character of the order passed.
[281 F G] A comprehensive definition of 'judgment ' contemplated by clause 15 cannot properly be given.
Letters Patent itself does not define 'judgment '.
The expression has necessarily to be construed and interpreted in each case.
But yet it is safe to say that if an order has the effect of finally determining any controversy forming the subject matter of the suit itself or any part thereto or the same affects the question of the Court 's jurisdiction or the question of limitation, it normally constitutes 'judgment ' within the meaning of clause 15 of Letters Patent.
[282 E G]
