The respondents were police officers.
The prosecution alleged that when the deceased and his brother were sitting outside the house three police vehicles carrying the respondents and other police officers suddenly stopped in front of their house and that a police officer rushed towards them and when the deceased disclosed his identity the officer fired at point blank range.
The shot having missed him, he rushed in the house.
Pursuing him respondents 2 and 4 dragged him out of the house, whereupon respondent 4 fired a shot at him.
In the meanwhile, the other brother, who was trying to get into the house was caught hold of by some of the respondents and respondent 1 fired at him.
The two brothers were thereafter dumped into a police jeep, and the convoy of police officers departed from the scene of the occurrence.
Both the brothers were taken to the hospital where the deceased was declared dead on the spot and his brother died, before any medical assistance could be given to him.
The defence of the respondents was as follows: that while they were on patrol duty led by one of the officers, they were attacked by some persons, as a result of which respondent 1 was injured and was removed to the hospital.
When fire was opened under orders of the officer the two deceased received injuries, and that respondents 1 and 2 were falsely implicated after an attempt to pressurise them into deposing against the officer had failed.
Prosecution was initiated on the basis of a private complaint filed by the third brother of the deceased implicating the respondents and two officers.
No action was taken against the two officers for want of section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
While the trial judge convicted and sentenced the respondents, the High Court acquitted them.
Before the High Court it was contended on behalf of the 361 State that this was a case in which the protectors of law and order had become A predators and in the circumstances the Court should not, insist upon the same standard of proof as in other criminal cases, and as the witnesses were desposing nearly nine years after the date of the incident there was bound to be discrepancies in their evidence.
Taking note of the unsettled political conditions prevailing in Calcutta during the time, and on an analysis of the prosecution evidence, the High Court found it impossible to believe that the incident had happened in the manner alleged by the prosecution.
Believing the defence version that there was mob violence which resulted in injuries to Respondent I and that in the circumstances the respondents were bound to obey the orders given by their officer, the High Court acquitted them.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition of the State, ^ HELD: 1.
If the order to open fire was justified as found by the High Court and is therefore lawful, no further question can arise whether the respondents, who acted in obedience to that order, believed or did not believe it to be lawful.
[365 F G] In the instant case since the situation prevailing at the scene of the offence was such as to justify the order given by the officer to open fire, the respondents could plead in defence that they acted in obedience to that order and therefore they could not be held guilty of the offence of which they were charged.
[366 C] 2.
A miscarriage of justice may arise from the acquittal of the guilty no less than from the conviction of the innocent and that if unmerited acquittal become general, they tend to lead to a cynical disregard of the law.
Courts must take equal care to ensure that the innocent are not convicted and the guilty are not acquitted.
[367 A B] E In the instant case, what the High Court has done is to acquit the innocent.[367 B] S.S. Bobade vs State of Maharastra ; referred to.
It is a self rigteous assumption to argue that the respondents are "undoubtedly guilty of murder" or that they have been acquitted by the High Court "light heartedly".
Respondents are undoubtedly not guilty of murder.
The High Court 's judgment reflects its serious concern for justice.
Judgments of acquittal are not to be condemned as "light hearted" for the reason that the Government considers that it has a stake in the conviction of the accused.
[367 C D] In the instant case the particular night on which the incident took place was cloudy and it was drizzling.
It is very difficult to take the witnesses at their word when their evidence suffers from various contradictions.
The witnesses were deposing to the incident nearly nine years later.
Their evidence is insufficient to establish the complicity of the respondents in causing the death of the deceased.
The surviving brother lodged the complaint more than a month after the incident.
The name of PW. 2 an important witness who was in the company of P.W. 1 from the beginning of the incident was not mentioned in the complaint.
[366 E H] 362
