On a part of a large area of land acquired by the Government during World War II an aerodrome was constructed and on the remaining 300 odd acres which remained unused a thick jungle grew over the years.
Pursuant to the decision of the Government of India to lease out the unused portion of the land, the respondent entered into an agreement with the Government and took possession of the land after paying one year s rent in advance.
The respondent alleged that, after taking possession of the land, he had spent a large sum of money in clearing the jungle and making it a well managed tea garden.
He also alleged that the concerned Government officials were putting off execution of the lease deed on some pretext or the other.
Having had no satisfactory reply from the Government, the respondent moved the Government of India through a Member of Parliament who was informed that the land was required for defence purposes and that it would not be possible to extend the lease.
A few months later the Defence Minister informed the Member of Parliament that the Government had decided to auction the lease hold right on an annual basis in order that possession of the land could be resumed for defence purposes at short notice.
A notice for public auction was thereafter issued .
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court and obtained an order restraining the appellants from auctioning the land.
In the meantime the respondent filed title suits against the Government.
The respondent contended that the auction notice was malafide because having found that the jungle had been cleared and the land had been developed into a workable tea garden, the Government wished to lease the land to the highest bidder for getting a large amount of money and that this was for a collateral purpose. ' The High Court upheld this contention.
555 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: If any authority exercised in bad faith or for collateral purpose power conferred on it by law such action would be struck down as an abuse of power and a fraud on the statute.
[559 E F] In the present case however there is much evidence on record to establish that there was no lack of bona fides OD the part of the Government and that the action sought to be taken by it was not for a collateral purpose.
Had the attention of the High Court been drawn to the material on record, there was no possibility of the High Court coming to the conclusion that it did.
Although in 1962 the Deputy Minister for Defence in the first instance informed the member of Parliament, who interceded on behalf of the respondent that the land was required for defence purposes and for that reason it would not be possible to extend the then current lease but later stated that it was decided to lease out the land to the highest bidder by way of public auction on a yearly basis and the Deputy Commissioner in the affidavit had stated that the land was not required for defence purposes until 1964, the need for defence purposes did arise when the war with Pakistan broke out in 1965.
It could not, therefore, h said that the Government did not need the land for defence purposes in 1966 when the order was issued.
Defence requirements depend on many unforeseeable factors.
[559 F H] That apart, the appellants did state right from the beginning that the lease was subject to the condition that whenever the Government needed the land for defence purposes it would be determined by notice without payment of compensation and that the Government was not bound to renew the lease.
[560 F G] There is, therefore, nothing to support the Finding of the High Court that the Government had never put forward the plea that the land would be required for defence purposes at any stage in the title suits and that it was putting forward such a case only as a ruse to auction the land for a larger amount of rent.
[561H]
