The appellant was the common landlord of the three premises in respect of which three analogous proceedings were started by the respective tenants for standardisation of rent under section 9 read with Sch.
A of the West Bengal Premises Rent Control (Temporary Provisions) Act of 1950.
Under the terms of the lease, which provided for a consolidated monthly rent, the landlord was to provide, besides electric installations, electric current for consumption and other special amenities.
His defence was that the special incidents of the tenancies took the tenancies out of the scope of the Act and if not, alternatively, cl.
(g) of section 9 of the Act should apply and the rent increased proportionately to the increase in the charges for electric current and enhanced Government duty payable thereon.
The Rent Controller rejected the contentions and fixed the standard rent in accordance with the rules laid down in Sch.
A of the Act.
The Chief Judge of the Small Causes Court, on appeal by the landlord, applied cl.
(g) of section 9 of the Act, gave relief in respect of the higher charges for electricity and Government duty and fixed the standard rent at a higher figure.
The tenants moved the High Court in revision and it held that cl.
(g) of section 9 did not apply and virtually, though not entirely, affirmed the decision of the Rent Controller.
The landlord appealed by special leave on the questions of law involved.
Held, that the Act applied to the premises and the standard rent must be determined, under the provisions of cl.
(g) of section 9 of the Act and the decision of the Chief judge restored.
21 The term 'Premises ' as defined in section 2(8) of_ the Act was wide enough to cover the tenancies with their special incidents and the consolidated monthly rent for the amenities provided by the landlord came within the comprehensive sense in which the word rent was used by the Act and was as such liable to be controlled under it.
The observation to the contrary made in respect of such rent in the case of Residence Ltd. vs Surendra Mokan did not correctly represent the legal position.
Property Holding Co., Ltd. vs Clark, (1948) I K. B. 63o, and Alliance Property Co. Ltd. vs Shaffer, , referred to.
Residence Ltd. vs Surendra Mohan, A.I.R. 1951 Cal.
126, considered.
The purpose which the legislature had in view in enacting the Act and the wide terms in which it defined the term 'premises ' leave no manner of doubt that its operative provisions were intended to have a wide application and the mere putting in of a term in the lease, not in terms provided for by any of the clauses of section 9, could not take the tenancy out of the scope of the Act and it would be the duty of the Court, in order that the provisions of the Act might have full effect, to give as wide an application to them as was permissible under the Act.
Where, as in the instant case, the lease provided for a consolidated monthly rent, the Rent Controller and other authorities under the Act were empowered by the provisions of cl.
(g) of section 9 to determine the standard rent on a consideration of all the payments that constitued the agreed rent and they did not prohibit a recourse to such other provisions of the Act as could be applied, either in part or as a whole, in arriving at a fair and reasonable rent.
