Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
The trial of a chid under the provisions of the Haryana Children Act, 1974 for the offence of murder was not barred.
The appellant here was a child within the meaning of that term under clause (d) of section 2 of the Act.
[689 A, C] 2.
A perusal of section 22 of the Central (Act LX of 1960) which is in pari materia with section 21 of the Haryana and other provisions of the State and Central Children Acts shows that the procedure for trial, conviction and sentence under the Children Acts are simple humane and by Courts manned with persons with knowledge of child psychology and child welfare; but not so under the Criminal Procedure Codes of 1898 and 1973.
The intention of the State Legislature of Haryana and of the Parliament in enacting the Children Acts was to make provisions for trial of delinquent children and dealing with them in accordance with such procedure so that the delinquent children do not come in contact with accused persons who are not children and but are hardened criminals.
The purpose undoubtedly was to reclaim delinquent children and rehabilitate them in such a way that they become useful citizens later in life.
[691 G H, 692 A B] 3:1.
The purpose of the Haryana Legislature as well as of the Parliament in enacting the Haryana and the Central respectively was to give separate treatment to delinquent children in trial, conviction and punishment for offences including offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life [693 C D] 3:2.
Section 27 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 is not 'a specific provision to the contrary ' within the meaning of section S of the Code the intention of the Parliament was not to exclude the trial of delinquent children for offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life, inasmuch as section 27 does not contain any expression to the effect "notwithstanding anything contained in any passed by any State Legislature".
Parliament 687 certainly was not unaware of the existence of the Haryana coming into force a month earlier or the Central coming into force nearly fourteen years earlier.
What section 27 contemplates is that a child under the age of 16 years may be tried by a Chief Judicial Magistrate or any court specially empowered under the .
It is an enabling provision and has not affected the Haryana in the trial of delinquent children for offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life.
[693 C, D G] 4:1.
If there be any conflict between any provisions of the Act and the Criminal Procedure Act, in view of Article 254(1) of the Constitution, the provision of the Haryana repugnant to any provision of the Criminal Procedure Code will be void to the extent of repugnancy [692 B C] 4:2.
Criminal Procedure appears in Item 2 of the Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.
One of the circumstances under 'which repugnancy between the law made by the State and the law made by the Parliament may result is whether the provisions of a Central Act and a State Act in the Concurrent List are fully inconsistent and are absolutely irreconcilable.
In the case in hand the relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code and the Haryana can co exist.
Their spheres of operation are different.
[693 G H, 694 A] Dev Singh and 2 Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, overruled.
