The appellant assessee a company manufactured cement which was sold partly in the State of Rajasthan and partly outside the State.
The sales tax returns relating to the sales were filed by the assessee under the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954 and under the before the Assessing Authority for the period August 1, 1973 to July 31, 1974 i.e. for the assessment year 1974 75.
In those returns the assessee did not include in the taxable turnover the freight charges paid in respect of the goods sold under the bonafide impression that freight charges were not to be so includible in the taxable turnover in view of certain decisions rendered by the High Courts and the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court on August 29, 1978 In Sugar Mills Limited vs State of Rajasthan and others held that freight charges formed part of the sale price and were includible in the taxable turn over of an assessee and that sales tax was payable thereon.
Coming to know of the aforesaid decision the assessee prepared and filed the revised returns in respect of the assessment year 1974 75 before the Commercial Tax officer on October 20, 1978 including freight charges in the turn over and also deposited along with the revised returns, challans showing payment of the balance of the tax payable under the State Act as well as under the Central Act.
The assessing authority passed two orders of assessment one under section 10(3) of the State Act and the other under section 9 of the Central Act.
The former order of assessment levied a penalty of Rs. 53,353 under section 7AA of the State Act on account of the delay in depositing the sales tax payable in respect of the amount of freight charges and also levied interest of Rs. 85910/under section 11B of the State Act.
In the latter order of assessment a penalty of Rs. 1,34,205/ was levied under section 7AA of the State Act read with section 9(2) of the Central Act for the delay in depositing the tax payable in respect of the freight charges, and interest of Rs. 2,07,174/ was levied under section 11 of the State Act read with section 9(2) of the Central Act, 564 In the appeals to this Court on the question whether: (A) the Assessing Authority was right in imposing penalty on the assessee under the two assessment orders for not depositing the tax in respect of the amount of freight at the time of filing of the original returns under the State Act and the Central Act, and (B) the assessee was liable under section 11B of the State Act to pay interest on the tax in respect of the amount of freight for the period between the date of filing of the original return and the date when such tax was actually paid while filing the revised return.
^ HELD: [By The Court] (A) The levy of penalties for not including the freight charges in the taxable turnover in the original returns and for not paying the tax in respect of such freight charges is unsustainable and the two orders of assessment in so far as they levy penalty are liable to be quashed and set aside.
[571 B, 589 B] Cement Marketing Company of India Limited vs Commissioner of Sales Tax Indore ; referred to.
[per Bhagwati J. dissenting] B(1) So long as the assessee pays the amount of tax which according to him is due on the basis of the return filed by him, there would be no default on his part in complying with the obligation under sub section (2) of section 7 and there would be no liability on him to pay interest under section 11B clause (a), because he would have paid the amount of tax quantified by him through the process of self assessment.
The actual amount of tax payable by the assessee would be determined only when it is assessed by the Assessing Authority under section 10 and that would not be payable until the expiration of the period specified in the notice of demand or thirty days from the date of service of such notice, as the case may be.
[584 D E] (2) Since the assessee deposited the amounts of tax which according to him were due on the basis of the returns actually filed by him and the returns were accompanied by receipts showing deposit of such amounts of tax, there was no default on the part of the assessee in paying the amounts of tax payable under sub section (2) of section 7 within the actual period allowed and in the circumstances no interest was payable by the assessee under section 11B clause (a).
[586 F G] State of Rajasthan vs Ghasi Lal ; relied on.
When the assessment, is made and the tax payable by an assessee is determined, the tax so determined does not become payable until after a notice of demand is served by the Assessing Authority under section 11 sub section (2) read with Rule 31 of the Rajasthan Sales Tax Rules 1955.
The assessee is allowed time to make payment up to the date specified in the notice of demand and if no such date is specified, then within thirty days from the date of service of the notice.
So long the assessee pays up the amount of the tax assessed within the time specified in the notice of demand or within thirty days from the date of service of the notice, as the case may be, he would not be in default and hence 565 section 11B clause (b) provides that the assessee would be liable to pay interest on the tax assessed only if the amount of such tax is not paid within the period specified in the notice of demand or in the absence of such specification, within thirty days from the date Of service of such notice and then too, the liability to pay interest would commence not from the date of the assessment, but from the day commencing after the end of the said period, that is, the period specified in the notice of demand or thirty days from the date of service of such notice, as the case may be.
Thus even after the assessment is made and the tax payable by an assessee is determined, the assessee is not liable to pay interest on the amount of such tax until after the period specified in the notice of demand or in the absence such specification, thirty days From the date of service of such notice, have expired.
[574 D H] 4.
The language used in sub section (2) of section 7 is "full amount of tax due on the basis of return".
The "return" is the return Sled by the assessee under sub section (1) of section 7.
When sub section (1) of section 7 requires an assessee to file a return, the return filed must be correct and proper.
If the return is not correct and proper, the Assessing Authority may not give credence to the return and may refuse to assess the tax on the basis of the return and if the Assessing Authority finds that the assessee has concealed any particulars from the return furnished by him or has deliberately furnished inadequate particulars in the return the Assessing Authority may levy penalty on the assessee under section 16, sub section (1) clause (e) and the assessee may also be liable to be punished for an offence under Section 16, sub section (3) clause (d) for making a false statement in the return.
Whether the return filed be correct or not, the tax payable by the assessee under sub section (2) of section 7 would be the full amount of tax due on the basis of the return.
The return actually filed by the assessee must be looked into in order to see what is the full amount of tax duo on the basis of such return.
It is not the assessed tax nor is it the tax due on the basis of a return which ought to have been filed by the assessee but it is the tax due according to the return actually filed that is payable under sub section (2) of section 7.
This provision is really in the nature of self assessment and what it requires is that whatever be the amount of tax due on the basis of self assessment must be paid up along with the filing of the return which constitutes self assessment.
The plain words of sub section (2) of section 7 cannot be tortured to mean full amount of tax due on the basis of return which ought to have been filed but which has not been filed.
[576 B F] 5.
The legislature could never have intended that the assessee should be liable on pain of imposition of penalty, to deposit an amount which is yet to be ascertained through assessment.
How would the assessee know in advance what view the Assessing Authority would take in regard to the taxability of any particular category of sales or the rate of tax applicable to them and deposit the amount of tax on that basis ? Even in regard to the liability to pay interest, it does not stand to reason that the legislature should have subjected the assessee to such liability for non payment of an amount of which the liability for payment is still to be ascertained.
[577 F G] 6.
The tax payable under sub section (2) of section 7 dealt with in clause (a) of section 11B cannot, be equated with the amount of the tax assessed forming the subject matter of clause (b) of section 11B and hence it must 566 be tax due on the basis of the return actually filed by the assessee and not on the basis of a correct and proper return which ought to have been filed by him.
[578 G H] 7.
The scheme of taxation envisaged in the State Act clearly shows that it is only when the assessment is made and the period specified in the notice of demand or in the absence of such specification, thirty days from the date of service of such notice expires, that the amount of tax as assessed becomes payable by the assessee and its payment can be enforced by the Revenue.
What becomes payable by the assessee under sub section (2) of section 7 is merely the tax due on the basis of the return actually filed by the assessee that is, on the basis of self assessment.
[579 F G] 8.
On a true construction of the provisions of the State Act tax becomes due from the assessee and is payable by him only when it is ascertained by the Assessing Authority under section 10 or by the assessee under section 7(2).
Till then there is only the liability of the assessee to be assessed to tax and no tax can be said to be payable by the assessee.
The tax payable is ascertained when the assessment is made by the Assessing Authority under section 10 or when the assessee himself quantifies it through the process of self assessment under subsection (2) of section 7.
These two amounts of tax may and in quite a number of cases would be different because one is ascertained by the Assessing Authority through the process of assessment and that is why sub section (4) of section 7 provides that every deposit of tax made under sub section (2) shall be deemed to be provisional subject to necessary adjustments in pursuance of final assessment of tax made under section 10.
This provision clearly contemplates that the tax payable under sub section (2) of section 7 may be different from the tax assessed under section 10 and it cannot, therefore, obviously be the tax due on the basis of a correct and proper return but must be the tax due on the basis of the return actually filed.
[580 D G] 9(i) it is clear from the language of subsection (2) of section 7 that it is only on the filing of the return that the liability to pay the tax due on the basis of the return arises.
If no return is filed within the prescribed time, it would undoubtedly constitute a default attracting penalty under section 16, sub section (1) clause (n) but there would be no liability on the assessee to pay interest on the amount of the tax, because the liability to pay the tax due on the basis of the return under sub section (2) of section 7 can arise only when the return is filed There is no liability on the assessee to pay any amount by way of tax until the return is filed or the assessment is made.
[581 H 582 B] (ii) It can neither be held that section 7 sub section (2) is attracted even when no return has been filed.
It is clear that until the assessee files a return or assessment is made, no tax is payable by the assessee, because till then there is only a liability to be assessed to tax.
The conclusion that a registered dealer who does not file any return at all as required by sub section (1) of section 7 would still be liable to pay the amount of tax and if he does not pay the same before the due date for filing the return, he would be liable to pay interest under section 11(b) clause (a) cannot be accepted.
This would be contrary to the decision of this Court in State of Rajasthan vs Ghasi Lal [ ; [582 C F] 567 [per A.P. Sen and Venkataramiah, JJ] B(1).
The statutory liability under section 11B arises wherever there is default in payment of the tax within the period allowed by law irrespective of any doubt which an assessee may be entertaining about the liability to pay the tax.
[604 D E] State of Rajasthan vs Ghasi Lal ; distinguished.
Tax, interest and penalty are three different concepts.
Tax becomes payable by an assessee by virtue of the charging provision in a taxing statute.
Penalty ordinarily becomes payable when it is found that an assessee has willfully violated any of the provisions of the taxing statute.
Interest is ordinarily claimed from an assessee who has withheld payment of any tax payable by him and it is always calculated at the prescribed rate on the basis of the actual amount of tax withheld and the extent of delay in paying it.
It may not be wrong to say that such interest is compensatory In character and not penal.
[594 D F] 3.
Registered dealers can be classified into the following different classes: (1) A registered dealer who files his return showing a higher taxable turnover than the actual turnover which is ultimately found to be taxable at the time of regular assessment and who pays tax under section 7(2) of the Act on the basis of the return.
(2) A registered dealer who files a true and proper return and pays tax on the basis of such return within the time allowed.
A registered dealer who does not file any return at all as required by section 7(1) and pays no tax under section 7(2) of the Act.
A registered dealer who files a true return but does not pay the full amount of tax as required by section 7(2), and; (5) A registered dealer who files a return but wrongly claims either the whole or any part of the turnover as not taxable and pays under section 7(2) of the Act that amount of tax, which according to him is payable, on the basis of the return.
In the case of a registered dealer falling under class (1) no question of payment of interest would arise as the amount of tax paid by him at the time of filing the return is much more than what is actually due and payable by him under the Act.
The extra tax paid by him becomes refundable after the regular assessment is completed in view of section 7(4) of the Act.
In the case of a registered dealer falling under clause (2) also no question of payment of interest arises as there is no shortfall in payment of the tax.
[594 F 595D] 4.
A fair reading of section 11 of the Act suggests that the Act expects that all assessees who are liable to pay sales tax should file a true return within the period prescribed under sub section (1) of section 7 and should produce a treasury receipt or a receipt of any bank authorised to receive money on behalf of the State Government showing that full amount of tax due from them has been paid.
[595 H 596 A ] 5.
It is settled law that a distinction has to be made by court while interpreting the provisions of a taxing statute between charging provisions which impose the charge to tax and machinery provisions which provide the machinery for the quantification of the tax and the levying and collection of the tax so imposed.
While charging provisions are construed strictly, machinery sections are not generally subject to a rigorous construction.
The courts are 568 expected to construe the machinery sections in such a manner that a charge to tax is not defeated.
[596 C D] India United Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, Bombay ; , Gursahai Saigal vs Commissioner of Income tax Punjab ; Commissioner of Income tax vs Mahaliram Ramjidas, A.I.R. and Whitney vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue , referred to.
If the words 'on the basis of return ' occurring in sub section (2) of section 7 of the Act are construed as on The basis of a true and proper return which ought to have been filed under sub section (1) of section 7 then all the three classes of persons viz (i) those who have not filed any return at all and who are later on found to be liable to be assessed, (ii) those who have filed a true return but have not deposited the full amount of tax which they are liable to pay and (iii) those who filed a return making a wrong claim that either the whole or any part of the turnover is not taxable and who are subsequently found to have made a wrong claim, would be placed in the same position and they would all be liable to pay interest on the amount of tax which they are liable to pay but have not paid as required by sub section (2) of section 7 of the Act.
This view is in conformity with the legislative intention in enacting section 11B of the Act [599 A C] 7.
In cases to which section 7(2) of the Act applies interest has to be paid on the tax payable but which has not been paid from the last date on which the return has to be filed for the assessment year in question and in cases to which sub section (2A) is applicable, from the last date on which the advance tax has to be paid.
The amount of interest has however to be calculated after the actual amount of tax payable is assessed and necessary adjustments are made.
[609 B C] 8.
Either by delaying the filing of the return or not filing it all or by filing a return wrongly claiming that a certain part of the turnover is not taxable or by not disclosing a part of the taxable turnover in the return an assessee cannot escape the liability to pay interest under section 11B on the amount of tax with held, as a consequence of his own action or inaction, from the last date on which it had to be paid as per sub section (2) or sub section (2A) of section 7, as the case may be, read with the Rules.
An assessee cannot contend that interest does not accrue under section 11B on the tax payable by him where the time to file the return has elapsed until the actually files a return admitting the liability to pay such talc or until assessment is made.
[604 B D]
