Assistant Sales Tax Officers serving in connection with the affairs of the former States of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad, on the appointed date, were allocated to the new State of Bombay under section 115 of the (Act No. XXXVII) with effect from November 1, 1956.
The Assistant Sales Tax officers from the former States of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad were superior to the Sales Tax Inspectors in their respective States and the posts of Assistant Sales Tax officer in those States was a promotion post.
In the former State of Bombay, there was no similarly constituted cadre of Assistant Sales Tax officers, but there were posts of Sales Tax Inspectors.
On November 16,1957, the State Government by its resolution directed that the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad should continue in their respective pay scales until such of them were not appointed as STOs Grade III, and Notes 3 and 6 appended to the Resolution provided that for purposes of promotion their inter se seniority be Fixed on the basis of their service as STOs and ASTOs.
On February 3, 1960, the State Government substantially modified rule 7 of the Allocated Government Servants (Absorption, Seniority, Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1957 and a new rule 7 was substituted which provided that the seniority of an allocated Government servant in the post or cadre of absorption shall, as on November 1, 1956 be determined by the length of continuous service etc.
Since 666 there were no comparable posts of ASTos in the former State of Bombay, the Central Government directed that the ASTos from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad should not be equated with the post of STIs but should be continued in an isolated category and their seniority should be fixed above the persons in the next lower grade.
The State Government by its resolution dated September 10, 1960 modified Notes 3 and 6 and directed that the seniority as on November 1, 1956 of ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad be fixed above all persons absorbed as STIs and that the inter se seniority of STOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad be fixed on the basis of their continuous service as ASTOs, and that the service rendered by the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh as Excise Inspec tors or Assistant District Excise Officers in the Excise Department be counted as equivalent service.
On August 17,1962, the State Government prepared a fresh provisional gradation list of ASTOs and STIs and invited objections.
None of the respondents raised any objection.
Upto and until August 8, 1960, departmental examinations for promotion to the post of STOs were conducted under the three different sets of rules applicable to the former States of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad.
The Departmental Examination Rules for Sales Tax officers 1954 framed by the former State Government of Bombay were made applicable to the Assistant Sales Tax officers allocated from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad from August 8,1960, as the provisions of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 were extended to the whole of the State, the CP and Berar Sales Tax Act 1947 and the Hyderabad General Sales Tax 1950 having been repealed.
The ASTOs from Vidarbha and Marathwada regions of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad were called upon to appear at the examinations prescribed from the STOs of the old Bombay region, and some of the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad who had been promoted as STos Grade Ill were reverted to the post of ASTOs due to their failure to pass the said examination.
The Government by its Resolution dated June 13, 1964 directed that the ex Hyderabad ASTOs even though they had not passed the prescribed depart mental examination should be confirmed on the basis of confidential records, efficiency and seniority: and by its Memorandum dated November 21,1964 order ed that all the ASTOs and STIs who had been allocated from the old M.P. and Hyderabad States should be considered eligible for promotion without passing the STos examination if they are otherwise fit for promotion.
On representation made by the ASTos from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad, the Government of India, by its letter dated March 9, 1965 to the State Government directed that the Bombay Departmental Examination Rules, 1954, could not be made applicable to the allocated ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad as it would amount to changing their conditions of service to their disadvantage.
It accordingly directed that all the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad who were compelled to appear for the said examination and who had failed to pass the same be reinstated as STOs.
This directive resulted in Respondents I and 2 who had been promoted to officiate as STO, Grade 111 being reverted as STIs.
The State Government in view of this change reviewed the cases of all the ASTOs, and STIs from the three regions and those who were otherwise found 667 suitable were according to their seniority promoted to the post of STO, Gr.
III even though they had not passed the STOs examination.
On January 6,1966 the State Government published a revised gradation list of ASTOs and STIs and invited objections.
Only Respondent 4 filed objections which was considered by the Government and rejected.
The writ petition filed by Respondents 1 to S who were STIs in the State of Bombay and had passed the prescribed departmental examination for promotion as STOs Gr.
III was allowed by the High Court which struck down the various resolutions and orders passed by the State Government from time to time relating to integration of service under sub section (7) of section 115 of the Act.
In the appeals by the State to this Court on the questions whether (I) the State Government could by an executive order without framing a rule under the Proviso to article 303 of the Constitution alter the rules relating to departmental promotion of ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad which constituted their conditions of service to the prejudice of the STIs of Bombay without the prior approval of the Central Government under the proviso to sub section (7) of section 115 of the Act, and (2) the State Government while integrating the services could unilaterally alter the seniority list of the allocated ASTOs and place the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad in an isolated category over the STIs from Bombay while determining their inter se seniority.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD :1 (i).
The matter of equation of posts is purely an administrative function under section 115 of the States Re organisation Act, 1956.
Under sub section
(5) of section 115 the Central Government is the sole repository of the power to effectuate the integration of services in the new States.
It has been left entirely to the Central Government as to how it has to deal with these questions.
The Central Government established an Advisory Committee for purposes of assisting in proper consideration of the representations made to it for the work of integration of services, the Central Government could take all manner of assistance from the State Government including the preparation of provisional gradation lists, The Central Government exercises general control in regard to the integration of services, and the ultimate integration was done with the sanction and approval of the Central Government.
The provisional gradation lists prepared by the State Government were not, therefore, open to challenge.
[679 A E] Union of India and Anr.
vs P.K. Roy and Ors.
; referred to.
In the instant case, not only had the Central Government laid down the principles for integration but also considered the representation made and passed the final orders thereon.
The provisional gradation lists were prepared by the State Government under the direction and with the sanction of the Central Government.
The Assistant Sales Tax officers from the former States of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad allocated to the new State of Bombay, could not be equated with the Sales Tax Inspectors.
In the former State of Bombay, there was no similarly constituted cadre of Assistant Sales Tax officers, but there were 668 posts of Sales Tax Inspectors.
The Assistant Sales Tax officers from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad were superior to Sales Tax Inspectors in their respective States and the post of Assistant Sales Tax officer in these State was a promotion post.
It would have been inequitable and unfair to equate Assistant Sales Tax officers from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad with Sales Tax Inspectors from Bombay having regard to the nature of their posts, the powers and responsibilities, and the pay scales drawn by them.
In addition, Assistant Sales Tax officers in these States were assessing authorities and they enjoyed statutory powers of their own to assess tax and levy penalties, whereas the Sales Tax Inspectors in Bombay had no such powers to assess tax or levy penalty but had merely to scrutinise returns and generally act in a subordinate capacity to Sales Tax officers.
[679 F 680 C] (ii) The principle adopted by the State Government for determining the relative inter se seniority was obviously wrong, being contrary to the principles settled at the Chief Secretaries Conference.
The Government of India, on re presentation by the affected Assistant Sales Tax Officers from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad in consultation with the Central Advisory Committee, directed that the inter se seniority should be fixed taking into account continuous service in the equated grade only subject to the inter se seniority of the Officers, coming from the several integrating regions.
Upon that basis, the State Government by its Resolution dated September 10, 1960 rightly modified Notes 3 and 6 of its 1957 Resolution and directed that the seniority as on November 1, 1956 of ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad be fixed above the persons in the cadre of STIs and that the inter se seniority of ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad be fixed on the basis of their continuous service as ASTOS in their respective States.
[680 E.G] 2.
There was a difference between the Departmental Examination Rules framed by the former State Governments of Bombay, Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad regulating the appointment of STOs.
In the former State of Bombay, eligibility for the promotion of STIs to the post of STO Gr.
Ill depended upon their passing the departmental examination for the non gazetted staff of the Sales Tax Department under rule I (b) (ii) of the Recruitment Rules for the STOs Gr.
III, i. e. it was condition precedent.
In the former States of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad there was no such condition attached.
Under the Rules for Departmental examination, the ASTOs who were promoted as STOs were required to pass the departmental examination within two or three years from the date of their promotion i.e. it was a condition subsequent.
The Departmental Examination Rules framed by the former State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad for promotion to the post of STOs formed part of the conditions of service of ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad and they could not be altered to their disadvantage without the prior approval of the Central Government under section 115 (7) of the Act.
Since no examination admittedly had been held there was no question.
Of their reversion as ASTOs.
[685 B C; E G; 683 B F; 685F] 3(i) The Resolution dated June 13, 1964 and the Memorandum dated November 24,1964 do not have the status of a rule framed under the Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
They merely conveyed the decision of the State Government that the allocated ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad 669 should be considered eligible for promotion to the post of STO, Gr.
III without passing the departmental examination for STOs Gr.
The State Government had not by its Resolution or Memorandum brought about a change in the conditions of service by an executive order.
All that was done was to rectify a mistake that had been committed in the past in subjecting the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad to the Departmental Examination Rules framed by the former State Government of Bombay i.e. to a rule which did not form part of conditions of their service and, therefore, was not applicable to them.
There is, therefore, no infirmity in these two documents.
[681 F H] (ii) Mere chances of promotion are not conditions of service and the fact that there was reduction in the chances of promotion did not tantamount to a change in the conditions of service.
A right to be considered for promotion is a term of service, but mere chances of promotions are not.
[683 C] (iii) The State Government 's Resolution dated June 13, 1964 and its Memorandum of November 21, 1964 clarifying that the ASTOs from Madhya Pradesh and Hyderabad were entitled for promotion to the post of STO Gr.
III without passing the departmental examination.
placed STI from Bombay at a disadvantage.
To ensure 'fair and equitable treatment the State Government rightly dispensed with the requirement of passing the departmental examination in the case of STIs from the former State of Bombay.
The State Government acted with the best of intentions.
It endeavoured to strike a balance between the competing claims to relative seniority.
When sub section (5) of section 115 of the Act speaks of 'fair and equitable treatment ', it envisages a decision which is fair and equitable to all.
[686 A D]
