Seventy six workers of the appellant company resorted to a tools down strike in sympathy with a dismissed co worker.
Repeated attempts to persuade them to resume work having failed the General Manager suspended them until further orders.
After midday recess the Management sought to prevent the workers from entering the mills but they violently entered the mills and the Police had to be called in by the company to keep the peace.
Charges of misconduct and insubordination were thereafter framed against the workers and they were called upon to show cause in an open enquiry to be held by the General Manager why disciplinary action should not be taken against them and the order of suspension was extended pending the enquiry.
The workers took up an attitude of total non cooperation and the atmosphere was tense with the result that the enquiry could not be held within 4 days.
The Management decided to dismiss the workers as a result of the enquiry but as an appeal was then pending before the Labour Appellate Tribunal, the company applied to it under section 22 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act of 1950 for permission to do so and extended the period of suspension pending receipt of such permission.
The workmen in their turn filed an application under a. 23 of the Act to the Appellate Tribunal for requisite action to be taken against the company for having contravened section 22(b) of the Act by resorting to an illegal lock out and thereby punishing them without its prior permission.
The Appellate Tribunal held that the company had not held the enquiry within the time specified by el.
L 12 of the Standing Orders and on that ground dismissed its application.
It allowed the application of the workers holding that the wholesale suspension of the workers and preventing them from continuing work.
after the mid day recess amounted to a lock out 917 and punishment by the company and contravened section 22(b) of the Act and directed their reinstatement.
The company appealed.
It was contended on behalf of the company that there had been neither a breach of el.
L 12 of the Standing Orders nor a contravention of section 22(b) of the Act.
Hold, that the contentions were correct and the appeals must succeed.
The conduct of the company did not come within the definition of a lock out and even if there was any lock out it was in consequence of the illegal strike resorted to by the workmen and as such could not be deemed to be illegal by virtue of section 24(3) of the Industrial Disputes.
Act, 1947.
Moreover, even assuming that the company declared an illegal lock out it was not necessary for it to obtain the permission of the Appellate Tribunal under section 22 of the Act before it could do so.
A lock out was neither an alteration of the conditions of service within the meaning of el.
(a) nor a discharge or punishment by dismissal or otherwise within the meaning of el.
(b) of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or under section 22 of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950 and no permission was, therefore, required for its declaration.
If the lock out was illegal the workmen had their remedy under section 26 of the Industrial Disputes Act and in any event they had the right to have the dispute referred for adjudication.
Jute Workers Federation, Calcutta vs Clive Jute Mills ([1951] and Colliery Mazdoor Congress, Asansol vs New Beerbhoom Coal Co. Ltd. ([1952] L.A.C. 219), approved.
The Company having been declared a public utility concern, the workers had no right to go on strike without giving a notice in terms of section 22(1) of the and the tools down strike resorted to by them was illegal and the company was within its rights in suspending them.
Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. vs Workers of the Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd., ([1953] S.C.R. 219), referred to.
Mere failure to hold an enquiry within the period of four days prescribed by el.
L 12 of the Standing Orders could not determine the matter before the Appellate Tribunal and where, as in the instant case, the delay was due to the conduct of the workers it was sufficiently explained.
Where full and free opportunity was given to the workers to be present and defend themselves in a duly notified enquiry and they failed to do so, the Management was quite within its right to come to its own conclusion as to their guilt and the punishment to be meted out to them and it was not open to the workmen thereafter to urge that such enquiry was not fair or impartial or violated the principles of natural justice.
918 There could be no punishment so long as there was no offence and any action of the employer to the detriment of the workers ' interest would not amount to punishment.
The law did not contemplate anything like a contingent punishment of a worker and, consequently, where there was an interim order of suspension pending an enquiry or the grant of permission by the Appellate Tribunal, the question of pay for the period of such suspension depending on whether or not the permission would be granted, such suspension would not amount to punishment even where it was of an indefinite duration so as to attract the operation of section 22 of the In dustrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950.
Champdany Jute Mills and Certain Workmen, ([1952) 1 L.L.J. 554), Joint Steamer Companies and Their Workmen, ([1954] II L.L.J. 221), Assam Oil Co. Ltd. vs Appalswami, ([1954] , Standard Vacuum Oil Co. vs Gunaseelan, M. G. ([1954] II L.L.J. 656), relied on.
Under that section the only thing that the Appellate Tribunal had to consider was whether a prima facie case had been made out by the employer for lifting the ban imposed by the section and if, on the materials before it, it was satisfied that there bad been a fair enquiry in the circumstances of the case and the Management had bona fide come to the conclusion that the worker was guilty of misconduct with which he had been charged and it would be detrimental to discipline and dangerous in the interests of the company to continue him in its employ, a prima facie case was made out and the Tribunal would be bound to permit the employer to punish the workman.
It would be no part of its duty to judge whether the punishment was harsh or excessive, except so far it might bear on the bona fides of the Management, and could only grant the permission as sought for or refuse it and the question of the propriety of the punishment could be decided only by the appropriate Tribunal appointed by the Government for adjudicating the industrial dispute which would ensue upon the action of the management.
Atherton West & Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mills Mazdoor Union and Others, ([1953] S.C.R. 780), The Automobile Products of India Ltd. vs Bukmaji Bala & Others, ([1955] 1 S.C.R. 1241) Champdany Jute Mills and Shri Alijan, ([1952] II L.L.J. 629), R.B.S. Lachmandas Mohan Lal & Sons Ltd. and Chini Hill Karmachari Union, ([1952] II L.L.J. 787) and Assam Oil Companies ' Case, ([1954] L.A.C. 78), referred to.
