Inderjit alias Billa has been detained by an order dated June 1, 1981 passed by the District Magistrate under sub section (2) of section 3 of the Prevention of Black marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 (PBMSECA).
The detenu submitted his representation challenging the order of detention on various grounds.
He had also made a request in writing that he be allowed the assistance of counsel during the hearing before the Advisory Board, but the Government did not accede to his request in view of section 11 of the Act.
On the contrary.
at the time of hearing before the Advisory Board the State was assisted by Public Prosecutor, two attorneys, a District Legal Advisor and a Legal Assistant.
Even at this stage, the detenu requested in writing for aid of a counsel but the same was rejected.
The State Government confirmed the detention under section 12 of the Act.
The father of the detenu, therefore, challenges the order of confirmation of the detention by the State.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court. ^ HELD 1:1.
Under Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution, the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice is denied to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing for preventive detention.
Subsection (3) of section 11 of the Prevention of Black marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 is undoubtedly in conformity with Article 22(3) (b) of the Constitution.
Normally, lawyers have no place in the proceedings before the Advisory Board.
[723 D] 1:2.
Upon the terms of sub section (4) of section 11 of the Act the detenu had no right to legal assistance in the proceedings before the Advisory Board but it did not preclude the Board to allow such assistance to the detenu when it allowed the State to be represented by an array of lawyers.
Kavita vs The State of Maharashtra & Ors., [1982] 1 SCR p. 138 is an authority for the proposition that while there is no right under section 8(e) of the COFEPOSA Act to legal 719 assistance to a detenu in the proceedings before the Advisory Board is entitled to make such a request to the Board and the Board is bound to consider such a request when so made.
[727 G H, 728 A B] Smt.
Kavita vs The State of Maharashtra & Ors., [1982] 1 SCR p. 138 distinguished.
The Advisory Board is entitled to devise its own procedure.
The functions of the Advisory Board are purely consultative.
It is an independent body constituted under section 9 of the Act consisting of a sitting judge as the Chairman and not less than two other members, who may be sitting or retired judges of the High Court.
It is expected that the Advisory Board would set in a fair and impartial manner in making a report whether or not there is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for the detention of person.
In coming to that conclusion, the Board has to make an objective determination on the question as to whether there was sufficient material on which the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority could be based.
Under sub section (1) of section 11 of the Act, the Advisory Board may also call for such further information as it may deem necessary for the appropriate Govt.
Or from the person 'concerned and if, in any particular case, it considers essential to do so or if the person concerned desires to be heard, shall hear him in person.
Arbitrariness is the very antithesis of Article 14.
The principle of reasonableness is an essential element of equality and the procedure contemplated by Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in order to be in conformity with Article 14.
The history of personal liberty is largely the history of procedural safeguards.
The need for observance of procedural safeguards, particularly in cases of deprivation of life and liberty is, therefore, of prime importance to the body politic.
In the context of 'deprivation of life and liberty ' under Article 21, the 'procedure established by law ' carried with it the inherent right to legal assistance.
The right to be heard before the Advisory Board would be, in many cases, of little avail it did not comprehend the right to be heard by the counsel.
[723 D G, 725 C D, F, 726 B C] E.P. Royappa vs Tamil Nadu, [ , Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India.
[1978] 2 SCR 621; Francis Coralie Mullin vs The Administrator, Union Territory of Delhi and Ors. ; at 531; reiterated.
The State Government while confirming the detention order under section 12 of the Act has not only to peruse the report of the Advisory Board, but also to apply its mind to the material on record.
If the record itself was not before the State Government as is evident from there turns filed in reply to the writ petition before this Court, it follows that the order passed by the State Government under section 12 of the Act was without due application of mind, which is a serious infirmity in the case which makes the continued detention of the detenu illegal.
[728 B D] OBlTER: It is expected that Parliament while making a law regulate the procedure before an Advisory Board under Article 22(7) (c) of the Constitution should provide the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice.
It is incomprehensible that a person committing a crime should 720 have under Article 22(1) of the Constitution the right to consult and be defended by a legal practitioner of his choice, but a person under preventive detention more often than not for his political beliefs should be deprived of this valuable right.
It cannot be denied that preventive detention is an anachronism in a democratic society like ours.
The detention of individuals without trial for any length of time, however short, is wholly inconsistent with the basic ideals of a parliamentary system of government.
In the nature of things, under the law as it exists, a person under preventive detention is not entitled to legal assistance.
The matter is essentially political and as such it is the concern of the statesmen and, therefore, within the domain of the Legislature, and not Judiciary.
[726 C F]
