In exercise of its executive power the State Government of Madhya Pradesh made by its order dated 2nd April, 1980 the Rules for admission into the Medical, Dentistal and Ayurvedic Colleges in Madhya Pradesh.
By and under Rule 7 the State Government has reserved 15% of seats for each of the categories of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates.
Rule 20 lays down that selection of candidates from amongst those who have qualified in the examination shall be made strictly on merit as disclosed by total number of marks obtained by candidates in the pre medical examination.
Rule 20 further provides that minimum qualifying marks for admission to Medical Colleges shall be 50% in the aggregate and 33% in each subject respectively; but for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates the minimum qualifying marks shall be 40% in the aggregate and 30% in each subject.
Note (ii) below Rule 20 empowers the Government to grant in case of candidate belonging to the categories of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes special relaxation in the minimum qualifying marks to the extent considered necessary in the event of the required number of candidates in these two categories not being available.
Rule 9 contains a provision to the effect that in case seats reserved for categories of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes remain vacant, these seats will be filled up by candidates available on the combined merit list.
The total number of seats in all the Medical Colleges being 720 in number, 108 seats each for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes became reserved under Rule 7. 760 For admission to The Medical Colleges for the academic year 1980 8., there were 9400 candidates in all of which 623 candidates were from Scheduled Castes and 145 candidates were from schedule Tribe.
On the result of the pre medical examination only 18 seats in the category of Schedule Casts and 2 seats in the Schedule Tribe could be filled up because the other candidates of these categories did not secure the qualifying marks prescribed by Rule 20.
The selection Board in exercise of the power under note (i) to Rule 20 made a relaxation of 5% in terms thereof and thereafter 7 more candidates in the category of Schedule Casts and one more in the category of Schedule Tribes got admitted leaving a balance of 83 seats under Schedule Casts quota, and 105 seats under the Schedule Tribes quota to be filled as provided for under Rule 9.
But the State Government, by its order dated 9th September 1980 removed the condition relating to minimum qualifying marks in favour of the candidates from amongst Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes.
The respondent belonging to the general category who obtained the minimum qualifying marks but could not secure admission as other candidates for the general seats had obtained marks higher than she had obtained in the premedical examination for filling up the vacancies available in the general category, would have been in a position to secure admission to the Medical College but for the complete relaxation granted by the impugned order without complying with the provisions of Rule 9.
She, therefore, filed a writ petition in the High Court on the grounds, inter alia, (1) that the order of the Government contravenes Regulation II of the Medical Council of India and would hit Section 19 of the Indian medical council Act 1956 exposing the Medical colleges to the risk of being derecognised:(2) that the order of the Government will have the effect of allowing less qualified and less deserving candidates to fill up the seats and would, therefore, destroy equality and violate Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution ; and (3) the order was violative of Ordinance 94 of the University of Jabal pur.
The High Court accepted the contentions of the writ petitioner and allowed the petition.
Hence the appeal by the State, after obtaining special leave.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The executive order dated 9th September, 1980 passed by the State cf Madhya Pradesh completely relaxing the conditions relating to the minimum qualifying marks for selection of students to Medical Colleges of the State in respect of candidates belonging to Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes is not violative of either Article 14, 15(1) or 15(2) or 15 (4).
[785 G, 788 C] 2.
The relaxation does not offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is no relaxation of the condition regarding eligibility for and admission into Medical Colleges.
The relaxation is only in the rule regarding selection of candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who were otherwise qualified and eligible to seek admission into Medical Colleges only in relation to seats reserved for them.
Further the validity of the reservation of seats for candidates belonging to Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes have not been challenged and very properly in view of Article 15 (4) of the Constitution.
[786 E G] 3.
The relaxation cannot be said to be unreasonable and does not violate Articles 15(1), (2) and (4) of the Constitution.
The State must do everything 761 possible for the upliftment of the Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other backward communities and it is entitled to make reservations for them in the matter of admission to medical and other technical institutions.
In the absence of any law to the contrary, it must also been open to the Government to impose such conditions as would make the reservation effective and would benefit the candidates belonging to these categories for whose benefit and welfare the reservations have been made.
In any particular situation taking into consideration the realities and circumstances prevailing in the State it will be open to the State to vary and modify the condition; regarding, selection for admission if such modification or variation becomes necessary for achieving the purpose for which reservation has been made and if there be no law to the contrary.
Note (ii) of rule 20 of the Rules for admission framed by the State Government specifically empowers the Government to grant such relaxation in the minimum qualifying marks to the extent considered necessary.
The order can be supported under Article 15(4) of the Constitution.
[785 H, 786 A D] State of Kerala and Anr.
vs N.M. Thomas, ; ; Jagdish Saran and Ors.
vs Union of India and ors.
; , , followed.
Amalendu Kumar vs State of Bihar, AIR 1980 Patna 1 overruled.
Under Article 162 of the Constitution the executive power of a State, extends to the matter with regard to which the Legislature of a State has power to make laws.
As there is no legislation covering the field of selection of candidates for admission to Medical Colleges, the State Government would, undoubtedly, be competent to pass executive orders in this regard.
[785 D.E] State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors.
vs Lavu Narendranath and Ors.
; , , reiterated.
Regulation II of the Indian Medical Council is merely directory and in the nature of a recommendation and, therefore has no such statutory force as to render the executive order dated 9th September, 1980 which contravenes the said Regulation illegal, invalid and unconstitutional.
[785 B Cl Entry 66 in List I (Union List) of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution relates to "co ordination and determination of standard in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions".
This entry by itself does not have any bearing on the question of selection of candidates to the Medical Colleges from amongst candidates who are eligible for such admission.
On the other hand, entry 25 in List II (Concurrent List) of the same Schedule speaks of "education, including technical education, medical education in Universities, subject to entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I. vocational and technical training of labour".
This entry is wide enough to include within its ambit the question of selection of candidates to Medical Colleges and there is nothing in the entries 63, 64 and 65 of List I to suggest to the contrary.
[784 G.H, 785 A C] 5:2.
Regulation I of the Medical Council prescribes the requisites which have to be satisfied to enable every student to become eligible or qualified to seek admission and the process of selection comes thereafter.
As this Regulation is 762 within the competence of the Council the Council, has framed this Regulation in a manner which leaves no doubt that this Regulation is mandatory.
[783 B C] 5:3.
Regulation II of the, Council is merely in the nature of a recommendation.
Regulation II begins with the words "selection of students in medical college should be based solely on merit".
Language used in Regulation II is deliberate and is intended to indicate the intention of the Council that it is only in the nature of a recommendation.
By way of solution to the problem of dearth of seats, the Council appears to have thought it fit to suggest the procedure which will have the effect of selecting such candidates on the basis of merit only.
The procedure suggested is intended to do away with nepotism and favoritism and any unfair practice in the matter of such admission, as the procedure recommends merit to be the criterion.
Regulation II recommending the process of selection is outside the authority of the Council under section 33 of the Act and the Council has advisedly and deliberately used such language in Regulation II as makes the position clear and places the matter beyond any doubt.
Further, apart from reservations of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other reservations, reservation of seats is commonly made for being filled up by nomination.
In the instant case, it appears that seats not exceeding three per cent are reserved for the nominees of the Government of India apart from the other reservations.
These nominees of the Central Government do not have to sit for any premedical examination to qualify themselves for selection to the Medical Colleges, They must of course be eligible for admission in the sense that they must have the necessary qualification for admission in accordance with Regulation I.
The candidates eligible under Regulation I are selected by virtue of nomination and there is no question of any pre medical test for such candidates nominated by the Central Government.
If Regulation II could be considered to be mandatory, there could be no such nomination of candidates by the Central Government.
[783 G H, 784A C, E G] 6:1.
An analysis of the various sections of the indicates that the main purpose of the Act is to establish Medical Council of India, to provide for its constitution.
composition and functions and the main function of the Council is to maintain the medical register of India and to maintain a proper standard of medical education and medical ethics and professional conduct for medical practitioners.
The scheme of the Act appears to be that the Medical Council of India is to be set up in the manner provided in the Act and the Medical Council will maintain a proper medical register, will prescribe minimum standards of medical education required for granting recognised medical qualifications, will also prescribe standards of post graduate medical education and will further regulate the standard of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics for medical practitioners.
The Act further envisages that if it appears to the Council that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in, or the proficiency required from candidates at any examination held by any University or Medical Institution do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Council or that the staff, equipment, accommodation training and other facilities for instructions and training provided in such University or medical institution or in any college or other institutions affiliated to that University do not conform to the standards prescribed by the Council, the Council will make a representation to that effect to the Central Government and 763 on consideration of the representation made by the Council, the Central Government may take action in terms of the provisions contained in section 19 of the Act.
[776 G H, 777 A C] The Act also empowers the Council to take various measures to enable the Council to judge whether proper medical standard is being maintained in any particular institution or not.
[777 C D] 6:2.
The authority of the Council extends to the sphere of maintaining proper medical standard in Medical Colleges or institutions necessary for obtaining recognized medical qualifications.
By virtue of this authority it may be open to the Council to lay down the minimum educational qualifications required of a student who may seek admission into a Medical College.
In other words, the eligibility of a candidate who may seek to get admitted into a medical ( ' college for obtaining recognized medical qualifications may be prescribed by the Council.
All the candidates who are eligible for admission into Medical Colleges or institutions for getting themselves qualified as medical practitioners are entitled to seek admission into a Medical College or institution.
As to how the selection has to be made out of the eligible candidates for admission into the Medical College is a matter which has necessarily to depend on circumstances and conditions prevailing in particular States.
Though the question of eligibility for admission into the medical curriculum may come within the power and jurisdiction of the Council, the question of selection of candidates out of the candidates eligible to the medical course does not appear to come within The purview of the Council.
[777 E H, 778 A] 6:3.
The process of selection of candidates for admission to a Medical College out of the candidates eligible for admission for filling up the limited vacancies has no real bearing on the question of eligibility or qualification for admission or on the standard of medical education.
The standard of medical education really comes into the picture in the course of studies in the medical colleges or institutions after the selection and admission of candidates into Medical Colleges and institutions.
Students who satisfy the requirements of Regulation I become qualified or eligible to seek admission into the Medical Course.
Regulation I prescribes the requisites which have to be satisfied to enable every student to become eligible or qualified to seek admission and the process of selection comes thereafter.
[778 C E] Undoubtedly, under section 33 of the Act, The Council is empowered to make regulations with the previous sanction of the Central Government generally to carry out the purposes of the Act and such regulations may also provide for any of the matters mentioned in section 33 of the Act.
[778 E F] G State of Kerala vs Kumari T. P. Roshana and Ors ; Arti Sapru vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors , explained and distinguished.
