In conciliation proceedings in relation to the demands of one of the two unions (known as Sanghatana) of workers of the appellant company a settlement wat reached.
At the instance of the second union (Telco Union) which was dissatisfied with the settlement, the Government referred the dispute to the tribunal.
Before the tribunal the company contended that since 564 out of 635 daily rated workers to whom the settlement reached by the Sanghatana related, had assented to it, the dispute no longer survived.
Rejecting the Telco Union 's is contention that the settlement was vitiated by duress, coercion or false promises, the tribunal held that it was binding on the parties under section 18 (1) read with section 2 (p) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The tribunal, however, held that it had not been proved by either party as to how many of the 564 workmen, who had assented to the settlement, were members of the Sanghatana.
Although the tribunal found that the settlement was just and fair in most aspects it held that an increase in the additional daily wages was called for in respect of certain categories and calculated the increase separately for each grade.
The tribunal refused to act upon the settlement.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The declaration signed by 564 workers of the company constituted presumptive proof of the fact that the signatories to it were all members of the Sanghatana when they signed it.
In the absence of any evidence that any of the signatories to the declaration was not one of the 635 workers or that any signature appearing in the declaration was forged or fictitious the assertion of each signatory that he was a member of the Sanghatana is to be presumed to be correct until it is shown to be false.
The onus to prove the falsity of the assertion in the case of any particular workman rested on the Telco Union which made no attempt to discharge the burden.
Out of 635 workmen, 564 signed the declaration.
The fact that 400 workmen later on challenged the settlement only leads to the inference that at least 329 workmen changed sides afterwards.
[932 H; 933A C] 930 The conclusion of the tribunal that the settlement was not just and fair is unsustainable.
The settlement as a whole was just and fair.
If the settlement had been arrived at by a vast majority of the concerned workmen with their eyes open and was accepted by them in its totality, it must be presumed to be just and fair and not liable to be ignored while deciding the reference merely because a small number of workers were not parties to it or refused to accept it or because the tribunal was of the opinion that the workers deserved marginally higher emoluments than they themselves thought they did.
The question whether a settlement is just and fair has to be answered on the basis of principles different from those which come into play when an industrial dispute is under adjudication.
[933 G H] Herbertsons Limited vs Workmen of Hetbertsons Limited & others, [197 /] 2 S.C.R. 15 followed.
