The appellant is the wife, and the respondent is the husband.
The parties originally belonged to village Bagyan, District Pithoragrh in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
They fell in love and the appellant became encients, as the respondent had access to her during the period of courtship.
As her father was opposed to her marriage, the appellant was brought in a advance stage of pregnancy to Delhi and through the intervention of her uncle Basant Kumar their marriage was solemnised according to Arya Samaj rites at New Delhi.
A few days after the marriage, the respondent left the residence of Basant Kumar on the pretext of fetching his belongings from the residence of his uncle who also lives at Delhi and never returned.
He served a notice on the appellant alleging that the marriage was a nullity as she got pregnant through someone else and that fraud was practised on him by her uncle and that he had coerced to marry against his will.
The appellant after denying the allegations filed a petition for restitution of conjugal rights under section 9 of the Act in the Court of Subordinate Judge, Class l, Delhi which was decreed in her favour and the said decree had become final.
Later on, the respondent filed a petition under section 12 of the Act in the Court of the District Judge, Almora, alleging that the parties were residents of village Bagyan while in fact at all material times both resided at Delhi.
A few days after, the appellant delivered a dead child at Delhi.
Later on, by her written statement she challenged the jurisdiction of the District Judge, Almora to try the suit.
The district Judge answered the preliminary issue as to the jurisdiction against the appellant.
The High Court, in appeal, by its judgment affirmed the order.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD; 1:1.
In the context of clause (ii) of the section 19 of the , the word "resides" must mean actual residence and not a legal or constructive residence; it certainly does not connote the place of origin.
In order to give jurisdiction on the ground of "residence ', something more than a mere temporary stay is required.
It must be more or less of a permanent 1004 character, and of such a nature that the court in which the respondent is sued, is his natural forum.
In the instant case, at the commencement of the proceedings both the parties admittedly resided at Delhi and, therefore, the District Judge, Almora did not have jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
[1008 F H, 1009A] 1:2 The word "residence" is a flexible one and has many shades of meaning but it must take its colour and content from the context in which it appears and cannot be read in isolation.
It is capable of being understood in its ordinary sense of having one 's own dwelling permanently, as well as in its extended sense.
In its ordinary sense "residence" is more or less of ca permanent character.
The expression "resides" means to make an abode for a considerable time; to dwell permanently or for a length of time; to have a settled abode for a time.
It is the place where a person has a fixed home or abode.
Where there is such fixed home or such abode at one place the person cannot be said to reside at any other place where he had gone on a casual or temporary visit, for example, for health or business or for a change.
If a person lives with his wife and children in an established home, his legal and actual place of residence is the same.
If a person has no established home and is compelled ta live in hotels, boarding houses or houses of others, his actual and physical habitation is the place where he actually or personally resides.
[1008 B C, E F] [The Court allowed the appeal and directed that the petition for nullity of marriage filed by the respondent under section 12 of the , be returned for presentation to the proper court, i.e., the court of the District Judge, Delhi.]
