The respondent was detained by the appellant under sub section (I) of section 3 of the .
The grounds for detention were that the respondent along with two others were members of the crew of a vessel that was engaged in smuggling of wrist watches and other contraband articles worth about Rs. 33 lakhs.
The respondent moved the High Court which quashed the order of detention, holding that the order of detention clearly showed that the detaining athority had not applied his mind to the facts of the case and that the impugned order nowhere stated that the detaining authority on having received a proposal from the customs authorities, had applied his mind tc all the materials on record and had reached satisfaction that the facts of the case warranted detention.
Allowing the State 's appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1, The order dated August 1, 1979 made under section S of the Act by the Government directed the detenu to be detained.
On the same date another order was passed under sub section (1) of section 3 which in fact was the order of detention.
It provided that the Government was satisfied that with a view to preventing the respondent from smuggling goods it was necessary to detain him.
These two orders were accompanied by the grounds of detention which was also dated August 1,1979.
A perusal of these three documents do not justify the finding of the High Court that the detaining authority had not applied its mind to the materials before it and that it had not "reached satisfaction that the facts of the case warranted the detention of the petitioner.
" The finding of the High Court has been based on a presumption which is unjustified.
[1016 F 1017 E] 1015 2.
The High Court in its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is to see whether the order of detention has been passed on the materials before it.
If it is found that the order has been based by the detaining authority on materials on record, then the court cannot go further n examine whether the material was adequate or not which is the function of an appellate authority or Court.
It can examine the material on record only for the purpose of seeing whether the order of detention has been based on no material.
The satisfaction mentioned in section 3 of the Act is the satisfaction of the detaining authority and not of the Court.
[1017 F] State of Gujarat vs Adam Kasam Bhaya, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 740, referred to.
Once the order quashing the order of detention of the detenu is set aside by this Court rendering the order of detention non est itself becomes non es and the order of detention gets life.
[1018 C] 4.
The relevant authorities that can pass order of detention are mentioned in sub section (1) of section 3 of the Act.
The authorities are the Central Government or the State Government or any officer of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government, specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, or any officer of a State Government, specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, or any officer of a State Government, not below the rank of a Secretary to that Government specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government.
[1018 E F] In the instant case the order having been taken in the name of the Governor and validly authenticated by the Deputy Secretary concerned, the order tentamounts to an order by the State Government.
It, therefore, cannot be said that the order of detention was not passed by the competent authority.
[1019 A]
