The Central Health Service was constituted by the Central Government and the Central Health Service Rules 1963 came into force with effect from 15 5 1963.
These Rules were amended by the Central Health Service (Amendment) Rules 1966.
Before the Punjab Reorganisation Act came into force the State of Punjab had its own Health Service known as the PCMS with two grades, Grade I and Grade II.
After the Punjab Reorganisation Act came into force, and the Central Health Service was formed, some persons belonging to the PCMS and some persons working as Medical officers in hospitals run by Local Bodies were inducted into that Service after they had exercised their option to be inducted therein.
The petitioners and contesting employees respondents in writ petition nos 2 of 1980 and 288 of 1979 filed in the High Court had been inducted into the Central Health Service after they had exercised their option.
When the Himachal Pradesh Union Territory was in existence, its Health Department was manned by officers of the Central Health Service, but after Himachal Pradesh became a full fledged State, the Himachal Health Service was constituted on 24.1.1974 1044 under the Himachal Pradesh Health Service Rules which came into force on 19.1.74.
The members of the Central Health Service serving in the erstwhile Himachal Pradesh Union Territory were asked to exercise their option to continue in the new Himachal Pradesh Health Service.
The writ petitioners and the contesting employees respondents exercised their option to continue in the Himachal Pradesh Health Service.
The Appellant in C.A. No. 2384 of 1980 who was one of the petitioners in writ petition No. 288 of 1979 contended before the High Court that his reversion from the post of Deputy Director of Health Services to which post he was appointed on a regular basis was void.
The petitioner in writ petition No. 2 of 1980 claimed that the seniority list of Specialists prepared by the State Government was contrary to the rules and that the appointment of the appellant in C.A. No. 2104 of 1980 and of respondents 2 and 4 in writ petition 288 of 1979 as Deputy Directors of Health Services was contrary to the provisions of the 1974 Rules.
It was contended that the appointments were also vitiated because the Departmental Promotion Committee constituted for making appointment was not properly constituted because one of the members of the committee the Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister was unauthorised by inducted into the Committee in place of the Secretary to the Government Health and Family Welfare Department and (ii) that their confidential reports were written by an officer junior to them and who was an aspirant for promotion to the higher post.
The appointments of the Director of Health Services and the two Deputy Directors having been made in haste immediately after the seniority list was issued rendered the appointments void.
The petitioner in writ petition 2 of 1980 claimed that the inter se seniority between himself and the respondents could not be disturbed at the time of absorption in the Himachal Pradesh Health Services having regard to the Punjab Reorganisation Act and the protection given to the members of the Punjab Service.
These two petitions were contested.
It was contended by the State of Himachal Pradesh that the petitioners in W.P. No. 288 of 1979 were appointed as Deputy Directors of Health Services only on ad hoc basis that the post is a selection post which cannot be claimed as of right by persons appointed on ad hoc basis by way of stop gap arrangement.
The incumbent to the post of Secretary Health and Family Welfare being on leave at the relevant period the Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister was appointed to function in his place as Secretary to Government in the Departmental Promotion Committee the constitution of the Departmental Promotion Committee was perfectly valid.
The annual confidential reports which were written by the junior officer who was working on ad hoc basis were not the only reports taken into account by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The post of Director of Health Services was manned on an ad hoc basis.
Ad hoc appointments were necessitated by the absence of the final seniority list which was prepared only on 2.11.1979 and since that impediment was over the Departmental Promotion Committee met on 3.11.1979 and orders of appointment to those selected by that Committee were issued on the same day.
Specialists were officers possessing post graduate qualifications while General Duty officers were as a rule only graduates.
The Rule making autho 1045 rity divided the higher posts equally amongst the officers of the two categories taking all factors into consideration.
Therefore the claim for being considered to the post of Director of Health Services is wholly untenable having regard to Rule 9(3) of the Rules which provides that only Deputy Directors should be considered for promotion to the post of Director of Health Services.
On behalf of the Central Government it was contended that the Central Health Service was constituted with effect from 9 9.1966 and the seniority of the Medical Officers appointed to the service with effect from that date had been determined to be that officers appointed to a grade under rule 7A of the Central Health Services Rules 1963 as amended by the Central Health Service (Amendment) Rules 1966 will rank en bloc senior in that grade to those who may be appointed to that grade under rule 8A.
The officers of the Punjab Government were appointed to the Central Health Service with effect from 1.11.1966 under rule 8A. As These officers have come into the Central Health Service only after the initial constitution of that service was over it was not possible to assign them seniority over the officers appointed at the initial constitution of the service.
The Government of Himachal Pradesh having proposed to formulate their own Health Service and the Medical officers who are to opt from the Central Health Service are to be included in that service those officers were asked to exercise their option.
Those officers who opted to join the proposed Himachal Pradesh Health Service were given the benefit of past continuous service while fixing their seniority in the Himachal Pradesh Health Service.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions and held (1) that the petitioners therein being appointed as Deputy Directors on ad hoc basis cannot claim a right to the post of Deputy Directors of Health Services or to seniority on the basis of ad hoc appointment though then can add the period of such appointment in the matter of experience for promotion and confirmation.
(2) The Principal Secretary E to the Chief Minister was appointed to function additionally as Secretary to Government Health and Family Welfare Department as per office order dated 2.11.1979 and therefore the Departmental Promotion Committee had been properly constituted.
(3) Seniority has to be determined on the basis of the date of induction into the Central Health Service and not on the basis of the earlier service.
Allowing the appeal to this Court ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court erred in holding that the inter se seniority has to be determined only on the basis of the date of induction into the Central Health Service and not with reference to Rule 10 (a)(iii) of the Rules.
Inter se seniority has to be determined only in accordance with Rule 10 (a)(iii) of the Rules and Dr. S.P. Kapoor would be senior to Dr. R.M. Bali who in turn would rank senior to Dr. Jiwan Lal.
[1072 1073 B] In the instant case the Central Government was under an obligation to see that in fairness and equity the seniority of officers drafted into the newly formed State from the integrating States is properly fixed and that obligation has been properly discharged by the Central Government.
Dr. section P. Kapoor had been appointed to the PCMS (Grade I) post on 29.1.1965 and he was inducted into the Specialist Grade in the Central Health Service with effect from 1.11.1966 while 1046 Dr. R.M. Bali and Dr. Jiwan Lal who were in the Central Health Service on the date of its constitution on 9.9.1966 had been taken in the Specialists Grade and G.D.O. Grade I respectively under the Central Health Service with effect only from 9.9.1968.
[1072 1068 C] Roshan Lal Tandon vs Union of India ; held inapplicable.
N. Subba Rao etc.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; and C.P. Damodaran Nayar and P.S. Menon vs State of Kerala and others ; referred to. 2.
The annual confidential reports were initiated by an officer not only junior but also an aspirant for promotion to the higher post and therefore such Confidential reports should not have been taken into consideration for further promotion.
[1073 C] In the instant case it would not have been fair for the Departmental Promotion Committee to take into account the annual confidential reports made by Dr. Grover though they might have been revised by the higher authorities.[1073F] 3.
The post haste manner in which the Departmental Promotion Committee Meeting was held on 3.11.1979 suggests that some higher up was interested in pushing through the matter hastily when the regular Secretary Health and Family Welfare was on leave.
The matter is therefore required to be considered afresh.
[1075 B] In the instant case the Director of Health Services and Deputy Director of Health Services were holding the posts on ad hoc basis from the year 1973.
The final seniority list was prepared only on 2.11.1979 and the Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted on 3.11.1979.
The Joint Secretary Personnel Department had written the letter dated 3.11.1979 requesting the Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister who was appointed additionally as Secretary of Health and Family Welfare to attend the Departmental Promotion Committee Meeting at 3.00 p.m.
On that day.
There is room for suspecting the reason why the whole thing was completed in haste on 3.11.1979 after the preparation of the final seniority list on 2.11.1979.
The matter was not such as could not have been put off by a few days.
Such rush is not usual is in any State Government.
[1074 GD.
1075 A] 4.
The High Court was right in finding that the Specialists had an advantage for their category starting the roster by the senior most of The Specialists having put in more number of years of qualifying service than the HPHS (Grade I) officers and that the Government was right in getting the roster started With Specialists instead of HPHS (Grade I) officers.
[1076 B C] In the instant case as Rule 9(4) did not provide the category with which the roster may be started whether with HPHS (Grade I) officers or Specialists difficulty arose.
The Government therefore stepped in and supplemented the Rule by directing that the roster may be started with the category of Specialists keeping in view the length of qualifying service in each of the two grades namely Specialists and HPHS (Grade I) officers.
This they were entitled to by Rule 21 [1075 H. 1076 A]
