After hearing the habeas corpus petitions of the respondents, who were detained under the provisions of the Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 the Division Bench of the High Court released the writ petitions from their list since the Court was to have holidays for over ten days immediately thereafter.
Another Division Bench, which took up the petitions for hearing, also adjourned the petitions until the reopening of the Court after holidays.
In the mean time a single Judge of the High Court, before whom the detenus made an application for bail, allowed their petitions on the ground that the Government had erred in forwarding their representations to the advisory board without considering them for itself.
On reopening of the Court, a Division Bench heard the habeas corpus petitions.
It however, allowed the detenus to be on bail till the judgment was pronounced.
In its petition for grant of special leave to appeal the State challenged the impugned order of the Single Judge releasing the detenus on bail "until the next date of hearing of the habeas corpus petitions".
Allowing the appeal ^ HELD: 1.
The single Judge erred in releasing the detenus on bail when their writ petitions were listed for hearing before a Division Bench.
Neither was there any pressing or particular reason of a unique kind such as grave illness or pressing and personal business justifying the order of release on bail for a short period.
The detenus cannot be released on bail as a matter of common practice on considerations generally applicable to cases of punitive detention.
[26 F H] In the instant case the single Judge took up on himself the decision on merits.
25 Although the Courts would be anxious to protect the individual liberty of the citizen on justiciable grounds and within the limits of their jurisdiction, it would be unwise to ignore the object which the orders of detention are intended to serve.
The reluctance of Courts to pass orders of bail in detention cases is based on the fact that they are fully conscious of the difficulties legal and constitutional and of the other risks involved in making such orders.
If an order of bail is made by the Court without a full trial of the issues involved merely on prima facie opinion formed by the High Court, such order would be open to challenge that it is the result of improper exercise of jurisdiction.
It is essential to bear in mind the distinction between the existence of jurisdiction and its proper exercise.
Improper exercise of jurisdiction in such matters must necessarily be avoided by the courts in dealing with applications of this character.
[29 A F] State of Bihar vs Rambalak Singh and others, applied.
There is no force in the argument of the detenus that by reason of the decision of the Division Bench, allowing the detenus to be on bail till the delivery of the judgment by it in their writ petitions, the special leave petition filed by the State had become infructuous because the primary order of bail was the one passed by the single Judge.
The Division Bench has allowed that order to remain in operation only because the counsel for the State was unable to say whether the Advisory Board had recommended the confirmation of detention or not.
The Division Bench postponed the delivery of the judgment for that reason and directed that the detenus would be allowed to continue on bail until further orders.
[30 A C]
