In exercise of the powers vested under the Essential Commodities Act, 1951, the State Government of Uttar Pradesh issued two orders, namely (1) the Uttar Pradesh Food Grains Dealers (Licensing and Restriction on Hoarding) Order, 1976 and (2) the Uttar Pradesh Food Grains (Procurement and Regulation of Trade) Order 1978.
By its teleprinter message dated March 31, 1981 to all the Regional Food Controllers, the State Government issued certain further instructions for effective enforcement of the two Orders and in particular regulating the inter district and outside the State movement of wheat by traders on private account.
By a Notification No. P XXIX Food 5 5(42)/80 dated April 21,1981, clause (4) of the 1978 Order, was amended providing that no wholesale dealer, commission agent, or a retailer shall have in stock wheat more than 250 quintals, 250 quintals and 20 quintals respectively, at any time, since it was of opinion that it was necessary or expedient so to do for securing the equitable distribution and availability of foodgrains at fair prices.
Pursuant to the powers vested in them, the Senior Marketing Inspector and the Chief Marketing Inspector, Agra, intercepted and seized the trucks laden with wheat of the petitioners who are wholesale dealers of foodgrains from the Union Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab and Haryana at the check post at Saiyan on the border between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, and after bringing them back to the purchase point at Agra unloaded the wheat from the said trucks.
While the petitioners moved an application for the release of the seized wheat before the Additional District Magistrate (Civil Supplies), Agra, the Marketing Inspectors not only lodged First Information 1138 Reports but obtained an interim order on May 23, 1981 for the sale of the seized wheat as it was subject to speedy and natural decay.
The seized wheat had been purchased by the State Government on Government account at the procurement price and the sale proceeds were credited into the treasury.
The petitioners challenged the teleprinter message dated March 31, 1981 and the Notification dated April 21, 1981 on the following grounds: (1) The Notification fixing the maximum limit of wheat permitted to be possessed by a wholesale dealer at 250 quintals, at a time, is an unreasonable restriction on the freedom of trader guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution; (2) there is no distinction made between a wholesale dealer and a commission agent in as much as the maximum limit of wheat allowed to be possessed by them is the same, i.e., 250 quintals at a time and the fixation of such limit in the case of a wholesale dealer is arbitrary, irrational and irrelevant and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution; (3) the instructions conveyed by the State Government by its teleprinter message dated March 31, 1981, placing restrictions on movement of wheat by traders on private account from the State of U.P. to various other States and on inter district movement of wheat within the State, were violative of their fundamental rights under Article 19(1)(g) and Article 301 of the Constitution; (4) the seizure of the consignments of the wheat, while they were in transit in the course of inter State trade and commerce from the Union Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab and Haryana to various destinations in the States of Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, was without "the authority of law" and in violation of Article 300A of the Constitution; (5) the restriction must be by "law" or by an "order" having the force of law and not by recourse to the executive authority of the State under Article 162 of the Constitution, that is, by an executive action.
The teleprinter message of the State Government dated March 31, 1981 on the basis of which the seizures were effected in truth and substance, had no legal sanction and cannot be construed to be a notified order within the meaning of sub section (1) read with sub section (5) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act; it was nothing but an executive direction.
No executive action which operates to the prejudice of the citizens can be taken without the authority of law.
The seizures effected were not in compliance with the instructions contained in the teleprinter message and not for breach of the two control Orders and, therefore, it was nothing but a "colourable exercise" of power.
The real purpose of the seizure was procurement of wheat in furtherance of the directives of the Central Government without any legal sanction, since the farmers were not willing to sell their wheat at the procurement price; and (6) under sub section 2(ii) of section 6A of the Act there being no control price for wheat, the wheat should have been sold by public auction by the Additional District Magistrate while passing an interim order.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The restriction imposed by the State Government on wholesale dealers of wheat is neither arbitrary nor is of an excessive nature beyond what is required in the national interest.
To check speculative tendencies of the wholesale traders and others who manipulate the market by withholding stocks of a commodity and to obviate blackmarketing, the stock limit of wheat was fixed for wholesale dealers at 250 quintals at a time, as in the case of a commission agent, the underlying idea being that the wholesale dealers should be allowed to 1139 continue their trading activities within reasonable limits.
The fixation of stock limit at 250 quintals implies that wholesale dealers can have at any time, in stock, a wagon load of wheat.
The words "at any time" mean "at any given time", which means that a wholesale dealer should not have in stock more than 250 quintals at a time.
But there is nothing to prevent a wholesale dealer from entering into a series of transaction during the course of the day.
[1173 A E] 1:2.
The State Government had adopted various measures in the interest of the general public for the control of production, supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce in, essential commodities.
The Order fixing a stock limit introduces a system of checks and balances to achieve the object of the legislation, that is, to ensure equitable distribution and availability of essential commodities at fair prices.
Looking to the prevailing conditions, the imposition of such restrictions satisfies the test of reasonableness.
The fixation of such stock limit is not arbitrary or irrational having no nexus to the object sought to be achieved and is, therefore, intra vires of Article 14.
The limitation imposed fixing a stock limit for a wholesale dealer at 250 quintals is also a reasonable restriction within the meaning of Article 19(6) of the Constitution.
[1174 A D] 2:1.
The teleprinter message No. PP 1061/XXIX.Food 5 dated 31st March, 1981 was in the nature of executive instruction of the State Government to the Regional Food Controllers of the various regions to be more vigilant and to secure due observance of the control orders.
[1156 B, E F, 1163 C] 2:2.
The instructions conveyed by the State Government by the impugned teleprinter message imposing the requirement for the making of an endorsement by the Deputy Marketing Officer or the Senior Marketing Officer or the physical verification of stocks of wheat during the course of transit, are not a 'restriction ' or an 'intrusion ' on the fundamental right to carry on trade or business guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) or on the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse under Article 301.
These are nothing but regulatory measures to ensure that the excess stock of wheat held by a wholesale dealer, commission agent or a retailer is not transported to a place outside the State or from one district to another.
Even if these requirements are considered to be a 'restriction ' on inter State or intra State trade, that is, across the State or from one part of the State to another, the limitation so imposed on the enjoyment of the right cannot be considered to be arbitrary or of an excessive nature and thus violative of Article 19(1)(g) or Article 301 of the Constitution.
There being no ban on the export of wheat from the State of Uttar Pradesh to various other States or from one district to another within the State, subject to the making of an endorsement by the Deputy Marketing Officer or the Senior Marketing Officer concerned, the Petitioners who are wholesale dealers of foodgrains in the State of Uttar Pradesh are, therefore, free to carry on their business within the permissible limits, that is, they may carry on their trade or business or enter into inter State or intra State transactions of wheat subject to the stock limit of 250 quintals, at a time.
[1174 D H, 1175 A B] 2:3.
The teleprinter message dated March 31, 1981 was a direct sequel to the Centre 's directives contained in its earlier teleprinter message and intended or meant to achieve three main objectives, namely, (i) to provide price support in wheat to purchasers with a view to sustain, maintain and maximise the pro 1140 curement of wheat; (ii) to prevent hoarding and black marketing; and (iii) to provide for equitable distribution and availability of wheat at fair prices.
The directions were obviously meant to subserve the object of the legislation and were in public interest.
The State Government was committed to provide price support in wheat to producers and hence to maximise procurement of wheat, there is nothing unusual on the State Government issuing such executive instructions.
[1156 E F, 1160 D E] 2:4.
Even assuming that the impugned teleprinter message is not relatable to the control Orders, the State Government undoubtedly could, in exercise of the executive power of the State, introduce a system of verification on movement of wheat from the State of Uttar Pradesh to various other States at the check post on the border and place restrictions on inter district movement of wheat by traders on private account within the State.
[1156 E F] Ram Jawaya Kapur vs State of Punjab and Naraindas Indurkhya vs State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors., ; , explained and followed.
The State Legislature is competent to enact a law on the subject covered by Entry 33, List III, regulating trade and commerce in, and the production, and supply and distribution of "foodstuffs".
The was enacted by Parliament in exercise of concurrent jurisdiction under Entry 73, List II, of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution as amended by the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, 1954.
The exercise of such concurrent jurisdiction would not deprive the State Legislature of its jurisdiction thereunder.
The executive power of the State which is coextensive with the legislative power is subject to the limitation contained in Article 162 which directs that in any matter with respect to which the legislature of a State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union of authorities thereof.
[1158 F H, 1159 A B] 3:2.
The State in exercise of its executive powers is charged with the duty and the responsibility of carrying on the general administration of the State.
So long as the State Government does not go against the provisions of the constitution of any law, the width and amplitude of its executive power cannot be circumscribed.
If there is no enactment covering a particular aspect, certainly the Government can carry on the administrative directions or instructions, until the legislature makes a law in that behalf.
Otherwise the administration would come to a standstill.
[1157 B C] 3:3.
The executive power of "search and seizure" is a necessary concomitant of a welfare State.
It tends to promote the well being of the nation.
Many questions arising in the field of search and seizure are factual in nature, involving varying degrees of difference among the infinitely diverse facts.
It is a limitless area where not only every factual variation presents a new constitutional question, but it is a peculiar field in which the decisions of courts do not help in clarifying the law.
The decisions in the field are of little precedental value, because the more the cases that are decided the more issues arise, through possible factual variation.
[1159 B E] 1141 4:1.
The quintessence of the Constitution is the rule of the law.
The State or its executive officers cannot interfere with the rights of others unless they can point to some specific rule of law which authorises their acts.
[1161 A] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Thakur Bharat Singh, ; , Satwant Singh Sawhney vs Dr. Ramarathnam, Assistant Passport Officer, Government of India, New Delhi & Ors., at 542; Smt.
Indira Nehru Gandhi vs Shri Raj Narain, at 524, reiterated.
The is a "law" within the meaning of Article 302 of the Constitution imposing reasonable restrictions on the right to carry on trade and commerce as guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) and Article 301 of the Constitution.
The object of the Act is to provide, in the interest of the general public for the control, production, supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce in, certain essential commodities.
[1161 D E] 5.
From the point of view either of Entry 54 List II or of Article 301 of the Constitution, the State Legislature is competent to set up the check posts and barriers on the State 's borders, designed and meant to prevent evasion of sales tax and other dues.
Just as inter State trade and commerce must pay its way and be subject to taxation, persons engaged in inter state trade or commerce are equally subject to all regulatory measures.
The check posts or barriers set up by the State Government under section 28 of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948, which is legally accepted as valid and also considered not a restriction or impediment to the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse granted under Article 301 of the Constitution, can certainly be utilised as a machinery for due observance of the laws, for example, for verification and control of movement of wheat by traders on private account from the State of Uttar Pradesh to various other States.
B D] 6:1.
The fundamental right to carry on trade or business guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) or the freedom of inter State trade, commerce and intercourse under Article 301 of the Constitution, has its own limitations.
The liberty of an individual to do as he pleases is not absolute.
It must yield to the common good.
Absolute or unrestricted individual rights do not and cannot exist in any modern State.
There is no protection of the rights themselves unless there is a measure of control and regulation of the rights of each individual in the interests of all.
Whenever such a conflict comes before the Court, it is its duty to harmonise the exercise of the competing rights.
The Court must balance the individual 's rights of freedom of trade under Article 19(1)(g) and the freedom of inter State trade and commerce under Article 301 as against the national interest.
Such a limitation is inherent in the exercise of those rights.
[1164 E H] 6:2.
Under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, a citizen has the right to carry on any occupation, trade or business and the only restriction on this unfettered right is the authority of the State to make a law imposing reasonable restrictions under clause (6).
[1165 A] 6:3.
The expression "reasonable restriction" signifies that the limitation imposed on a person in enjoyment of the right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond what is required in the interests of the public.
The test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed, should be applied to each individual 1142 statute impugned, and no abstract standard, or general pattern of reasonableness can be laid down as applicable in all cases.
The restriction which arbitrarily or excessively invades the right cannot be said to contain the quality of reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper balance between the freedom guaranteed in Article 19(1) (g) and the social control permitted by clause (6) of Article 19, it must be held to be wanting in that quality.
[1165 B D] 6:4.
Several steps taken, in the instant case, like prevention of movement of stock of wheat to various other States, movement of wheat from one district to another within the State only after the verification of the transaction and due endorsement by the Deputy Marketing Officer or the Senior Marketing Officer concerned and also the physical verification at the check post on the State 's borders etc. were designed to prevent a price rise in wheat in the State of Uttar Pradesh and to prevent outflow of wheat from the State to various other States and from one district to another district within the State.
The whole object was to ensure that the wholesale dealers in foodgrains did not corner stocks of wheat for the purpose of speculation, and hence the steps taken were reasonable and in the interests of the general public.
If, therefore, the seizure can be justified on the basis of any valid law, it cannot be held to be illegal.
[1165 D H] 7:1.
Article 301 imposes a limitation on all legislative power in order to secure that trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.
Although Article 301 guarantees that trade, commerce intercourse throughout the country shall be free, the right to carry on inter State trade and commerce may be subject to reasonable restrictions in the interests of the general public.
[1165 A, 1166 A, C] 7:2.
The word 'free ' in Article 301 does not mean freedom from laws or from regulations.
Article 301 guarantees freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the country from any State barriers.
The whole object was to bring about the economic unity of the country under a federal structure, so that the people may feel that they are members of one nation.
One of the means to achieve this object is to guarantee to every citizen in addition to the freedom of movement and residence throughout the country, which is achieved by Article 19(1)(d) and (e) is the freedom of movement or passage of commodities from one part of the country to another.
This freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the country without any "State barriers" is not confined to inter State trade but also including intra State trade as well.
In other words, subject to the provisions of Part XIII, no restrictions can be imposed upon the flow of trade, commerce and intercourse, not only between the State and another, but between any two points within the territory of India whether any State border has to be crossed or not.
[1166 D H] 7:3.
The regulatory measure or measures imposing compensatory taxes do not come within the purview of the restrictions contemplated by Article 301.
The regulatory measures should, however, be such as do not impede the freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.
[1166 H, 1167 A] 8:1.
In view of the provisions of clause (3) of the 1976 Order read with clauses (4) & (6) of the 1978 Order, the validly seized excess stock of wheat lying with such dealer, that is, a wholesale dealer, commission agent or a retailer, in truth and substance, became their "unlicensed stock".
Here, if really the Delhi traders had purchased the excess stock of wheat from wholesale dealers, com 1143 mission agents or retailers in the State of Uttar Pradesh, as is alleged, it is possible to contend that there was a contravention of the provisions of clause (4) of the 1978 Order.
The question whether the seizure was for any contravention of any order issued under section 3 of the Act has to be determined by the Additional District Magistrates (Civil Supplies), Agra, on the evidence adduced by the parties before him.
The facts being controverted, the petitioners have no right to relief under Article 32 of the Constitution.
[1168 D H, 1169 A B] 8:2.
Supreme Court can neither act on documents which are yet to be proved nor can they pronounce upon the genuineness of the transactions covered by them or record any finding on the basis of the documents when the facts are in dispute.
[1169 E] 8:3.
Normally, it is not the function of Supreme Court to investigate into facts in proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution when they are controverted with a view to discerning the truth.
The matter must, in a situation like this, be left to the fact finding body.
For the establishment of their right to relief under Article 32, the petitioners must establish the necessary facts before the said Additional District Magistrate in the proceedings under section 6A of the .
If they fail to get relief in such proceedings, their obvious remedy lies in a suit for damages for wrongful seizure.
[1171 A C] 9:1.
The State Government cannot while taking recourse to the executive power of the State under Article 162 of the Constitution deprive a person of his property.
Such power can be exercised only by authority of law and not by a mere executive fiat or order.
Article 162 being subject to other provisions of the Constitution, is necessarily subject to Article 300A. [1169 F G] Wazir Chand vs The State of Himachal Pradesh, ; ; Bishan Das and Others vs The State of Punjab and Others, ; , referred to.
The word 'law ' in the context of Article 300A must mean an Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, a rule, or a statutory order, having the force of law, that is positive or State made law.
[1169 G H] 9:3.
The effect of the Constitution (Fourth) Amendment Act, 1955, is that there can be no 'deprivation ' unless there is extinction of the right to property.
Here, no doubt, the wheat had to be sold, as it was subject to speedy and natural decay, but the petitioners are entitled to the sale proceeds, if ultimately it is found by the Additional District Magistrate (Civil Supplies), Agra, that there was no contravention by them of an order issued under section 3 of the Act.
It is true that the seizure was with intent to confiscate under section 6A of the Act, but that would not make the seizure illegal, if, ultimately, it is found that there was contravention of an order issued under section 3 of the Act.
If the facts were not in controversy and if the petitioners were able to prove that there was wrongful seizure of wheat by the State Government of Uttar Pradesh at the check post of Saiyan on the border, while in transit, in the course of inter State trade and commerce from the Union Territory of Delhi, perhaps, they would be entitled to the return of the seized wheat, or, in the alternative, to the payment of price thereof.
[1170 D H, 1171 A] 1144 9:4.
The question that the seizures were in reality for procurement of wheat in furtherance of the directive of the Central Government, and not for breach of the two Control Orders and, therefore, were nothing but a 'colourable exercise of power ', is dependent on facts to be found on investigation.
Further, the question that there being no control price for wheat, the wheat should have been sold by public auction, is again a question that must be raised before the Additional District Magistrate (Civil Supplies), Agra, in the proceedings pending before him under section 6A of the Act.
[1171 C D]
