The petitioners were detained under the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act 1978.
Their cases were referred to the Advisory Board, which did not submit its report yet to the Government, although eight weeks from the date of detention had already expired.
It was argued that there was a violation of sub section (1) of Section 16 of the Public Safety Act and therefore, further detention of the Petitioners was invalid.
Accepting the petitions it was, ^ HELD: (1) The petitioners enjoy a fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution not to be deprived of their personal liberty, except according to procedure established by law.
In cases where a Government resorts to preventive detention, Clauses (4) to (7) of Article 22 prescribe the conditions relating to preventive detention.
A perusal of these Clauses will make it immediately apparent that the constitution places the greatest emphasis on severely limiting the period of preventive detention and envisages time bound stages for the processing of a case as it reaches its determination.
The Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act contains provisions which specify the successive stages and also prescribe the period within which each stage must be completed [143 H, 144 A B] 2.
It is clear that the period prescribed by sub s (1) of section 16 of the Act for the submission of its report by the Advisory Board has already expired.
Sub section
(1) of section 16 provides that the Advisory Board, after considering the material before it and such further material as it may deem necessary and after hearing the person concerned, shall .
submit its report to the Government within eight weeks from the date of detention. ' The obligation placed on the Advisory Board to submit its report within the prescribed period must be construed strictly in as much as the personal liberty of a person is involved and having regard to the emphasis which the Constitution has placed, and which emphasis is reflected in the Act, on the necessity of expeditiously determining whether the detention of the person concerned should be continued.
[144 B F] 143 Shri Mritunjoy Pramanik vs The State of West Bengal, , referred to.
