To man the various posts in the newly established Bombay Rationing Organisation (BRO) the State Government sanctioned a skelton staff.
In addition to the sanctioned staff, the existing staff of the erstwhile adhoc organisation of Controller of Foodgrains (CFD) were taken into the BRO.
Since it was considered necessary to have experienced staff for manning higher posts in the new Organisation the Government borrowed the services of experienced hands from other departments.
Since, as work expanded, it was found that the number of persons brought on deputation to fill up all the new posts in the BRO were not enough, some persons were directly recruited into the BRO.
In 1968 the State Government issued, under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, the Bombay Rationing Organisation (Fixation of Seniority) Rules, 1968 laying down the principles to be applied for the fixation of seniority of persons working in the BRO.
The rules were given retrospective effect from the date of the Government resolution sanctioning the skelton staff for introduction of statutory rationing.
Rule 4(a) provided that seniority of a released government servant and a merged government servant in the cadre of senior clerk etc.
, as also a person who was initially appointed as a clerk etc.
in the Bombay Rationing Organisation and subsequently promoted to the said cadre shall be determined with reference to the dates which shall be fixed after deducting two years from the length of continuous service.
Clause (c) of this rule provided that seniority of government servants in the cadre of senior clerks fixed on the basis of rules (a) and (b) of this rule shall be merged and refixed with reference to the dates from which their seniority is determined according to the principles in rules 4(a) and (b).
70 The proviso to rule 7 provided that where there is a clash of principles contained in the government resolution with the seniority inter se in the former department shall prevail.
Based on the principles laid down in 1968 Rules the Controller of Rationing had drawn up a gradation list of Rationing Inspectors, Senior Clerks and Deputy Accountants working in the BRO as on April 1, 1968.
The list was exhibited on the notice board of the head office of BRO, regional offices and Rationing Offices and was communicated to the individual members of the staff.
A final gradation list was thereafter drawn up as on April 1, 1968.
Some time later on April 9, 1973 another provisional gradation list as on April 1, 1972 was drawn up and published as before.
Since at that time there were many employees who were temporarily recruited pending allotment of candidates selected by the State Public Service Commission rules were relaxed and their appointments were regularised subject to the condition that seniority of such non P.S.C. candidates on whom the benefit of continuance of service was conferred was to be fixed only with reference to the date of issue of the resolution, as a result of which candidates selected by the Public Service Commission already working in the various departments were treated as seniors in relation to the non P.S.C. persons covered by the resolution.
A provisional gradation list as on April 1, 1974 was published following the seniority principles laid down by the BRO in 1968 and those laid down in the resolution concerning non P.S.C. candidates.
In January 1976, respondents 1 to 22 who were directly recruited in the former CFD but subsequently absorbed in the BRO challenged in a writ petition the validity of the two gradation lists contending that in preparing these lists the normal rule of fixation of seniority according to the date of appointment to the post was given a go by and that while fixing seniority unequals had been treated as equals in that the service rendered in the clerical cadre had been reckoned and equated with the service rendered in the Rationing Inspectors ' cadre.
The respondents raised a preliminary objection that the petition was barred by laches because though the gradation list had been circulated to all concerned in 1968 itself no objection had been raised and no effective steps had been taken by the petitioners to challenge the validity of the principles laid down in the government resolution and that after a lapse of 8 years it was not open to them to raise the challenge against the gradation list and try to unsettle a settled principle; (2) in view of the fact that persons from various departments had been recruited, it was necessary to evolve some fair and reasonable principles for the fixation of inter se seniority of the integrated personnel in the different categories.
A single Judge of the High Court struck down clauses (a) and (c) of rule 4 and the proviso to rule 7 of the government Order dated March 22, 1968 as 71 being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and directed the State Government to prepare fresh lists of seniority without taking into consideration the provisions struck down by him.
On the question of laches the Single Judge held that the law did not lay down any obligation on the Court to refuse to grant relief merely because there was a lapse of time but that since the cause of action arose and the challenge was based on infringement of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the Court could not shut out the petitioners on the ground of laches because such a course would amount to condoning the invalid rules.
The Division Bench dismissed in limine the appeal preferred by the respondents in the writ petition.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court was wrong in holding that clauses (a) and (c) of rule 4 and the proviso to rule 7 of the government resolution dated March 22, 1968 are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the constitution and in directing the State Government to prepare a fresh seniority list without taking into consideration these provisions.
[90 B C] Assuming that the principles for determining the inter se seniority of persons appointed in the different categories of the newly constituted BRO laid down in the government resolution of March 22, 1968 were not known to the members of the staff immediately after the resolution was passed by the State Government a Provisional Gradation List of Rationing Inspectors etc.
as on 1st April, 1968 was drawn up in implementation of these principles on 28th May 1971 and the said list was circulated to all the personnel working in the establishment of the BRO.
Neither after the publication of the provisional gradation list on May 28, 1971 which was followed up by the publication and circularisation of a final gradation list on November 23, 1972, nor even after the gradation list was revised and published on April 9, 1973, did the writ petitioners file any objections against their ranking in those gradation lists, within the time allowed.
[90 F H] Even in the belated representations filed by some of the writ petitioners no objection was raised against the principles for determination of seniority enunciated in the government resolution of 1968, nor was there any protest whatsoever against the provision made in the resolution for fixation of seniority of released government servants.
Nor again when their representations were rejected by the government did the petitioners challenge the constitutionality of the rules contained in the impugned resolution.
[92 D E] The government resolution in regard to the position of non P.S.C. candidates vis a vis the P.S.C. candidates did not in any way affect the inter se seniority between the petitioners and the released government servants drafted to the BRO because that resolution was a general order applicable to all the non P.S.C. personnel functioning on a temporary or ad hoc basis in the various departments of the State Government.
[93 E F] 72 There is no substance in the contention of the petitioners that they stood on a separate and superior footing for the purpose of seniority in the new organisation.
The staff in the new organisation was drawn from four different sources and this inevitably necessitated the formulation of reasonable principles for the determination of inter se seniority.
At the time of formation of the BRO the petitioners were not holding any substantive or regular appointments in the CFD which itself was a mere temporary department.
In contrast the deputationists (released government servants) were regular hands recruited by the Public Service Commission and they were holding posts on a substantive basis in other departments.
The principles of equation evolved for determining the inter se seniority could not be regarded as arbitrary or unreasonable viewed in the context that the CFD candidates were merely temporary hands in a temporary department.
[101 E H] It is not an invariable rule that seniority should be determined only on the basis of the respective dates of appointment to the post and that any departure from it would be unreasonable and illegal.
It is open to the rule making authority to take a note of the relevant circumstances obtaining in relation to each department and determine objectively the rules that should govern the inter se seniority and ranking.
Such rules should be reasonable, just and equitable.
[102 F G] In the instant case the action of the Government in determining the inter se seniority of clerical personnel under rule 4(a) cannot be said to be in any way discriminatory or illegal.
S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Bishan Sarup Gupta vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; at p. 114, referred to.
When personnel drawn from different sources were being absorbed and integrated in a new department it was primarily for the government to decide as a matter of policy how the equation of posts should be effected, Courts would not interfere with such a decision unless it is shown to be unreasonable or unfair.
[104 E] All that the proviso to rule 7 does is to state that in respect to persons drafted into the CFD from one and the same government department on deputation basis their inter se seniority in the former department should not be disturbed and to that extent a deviation should be made from the principles laid down in the government resolution of April 1, 1963.
This proviso contains a just and wholesome principle commonly applied in such situations and it cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
The High Court was in error in striking down the rule as being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[105 E H] The object of clause (b) of rule 7 is limited to the preservation and maintenance of the pre existing inter se seniority as between CFD personnel even after their absorption in the BRO and this provision does not in any way hamper the operation of the principle laid down in rule 4 for the fixation of seniority of all the personnel including the merged government servants in the respective categories of BRO.
[106 D E] 73 The view of the single Judge that a petition under Article 226 seeking redress for alleged infringement of fundamental rights could not be dismissed on the ground of laches under any circumstances is inconsistent with the pronouncements of this Court on the subject.
The High Court was wrong in over ruling the preliminary objection based on delay and laches.
[94 B C] Tilokchand Motichand and Ors.
vs H.B. Munshi and Anr.
at pp.
805, 836, 853 855, Rabindra Nath Bose and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; at pp. 711 712; Malcom Lawrence Cecil D 'Souza vs Union of India and Ors.
at p. 602; S.S. Moghe and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; at p. 292, referred to.
The petitioners had ample opportunities to file their objections to the gradation list but they failed to avail those opportunities.
They had not furnished any valid explanation whatsoever for the inordinate delay on their part in approaching the Court with the challenge against the principles of seniority laid down in the resolution of 1968.
The single Judge was in error in thinking that the passing of the government resolution of 1974 furnished a fresh cause of action for the petitioners for agitating their contentions regarding the validity of the government resolution of 1968.
[99 B F]
