The Appellant was working as a Cashier in a Bank.
A depositor who had a Savings Bank Account with the Bank came to the Bank to receive his Pass Book.
On receipt of his Pass Book from the Counter Clerk he complained to the ledger keeper that, on a certain date he had withdrawn only Rs. 500 but a debit entry of Rs, 1,500 had been shown in the Pass Book.
The Ledger keeper took the depositor to the Supervisor and The Agent and his complaint was recorded.
When the documents pertaining to the withdrawal were examined it was found that the depositor had given a letter of authority to the appellant authorising withdrawal from his account.
The letter of authority showed that it was for withdrawal of Rs. 1500 though there appeared to be some interpolation suggesting that the figure of Rs. 500 had been altered lo the figure of Rs. 1500.
A memorandum of charge was served on the appellant by the Management respondent No. I and a disciplinary enquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report and his findings were that the appellant had fraudulently altered the amount in the letter of authority given by the depositor, withdrew Rs. 1500 from the depositor 's account and paid Rs. 500 only to the depositor and 228 misappropriated Rs. 1500.
In pursuance of the enquiry the appellant was discharged from service.
The appellant having raised an industrial dispute the matter was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
Before the Tribunal the appellant denied the charges and pleaded that as the depositor was not examined in the disciplinary enquiry there was no legal evidence before the Enquiry officer for finding that he was guilty.
Before the Tribunal the Management examined no witnesses but produced documents and relied on them.
The Tribunal held that on the evidence before it the appellant could not be held guilty as in the absence of the evidence of the depositor, the evidence recorded was 'hearsay ' and directed reinstatement to the appellant with full back wages.
The respondent moved the High Court under Article 226 and 227 which held that the charge against the appellant had been established and quashed the award of the Tribunal.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (1) that the Tribunal exercised its powers under Section 11 A of the and the High Court exercising powers under Article 226/227 had no jurisdiction to interfere with the award; (2) the Tribunal rightly refused to rely on the evidence which was hearsay; the depositor not having been examined, and (3) the High Court committed an error in not considering the receipt executed by the depositor showing payment of Rs. 1000 to the depositor.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The award of the Tribunal is vitiated by misconception of the law involved.
It erred in holding that as Kansal (depositor) was not examined, fraud and misappropriation on the part of appellant cannot be held to be proved and in failing to appreciate the confession made by the appellant to the higher officer that he had altered the amount in figures and words in his own hand.
[236 G] 1.
In an application for a writ of certiorari under Article 226 for quashing the award of an Industrial Tribunal the jurisdiction of the High Court is limited.
It can quash the award when the Tribunal has committed an error of law apparent on the face of the record or when the finding of facts of the Tribunal is perverse.
[233 B] In the instant case, three kinds of proceedings against the delinquent were possible: (i) departmental proceedings and action, (ii) Criminal prosecution for the alleged misappropriation of the amount, and (iii) civil proceedings for recovery of the amount alleged to be misappropriated.
The respondent adopted the first course and instituted the domestic enquiry.
In such an enquiry guilt need not be established beyond reasonable doubt; proof of misconduct may be sufficient.
[234 G 235 A] State of Haryana & Anr.
vs Rattan Singh , referred to 229 2.
The word 'hearsay ' is used in various senses.
Sometimes it means whatever a person declares on information given by someone else.
[235 E] In the instant case, the Tribunal after having made a detailed reference to the evidence of the witnesses found that a complaint was made by Kansal and that the appellant confessed that he had altered the debit authority, but held That as Kansal was not examined, this was not direct evidence but was of the nature of 'hearsay ' evidence, with regard to the fact whether the appellant manipulated the documents, withdrew the excess amount and misappropriated it, there is no direct evidence of any of the witnesses except the appellant 's confession.
The evidence on which reliance has been taken by the respondent is the confession and circumstantial evidence.
The evidence of Kansal would have been primary and material.
if the fact in issue were whether Kansal authorised the appellant to make the alterations in the authority letter.
But Kansal 's complaint was to the contrary.
No rule of law enjoins that a complaint has to be in writing as insisted by the Tribunal.
For the purpose of a departmental enquiry, complaint substantiated by circumstantial evidence is enough.
What the respondent sought to establish in the domestic enquiry was that Kansal had made a verbal complaint with regard to the withdrawal of excess money by the appellant.
On the factum of complaint of Kansal the evidence of these four witnessess is direct as the complaint is said to have been made by Kansal in their presence and hearing.
It is not therefore 'hearsay '.
The respondent has succeeded in proving that a complaint was made by Kansal on the evidence of these four witnesses.
[236 A E] Subramaniam v Public Prosecutor [1956]1 W.L.R. 965, referred to 3.
The receipt executed by Kansal showing payment by the appellant of Rs. 1000 to the former is destructive of the appellant 's defence and on the contrary proves the respondent 's case.
[236 H 237A]
