The land in dispute originally belonged to a person who had migrated to Pakistan.
After acquiring the lessee rights in the land under section 12 of the the Central Government sold these rights by auction.
The first respondent purchased a plot of land and a sale certificate was issued to him.
The respondent, however could not get possession of the land as a result of litigation resorted to by the person in possession of the land.
In the meantime the State Government filed a suit against the Custodian of Evacuee Property and the auction purchasers for possession; but the suit and later appeal were dismissed.
Before the respondent obtained possession of the land a notification under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act was issued seeking to acquire the land for construction of residential houses for the members of the appellant society.
Having had no knowledge of the notification the respondent did not file any objection under section 5A. After the issue of notification under section 6 of the Act proceedings relating to determination of compensation for the lands were started.
A notice was served on the respondent under section 9(3) of the Act calling upon him to prefer his claim for compensation.
Allowing the respondent 's petition impugning the action of the Government the High Court held that the State Government could acquire the land only after complying with the provisions of Chapter VII of the Act and the Land Acquisition (Companies) Rules, 1963 and this not having been done there was a breach of the principle of natural justice and that secondly the respondent was a "person interested" within the meaning of section 3(b) of the Act.
On the question whether the respondent was a 'person interested ' and whether the notification issued under section 6 was valid.
^ HELD: The expression "person interested" is defined in section 3(b) as including all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of acquisition of land under the Act.
That the first respondent had interest in the land in question is warranted by the following circumstances: (i) a sale certificate had been issued to him after he purchased the land in auction sale; (ii) the Collector knew that he had purchased the land for he had himself filed a suit for ejectment against him from the land and that the suit was dismissed and the appeal against that order was also dismissed; (iii) the Collector called upon the respondent to prefer his claim under section 9(3) of the Act which showed that 47 the Collector had admitted the first respondent 's interest in the land; and (iv) before the High Court the Collector had not denied the respondent 's right to compensation.
Therefore, the first respondent was a "person interested" within the meaning of section 3(b).
[50 F H] 2.
The notification under section 6 is invalid for non compliance with rule 4 of the Rules.
[54 G] The appellant society is a "company" within the meaning of section 3(e) of the Act.
When the land was acquired for the purpose of a company, Part VII of the Act is attracted and the provisions of that Chapter have to be followed.
Rule 4 is mandatory and unless the directions enjoined by this rule are complied with the notification under section 6 would be invalid.
Its compliance precedes the notification under section 4 as well as compliance of section 6 of the Act.
[51 F G] In the instant case on receipt of the notice under section 9(3) the respondent objected to the acquisition on the grounds that the land or lessee rights having been acquired by the Central Government under the provisions of the could not be acquired by the State Government, and that the mandatory procedure for acquisition of land for private companies had not been followed.
No inquiry report had been submitted by the Collector.
The report submitted was under section 5A and not under rule 4.
There had therefore been a failure of justice.
[54 C F] 3.
The appellant 's contention that the first respondent 's claim was barred by limitation under sections 45(f) and 180 of the Tenancy Act, has no force because there is no evidence to show that the requirements of the section have been satisfied.
That apart, this is a mixed question of fact and law requiring investigation into facts.
Since it had not been taken before the High Court but sought to be urged for the first time in this Court, it cannot be allowed to be urged in an appeal by special leave under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[50 C D]
