Respondents Nos. 2 to 14 were appointed to the cadre of Income tax Officers, Class I, against vacancies reserved for Scheduled Caste and Schedules Tribes, as a result of a competitive examination or test as envisaged by sub rule (3) of Rule 6.
The Petitioner was similarly appointed to the same cadre but against a vacancy reserved under sub rule (1) of Rule 4 for certain officers of the Armed Forces of the Union.
He was placed in the impugned seniority list below respondents Nos. 2 to 14.
He made a representation against the seniority assigned to him on the ground that under sub rule (3) of Rule 6 he was entitled to rank immediately below candidates appointed against unreserved vacancies.
The representation was rejected by a letter dated 16th March, 1979.
The petitioner filed a petition under article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking the issuance of a writ quashing that letter.
At the hearing it was not disputed that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of reservation sub rule (1) of Rule 4 and to have his seniority determined in accordance with sub rule (3) of Rule 6.
However, it was contended on behalf of the respondents Nos. 2 to 14, inter alia, that the rules of the service had been amended earlier to 1971, so as to place candidates covered by sub rule (1) of Rule 4 below those who had been appointed against reserved vacancies through a competitive examination.
Accepting the petition, it was ^ HELD: (1) Sub rule (3) of Rule 6 is not ambiguous in any manner whatsoever and lays down in clear terms that the officers appointed against vacancies reserved under sub rule (1) of Rule 4 shall rank below candidates who were appointed against unreserved vacancies in the Services concerned through a competitive examination, etc.
[40 F G] 2.
Respondents Nos. 2 to 14 have been appointed against vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes.
Clearly therefore, they must rank below the petitioner inasmuch as it cannot be said with any plausibility that they were appointed against unreserved vacancies.
[41 A B] 3.
The argument that the rules of the service in question had been amended to 1971, so as to place candidates governed by Rule 4(1) below those who had been appointed to reserved vacancies through a competitive examination has no substance and makes no difference to the interpretation which is given above to 39 sub rule (3) of Rule 6, Rule 8 of the Rules declares in no uncertain terms that all rules regulating the recruitment of persons to Central Civil Services and Posts, Class I, to which the Rules apply, shall be deemed to have been amended to the extent provided for in the Rules.
Although the rules regulating the seniority of the petitioners and respondents Nos. 2 to 14 were so amended earlier to 1971 as to assign to the petitioner seniority below respondents Nos 2 to 14, the situation is wholly irrelevant to the present dispute because after the amendment brought about by Rule 8 of the Rules, the members of the service to which the contenting parties belong, have to be governed by the later amendment, of which sub rule (3) of Rule 6 forms a part.
This is the inescapable consequence flowing from Rule 8 of the Rules.
[41 G H, 42 A D] 4.
The word 'recruitment ' is comprehensive enough to embrace the content of all the rules proceeding Rule 8 including the fitment of candidates recruited to the service vis a vis each other.
[42 D E]
