The Presidency Magistrate convicted the petitioner for offences under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code read with section 135 of and Customs Act and Rule 126P(2) (ii) and (iv) of the Defence of India Rules 1962 and sentenced him to suffer imprisonment for various periods ranging from two years to four years and to payment of fine.
The conviction and sentence was set aside by the High Court, but this Court in appeal by the State set aside the judgment of acquittal by the High Court and restored that of the Presidency Magistrate.
The petitioner was also preventively detained for various periods first under the Maintenance of Internal Security Act and afterwards under the .
In the review petition and writ petition to this Court it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that: (I) though it was argued in the appeal to this Court that the periods during which the petitioner had been preventively detained should be 'set off ' against the sentence of imprisonment imposed upon him this court had not touched upon the point; and (2) this court 's decision in Government of Andhra Pradesh and another vs Venkateswara Rao; , , enabled the petitioner to claim the total of the three periods of detention to be 'set off ' against the sentence of imprisonment.
Dismissing the review and writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
It was not argued that the petitioner was entitled to a 'set off ' but that the period of his detention might be taken into account in considering the question of the appropriate sentence be imposed on him.
[62 H, 63 A].
2(i) In Government of Andhra Pradesh vs Venkateswara Rao, this Court negatived the contention that the expression period of detention in Section 428, Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 included the detention under the Preventive Detention Act or the Maintenance of Internal Security Act.
[63 F G] (ii) Section 428, Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 makes it clear that the period of detention which it allows to be 'set off ' against the term of imprisonment imposed on the accused on conviction must be during the investigation, enquiry, or trial in connection with the 'same case ' in which he has been convicted.
[64 A B] 62 (iii) only in circumstances where the petitioner would have unquestionably been in detention in connection with a criminal case if he had not been preventively detained, his preventive detention might be reckoned as detention as an undertrial prisoner or detention pursuant to conviction, for the purposes of Section 428, Code of Criminal Procedure 1973.
[64 G] In the instant case the petitioner had been acquitted by the High Court before any of the orders of detention were made against him.
There can, there fore, be no question of the detention being considered as detention pursuant to conviction nor can the detention be treated as that of an undertrial.
[64 F]
