The petitioner (wife) filed a suit (O.P. 72/79) in forma pauperis seeking maintenance from the respondent (husband) in the court of subordinate Judge, Eluru (Andhra Pradesh).
On the receipt of the notice of the suit, the respondent filed a divorce suit (Petition Case No. 28/1980) against the wife under section 13 of the in the court of the District Judge, Udaipur (Rajasthan).
By the instant transfer petition filed under section , the wife sought to get the suit at Udaipur transferred to Eluru.
A preliminary objection was raised to the effect that section 25 of the Civil Procedure Code, which gets excluded by reason of the provisions of sections 20 and 21 of the , is not applicable to proceedings under the said Act and as such the Supreme Court has no power to transfer the husband 's suit from Udaipur District Court, Udaipur (Rajasthan) to Eluru District Court, Eluru (A.P.).
Rejecting the preliminary objection, the Court ^ HELD: Per curiam On merits, it is expedient for the ends of justice to transfer the husband 's suit pending in the District Court Udaipur (Rajasthan) to the District Court at Eluru (Andhra Pradesh), where both the proceedings could be tried together and for that purpose, the wife is agreeable to have her maintenance suit transferred to the District Court at Eluru (A.P.).
[226 A B] Per Tulzapurkar J. 1.
It will invariably be expedient to have a joint or consolidated hearing or trial by one and the same Court of a husband 's petition for restitution of conjugal rights on the ground that the wife has withdrawn from his society without reasonable excuse under section 9 of the and the wife 's petition for judicial separation against her husband on ground of cruelty under section 10 of the said Act in order to avoid conflicting decisions being rendered by two different Courts.
In such a situation resort will have to be had to the 224 powers under sections 23 to 25 of the Civil Procedure Code for directing transfer of the petitions for a consolidated hearing.
[228 G H, 227A] 2:1.
On a proper construction of the relevant provisions, it cannot be said that the substantive provision contained in section 25 Civil Procedure Code is excluded by reason of section 21 of the .
In terms, section 21 C.P.C. does not make any distinction between procedural and substantive provisions of C.P.C. and all that it provides is that the Code, as far as may be, shall apply to all proceedings under the Act and the phrase "as far as may be" means and is intended to exclude only such provisions of the Code as are or may be inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Code.
It is impossible to say that such provisions of the Code as partake of the character of substantive law are excluded by implication as no such implication can be read into section 21 of the Act and a particular provision of the Code irrespective of whether it is procedural or substantive will not apply only if it is inconsistent with any provisions of the Act.
[226 G H, 227 A B] 3.
Section 21A of the does not exclude the power of transfer conferred upon the Supreme Court by the present section 25 C.P.C., in relation to proceedings under that Act.
The marginal note of section 21A itself makes it clear that it deals with power to transfer petitions and direct their joint or consolidated "trial in certain cases" and is not exhaustive.
Section 21A does not deal with the present section 25 C.P.C. which has been substituted by an amendment which has come into force with effect from February 1, 1977 (section 11 of the Amending Act 104, 1976).
By the amendment very wide and plenary power has been conferred on the Supreme Court for the first time to transfer any suit, appeal or other proceedings from one High Court to another High Court or from one Civil Court in one State to another Civil Court in any other State throughout the country.
Conferral of such wide and plenary power on the Supreme Court could not have been in contemplation of Parliament at the time of enactment of section 21A of the .
[227 C D, F H, 228 A B] Smt.
Rama Kanta vs Ashok Kumar, AIR 1977 Punjab & Haryana 373 and Priyavari Mehta vs Priyanath Mehta, AIR 1980 Bombay 337, overruled.
Per Amrendra Nath Sen, J. 1.
A plain reading of section 25 C.P.C. clearly indicates that very wide jurisdiction and powers have been conferred on the Supreme Court to transfer any suit, appeal or any other proceedings from a High Court or other Civil Court in any State to a High Court or other Civil Court in any other State for the ends of justice.
Supreme Court enjoys the power and jurisdiction to entertain the transfer application under section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
D] 2 : 1.
Sections 21 and 21A of the do not in any way, exclude, effect or curtail the power conferred on the Supreme Court under section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
If the jurisdiction clearly conferred 225 on any court has to be ousted, the exclusion of such jurisdiction must be made in clear and unequivocal terms.
[232E, 233D] 2 : 2.
Section 21 of the only provides that "all proceedings under the shall be regulated as far as may be by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908".
Section 21 of the does not deal with the question of jurisdiction of any court and it cannot be construed to exclude the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under section 25 C.P.C. [232 E G] 2 : 3.
Section 21A of the has, indeed, no bearing on the question of jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under section 25 C.P.C. Section 21A has no application to the case of transfer of any suit or proceeding from one State to another.
[233 B C] 2 : 4.
The Supreme Court must necessarily enjoy the power and jurisdiction under the provisions of section 25 C.P.C. of transferring such a suit or proceeding for the ends of justice unless the power and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court are specifically taken away by any statute.
[232D E] 3.
Section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure came into force after section 21 and 21A of the have been incorporated in the and as such section 25 of the Code overrides sections 21 and 21A of the .
[233 A E]
