The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 by section 354(3) provides that when the conviction is for an offence punishable with death, the judgment shall in the case of sentence of death state 'special reasons ' for such sentence.
The appellant was charged under section 302 of the Penal Code for having committed the murder of his maternal uncle and his son.
The Sessions Judge convicted the appellant for murder and being of the opinion that it was "a terrific double murder" sentenced the appellant to death, The High Court condemned the murders as "cold blooded" and confirmed the conviction and sentence.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, limited to the question of sentence.
^ HELD: 1.
The sentence of death imposed on the appellant is set aside and he is sentenced to imprisonment for life.
[275 F] 2.
The reasons given by the Sessions Judge for imposing the death sentence are not 'special reasons ' within the meaning of section 354(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code.
It is not certain if he were cognizant of his high responsibility under that provision, that he would have imposed the death sentence.
[275 E] 3.
It is not understood what is meant by "a terrific murder" as suggested by the Sessions Judge.
All murders are terrific and if the fact of the murder being 271 terrific is an adequate reason for imposing the death sentence then every murder shall have to be visited with that sentence.
Death sentence will then become the rule, not an exception and section 354(3) would become a dead letter.
[272 F G] 4(i).
On the question of sentence it is not merely the accused but the whole society which has a stake.
[273 B] (ii) After the conviction is recorded, the occasion to apply the provisions of section 235(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code arises.
The obligation under this section to hear the accused on the question of sentence is not discharged by putting a formal question to the accused as to what he has to say on the question of sentence.
The Judge must make a genuine effort to elicit from the accused all information which will eventually bear on the question of sentence.
All admissible evidence is before the Judge but that evidence itself often furnishes a clue to the genesis of the crime and the motivation of the criminal.
It is the bounden duty of the Judge to cast aside the formalities of the Court scene and approach the question of sentence from a broad sociological point of view.
Questions which the Judge can put to the accused under section 235(2) and the answers which the accused makes are beyond the narrow constraints of the Evidence Act.
The Court, while on the question of sentence, is in an altogether different domain in which facts and factors of an entirely different order operate.
[273 B; 272 H 273 A; 273 C] In the instant case, the Sessions Judge complied with the form and letter of the obligation which section 235(2) imposes, forgetting the spirit and substance of that obligation.
[273 D] 5.
It is not possible to appreciate how, after being shot in the chest and receiving the injuries described in the post mortem report, the deceased could have survived for a couple of hours thereafter.
There is also no explanation as to why the F.I.R. was not recorded at the Police Station when P.W. 1 went there.
It is therefore unsafe to confirm the sentence of death imposed upon the appellant.
[273 H. E] 6.
It is not the normal function of the High Court to pass judgment on the conduct of lawyers who appear before the lower courts.
[275 C] 7.
The High Court should have given an opportunity to the two police officers to explain their conduct before making criticism on it.
[274 G]
