Section 16(1) (b) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 empowers the District Magistrate to release the whole or any part of a building or any land appurtenant thereto, in favour of the landlord.
Section 17(2) provides that where a part of a building is in the occupation of the landlord for residential purposes or is released in his favour under section 16(1) (b) for residential purposes the allotment of the remaining part thereof under clause (a) of sub section (1) shall be made in favour of a person nominated by the landlord.
On intimation from tho tenant that he was vacating the premises, the rent control authority allotted them to the appellant without informing the landlady about the allotment.
On appeal the District Judge cancelled the allotment made in favour of the appellant The landlady then made an application for delivery of possession of the premises.
This application was rejected on the ground that she had not applied for release of the accommodation.
Her application under section 16(1) (b) for release of the premises was rejected and the accommodation was re allotted to the appellant.
The District Magistrate affirmed the order of the rent control authority.
The landlady 's writ petition impugning the orders of the courts below was allowed by the High Court.
The case was remitted to the courts below for reconsideration afresh of the question of allotment.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that since the landlady was not in actual physical possession of the premises neither section 16(1) (b) nor section 17(2) had any application to the facts of this case.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The order of the prescribed authority allotting the premises to the appellant was without jurisdiction and against the plain terms of section 17(2) of the Act.
The District Judge had rightly allowed the landlady 's appeal and cancelled The allotment to the appellant.
115 The object of the Act is that where a tenant inducted by the landlord voluntarily vacates the premises, partly occupied by the landlord, allotment in the vacancy should be made only to a person nominated by him, the dominant purpose of such provision being to remove any inconvenience to the landlord by imposing or thrusting on the premises an unpleasant neighbour or a tenant who invades the landlord 's right of privacy.
While empowering the prescribed authority to allot the accommodation, the Act safeguards the right of the landlord to have a tenant of his choice.
[117 B C, D] In the instant case if a tenant was thrust on the respondent without allowing her an opportunity to nominate a tenant of her choice it would violate the very spirit and tenor of section 17(2).
[120 F] Possession by a landlord of his property may assume various forms: a landlord living outside the town might retain possession over his property or a part of it either by leaving it in charge of a servant or by putting his household effects locked up in the premises.
Such occupation would be full and complete possession in the eye of law.
[119 F] In the instant case from the fact that the landlady was residing in another town and so was not actually residing in the premises it could not be said that she was not in possession of the premises or that she had severed her connection with her own property.
[119 G] The High Court was justified in quashing the orders of the rent control authority because no attempt had been made to approach the landlady for making a nomination in respect of the premises vacated by the original tenant.
All that the landlady did was to ask for the release of the premises.
Even if this was refused it was incumbent on the rent control authority to have fulfilled the requirements of section 17(2) before making an allotment in favour of the appellant or anyone else.
Simply because the landlady was living outside the town it could not be said that the provisions of this sub section would not apply and that the authorities concerned could make an allotment in favour of any person without giving an opportunity to her to exercise her privilege to nominate a tenant.
[120 A C]
