The management of a cooperative society registered under the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act vests in a committee constituted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the Rules made thereunder.
The term of elected members of a committee, according to section 29(2) read with r. 445(1) is three 'Cooperative years ' including the cooperative year in which they are elected. 'Cooperative year ' means the year commencing on the 1st day of July and ending on the 30th day of June next following.
Fresh members are to be elected before the expiry of the term of existing elected members failing which an administrator can be appointed by the Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies to manage the affairs of the cooperative society till the reconstitution of the committee.
In this case the term of the cooperative society in question was drawing to a close and the poll to elect fresh members was held on September 11, 1978.
The result of the poll could not be declared immediately owing to an injunction issued by a court in a suit filed by a voter whose name had not appeared in the electoral roll.
The result was, however, declared ultimately on January 28, 1980, and appellant No. 1 was elected Chairman of the committee on January 29, 1980.
By an order dated July 1, 1981, made under section 29(4) (b), the Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies appointed an administrator to manage the affairs of the society on the ground that the term of members of the Committee had expired on June 30, 1981.
The appellants challenged the validity of the order under article 226.
The High Court upheld the impugned order and dismissed the petition on the ground that once the poll was held and even though the result of the election was not announced, the term would commence from the date of the poll.
The appellants submitted that even though the poll was held on September 11, 1978, the result having been declared for the first time on January 28, 1980, the term of three cooperative years of the elected members would expire on June 30, 1982.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
(a) Election means the process of being elected and the term of office is of elected members.
The term of office as member cannot begin to run unless the status of being a member is acquired on being declared elected.
208 The result of the election having been declared on January 28, 1980, the term of members commenced from the cooperative year beginning on July 1, 1979 and ending with June 30, 1980 and since their term was three cooperative years including the year of election, it would expire on June 30, 1982.
The order appointing the administrator was, therefore illegal.
[213 H, 214 H, 215 A, 216 F G] (b) The provision of section 29(4) (b) was not attracted as the process of election had begun with the holding of the poll before the expiry of the term and, once the poll was held as a part of the programme of election, it had to progress to the statutory end of declaration of result.
[216 B E] 2.
The various stages of election were clearly demarcated in the Rules.
Mere holding of poll, which means recording of votes, without anything more would be inconsequential.
It is the counting of votes and the consequent declaration of result which would determine who has become eligible for office by the democratic process.
No election process can be said to be complete unless the votes are recorded and counted and the result of the election declared and publicised.
[212 G H, 213 E G] 3.
The election process is sacrosanct and members elected must be permitted to discharge their functions as chosen representatives of the electorate for the statutorily prescribed term and therefore the plea that the administrator should not be disturbed as only four months would remain for the expiry of the term cannot be countenanced.
The drastic power of removing elected representatives before the expiry of their term must receive strict and narrow interpretation.
[217 A C]
