Bhikoba, the tenant (the predecessor of the appellants), as required by section 12 of the Maharashtra Land Ceiling Act, filed before the Special Deputy Collector a return in the prescribed form furnishing particulars of land including the extent of 21 acres 28 guntas bearing Survey No. 34 in his possession on the appointed day, that is, January 26, 1962.
After recording the statement of Bhikoba and considering all the other relevant material before him, the Special Deputy Collector found that Bhikoba was in possession of surplus land to the extent of 132 acres 1 guntas, as per his order dated March 27, 1965.
The appeal filed by Bhikoba was partly allowed by the appellate authority by its order dated April 13, 1966 and the matter was remanded to the Special Deputy Collector with certain directions.
Thereafter Bhikoba died on January 31, 1969.
On June 27, 1969, the Special Deputy Collector after hearing the legal representatives held that Bhikoba was a surplus holder of land to the extent of 16 acres and 26 guntas.
An appeal against that order filed by the four sons of Bhikoba was dismissed on November 4, 1970 as premature, since the holders had not yet exercised their choice under section 16(2) of the Act and a declaration under section 21 had not yet been made.
When a notice was issued under section 16 of the Act to the heirs of Bhikoba to exercise their choice in respect of the land to be retained by them out of Bhikoba 's holding to the extent of the ceiling area, the heirs of Bhikoba filed objections on November 23, 1971 pleading, inter alia, that a holder of land in excess of the ceiling prescribed by the Act would be divested of his title to the surplus land only when its possession was taken from him after the publication of the notification under section 21 of the Act and since such notification had not yet been published and possession of the surplus land had not been taken, Bhikoba continued to be the owner of the entire land till his death and that as inheritance could not remain in abeyance, his heirs at law became entitled to the 219 entire land and that if a fresh determination was then made there would be no surplus land at all in their hands which had to be surrendered.
The Special Deputy Collector accepted the plea of the heirs of Bhikoba and dropped further proceedings by his order dated March 13, 1973.
Respondents 1 to 4, former landlords, who would have become entitled to claim relief under the Act at the time when the distribution of surplus land held by Bhikoba was taken up for consideration preferred an appeal against the order of the Special Deputy Collector dropping the proceedings, before the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal.
The Tribunal dismissed the appeal by its judgment dated January 31, 1975.
A petition filed under Article 227 of the Constitution before the High Court of Bombay challenging the decision of the Tribunal was allowed by the High Court by its judgment dated July 30, 1980 and the matter was remanded to the Special Deputy Collector to continue the proceedings commenced on the basis of the return filed by Bhikoba.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Respondents 1 to 4 had locus standi to file not only an appeal before the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal but also later on a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution before the High Court.
It is no doubt true that at the first instance the land which is declared a surplus land in the hands of any person would vest in the State Government under the Land Ceiling Act.
But the said land had to be distributed in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter VI of the Act.
Any person who is entitled to grant of land under any of the provisions of the Act may question any order which would have the effect of reducing the extent of total surplus land in any village.
Respondents 1 to 4 were the former landlords of the land bearing Survey No. 34 which formed part of the holding of Bhikoba in the instant case.
They cannot, therefore, be characterised as just strangers to these proceedings.
[226 F H, 227 A B] 2.
It is very hazardous to decide cases in which proprietary rights arise for determination on the basis of decisions rendered under taxation laws which have their own peculiarities.
The Land Ceiling Act is not one levying tax on the income during the previous year or previous years or of a period other than the previous year in the hands of an assessee but a Law imposing a ceiling on the holding of a person or a family as on a specified date.
The Act has to be construed in accordance with its scheme and object which is equitable distribution of land in the hands of those who held land in excess of the ceiling limit on the appointed day, or those who would acquire subsequently land in excess of the ceiling or those who own lands which exceed the ceiling limit by reason of their conversion into a different class.
[227 E G] In order to achieve that object the Legislature enacted sections 3 and 4 of the Act declaring that no person could on or after the appointed day hold land in excess of the ceiling area and compelling every person acquiring or coming into possession of any land in excess of the ceiling area on or after the appointed day to file a return before the Collector furnishing particulars of all land held by him.
[227 G H, 228 A] 220 3. 1.
A close reading of the provisions contained in sections 3, 4 and 18 to 21 of the Land Ceiling Act shows that the determination of the extent of surplus land of a holder has to be made as on the specified date which is made further clear by the following requirements under section 12 of the Act.
If any person has at any time after the fourth day of August, 1959 but before the appointed day held any land (including any exempted land) in excess of the ceiling area, such person should file a return within the prescribed period from the appointed day furnishing to each of the Collectors within whose jurisdiction any land in his holding is situated, in the form prescribed containing the particulars of all land held by him.
If any person acquires, holds or comes into possession of any land (including any exempted land) in excess of the ceiling area on or after the appointed day, such person has to furnish a return within the prescribed period from the date of taking possession of any land in excess of the ceiling area.
If any person whose land is converted into another class of land in the circumstances described in section 11 A (formerly numbered as section 11) thereby causing his holding to exceed the ceiling area then such person has to file a return within the prescribed period from the date of such conversion (such date being a date to be notified in the Official Gazette by the State Government in respect of any area).
[228 F H, 229 A B] 3:2.
If a person is found to be in possession of land in excess of the ceiling area at any time after the fourth day of August, 1959 but before the appointed day, he incurs the liability to surrender any surplus land as on the appointed day itself even though the actual extent of such surplus land is determined on a subsequent date.
Similarly those who acquire land in excess of the ceiling area on or after the appointed day would become liable to surrender surplus land on the date of taking possession of any land in excess of the ceiling area.
A person whose case falls under section 11 A of the Act becomes liable to surrender any surplus land in his possession as on the date of conversion of land into irrigable land.
[229 D F] 3:3.
The liability to surrender surplus land would not in any way come to an end by reason of the death of such holder before the actual extent of surplus land is determined and notified under section 21 of the Act.
Section 21 of the Act, no doubt, states that the title of the holder in the surplus land would become vested in the State Government only on such land being taken possession of after a declaration regarding the surplus land is published in the Official Gazette.
But the liability to surrender the surplus land, however, relates back to the appointed day in the case of those who fall under section 12(1) (a) of the Act, to the date of taking possession of any land in excess of the ceiling area in the case of those who come under section 12(1) (b) of the Act and to the date of conversion of land into a different class in the case of those who come under section 12(2) of the Act.
Any other construction would make the Act unworkable and the determination of the extent of surplus land of a holder ambulatory and indefinite.
[229 F H, 230 A] 3:4.
Further, section 8 of the Act prohibits transfer or partition of any land held by a person holding land in excess of the ceiling area on or after the appointed day until the land in excess of the ceiling is determined under the Act.
Section 10 provides that if any person after the fourth day of August, 1959 but 221 before the appointed day transferred or partitioned any land in anticipation of or in order to avoid or defeat the objects of the Act or any land is transferred or partitioned in contravention of provisions of section 8 then in calculating the ceiling area which that person is entitled to hold the area so transferred or partitioned should be taken into consideration and land exceeding the ceiling area so calculated should be deemed to be in excess of the ceiling area for that holding notwithstanding the land remaining with him may not in fact be in excess of the ceiling area.
[230 B D] 3:5.
The expression 'holding ' used in sections 3, 5, 6 and 10 shows that the statute treats a holding as a unit for purposes of determination of surplus land which can be acquired from such holding.
Section 2(14) which defines the expression 'to hold land ' as 'to be lawfully in actual possession of land as owner or tenant ' requires that the expression 'holding ' should be construed accordingly.
Section 3 of the Act expressly imposes a limit on the holding of agricultural land on the commencement of the Act.
The extent of surplus land which the Government can acquire under the Act from a holder cannot therefore be made to depend upon the date on which a declaration indicating the extent of surplus land is notified in the Official Gazette under section 21 and the date on which such surplus land is taken possession of.
It cannot be also made to depend upon the holder who has incurred the liability on the relevant date being alive on the date on which the declaration is made under section 21 and possession of surplus land is taken.
The proceedings initiated by a return filed by a holder cannot be dropped if such holder dies before a declaration is made under section 21 and surplus land is taken possession of.
To hold otherwise would frustrate the very object and purposes of the Act.
[230 D H] 3:6.
The surplus land in the case of a person who at any time after the fourth day of August, 1959 but before the appointed day held any land (including any exempted land) in excess of the ceiling area has got to be determined as on the appointed day even though such person may die before the actual extent of surplus land is determined and notified under section 21 of the Act.
The persons on whom his 'holding ' devolves on his death would be liable to surrender the surplus land as on the appointed day because the liability attached to the holding of the deceased would not come to an end on his death.
The heirs of the deceased cannot be permitted to contend to the contrary and allowed to get more land by way of inheritance that what they would have got if the death of the person had taken place after the publication of the notification under section 21.
[231 G H, 232 A C] Raghunath Laxman Wani & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, ; , applied.
The introduction of the second paragraph of the new section 3(2) does not alter the position as to the true legal position and scope of section 21 of the Act.
The said paragraph was introduced by way of abundant caution to get over the possible objection raised on the basis of the decision in the case of Dadarao Kashiram.
The said paragraph is merely declaratory of what the true legal position had always been even from the commencement of the Act.
The said paragraph in the new section 3(2) refers to two contingencies (i) the death of a person who was holding land in excess of the ceiling limit; and (ii) the death 222 of any member of a family unit owning land in excess of the ceiling on the appointed day.
It provides that the death of the person or the death of a member of the family unit as the case may be should be ignored.
The death of a person after the appointed day also would make no difference so far as the liability of his holding to part with a surplus land is concerned.[232 F H, 233 A, E F] 3:8.
In the instant case, (i) the proceedings commencing with the return filed by Bhikoba could not be dropped merely because he died before a notification was issued under section 21 of the Act.
The proceedings have to be continued and the surplus land in the hands of Bhikoba as on the appointed day should be determined and taken possession of in accordance with law; (ii) the heirs of Bhikoba are entitled to participate in the said proceedings representing the estate of Bhikoba and (iii) they would be entitled as heirs at law only such land that may remain after surrendering the surplus land as may be determined under the Act.
[233 G H, 234 A B] Dadaro Kashiram vs The State of Maharashtra, , overruled.
