Respondents Nos. 1 to 16 applied for the grant of plots of land for purposes of constructing shops, alleging that they were displaced persons and entitled to the grant of plots.
The appellants also made a similar application.
There were applications from other claimants.
The State Government acting on the report of the Commissioner rejected all the applications.
Subsequently the Government at the instance of the appellants who had sought a review, reversed its earlier order and decided to grant plots on permanent lease to the appellants.
The decision was conveyed in a memorandum by the State Government, who granted the plots to the appellants as shop sites in Bhumidhari rights without auction on payment of premium.
The allotment was assailed by the respondents and they represented to the State Government that only after further inquiry should the land be reserved for deserving claimants.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the allotment made by the Government in favour of the appellants contending that no reasonable opportunity had been given to them to press their claim for grant of plots, after reversal of the earlier decision not to grant land, that the appellants had been unduly favoured, and that the power to grant plots was vested in the Collector and not in the State Government.
The appellants contested alleging that they had acquired a right to the land that they could not be divested of those rights.
The High Court quashed the order granting plots to the appellants and directed the State Government to take appropriate action on the several claims for allotment of land.
It held that under sub section (2) of section 149 read with sub section (3) of section 164 of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1954, and rules 22 and 26 framed under the Code it was not open to the State Government to dispose of the plots without holding a public auction unless there were reasons recorded in writing for doing so and that after initially deciding not to 289 grant the plots, the subsequent decision to allot them was contrary to law as the claims of others had not been considered.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD :1.
The High Court was right in quashing the order granting plots to the appellants and directing the State Government to consider the several claims for allotment.
[296 C D] 2.
The grant cannot be attributed to clause (c) of sub section (2) of section 149.
The land was disposed of in Bhumidhari right.
It was not given on favourable terms to the appellants, the market value of the plots was taken for fixing the premium.
From the nature of the grant, it was clear that action under subsection (1) of section 149 was intended.
[293 E] 3.
Under Rules 24 to 26 of the Land Revenue Code, lease hold rights in nazul land are to be disposed of by public auction.
If in any particular case the State Government or the Collector considers that there is good reason for granting the land without auction the reasons must be recorded in writing.
The existence of good reason for departing from the general principle and the recording of the reason in writing are essential prerequisites which must be satisfied before lease hold rights are granted without auction.
[295 A C] In the instant case there is no evidence that the State Government has recorded any reasons in writing for preferring the mode of disposing of the land without auction.
It had also no good reason for favouring that mode.
In these circumstances the grant of land to the appellants was rightly quashed by the High Court.
[295 E F] 4.
The State Government had decided earlier, as a matter of policy, not to allot nazul land to displaced persons, and pursuant to the decision all the applications for allotment were rejected.
The applications were not rejected on the merits of their respective claims.
Subsequently, when the State Government made an allotment of the plots to the appellants, it was consequent to a decision, which must be regarded as a composite of two decisions, one a policy decision to throw open the land to allotment in reversal of the earlier policy and, two, to allot the land to the appellants.
The applications of the respondents for allotment of plots were rejected on the ground that the land was not available for allotment.
That was a policy decision.
When it was reversed it was incumbent on the State Government to reconsider those applications or to notify that the land was available for allotment and to invite fresh applications in that behalf.
It was not open to the State Government to allot the plots to the appellants in disregard of the claims of others who had also applied for allotment.[295 G H; 296 A B]
