The appellant joined service as a gangman in Southern Railway on July 1, 1948.
In course of his service he was transferred to various places.
While he was working as a Lascar at Ernakulam, he was transferred, some time in March 1970 by way of punishment for his Union activities in the capacity of General Secretary of the Southern Railway Construction Workers Union, Ernakulam, to Podannur in Tamil Nadu.
However, his transfer was cancelled and he joined duty on 20 2 1971 at Ernakulam.
The Ministry of Labour, Government of India, by its letter dated April 23, 1974 directed treatment of his entire period of absence from 8th March, 1970 to 19th February, 1971 as duty.
Later, the appellant approached the Labour Court for recovering some of his dues which remained pending for a long time.
As the appellant and those similarly situated were likely to reach the age of superannuation and by the unfair labour practice, namely, treating them only as 'daily rated labour ', of the Railway Administration, they were likely to be denied the full retirement benefits, appellant and several others filed a writ petition in the High Court of Kerala, praying for a direction that they should be treated at least as temporary railway servant with attendant benefits.
During the pendency of the matter, in connection with the demand for all the benefits granted by the Central Pay Commission being extended to the category of employees to which the appellant belonged the appellant undertook a fast, but broke the same on September 28, 1974 at the intervention of the Assistant Labour Commissioner.
Taking advantage of the appellant 's absence, the respondents terminated his service with retrospective effect, i.e., from 18 9 1974 on the ground of unauthorised absence.
A learned single Judge having dismissed the same, the matter was taken in appeal before the Division Bench.
In the appeal, it was contended that the termination of service of the appellant in the circumstances would constitute retrenchment within the meaning of section 25F of the and, therefore, the order of termination was invalid.
The matter was referred to the Full Bench which held that there was no retrenchment and dismissed the appeal.
Hence, the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court 252 ^ HELD: 1.
The expression "termination of service for any reason whatsoever" in the definition "retrenchment" in section 2(oo) of the covers every kind of termination of service except those not expressly included in section 25F or not expressly provided for by other provisions of the Act such as sections 25FF and 25FFF.
The excepted categories are (i) termination by way of punishment inflicted pursuant to disciplinary action; (ii) voluntary retirement of the workman; (iii) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; (iv) or termination of the services on the ground of continued ill health.
Once the case does not fall in any of the excepted categories, the termination of service even if it be according to automatic discharge from service under agreement would nonetheless be retrenchment within the meaning of expression in section 2(oo) of the Act.
It must as a corollary follow that if the name of the workman is struck off the roll, that itself would constitute retrenchment.
[259 B C, 206 H, 261 A B] Delhi Cloth & General Mills Ltd. vs Shambhu Nath Mukherji, ; , followed.
State Bank of India vs N. Sundera Money, ; ; Hindustan Steel Ltd. vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court, ; ; Santosh Gupta v, State Bank of Patiala, at 892; Mohan Lal vs Bharat Electronics Ltd.; , , referred to.
There is neither apparent nor real conflict between the decision of the constitution bench in Hariprasad Shivshanker Shukla vs A.D. Divikar, [1957] S.C.R. 121 and the later five decisions commencing from Sundera Money and ending with Mohanlal 's case.
Re examining a contention over again so as to cover the familiar ground would, apart from giving a gobye to the doctrine of stare decisis, would be a sheer waste of time and mere lengthening of the judgment.
[260 C D] Surendra Kumar Verma & Ors.
vs Central Government Industrial cum Labour Court, New Delhi & Anr., , View of Pathak, J. held inapplicable.] 2:1.
Notice contemplated by clause (a) of section 25F would not be dispensed with, in view of the provision contained in proviso (b) of section 9A, which is an independent provision having no co relation with section 25F. [264 B] 2:2.
Section 9A imposes an obligation on the employer, who promises to effect any change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman in respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule to give notice as therein provided and the employer is precluded from effecting the change without giving to the workman likely to be effected by such change, notice in the prescribed manner of the nature of the change proposed to be effected, and the change cannot be effected within 21 days of the giving of such notice.
In order to attract section 9A the change proposed must be in the conditions of service applicable to 253 the workman in respect of any matters specified in the Fourth Schedule.
If the proposed change falls in any of the matters specified in the Fourth Schedule the change can be effected after giving notice in the prescribed manner and waiting for 21 days after giving such notice.
In order to attract section 9A the employer must be desirous of effecting a change in conditions of service in respect of any matter specified in Fourth Schedule.
If the change proposed does not cover any matter in Fourth Schedule section 9A is not attracted and no notice is necessary.
[262 E G] Workmen of Sur Iron & Steel Co. (P) Ltd. vs Sur Iron & Steel Company (P) Ltd., ; Tata Iron & Steel Company Ltd. vs Workmen, ; ; Assam Match Co. Ltd. vs Bijoy Lal Sen, ; , referred to.
Retrenchment to be valid must comply with three conditions set out in section 25F.
They are, (a) subject to the proviso to clause (a) one month 's notice in writing specifying the reasons for retrenchment or wages in lieu of notice: (b) compensation to be paid according to the measure provided in the clause, the payment to be simultaneous with the retrenchment; and (c) the notice in the prescribed manner to be served on the appropriate Government.
It was obligatory upon the employer, who wants to retrench the workmen to give notice as contemplated by clause (a) of section 25.
[262 C E] 2:4.
A careful reading of sections 9A and 25F makes it clear that when a workman is retrenched, no change in his conditions of service is effected.
No item in Fourth Schedule which sets out the conditions of service covers the case of retrenchment.
In fact retrenchment is specifically covered by item 10 of the Third Schedule.
If retrenchment which connotes termination of service, cannot constitute change in conditions of service in respect of any item mentioned in Fourth Schedule section 9A would not be attracted.
If section 9A is not attracted, the question of seeking exemption from it in the case falling under the proviso would hardly arise.
Therefore, neither section 9A nor the proviso is attracted in this case.
That apart, none of the other pre conditions to a valid retrenchment have been complied with, because the very letter of termination of service shows that services were deemed to have been terminated from a back date which clearly indicates no notice being given, no compensation being paid and no notice being given to the prescribed authority.
Therefore, termination of service, being retrenchment, for failure to comply with section 25F, would be void ab initio.
[263 D E, H, 264 A, C D] 3:1.
The test provided is that for the purpose of determining the eligibility of casual labour to be treated as temporary, the criterion should be the period of continuous work put in by each individual labour on the same type of work and not the period put in collectively by any particular gang or group of labourers.
It is thus abundantly clear that if a person belonging to the category of casual labour employed in construction work other than work charged projects renders six months ' continuous service without a break, by the operation of statutory rule the person would be treated as temporary railway servant after the expiry of six months of continuous employment.
It is equally true of even seasonal labour.
Once the person acquired the status of temporary 254 railway servant by operation of law, the conditions of his service would be governed as set out in Chapter XXIII.
The service of a temporary railway servant may be termined only as provided in Rule 2301.
[266 H, 267 A B, E] 3:2.
The underlying intendment of the Rule 2501(b) (i) has rendered six months ' continuous service would be placed in the category of temporary railway servant unless he is employed on work charged project.
Rule 2501(b) (i) clearly provides that even where staff is paid from contingencies, they would acquire the status of temporary railway servants after expiry of six months of continuous employment.
[271 E H] In the instant case: (i) the appellant acquired the status of temporary railway servant long before the termination of his service and, therefore, his service could not have been terminated under Rule 2505; (ii) he never worked on projects but on a construction Unit.
Construction Unit is a regular Unit and cannot be equated to Project.
Every construction work does not imply Project.
Project is correlated to planned projects in which the workman is treated as work charged.
Persons belonging to casual labour category cannot be transferred but the appellant was transferred on innumerable occasions; (iii) as a result of the appellant and others filing a writ petition, three co appellants were informed that they were treated as on regular employments and ceased to belong to the category of casual labour.
But for impugned termination orders the appellant also would have been treated as temporary and therefore, the appellant received discriminatory treatment offending Article 14 & 16 of the Constitution; and (iv) section 25F of the provides that no workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until the conditions set out in Act are satisfied.
The appellant would be a workman within the meaning of that expression in section 2(s) of the Act.
He has rendered continuous service for a period over twenty years.
Therefore, the first condition of section 25F that appellant is a workman who has rendered service for not less than one year under the Railway administration, an employer carrying on an industry, is satisfied.
His service is terminated which for the reasons herein before given would constitute retrenchment.
It is immaterial that he is a daily rated worker.
He is either doing manual or technical work and his salary was less than Rs. 500 and the termination of his service does not fall in any of the excepted categories.
Therefore, assuming that he was a daily rated worker, once he has rendered continuous uninterrupted service for a period of one year or more, within the meaning of section 25B of the Act and his service is terminated for any reason whatsoever and the case does not fall in any of the excepted categories, notwithstanding the fact that Rule 2505 would be attracted, it would have to be read subject to the provisions of the Act.
Accordingly the termination of service in this case would constitute retrenchment and for not complying with pre conditions to valid retrenchment the order of termination would be illegal and invalid.
[271 D, 272 A, G, 275 D G] 3:3.
Absence without leave constitutes misconduct and it is not open to the employer to terminate service without notice and inquiry or at any rate without complying with the minimum principle of natural justice.
Further 255 Rule, 2302 clearly prescribes the mode, manner and methodology of terminating service of a temporary railway servant and admittedly the procedure therein prescribed having not been carried out, the termination is void and invalid.
Accordingly, the same conclusion would be reached even while accepting for the purpose of the facts of this case simultaneously rejecting it in law that the termination does not constitute retrenchment yet nonetheless it would be void and inoperative.
[273 A C] OBSERVATION: Rule 2501 which permits a man serving for 10, 20, 30 years at a stretch without break being treated as daily rated servant, is thoroughly opposed to the notions of socio economic justice and it is high time that Railway administration brings this part of the provision of the Manual, antiquarian and antediluvian, in conformity with the Directive Principles of State Policy as enunciated in
