The raw material for manufacturing sugar or Khandsari sugar is sugarcane.
When the vacuum pan process is employed the end product is called sugar and when the open pan process is employed the end product is called Khandsari sugar.
In order to extend protection to the farmers who had undertaken raising of sugarcane crop, the Central Government issued the Sugarcane (Control) Order 1966.
Clause 3 of this Order conferred power on the Central Government to fix minimum price of sugarcane to be paid by producers of sugar for sugarcane purchased by them.
Clause 4 conferred similar power to fix the minimum price to be paid by the producers of khandsari sugar for the sugarcane purchased.
Clause 3A which was introduced on September 24, 1976 conferred power on the Central Government and various other authorities to allow a suitable rebate in regard to the weight of the binding material not exceeding 0.625 Kg.
per quintal of sugarcane, when sugarcane was purchased by the producer of the sugar.
Later, Clause 4A was introduced on March 20, 1978 to provide for the rebate that can be deducted from the price paid for sugarcane by producers of khandsari sugar.
The State Government issued a notification on September 3, 1980 to provide that where sugarcane is brought in bundles and is weighed as such, a rebate in regard to the binding material at 0.625 Kg.
per quintal should be allowed.
As there was a printing error in mentioning the figure '0.650 kg. ' a corrigendum was issued to correct it, to '0.625 kg ' per quintal in the notification.
The petitioners in the writ petitions who were manufacturing khandsari sugar by the open pan process assailed the decision of the State Government allowing rebate.
They contended that: (1) the power to prescribe the rate of rebate under the third proviso to clause 4 is conditional upon the fixing of the minimum price of sugarcane and as the pre condition for exercise of that power was not satisfied, the authorities cannot exercise power to prescribe the rate of 372 rebate, (2) if the purchaser and seller of sugarcane are free agents to negotiate the price no useful purpose would be served by prescribing the rate of rebate statutorily.
If higher rebate is to be allowed, the producer of khandsari sugar and the grower of sugarcane would work out the price accordingly and if less rebate is allowed, it will have a direct impact on the negotiated price, (3) assuming that the power to prescribe the rate of rebate under clause 4A read with the third proviso could also be exercised where the price of sugarcane was left to be negotiated between the growers of sugarcane and the producers of khandsari sugar, the quantum of rebate determined must have a reasonable relation to the reality of market situation as well as to prevalent trade practice, (4) assuming that the Central Government was influenced by the report made by the Director, National Sugar Institute the report suggests that the average works out at 0.741 kg per quintal, and consequently there was no justification for further reducing it to 0.625 kg, (5) the notification places a restriction on the freedom of trade guaranteed under Article 19(1) (g) and as it is neither reasonable nor imposed in public interest, it is violative of freedom of trade and therefore void, and (6) in order that a restriction may be reasonable it must have a reasonable relation to the object which the statute seeks to achieve and must not be in excess of that object.
Dismissing the writ petitions.
^ HELD: The State Government notification dated September 3, 1980 directing that where sugarcane is brought in bundles and is weighed as such a rebate in regard to the binding material at 0.625 kg per quintal be allowed, is valid and legal.
The rebate was statutorily prescribed to ensure that sugarcane growers were not at the mercy of the producers of sugar and khandsari sugar.
The statutory rebate serves two fold purpose: (i) it ensures price of sugarcane avoiding impermissible deductions and (ii) it circumvents fraud by making such deductions as would render illusory even the negotiated price, if not fixed price.
The restriction is undoubtedly reasonable and is imposed in the interest of the general public and the guarantee of freedom of trade is not violated.
[376 E; 392 H; 393 A C] 1.
(i) Though clause 3A was inserted in the Control Order in 1976 conferring power on the Central Government or with the approval of the Central Government, on the State Government to allow rebate at 0.625 kg.
per quintal of sugarcane purchased by manufacturers of sugar, such rebate was being prescribed by the Central Government since 1968.
[379 G] (ii) Clause 4 confers power on the Central Government or a State Government with the concurrence of the Central Government to fix the minimum price or the price of sugarcane to be paid by producers of khandsari sugar for sugarcane purchased by them.
Third proviso to clause 4 provides that the Central Government or with the approval of the Central Government the State Government to allow a suitable rebate in the price so fixed.
If the provision were to end with clause 4, the question may arise whether the power to determine rate of rebate can be exercised de hors the power to fix minimum price or price of sugarcane or can be unilaterally exercised.
But the language of the third proviso ". as it may specify, allow a suitable rebate of the price so fixed", indicates that the rebate is co related to the price fixed.
[381 C F] 373 (iii) The rebate contemplated by the third proviso to clause 4 is not necessarily confined to rate of rebate for binding material only but permissible rate of rebate from the price or minimum price fixed under the substantive provision of clause 4 can be prescribed.
[381 H; 382 A] (iv) Clause 4A stands on an independent footing and it is independent of clause 4.
Clause 4A is neither inter dependent nor interrelated to clause 4.
Clause 4A visualises a situation in which either the minimum price of sugarcane is fixed under clause 4 or where no such price if fixed, the price agreed to between the sugarcane grower and the producer who purchased sugarcane and even in this latter situation the power to prescribe rate of rebate only in respect of binding material was conferred on the authorities set out in the third proviso to clause 4A.
Therefore, fixing of the minimum price may be a pre condition to the exercise of power under the third proviso of clause 4, as far as clause 4A is concerned, even where the price to be paid by the producer to the sugarcane grower is the one negotiated between the two, the producer or his agent will have to allow that much rebate and no more for binding material if notified under the third proviso.
This literal construction accords with the intendment of the provision.
[382 B E; 383 G] 2.
(i) Sugarcane is a perishable commodity.
The grower of the sugarcane is at the mercy of producers of sugar or khandsari sugar.
It would be uneconomic for him to transport sugarcane to a long distance.
The product, being perishable and transport over a distance being uneconomic, the grower of sugarcane has limited choice in selecting the producer to whom it could be sold.
Between the producer of khandsari and the grower of sugarcane, the first one is primarily in a position to dominate and dictate and they do not operate on the level of equality.
The grower of sugarcane in relation to the producer of the khandsari sugar would therefore be weaker and requires to be protected.
If the protection of fixing of minimum price is not resorted to because the authorities have information that the grower of sugarcane would be able to obtain a reasonably fair price for his labour, the only thing which is required to be protected against is iniquitous.
unauthorised and impermissible deductions.
In the States of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar the weight of the binding material when sugarcane is brought in bundles to the producer has been a fruitful source for the producers of khandsari sugar to make deductions from the weight of sugarcane delivered to them in an exorbitant quantity so as to deny in real money worth the negotiated price.
[382 H; 388 A D] (ii) While retaining the power to fix minimum price or price to be paid and also in a given situation leaving it to the purchaser of sugarcane to negotiate the price in order to eschew any exploitation of the weaker section between the two, the power to prescribe the rate of rebate was acquired and it can be rightly enforced.
There is therefore no merit in the submission that unless the power to fix the price or minimum price is exercised there is no power to prescribe the rate of rebate.
[383 F G] 3.
The rate of rebate has been determined by the law of averages after collection information from all over the country, and the present rate of rebate 374 is in vogue for over a quarter of a century.
It is therefore difficult to accept the submission that the fixation of rate of rebate for binding material at 0.625 kg.
for the whole country is either arbitrary or unreal or unrelated to trade and practice.
[376 G H] 4.
(i) The differential between what is prescribed and what is calculated as average by the study of the National Sugar Institute is not so wide as to render the prescribed rate arbitrary or unrealistic.
The differentials being within a narrow range, the one which is in vogue for over a quarter of a century cannot be rejected as arbitrary or unrelated to trade and practice.
Nor is the Court competent to work out the exact permissible rebate with mathematical accuracy.
[387 D E] (ii) The rate of rebate set out in the impugned notification bears resemblance to the sample testing of actual weight of binding material used in binding sugarcane when brought in bundles to the khandsari factory.
[388 G] (iii) This does not however imply that no case has been made for upward revision of the rebate.
The Central Government may realistically examine the same before the next crushing season commences.
[388 G] 5.
(i) It would be open to the producer of khandsari sugar to buy sugarcane from the grower who may be asked to bring sugarcane not bound in bundles.
The rebate for binding material is to be allowed only when sugarcane is brought to the khandsari sugar producing unit bound in bundles.
It is always open to the purchaser of sugarcane to insist upon the grower bringing the sugarcane not bound in bundles and he is free to negotiate the price of sugarcane is not fixed and the impugned notification will not even remotely impinge upon his freedom to carry on his trade.
The restriction complained of therefore does not directly and proximately interfere with the exercise of freedom of trade and Article 19(1) (g) is not attracted.
[389 E G] (ii) Producers of sugar and khandsari sugar constitute powerful trade lobby, and this can be taken judicial notice.
Sugar being an essential commodity occasionally kept in short supply and being a commodity needed for consumption by almost the entire population, the powerful industry magnates are in a position to dominate both the growers of sugarcane as also the consumers of the essential commodity.
Number of regulations have been enacted to regulate this powerful combination of manufacturers of sugar and khandsari sugar all over the country for the ultimate benefit of consumers, the farmers the growers of sugarcane.
The marginal farmers, are unable to stand up against the organised industry and need protection for selling at fair price their meagre agricultural produce.
[391 D G] (iii) Sugarcane growers who are farmers cannot negotiate on the footing of equality with the producers of sugar and khandsari sugar.
The State action for the protection of the weaker sections is not only justified but absolutely necessary unless the restriction imposed is excessive.
If price or minimum price of sugarcane is fixed, the producers of sugar would try to circumvent the price or minimum price by unrealistic and impermissible deductions.
The rebate for weight of binding material seems to be a source for indulging in this nefarious, if not wholly fraudulent conduct.
375 6.
To strike the balance between the conflicting interests not only the State acquired power to fix minimum price of sugar and khandsari sugar but that this wholesome effort may not work to the disadvantage of the sugarcane growers another weaker section of the society, the power to prescribe rate of rebate was acquired.
And the power to fix price or minimum price comprehends the power to so regulate supply as to ensure the price so fixed and to ensure that in the name of unauthorised and unwarranted deduction the price fixed or negotiated is not rendered illusory.
[393 G H; 394 A]
