The U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and (Eviction) Act, 1972 provided by sub section (2) of section 2 that except as provided in the Act, the Act was not to apply to a building during a period of 10 years from the date on which its construction was completed.
Explanation I to the sub section provided that the building shall be deemed to have been completed on the date on which completion thereof is reported or otherwise recorded by the local authorities having jurisdiction, and in case of a building subject to assessment, the date on which the first assessment thereof comes into effect, and where the said dates are different, the earliest of the said date, and in the absence of any such report, record or assessment, the date on which it is actually occupied for the first time.
The appellant tenant was in occupation of a shop from the 16th June, 1967 and prior to his occupation the shop was in occupation of another tenant for about a month and a half.
The first assessment of the shop took place on Ist of April, 1968.
The respondent landlord filed a suit for the eviction of the tenant on the ground that the Act did not apply to the shop and the tenant was liable to eviction.
The Trial Judge finding that the construction of the shop was completed in the year 1967 and that 10 years having not elapsed since then, held that the provisions of the Act did not apply and decreed the suit.
The appellant 's 492 petition under section 25 of the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act was dismissed.
In his revision petition to the High Court under section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code the appellant contended that the date of occupation should be taken to be the date of completion of the construction of the shop and not the date of first assessment.
The High Court overruled the contention and held that the construction of the shop would be deemed to have been completed on 1st of April, 1968 the date of the first assessment and ten years not having elapsed, the Act would not be applicable to the building and dismissed the revision petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant: (1) that by virtue of sub section (2) of section 2, the Act would be applicable to the shop in question and that the exemption created by the sub section did not embrace buildings constructed prior to the commencement of the Act and (2) that the building should be deemed to have been constructed on the date of occupation on 16th June, 1967 and not on the date of the first assessment.
and that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of section 39 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1(i) The suit was rightly decreed by the Courts below.
The Act had no application and the appellant could not be given the benefit of section 39.
[498 G H] (ii) Primarily, the language employed is the determining factor of the intention of the legislature.
The first and primary rule of construction is that the intention of the legislature must be found in the words used by the legislature itself.
The question of interpretation arises only when the language is ambiguous and, therefore capable of two interpretations.
[497 F] (iii) The language of sub section (2) of section 2 of the Act is explict and unambiguous and is not capable of two interpretations.
[497 G] In the absence of any ambiguity there is no question of taking any external aid for the interpretation of the sub section.
The sub section contemplates that the Act shall not apply to a building during a period of 10 years from the date on which its construction is completed.
It no where says that the building should have been constructed after the enforcement of the Act and to interpret it in such a way would be to add words to the sub section, which is not permissible.
[497 D F] 2 (i) Explanation I makes it abundantly clear that the date of occupation would be taken to be the date of completion of the construction only when there is no report or record of the completion of the construction or no assessment thereof.
If there is an assessment, as in the instant case it will be the date of the first assessment which will be deemed to be the date of completion of the construction.
The building had not therefore become more than ten years 's old on the date when the revision came to be decided by the High Court and consequently there was no question of giving the benefit of section 39 of the Act to the appellant.
[498 D F] 493 (ii) In order to attract section 39 the suit must be pending on the date of the commencement of the Act which was 15th of July, 1972.
[498 F] In the instant case the suit was filed on 23rd of March 1974 long after the commencement of the Act.
[498 F] (iii) In view of sub section (2) of section 2, the Act is not applicable to a building which has not a standing of ten years.
If the Act itself was not applicable, it would be absurd to say that section 39 thereof would be applicable.
[498 G] Rattan Lal Shinghal vs Smt.
Murti Devi (1980)4 S.C.C. 258 and Ram Saroop Rai vs Lilavati ; , over ruled.
