Thakur Sangram Singh, the father of the appellant was a jagirdar of Thikana Diggi in the erstwhile State of Jaipur.
His jagir was resumed on 1st of July, 1954 under section 21 of the Rajasthan Land Reforms and Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1952 entitling him to compensation on the date of resumption of his jagir under section 26 of the Jagirs Act.
The compensation was to be determined according to the principles laid down in the Second Schedule attached to the Act.
If the jagir was a settled one the compensation would be assessed on the basis of the rent rates as settled in settlement operation which were prevalent on the date of resumption and as entered in the Revenue records of the village within the meaning of section 6(3) (a)(i) read with the definition of "settled village" contained in section 2(n).
If on the other hand, the jagir was an unsettled one the compensation would have to be assessed on the actual income from the rents during the three agricultural years: 1949 50, 1950 51 and 1951 52 as provided in section 7 of the Act.
Prior to the date of resumption settlement operation were going on under the Jaipur State Grants Land Tenures Act, 1947 in respect of the jagir.
The rent rates proposed by the Settlement Officer were published in the Rajasthan Gazette dated 23rd of August, 1952.
The rent rates fixed were made applicable with effect from Ist of July 1953 and, therefore, on the date of resumption, namely, on Ist July, 1955, rent rates assessed by the Settlement Officer and approved by the Government were in force, for the purpose of payment of compensation under the Jagirs Act.
Sangram Singh challenged the validity of the rent rates fixed under the settlement operation by means of a writ petition No. 308 of 1953.
The High Court quashed the order settling the rent rates being in flagrant violations of sec.
82 (1) (a) and (b) of the Jaipur State Grants Land Tenures Act, 1947 with a direction to settle fresh rent rates in accordance with the said provision.
Pursuant to the order of the High Court fresh rent rates were settled by the Settlement Officer on 6th of June, 1955 with retrospective operation from Ist July, 1953.
According to the new settlement the total rental income from the jagir was reduced from Rs. 1,31,657.48 to Rs. 82,501 50.
475 The Jagir Commissioner by his order dated 25th November, 1960 granted compensation on the basis of the rent rates assessed in 1955.
The Jagirdar unsuccessfully preferred an appeal before the Board of Revenue.
Sangram Singh died in the mean time so his son the appellant challenged the order of the Board of Revenue on two grounds: (1) that the compensation should have been assessed on the basis of rent rates determined in 1953 as it stood on the date of resumption.
(2) or in the absence of a valid settlement on the basis of actual income from rents during the three agricultural years.
Treating the Jagir as unsettled, the High Court rejected both the grounds.
Hence the appeal by certificate under Article 133 (1) (a) of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the case, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
As a result of the quashing of the order of Settlement of rent rates of 1953 by the High Court, the jagir would be taken as an unsettled one on the date of resumption.
The quashing of the order of Settlement only means tabula rasa (clean slate) as if there was no determination of rent rates in 1953.
[479 E F] 2.
The criterion to determine whether a particular jagir is a settled one or not is to see whether the rent rates determined in settlement operations have been made applicable.
It is only from the date of effectuation of a valid settlement of rent rates in respect of a particular jagir which makes the jagir a settled one.
[480 C D] 3.
Section 86 of the Jaipur State Grants Land Tenures Act, 1947 clearly indicates that the rent fixed by the Settlement Officer shall normally be payable from the first of July next following the date of such order and further authorises the Settlement Officer to make the same shall be payable from some earlier date.
The realisation of rent from a retrospective date will not make the jagir in question a settled one as from that date.
The settlement of rent rates is one thing and the realisation of rent on the basis of the settlement is quite another.
In the case of a settled village the compensation would be determined on the basis of the rent rates settled during the settlement operation recorded in the Revenue Papers on the date of resumption.
Thus it is the effectuation of the rent rates determined during the settlement made prior to the date of resumption which would make the village a settled village as on that date.
[480 F H] In the instant case, the jagirdar became entitled to compensation on the date of resumption.
If the village was an unsettled village on the date of resumption he would be entitled to compensation on the basis of the village being unsettled.
The right of compensation vested in the jagirdar on the date of resumption and he could not be deprived of his right by a subsequent amendment unless the amendment in law specifically or by necessary implication provided for depriving the jagirdar of his vested right.
There is nothing in the definition of the term "settled" under sec 2 (n) of the Act or in sec.
86 of the Jaipur State Grants Land Tenures Act to indicate that the Legislature intended to affect the vested right.
[481 A D]
