Under the Reserve Bank of India (Staff) Regulations, 1948 framed under section 58 of the , the terms and conditions of service of the staff (including officers) in the Reserve Bank were revised and regulated from time to time.
Ever since the date of the Staff Regulations of 1948 and even prior thereto, there were "groups" constituted for the different departments of the Reserve Bank, and officers were required to exercise irrevocable options for service in any particular Group.
Those who had opted for a service in a particular Group were to be normally eligible for promotion in that Group only.
The grouping was revised with effect from April 1951 when employees were asked to exercise their option with regard to the Group of their choice.
In 1951, the various departments of the Bank were re classified into three Groups, Group I, Group II and Group III.
This system of grouping continued until 1955, in which year the Bank found it necessary to reorganise the Agricultural Credit Department.
Accordingly, the staff attached to the various departments were regrouped into Groups I, II, III, and IV, with effect from April 1, 1957.
In each of these Groups, there are six grades of officers based on pay scales, namely, Grades A, B, C, D, E and F, the lowest being Grade A and the highest being Grade F.
Each Group had its own seniority list, that is to say, there were four separate seniority lists, one for each group.
The latest of such lists prior to the draft combined seniority list of 1978 is dated July 1,1976.
Earlier to the said list dated July 1, 1976, the Reserve Bank had constituted a Cadre Review Committee in 1970 followed by another Committee.
On the 412 basis of the report submitted by the Cadre Review Committee in October 1972, the Bank issued an Administrative Circular No. 15 dated May 22, 1974 specifying the decisions taken by it in the light of the recommendations made by the Committee.
One such decision which the Bank took was to prepare a common seniority list for and to provide for inter group mobility at the lowest level of officers in each group, namely, Grade A officers, including those who were promoted to Grade B on or after January 1, 1970.
With regard to higher grades (including officers in Grade B promoted prior to January 1, 1970), the Bank decided to retain the "group wise seniority as at present".
The inter group mobility in Grades C and D was to be introduced only to a limited extent, namely, "on a swap basis".
It was first to be introduced in Grade C and thereafter to be extended "in due course" to the officers in Grade D.
The two higher Grades, namely, Grades E and F were left untouched and no intention was expressed in the above circular to introduce either combined seniority or any scheme for inter mobility in these grades.
In accordance with the decisions expressed in the Administrative Circular dated May 22, 1974 the Bank published separate seniority lists of officers in Grade B and above for the years 1974, 1975 and 1976.
By the Administrative Circular No. 8 dated January 7, 1978, the Bank stated that it had decided to combine the seniority of all officers on the basis of their total length of service (including officiating service) in Group I (Section A), Group II and Group III.
The seniority of all officers in each of the three Groups was to be combined with effect from May 22, 1974 on the basis of their total length of service, including officiating service, in the grade in which they were then posted on a regular basis.
The Circular introduced combined seniority with retrospective effect from May 22, 1974 (the date of Administration Circular No. 15) as it was "fair and equitable to the officers as a class".
The effect of this decision is that the group wise system of seniority which was in existence for more than 27 years stands substituted by a combined seniority for officers in Group I (Grade A) and in Groups II and III with retrospective effect.
That has adversely affected the existing seniority of officers, particularly of those in Group I, who are now placed many places below their existing position of seniority, some by several hundred places.
Hence these twenty five petitions under article 32 by the petitioners, all of whom are officers in Group I, and who are given their due seniority as on July 1, 1976.
Dismissing the petitions, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
The Administrative Circular No. 8 dated 7 1 1978, the Office Order No. 679 dated 22 4 1978 and the draft combined seniority list are not violative of the rights of the petitioners under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Whether there should be a combined seniority in different cadres or groups is a matter of policy which does not attract the applicability of the equality clause.
[442 D F] Reserve Bank of India vs N. C. Paliwal, ; , applied and followed.
413 1:2.
The historical events make it clear that the various Departments of the Reserve Bank were grouped and regrouped from time to time.
Such adjustments in the administrative affairs of the Bank are a necessary sequel to the growing demands of new situations which are bound to arise in any developing economy.
The group system has never been a closed or static chapter and the officers of the various groups were not kept, as it were, in quarantine.
The group system has been a continuous process of trial and error and the impugned scheme of inter group mobility has emerged as the best solution of the experience of the past.
Combined seniority has been recommended by two special committees, whose reports reflect the expertise and objectivity which was brought to bear on their sensitive task.
[441 B D] 1:3.
Inter group mobility and common seniority are a safe and sound solution to the conflicting demands of officers belonging to Group I on one hand and those of Groups II and III on the other.
Private interest of employees of public undertakings cannot override public interest and an effort has to be made to harmonize the two considerations.
No scheme governing service matter can be fool proof and some section or the other of employees is bound to feel aggrieved on the score of its expectations being falsified or remaining to be fulfilled.
[441 D E] Arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and mala fides will of course render any scheme unconstitutional but the fact that the scheme does not satisfy the expectations of every employee is not evidence of these.
Vested interests are prone to hold on to their acquisitions and the Group I officers have to surrender a part of the benefits which had accrued to them in a water tight system of grouping.
Combined seniority is indispensable for the smooth functioning of the Bank and no organisation can function smoothly if one section of its officers has an unfair advantage over others in matters of promotional opportunities.
The reports of the Cadre Review Committee and the Thareja Committee show that combined seniority has emerged as the most acceptable solution as a matter of administrative, historical and functional necessity.
Further, the conclusion to which these committees came were considered by the Bank when Shri M. Narasimhan, later India 's Executive Director in the World Bank, was the Governor and it was after Dr. I.G. Patel, Formerly Secretary, Economic Affairs, Govt.
of India and Deputy Administrator, United Nations Development Programme, took over as Governor in December 1977 that the final decision was taken by the Central Board to introduce inter group mobility and combined seniority.
[441 E H, 442 A B] 2.
As regards the retrospective operation given to Scheme with effect from May 22, 1974, it does appear that the Board has struck a via media between two extreme contentions advanced by officers belonging to Group I and those belonging to Groups II and III.
But that was inevitable and it was the best solution in the peculiar circumstances of the case.
In order to rectify the imbalances and anomalies caused by the compartmentalised and group wise seniority, it was necessary to give retrospective effect to the Combined Seniority List.
Officers belonging to Group I urged that the Scheme should be brought into effect from January 1, 1976, while those belonging to Groups II and III wanted the Scheme to be brought into effect from January 1, 1970.
The Central Board struck a balance by choosing the date May 22, 1974, because that was the date on which 414 the decision in regard to combining the seniority retrospectively with effect from January 1, 1970 in regard to Grade 'A ' and part of Grade 'B ' officers was announced.
It was, again, on that date that the Bank had announced that a similar decision in regard to the remaining grades of officers was under its consideration.
Thus, at least on May 22, 1974 it was known to officers of all grades that a combined seniority list was due to be brought into force.
If a certain section officers succeeded in obtaining promotional benefits thereafter, the imbalance introduced thereby in the services of the Bank and the consequent dissatisfaction had to be rectified.
That could only be done by not recognising the accelerated promotions obtained in the intervening period by a certain class of officers.
Any scheme of seniority is bound to produce isolated aberrations and that fact cannot justify the argument that the entire scheme is for that reason violative of the guarantee of equality.
[442 F H, 443 A D] 3:1.
The power to frame service conditions is not derived from clause (j) of section 58(2) of the .
Section 58(2) (j) refers to staff funds and superannuation funds and it cannot comprise service conditions.
Clause (j) cannot be split up to read: "the constitution and management of staff: and superannuation funds for the officers and servants of the Bank".
It hardly makes any sense that way.
What the clause means is: "the constitution and management of staff and superannuation funds for the officers and servants of the Bank".
An important subject like the service conditions of the staff could not have been provided for in such a dubious and indirect manner.
Nor indeed, could it have been described as "constitution and management of staff".
A rule of seniority cannot properly fall under such a head.
[426 A D] Reserve Bank Employees Association vs Union of India, approved.
Where a specific power is conferred without prejudice to the generality of a power already conferred, the specific power is only illustrative and cannot restrict to width of the general power.
Therefore, the ambit of the general power conferred by sub section (1) cannot be attenuated by limiting it to matters specified in sub section (2) of section 58, the provisions whereof are not exhaustive of the power of the Central Board to make regulations.
[426 D F] Emperor vs Shibnath Banerjee, 72 I.A. 241; Omparkash vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1971 SC 771, 773, 774, referred to.
The doctrine of ultra vires in relation to the powers of a statutory corporation has to be understood reasonably and so understood, "whatever may fairly be regarded as incidental to, or consequential upon, those things which the Legislature has authorised ought not (unless expressly prohibited) to be held by judicial construction to be ultra vires".
The Central Board of Directors of the Reserve Bank has the power to make service regulations under section 58(1) of the Act.
The Board is vested with power to make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or convenient for the 415 purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act and it is not only convenient but manifestly necessary to provide for the service conditions of the Bank 's staff in order to give effect to the provisions of the Act.
It cannot be denied that the power to provide for service conditions of the staff is at least incidental to the obligation to carry out the purposes for which Bank was constituted.
[426 G H, 427 A D] Armour vs Liverpool Corporation, , 434, 435; Attorney General vs Great Eastern Ry.
Co., 5 Appeal Cases 473, quoted with approval.
There is no doubt that a statutory corporation can do only such acts as are authorised by the statute creating it and that, the powers of such a corporation cannot extend beyond what the statute provides expressly or by necessary implication.
If an act is neither expressly or impliedly authorised by the statute which creates the corporation, it must be taken to be prohibited.
But, section 58(1) being in the nature of an enabling provision under which the Central Board "may" make regulations in order to provide for all matters for which it is necessary or convenient to make provisions for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of the Act, the Central Board has the power to frame regulation relating to the conditions of service of the Bank 's staff.
If it has that power, it may exercise it in accordance with section 58(1) or by acting appropriately in the exercise of its general power of administration and superintendence.
[428 E F, G H, 429A] 4:3.
By section 7(2) of the , the general superintendence and direction of the affairs and business of the Bank are entrusted to the Central Board of Directors, which is empowered to exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the Bank.
Matters relating to the service conditions of the staff are, pre eminently, matters which relate to the affairs of the Bank.
It would therefore be wrong to deny to the Central Board the power to issue administrative directions or circulars regulating the conditions of service of the Bank 's staff.
To read into the provisions of section 58 (1) a prohibition against the issuance of such administrative directions or circulars is patently to ignore the scope of wholesome powers conferred upon the Central Board of Directors by section 7 (2) of the Act.
While issuing the administrative circular governing the staff 's conditions of service, the Central Board of Directors has neither violated any statutory injunction nor indeed has it exercised a power which is not conferred upon it by the statute.
The circular is strictly within the confines of section 7 (2).
[429 A E,G H, 430 A] Sukhdev Singh vs Bhagatram, ; , reiterated.
So long as staff regulations are not framed under section 58 (1), it is open to the Central Board to issue administrative circulars regulating the service conditions of the staff, in the exercise of power conferred by section 7 (2) of the Act.
The power to frame rules or regulations does not necessarily imply that no action can be taken administratively in regard to a subject matter on which a rule or regulation can be framed, until it is so framed.
The only precaution to observe in the cases of statutory corporations is that they must act within the framework of their charter.
Its express provisions and necessary implications must at all events be observed scrupulously.
[430 A B, 431 A B] 416 T. Cajee vs U. Jormanik Siom, ; ; B.N. Nagarajan vs State of Mysore, , explained and applied.
Any action taken by the Central Board of Directors under section 7 (2) is subject to the directions given by the Central Government under section 7(1), just as any regulation framed by it under section 58 is subject to the previous sanction of the Central Government.
In either case, the Central Board has to abide by the decision or directions of the Central Government.
There can, therefore; be no apprehension that, by taking action under section 7 (2), the Central Board may circumvent the condition on which the power conferred by section 58 can be exercised by it.
The overall authority of the Central Government acts as a restraining influence on any action taken by the Central Board, whether it acts under one or the other provision of the Act.
[431 B D] 5:1.
A consideration of the entire material on the subject, including the correspondence that has transpired between the Reserve Bank and the Central Government and in particular the Memorandum of January 21, 1949, makes it clear that the Staff Regulations of 1948 were not framed in the exercise of power conferred by section 58 of the Act and that they were not made with the previous sanction of the Central Government.
Whereas section 58 (1) envisages the making of regulations "with the previous sanction of the Central Government", the Regulations of 1948 do not purport to have been made with such sanction.
Indeed, in so far as the ex facie aspect of the matter is concerned, the Regulations of 1948 have not been made under section 58 at all.
The statement contained in paragraph 9 of the counter affidavit of the Deputy Manager dated March 30, 1980 that the Memorandum of January 21, 1949 contains a "factual mistake" to the effect that the Staff Regulations (which would include the Regulations of 1948) were made with the approval of the Central Government, correctly clarifies the position.
It is one thing to infer that the Regulations had the approval of the Central Government since no objection was raised by it to the making of the Regulations and quite another that they were made with its previous sanction.
[431 F H, 433 B D] Reserve Bank Employees Association vs Union of India, ; Emperor vs Shibnath Barerjee; 72 I.A. 241; Om Parkash vs Union of India A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 771, 773, 774; Reserve Bank of India vs N.C. Paliwal,[1977] 1 SCR 377; Bimal Kumar Shome vs P.C. Bhattacharya, Misc.
Petition No. 206 of 1967 decided on August 6, 1969 (Bombay H.C.) R.M. Joshi vs The Reserve Bank of India, Civil Writ No. 876 of 1974 decided on March 19, 1980 by a Full Bench (Delhi H.C.), approved 5:2.
Since the Staff Regulations of 1948 are in the nature of administrative directions, it was competent to the Central Board to alter or amend them by an administrative circular.
No lack of statutory powers is involved in that process.
Under section 7(2), the Central Board has the power to provide for service conditions of the Bank 's staff by administration circulars, so long as they do not impinge upon any Regulations made under section 58 of the Act.
[433 F G, 434 A] 417
