Vinay Kumar, the husband of the deceased Asha and his mother Chhano Devi were charged, convicted for the offence of burning alive the deceased and sentenced to life imprisonment on a complaint by Hanumant Dass the father of the deceased and the appellant in Criminal Appeal 45 of 1982 by the Sessions Judge Gurdaspur, Punjab.
The offence is alleged to have been committed within the territorial limits of the State of Himachal Pradesh, but on an application of the complainant the case was transferred by an order of the Supreme Court inasmuch as the accused were the brother in law and mother in law of a Judge of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh.
In appeal by tho accused the High Court of Punjab issued, on 22 6 1981, notice for 6 7 1981 to the Advocate General of Punjab only and on that date heard the appeal and acquitted both the accused.
Hence the appeal by the complainant and the special leave by the State of Himachal Pradesh.
Dismissing the appeal and the Special Leave Petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The charge levelled against the High Court that it was in a hot haste to decide the appeal at the earliest possible is incorrect in view of the order dated 22 6 1981 passed by the High Court of Punjab.
[600 B] 2:1.
Section 385 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is a mandatory provision and the requirement of the section must be satisfied.
In the appeal before tho High Court State of Punjab was made a party and notice of the appeal was also given to the Advocate General of Punjab.
From sections 2(4), 24, 225, 378 and 432 it is evident that there shall be a Public Prosecutor for conducting any prosecution appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central 596 Government or State Government in the High Court.
If notice has been given to the Public Prosecutor, namely, the Advocate General of Punjab the requirement of law has been fulfilled.
[601 B C, 603 C D] 2:2.
Section 432 of the Criminal Procedure Code defines "appropriate Government" as meaning (a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to in sub section (6) is passed under any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; (b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is passed.
According to this section the appropriate Government is the Government of the State of conviction and not the Government of the State where the offence was committed.
[603 C D] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Ratan Sing & Ors., [1976] Supp.
S.C.R. 552, applied.
To contend that the High Court disposed of the appeal even without summoning the record is incorrect.
No specific allegation has been made in the Special Leave Petition that the record was not summoned.
The tenor of the judgment of the High Court indicates that the record must have been there before the High Court.
There is copious reference to the materials on the record which could be possible only when the record was there before the court.
Besides, the counsel for the appellant made a statement before the court that on the finding of fact recorded by the High Court he was entitled to an acquittal and in this view of the matter even if the record had not been summoned that would not be fatal.
Further proviso to sub section (2) of section 385 itself provides ". the court may dispose of the appeal without sending for the record," in a certain situation.
The rigour of sub section (2) of section 385, which provides that "the Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case. " has been taken away by the proviso in a certain situation.
If the appellant himself says that the appeal can be allowed on the findings recorded by the Sessions Judge, the non summoning of the record, if it was at all so, would not be fatal.
The complainant was present with his counsel, the State Advocate General was also present.
If there had been any grievance about the record, they would have raised an objection.
Their non objection on this point is also an indicator that the record was there or in any case, the summoning of the record was not thought to be necessary by the parties.
[604 E H, 605 A B] 4.
On merits also there is no case for the appellants since each and every aspect of the matter has been thoroughly discussed by the High Court which has referred to the error committed by the Sessions Judge in the approach of the case and also in making unwarranted assumptions.
There is no eye witness.
The fate of the case hinges upon the circumstantial evidence.
The High Court has dealt with the two dying declarations, one recorded by the Doctor and the other by the Assistant Sub Inspector.
The High Court also took into consideration the oral dying declaration on which the prosecution strongly relied.
But even that declaration does not implicate the accused.
[605 G H, 606 A B]
