Clause 3(2)(a) of the Edible oil, Edible oil Seeds and oil Cakes (Declaration of Stocks) order, 1976 enjoins that before a consignment of oil leaves a place a stock holder who transports edible oils shall make a declaration in Form II to the specified officer of the place (in this case the Tehsildar of the) Taluk from where such edible oils are transported.
Clause (b) enjoins that the declaration shall be shown at every check post on the route immediately after arrival there.
A police officer seized in transit a truck carrying a large quantity of ground.
nut oil on the ground that the requisite declaration in Form II had not been furnished to the Tehsildar of the place of despatch of the consignment.
The Deputy Commissioner, after issuing a notice to the respondent under section 6B of the , released the truck and the consignment on taking from him an indemnity bond and a bank guarantee towards the price of oil.
The respondent however produced before the Deputy Commissioner a copy of the invoice issued by the seller and a declaration in Form 39 prescribed under the Mysore Sales Tax Act, 1957.
The Deputy Commissioner ordered confiscation of the truck and the oil on the view that the respondent had contravened the provisions of clause 3(2) (a) and (b) of the order.
On appeal the Sessions Judge affirmed this order.
A single Judge of the High Court in revision held that there was no contravention of the requirement of the order because the day on which the goods were despatched being a Sunday, it was impossible for the respondent to deliver on that day to Tehsildar the declaration in Form II and that the law would not expect a citizen to do the impossible.
The respondent in the State 's appeal to this Court contended that: (1) the confiscation of the entire consignment was arbitrary and excessive in that the use of the word "may" in section 6A made exercise of that power discretionary; (2) since there was nothing to show that the goods had been seized, the power of 830 confiscation under section 6A had not been properly exercised and (3) the order of confiscation was a nullity in that the Deputy Commissioner had not issued a proper show cause notice under section 6B of the Act.
Allowing the State 's appeal ^ HELD: 1 (a) The word "may" used in section 6A does not mean that the Deputy Commissioner could not order confiscation of the entire consignment of an essential commodity where he found contravention of any of the orders issued under section 3 of the Act.
The power conferred on the Deputy Commissioner under section 6A is a power coupled with public duty.
[834 H] (b) In directing confiscation of the entire consignment which was being transported without furnishing the declaration in Form II the Deputy Commissioner acted in public interest.
The whole purpose of the control order was to maintain control over the stock of essential commodities at a place with a view to securing their equitable distribution and availability at fair prices.
The requirements of clause 3 (2) (a) and (b) are mandatory.
[835 C D] (c) "Stock holder" as defined in the order includes the purchaser of oil who is in possession or control thereof.
By a legal fiction the explanation treats the owner to have control over the oil in transit.
Respondent 4 being the purchaser fell within the definition of "stock holder".
Moreover there was nothing to show that the consignor had reserved the jus disponendi by the terms of the contract or appropriation and, therefore, the property in the goods passed to respondent 4 (purchaser) on delivery to a common carrier under section 25 of the .
[836 A B] (d) The Deputy Commissioner was right in holding that the declaration in Form II was required to be filed before the specified officer before the goods left a place and that the declaration should be produced at every check post in transit as required by law.
The respondent having contravened the provisions of clause 3 (2) (a) and (b) of the order the truck and the consignment of oil were rightly confiscated.
[837 A C] (e) It is not correct to say that since the date of despatch of the goods was a Sunday there was no need to comply with the requirements of clause 3 of the order.
If the consignment had to be despatched on Sunday nothing prevented the parties from furnishing the declaration a day earlier.
In a transaction of such a magnitude a duty was cast on the party to comply with the requirements of the order before the consignment left the place.
[834 A B] 2.
The very fact that the seized groundnut oil was released only after the respondent furnished the requisite Bank guarantee clearly showed that the consignment had been seized.
Therefore power under section 6A had been correctly exercised.
[837 E F] 3.
There was no breach of the requirement of section 6B.
In response to the show cause notice issued by the Deputy Commissioner respondent 4 appeared before him and filed a copy of the invoice and declaration in Form 39 of the Mysore Sales Tax Act.
The Deputy Commissioner gave a hearing to the parties.
That being so, validity of the confiscation under section 6C could not be challenged.
[837 G H] 831
