The appellants were lessees holding a license for the manufacture of salt on the demised lands.
The salt was manufactured by a class of professional labourers known as agarias from rain water that got mixed up with saline matter in the soil.
The work was seasonal in nature and commenced in October after the rains and continued till June.
Thereafter the agarias left for their own villages for cultivation work.
The demised lands were divided into plots called Pattas and allotted to the a arias with a sum of Rs. 400/ for each Patta to meet the initial expenses.
Generally the same patta was allotted to the same aigaria every year and if a patta was extensive in area, it was allotted to two agarias working in partnership.
After the manufacture of salt the agayias were paid at the rate Of 5 as.
6 pies per maund.
At the end of each season the accounts were settled and the agarias paid the balance due to them.
The agarias who worked themselves with the members of their families were free to engage extra labour on their own account and the appellants had no concern therewith.
No hours of work were prescribed, no muster rolls maintained, nor were working hours controlled by the appellants.
There were no rules as regards leave or holidays and the agarias were free to go out of the factory after making arrangements for the manufacture of salt.
The question for decision was whether in such circumstances the agarias could be held to be workmen as defined by section 2(s) Of the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947, as found by the Industrial Tribunal and agreed with by the High Court or they were independent contractors and the reference for adjudication made by the Government competent under section 10 of the Act.
Held, that the finding of the Industrial Tribunal that the agarias were workmen within the meaning of section 2(S) of the Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 was correct and the reference was competent.
The real test whether a person was a workman was whether he had been employed by the employer and a relationship of employer and employee or master and servant subsisted between them and it was well settled that the prima facie test of such 153 relationship was the existence of the right in the employer not merely to direct what work was to be done but also to control the manner in which it was to be done, the nature or extent of such control varying in different industries and being by its nature incapable of being precisely defined.
The correct approach, therefore, was to consider whether, having regard to the nature of the work, there was due control and supervision of the employer.
Mersey Docks and Harbour Board vs Coggins & Griffith (Liver Pool) Ltd., and Another ; , and Simmons vs Heath Laundry Company , referred to.
The question whether the relation between the parties was one as between an employer and employee or master and servant was a pure question of fact and where the Industrial Tribunal having jurisdiction to decide that question came to a finding, such finding of fact was not open to question in a proceeding under article 226 of the Constitution unless it could be shown to be wholly unwarranted by the evidence.
Ebrahim Aboobakar vs Custodian General of Evacuee Property ; , referred to.
Performing Right, Society Ltd. etc.
vs Mitchell and Booker (Plaise De Danse) [1924] i K.B. 762, not followed.
A person could be a workman even though he did piece work and was paid not per day but by the job or employed his own labour and paid for it.
Sadler vs Henlock ; and Blake vs Thirst (1863) 32 L.J. (Exchequer) 188, referred to.
The broad distinction between a workman and an independent contractor was that while the former would be bound by agreement to work personally and would so work the latter was to get the work done by others.
A workman would not cease to be so even though lie got other persons to work with him and paid and controlled them.
Grainger vs Aynsley : Bromley vs Tams (1881) 6 Q.B.D. 182, Weaver vs Floyd (1825) 21 L.H., Q.B. 151 and Whitely vs Armitage , referred to.
As in the instant case the agayias, who were professional labourers and personally worked with the members of their families in manufacturing the salt, were workmen within the meaning of the Act, the fact that they were free to engage others to assist them and paid for them, could not affect their status as workmen.
