On his retirement as Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court the respondent claimed cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of the unutilised earned leave standing to his credit.
His claim was rejected by the Government.
Allowing his petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the High Court directed the Government to pay the leave salary claimed by him.
In its petition for grant of special leave the appellant contended that the being a complete code governing the conditions of service of High Court Judges it would not be permissible to proceed beyond those provisions to discover any further rights in favour of the Judges of the High Court.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD : The High Court was right in upholding the respondent 's claim for payment of the cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of the period of unutilised earned leave at the credit of the Judge on the date of his retirement in accordance with the provisions of rule 20B of the All India Services (Leave) Rules 1955 read with rule 2 of the High Court Judges Rules 1956.
[706 B C] Section 24(2)(a) of the 1954 Act enables the Central Government to make rules in respect of, among others, "any other matter which has to be or could be prescribed." [703 B] The second proviso to rule 2 of the High Court Judges ' Rules, 1956 provides that, in the case of a Judge of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, if no provision had been expressly made in the 1954 Act, as to the conditions of his service, they shall be determined by the rules applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service of the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India stationed at New Delhi.
Rule 20B of All India Services (Leave) Rules 1955, which is the rule applicable to a member of the Indian Administrative Service of the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India stationed at New Delhi, entitles him on retirement from service to the cash equivalent of leave salary in respect of the period of unutilised earned leave subject to a maximum of 180 days.
By virtue of rule 2 of the High Court Judges Rules 1956 this 701 benefit must be read as a condition of service enjoyed by a Judge of the High Court.
[704 B C, 705 A B] The concept of "earned leave" is embedded in the 1954 Act under which the time spent by a Judge on duty constitutes the primary ingredient in the concept of "actual service" which is the reason for crediting leave in the leave account of a Judge.
Although the expression "earned leave" is not employed in the 1954 Act the fundamental premise for grant of leave to a Judge is that he has earned it.
That a Judge earns the leave which is credited to his leave account is borne out by the proviso to section 6 of the 1954 Act.
The concept on which rule 20B proceeds is familiar to and underlies the statutory scheme relating to leave formulated in the Act.
It bears a logical and reasonable relationship to the essential content of that scheme.
On that it must be regarded as a provision absorbed by rule 2 of the High Court Judges ' Rules 1956 into the statutory structure defining the conditions of service of a Judge of the High Court.
[705 C H, 706A]
