A landlord is entitled to recover possession of the premises let for residential purpose under section 14(1)(d) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, if he can show that neither the tenant nor any member of his family has been residing therein for a period of six months immediately before the date of the filing of the application.
The appellant took the house in question on lease in May, 1961 and lived there with his parents, sisters and a brother.
He went to Canada in 1971, leaving behind in the house, his mother and brother, who continued to pay the rent.
The landlord filed an application for ejectment of tenant under section 14(1)(d) of the Delhi Rent Control Act in September 1972 contending that with the migration of the tenant to Canada, his mother and brother could not be treated as members of the appellant 's family.
The application was dismissed by the Rent Controller who found that the mother, brother and sister of the appellant were undoubtedly residing in the disputed premises along with the appellant and continued to reside there even on the date when the action for ejectment was brought.
The landlord 's appeal against the order of the Rent Controller was allowed by the Rent Control Tribunal which ordered eviction of the family members of the appellant from the tenanted house.
The appeal of the family members against the order of eviction was dismissed by the High Court on the ground that after the exit of the main tenant to Canada, neither the mother nor the brother or the sister could be legally termed as a member of the family of the appellant.
Allowing the appeal, 671 ^ HELD: 1.
(a) The Act affords intrinsic evidence to show that the non applicants were undoubtedly members of the family residing in the house and the migration of the main tenant to Canada would make no difference.
[674 H] (b) The term 'family ' has to be given not a restricted but a wider meaning.
There are abundant authorities to show that the term 'family ' should always be liberally and broadly construed so as to include near relations of the head of the family.
A beneficial provision must be meaningfully construed so as to advance the object of the Act.
E] Price vs Gould and Ors., [1930] Vol.
143 Law Times 333; G.V. Shukla vs Shri Prabhu Ram Sukhram Dass Ojha, [1963] P.I.R. (Vol.
LXV) 256; Govind Dass and Ors.
vs Kuldip Singh, A.I.R. 1971 Delhi 151 and Hira Lal and Ors.
vs Banarsi Dass, [1979] 1 R.L.R. 466 referred to.
(c) The Act has manifested its intention by virtue of a later amendment.
The definition of 'tenant ' inserted in section 2(1) of the Act by the Amending Act 18 of 1976 expressly included 'parents ' in sub clause (iii) thereof and also indicated that apart from the heirs of the tenant specified therein, even those persons who had been ordinarily living in the premises with the tenant would be treated as members of the family.
[675 B; 677 H; 678 A] 2.
(a) The legislature has advisedly provided that any member of the family residing therein for a period of six months immediately before the date of the filing of the action would be treated as a tenant.
The stress is not so much on the actual presence of the tenant as on the fact that the members of the family actually live and reside in the tenanted premises.
Clause (d) of section 14(1) of the Act is a special concession given to the landlord to obtain possession only where the tenanted premises have been completely vacated by the tenant.
[676 G H; 677 A] (b) The landlord had failed to prove the essential ingredients of clause (d) of section 14(1) of the Act so as to entitle him to evict the members of the family of the main tenant.
It could not be said that when the appellant migrated to Canada, he had severed all his connections with his mother so that she became an absolute stranger to the family.
Such an interpretation is against our national heritage and could never have been contemplated by the Act.
[680 B; 675 B]
