An identical scale of pay was being enjoyed by both Naiks and Radio operators Grade III (Naik) in the antral Reserve Police Force before the revision of scales of pay of Central Government employees with effect from January 1,1973 consequent upon the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission.
However, Radio operators Grade III (Naik) were entitled to a special pay of Rs. 30.
The Pay Commission recommended the scale of pay of Rs. 225 308 for the post of Naik but did not make any separate recommendation in respect of Radio operator Grade III (Naik).
The petitioners who were Radio operators Grade III (Naik) were initially paid a salary of Rs. 250 with a special pay of Rs. 30 from January 1,1973.
They were subsequently placed in tho revised scale of pay of Rs. 225 308 given to Naiks with a special pay of Rs. 30 and the excess amount paid earlier was sought to be recovered from them.
The petitioners contended: (i) that they were entitled to the scale of pay of Rs. 260 430 as that was the scale of pay prescribed for posts in other departments for which matriculation was the minimum qualification, (ii) that their scale of pay could not be far below the scale of pay of Rs. 330 480 prescribed for the next immediate senior post of Radio operator Grade II and (iii) that they should be paid at par with comparable government employees on the civil side.
In the alternative, the petitioners contended that they were entitled to the pay of Rs. 250 and the special pay of Rs. 30 paid to them before refixation of their salary.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The minimum qualification prescribed for the post of Naik as on January 1,1973 was Middle School Examination and it had been raised to Matriculation Examination only from January 24, 1975.
As Naiks and Radio operators Grade III (Naik) had been uniformly treated at par in the matter of that basic qualification, it was not open to the petitioners to base their claim with reference to a qualification which had not existed on January 1, 1973.
[5 E G] 2 2.
It was not for the Court to examine how far below should be the revised scale of pay of Radio operators Grade Ill as compared to that of Radio operators Grade II.
If the Government had prescribed a particular pay scale in respect of them, all that the Court could do was to merely pronounce on the validity of that fixation.
If the prescription was found contrary to law, the Court would strike it down and direct the Government to take a fresh decision in the matter.
This case was very different from one where the Court had sought to prescribe scales of pay in appeals directly preferred from an award of the Labour Court dealing with such a matter.
In the latter case, the Court in its appellate jurisdiction could be regarded as enjoying all the jurisdiction which the Labour Court enjoyed.
[6 A C] 3.
Radio operators Grade Ill (Naik) had to be considered substantially on the same basis as Naiks and it was because of their special qualifications and of the specialised nature of their duties that they had been provided with a special pay in addition.
Ever since 1975 Radio operators Grade III (Naik) had been selected only from the rank of Constables on the General Duty Side.
The revised pay scale of Radio operators of the rank of Head Constable as well as Head Constables on General Duty was Rs. 260 350 with a special pay of Rs. 40 to the former.
As this post was the next immediate higher post above the rank of Naik.
it was apparent that there was no justification for giving to the petitioners, who were junior in rank, the scale of pay of Rs. 260 430.
[6 D F] 4.
The petitioners could not claim to be paid at par with comparable government employees on the civil side as they were entitled to certain benefits which were not available to the latter.
[6 G H; 7 A B] 5.
The revised pay initially paid to the petitioners had been computed in error inasmuch as when fixing the pay in the revised scale the special pay had been wrongly taken into account.
[7 D E]
