The husband of the petitioner was detained by an order made under section 3(2) of the Act.
The grounds of detention in support of the order referred to a number of criminal cases involving the detenu in many of which he had been acquitted The allegations in cases pending against the detenu were: that a Municipal Councillor had complained that when the staff of the Corporation wanted to apprehend some persons for purposes of prosecution, the detenu along with 70 others had pelted stones etc.
resulting in damage to a building; that whisky was being served in his restaurant; that a loaded revolver along with live cartridges had been recovered from his restaurant; that a lady had complained that he had conspired for the murder of her husband; that a police officer had reported that two ladies of the family of a deceased person apprehended danger from him; and that a lady had complained that he had threatened her with dire consequences.
It was stated in the grounds that these acts of the detenu showed that he was a desperate and dangerous character who was prone to act in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and therefore his detention under the provisions of the Act had been considered essential.
The detenu had challenged his detention by I writ petition filed under Article 226 but the High Court which had heard the matter several months before the filing of the present petition under Article 32, had not passed any order thereon.
It was alleged in the petition that the detenu was a social worker who was active in politics, that due to political rivalry he had been involved from time to time in a number of false cases, that he had succeeded in proving his innocence in most of them and that he had now been detained on account of political vendetta.
It was submitted that the alleged activities of the detenu, even if true, did not fall within the concept of threat to public order.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that since the National Security Act did not contain a provision like section SA of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Act, if one of the grounds was bad, the order of detention had to be quashed in its entirety.
43 Allowing the petition.
^ HELD :1.
None of the instances in which the detenu had been found to be not guilty and acquitted could have legitimately been taken into consideration for detaining the detenu under section 3(2) of the National Security Act.
Since the detaining authority would naturally have been influenced by these grounds as well for coming to the conclusion That the detenu was required to be detained under the provisions of the Act, the entire order of detention was unsustainable.
[45 F G: 46 B] 2.
It is the potentiality of the act to disturb the even tempo of living in a community or society which makes it prejudicial to the maintenance of public order or public tranquillity.
A mere allegation in the complaint of the Municipal Councillor without anything more could not constitute a ground for detention under the Act.
There was no allegation in that instances that the law enforcement authorities had any valid reason to) believe that the allegations made in the complaint were true.
There was also no allegation that the building at which stones etc.
were alleged to have been thrown was situate in a public place and that the alleged act of the detenu and 70 other persons had caused apprehension in the minds of the residents of the locality in regard to maintenance of public order.
This instance could not constitute a ground for detention under the Act as it had no potentiality to interfere with or affect public order or public tranquillity.
The instances mentioned in other cases pending against the detenu could not in law amount to any interference with the maintenance of public order and could not constitute grounds of detention under the Act.[47G; 46E F; 47E G;47C] Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1970 S.C. 1228, referred to.
