The Banco Nacional Ultramarino (B.N.U.) with its head office at Lisbon in Portugal carried on banking business in Goa, Daman and Diu.
On the eve of the liberation of these territories from Portuguese rule and their integration with India the B.N.U. removed a substantial portion of valuable assets held there to its head office at Lisbon.
To relieve the distress closure to the people by reason of the closure of the B.N.U. the President promulgated regulations by which the branches at these places were integrated into a fully constituted bank independent of the B.N.U. and a Custodian was appointed to take charge of the bank.
The Custodian was empowered to realise all debts due to the branches including any debts from the head office of the B.N.U.
The Custodian filed a suit against the appellants stating that the loan accounts of the appellants showed a debit balance in favour of the branch.
It was also stated that the promissory notes were not in his possession but that they could be presumed to have been removed to Portugal.
While suits similar in nature filed in some courts had been dismissed, suits filed in other courts were decreed against the original debtor as well as tho guarantor and surety.
The Additional Judicial Commissioner on appeal decreed the suits against tho appellants and granted the reliefs claimed by the Custodian, holding that the 17 Custodian was entitled to maintain the suits and sue for the realisation of debts arising out of the transactions entered into through the branches.
He further hold that the execution of the negotiable instruments having been admitted in the written statement and these documents having been removed by the B.N.U. to Lisbon there was nothing to preclude the Custodian from claiming relief without producing those negotiable instruments.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that since the loans had been granted by the head office of the B.N.U. and not its branches, the Custodian was not entitled to sue for recovery of loans granted by the head office.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: The transactions under consideration fell within the scope of the regulations and the Custodian was fully entitled to sue for the recovery of the debts covered by the loan agreements.
[28 C] It is settled law that a body corporate and its branches are not distinct and separate entities from each other, that the branches constitute mere components through which the corporate entity expresses itself and that all transactions entered into ostensibly with the branches are in legal reality transactions with the corporate body and that it is with the corporate body that a person must deal directly.
In the case of a bank which operates through its branches, however, the branches are regarded for many purposes as separate and distinct entities from the head office and from each other.
If the bank wrongly refuses to pay when a demand is made at the proper place and time, then it can be sued at its head office as well as at its branch office the reason being that the action is then not on the debt, but on the breach of the contract to pay at the place specified in the agreement.
The regulations had been made apparently in the light of this banking law and practice.
[24 B C; 25 B] The Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Harnam Singh and others, at 422, referred to.
The regulations were intended to achieve what emergency legislation was designed to secure.
In all such emergency laws there is a departure from the general rule that the branches and agencies of a business are no more than components through which the entire enterprise is carried on and that they cannot be considered as distinct and separate from the head office.
[26 A B] It is abundantly plain from the object and purpose of the regulations and the provisions which seek to realise them that all transactions effected by or through the branches of the B.N.U. were intended to be brought within the compass of the Regulations.
[26 D] New York Life Insurance Co. vs Public Trustee, ; In re: W. Hagelberg Aktien Gesellschaft, 1916 Chancery Division 503 and Re The Banca Commercial Italiana, [1943] 1 All England Law Reports 480, referred to. 18 In the instant case although the loan agreements might have been entered into with the B.N.U, the branches were authorised by the head office to give effect to those agreements and accordingly the branch concerned embarked upon the execution of the agreements and the working out of the transactions.
The entire business involved in those transactions and dealings was effected by the branch concerned and it was only when occasion strictly so required that the branch made reference to the head office for authority to amend or enlarge the scope of the operation.
The transaction and the business nonetheless remained throughout those of the branch and this is fully affirmed by the existence and operation of the loan accounts in the books of the branch by the pledge or hypothecation of goods in almost all cases in favour of the branch and by the overall nature and character of the transaction as an ordinary banking transaction falling within the normal business of a branch.
[26 E F] The discharge of the debts under the Regulation amounted to their complete discharge and it was not open to anyone else to sue for their recovery.
No indemnity was required to be furnished by the Custodian on the ground that the relevant documents could not be produced.
Having regard to the circumstances of this case it was within the competence of The Court to base its decree on the books of account of the branches in Goa and on other evidence.
The Portuguese law stands superseded by reason of the express provisions of regulation 8 (1).
[31 A] The Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Harnam Singh and others, , 425, distinguished.
