The appellants, who were husband and wife belonging to the Roman Catholic Community were married under section 27 of the .
They filed a joint petition under Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act for a decree of divorce by mutual consent in the District Court.
The trial court dismissed the petition on the ground that section 28 of the Special Marriage Act could not be availed of.
The Supreme Court allowed the appellants to amend their joint petition to enable them to rely on section 7 of the read with section 1 (2)(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 of England and to seek divorce on the ground that they had been living separately for more than two years and had not been able to live together and that the marriage had broken down irretrievably, and that therefore they were entitled to a decree of divorce.
The District Court however dismissed the petition holding that they were not entitled to rely on section 1 (2)(d) of the English Statute.
In appeal the High Court affirmed the view taken by the trial Court.
In the appeal to this court it was contended on behalf of the appellants: (1) that the trial court and the High Court were wrong and that section 7 of the incorporated the provisions of section 1(2)(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 and that the appellants were entitled to the benefit of the ground for divorce as set forth in the latter enactment, and (2) that the Letters Patent jurisdiction enjoyed by the High Court in Matrimonial matters is sufficiently extensive to enable the High Court to make a decree for divorce.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: [By the Court] 33 Mutual consent is not a ground for divorce under the .
The provisions of section l(2)(d) of the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 of England cannot be read into section 7 of the .
[39 A] [Per Pathak and Baharul Islam, JJ.] 1.
Whether a provision for divorce by mutual consent should be included in the is a matter for legislative policy.
The courts cannot extend or enlarge legislative policy by adding a provision to the statute which was never enacted there.
It is for Parliament to consider whether the should be amended so as to include a provision for divorce by mutual consent.
[38 C D; 39 F] 2.
The Letters Patent jurisdiction enjoyed by the High Court in matrimonial matters cannot be construed to include a ground for divorce not specifically set forth in section 10 of the .
[39 E] M. Barnard vs G.H. Barnard A.I.R. 1928 Cal. 657; Miss Shireen Mall vs John James Taylor A.I.R. T.M. Bashiam vs M. Victor A.I.R. 1970 Mad. 12; aad A. George Cornelius vs Elizabeth Dopti Samadanam A.l.
R. 1970, Mad.
approved.
[Per Chinnappa Reddy and Baharul Islam, JJ.] Legislation whenever made by Parliament of a foreign state cannot automatically become part of the law of another sovereign state.
Whatever interpretation of section 7 of the was permissible before August 15, 1947 when the British Parliament had plenary powers of legislation over Indian territory, no interpretation is now permissible which would incorporate post 1947 British laws into the Indian laws.
[39 G H; 40 A]
