The appellant wife filed on 1.9.1979, a petition under section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, against the respondent for dissolution of her marriage with him and for a decree for divorce.
The next date of hearing was fixed for 6.12.1979.
On 10.11.1979, the respondent husband had addressed a letter to the court requesting the court for an adjournment of the case fixed for 6.12.1979 on the ground that because of special assignment it would not be possible for hi to be present in Court on that day.
On that date, the court refused to grant the adjournment and passed an ex parte decree in favour of the appellant.
The respondent husband, thereafter preferred an appeal under section 96 of the Civil Procedure Code before the High Court with an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act to condone the delay in filing.
The High Court dismissed the condonation application as well as the appeal.
Thereafter the respondent husband moved the Trial Court with an application under Rule 13 of order IX with an application under section 5 of the Limitation Act.
Both the applications were dismissed.
The respondent husband moved the High Court against the said orders of dismissal which was accepted rejecting the contention of the appellant wife that the newly added Explanation to Rule 13 of order IX C.P.C. is a bar to the maintainability of the application itself filed by the respondent husband under that Rule.
Hence the appeal by the appellant wife, after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal the Court, ^ HELD: Per Pathak, J. (Concurring with A.N. Sen, J.) 1.
No doubt the provision is described as an 'Explanation ', but it is not the rubric which decisively defines the true nature of a statutory provision.
Its true 373 nature must be determined from the content of the provision, its import gathered from the language employed, and the language construed in the context in which the provision has been enacted.
What was the law before the amendment; what was the mischief and defect for which the law did not provide, what remedy has Parliament resolved and appointed to cure the mischief, and the true reason of the remedy.
[376 E G, 377 A B] Rule in Heydon 's case, 76 English Reports 637; Swantraj & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra ; , followed.
The Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 was enacted with the avowed purpose of abridging and simplifying the procedural law.
Prior to it a defendant burdened by an ex parte decree could apply to the trial court under Rule 13 of order IX C.P.C. for setting aside the decree.
He could also appeal under section 96 against the decree.
The mere filing of the appeal did not take away the jurisdiction of the trial court to entertain and dispose of application for setting aside the ex parte decree.
It was where the appeal was disposed of, and the appellate decree superseded the trial court decree by reversing, confirming or varying it that the trial court could not proceed to set aside its ex parte decree.
For the trial court decree was said to have merged with the appellate decree.
Prior to the Amendment Act, the courts were open to a duplication of proceedings, and although the immediate relief claimed in the two proceedings was not identical both ultimately aimed at a redecision on the merits.
The earlier disposal of either resulted in the other becoming infructuous.
The plaintiff, therefore, was in the unfortunate position of being dragged through two courts in simultaneous proceedings.
[376 A C, 377 C D] 2:2.
Public time and private convenience and money was sought to be saved by enacting the Explanation.
By enacting the Explanation, Parliament left it open to the defendant to apply under Rule 13 of order IX for setting aside an ex parte decree only if the defendant had opted not to appeal against the ex parte decree or, in the case where he had preferred an appeal, the appeal had been withdrawn by him.
The withdrawal of the appeal was tantamount to effacing it.
It obliged the defendent to decide whether he would prefer an adjudication by the appellate court on the merits of the decree or have the decree set aside by the trial court under Rule 13 of order IX.
The legislative attempt incorporated in the Explanation was to discourage a two pronged attack on the decree and to confine the defendant to a single course of action.
If he did not withdraw the appeal filed by him, but allowed the appeal to be disposed of on any other ground, he was denied the right to apply under r. 13 of order IX.
The disposal of the appeal on any ground whatever, apart from the withdrawal, constituted sufficient reason for bringing the ban into operation.
[377 D G, 378 A] 2:3.
In the present case, the appeal was dismissed as barred by limitation and the order was one disposing of the appeal on any other ground.
[378 A] M/s. Mela Ram & Dons vs Commissioner of lncome tax; , , followed.
374 Per Amarendra Nath Sen, J. 1:1.
A proper interpretation of the Explanation, makes it clear that where there has been an appeal against an ex parte decree and the appeal has not been withdrawn by the appellant and has been disposed of any ground, the application under Rule 13 of order IX of the Code of Civil Procedure will not lie and cannot be entertained.
[384 G H] 2:2.
The words used in the Explanation are clear and unambiguous.
The language used in the Explanation makes it clear that the withdrawal of the appeal is considered to be disposal of the appeal, as contemplated by the Explanation.
Though an appeal may be disposed of on very many grounds, the Legislature has thought it fit to provide in the Explanation that only when an appeal against an ex parte decree is disposed of on the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, the bar created to the maintainability of an application under order IX, Rule 13 of the Code for setting aside the ex parte decree will not apply.
The Legislature must be presumed to know that there are various ways of disposal of an appeal and that in all other cases of the disposal of the appeal on any other ground than the ground of withdrawal of the appeal, there will be a bar to the maintainability of the application under order IX, Rule 13 and no application will lie for setting aside the ex parte decree.
Withdrawal of appeal by an appellant does not result in any adjudication on merits.
Even, then, the withdrawal of an appeal is still considered to be a disposal of the appeal, but not creating a bar for the maintainability of the application under order IX Rule 13 [383 E, 384 B G] 1:3.
In the instant case, the appellant had not withdrawn the appeal.
His application for condonation of delay was rejected by the High Court and therefore, the appeal was dismissed on the ground of limitation.
The appeal filed against the ex parte decree was, therefore, disposed of on grounds other than the ground of withdrawal of the appeal.
The application under order IX, Rule 13, after the disposal of the appeal, therefore, became incompetent.
[385A B] 2:1.
The words used in the Explanation make it abundantly clear that disposal of the appeal as contemplated in the Explanation is not intended to mean or imply disposal in merits resulting in the merger of the decree of the Trial Court with the decree, if any, of the Appellate Court on the disposal of the appeal.
The Explanation speaks of "the appeal has been disposed of an any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal" and these words make it abundantly clear that disposal of the appeal by the appellant is also considered to be the disposal of the appeal on the ground of withdrawal; and, the disposal of the appeal from the ex parte decree on the ground of withdrawal of the appeal by the appellant has only been exempted from the operation of the Explanation.
If the intention was that the Explanation would not be attracted and there would be no disposal of an appeal within the meaning of the Explanation unless the appeal was disposed of on merits resulting in the merger of the decrees of the Trial Court with the decree of the 375 the Appellate Court, it would not have been necessary to provide specifically that the disposal of an appeal on the ground of withdrawal would be exempt, because the disposal of an appeal on the ground of withdrawal would not be disposal of the appeal within the meaning of the Explanation, as on the withdrawal of an appeal there is no decision on merits and there is no merger of the decree with any decree of the Appellate Court.
The legislature could also have simply provided in the Explanation for the disposal of an appeal on merits and it would not have been necessary to use the other words, "on the disposal of an appeal on any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal.
The words used, "disposal of the appeal on any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal" will undoubtedly attract within its ambit the disposal of an appeal on the ground of the same being dismissed for non prosecution, though in the case of such disposal of the appeal there will be no effective adjudication of the appeal on merits and the disposal of the appeal may not have the effect of the decree of the trial court appealed against being merged with any decree of the Appellate Court on the disposal of the appeal.
[390D H, 391 A C] 2:2.
The disposal of an appeal on the ground of limitation may or may not be adjudication on the merits of the appeal, depending on the particular facts and circumstances of the case and may or may not result in the merger of the decree of the Trial Court with the decree, if any, of the appellate Court; but there cannot be any manner of doubt that when an appeal from the ex parte decree is dismissed on the ground of limitation, the appeal is disposed of on any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the appeal.
As the dismissal of the appeal on the ground of limitation results in the disposal of the appeal on any ground other than the ground of the withdrawal of the appeal by the appellant, the Explanation is attracted, and the application for setting aside the ex parte decree becomes incompetent after the disposal of the appeal and cannot be entertained.
[391 C F] Ckandri Abdul Majid vs Jawahar Lal, A.l.
R. 1914 P.C. 66: Kalumuddin Ahmad vs Esabakuddin & Ors.
, A.I.R. 1924 Cal. 830; discussed and held inapplicable.
