The appellant, a Factory Inspector, visited the complainant 's factory and demanded an illegal gratification of Rs. 150/ on the threat of entangling him in some legal proceedings.
The complainant, who was not inclined to give the bribe, made a written complaint to the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Anti Corruption Department (Dy SP) requesting for suitable action.
A trap was arranged by smearing 15 currency notes of the denomination of Rs. 10/ each with phenolphthalein powder and, on the direction of the Dy SP, two motbirs were requested to accompany the raiding party and to watch what happens.
The motbirs went along with the complainant to the residence of the appellant and witnessed the acceptance of the money given to him by the complainant, the subsequent search for the recovery of the currency notes from the appellant, the dipping of his hands in sodium carbonate solution and the consequent change in the colour of the hands into pink.
By the time the case came up for trial, the complainant was dead.
In the absence of the evidence of the complainant, the trial Judge noted that the first demand of the bribe at the factory of the complainant had not been proved.
He, however, held that the evidence of the two motbirs was reliable and was amply corroborated by the recovery of the currency notes as well as the presence of phenolphthalein powder on the hands of the appellant.
The trial Judge convicted and sentenced the appellant under section 161, I.P.C. and section 5(1)(d) read with section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
The High Court which examined the evidence of the motbirs agreed with the findings recorded by the trial Court and dismissed the appeal filed by the appellant.
One of the contentions urged on behalf of the appellant was that once the complainant was not available to give evidence not only of the first demand but also on the payment of bribe pursuant to the demand, the evidence of the two motbirs had assumed considerable importance and it was unwise and dangerous to place implicit reliance on their testimony to convict the appellant 570 as (i) both the motbirs were petty clerks and (ii) by virtue of their service, they were likely to be under police influence.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Truth is neither the monopoly nor the preserve of the affluent or of highly placed persons.
In a country where renunciation is worshipped and the grandeur and wild display of wealth frowned upon, it would be the travesty of truth if persons coming from humble origin and belonging to office wise, wealth wise lower strata of society are to be disbelieved or rejected as unworthy of belief solely on the ground of their humble position in society.
[577 F] Khairati Lal vs The State, (1965) 1 Delhi Law Times, 362 overruled.
In the instant case it is factually not correct to say that both the motbirs are petty clerks: one was serving as a clerk in a nationalised bank and the other was a teacher in a middle school.
The testimony of the motbirs which had been accepted as wholly reliable by the trial Judge and the High Court cannot be rejected on the sole ground that they are petty clerks.
[577 E: 578 A B] It may be that officers of Anti Corruption Department have jurisdiction to investigate lapses on the part of clerks in nationalised banks.
It is not clear whether the motbir who was a teacher was a government employee or the school itself was a government school.
It may be that the school was receiving grant but if all institutions which receive grant from government are styled as government departments and have to be treated as falling under the police influence then the net will have to be spread so wide as not to exclude anyone as independent of police influence.
There is no justification in the submission that the two motbirs were persons not likely to be independent of police influence.
[578 D E] Raghbir Singh vs State of Punjab, AIR 1976 S.C. 91, distinguished.
