In order to avoid the charge of vindictiveness, justice, equity and fairplay demand that punishment must always be commensurate with the gravity of the offence charged.
In the development of industrial relation norms law has moved far from the days when quantum of punishment was considered a managerial function with the courts having no power to substitute their own decision in place of that of the management.
More often, the courts found that, while the misconduct was proved, the punishment was disproportionately heavy.
As the situation then stood, courts remained powerless and had to be passive sufferers incapable of curing the injustice.
Parliament stepped in and enacted section IIA of the Industrial Disputes Act by which the Labour Court is clothed with jurisdiction and power to substitute its measure of punishment in place of the managerial wisdom once it is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified in the facts and circumstances of the case.
This Court, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 136 can examine whether the Labour Court has properly approached the matter in exercising or refusing to exercise its power under section 11A.
The words that the court must be "satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified" occurring in section 11A indicate that even though misconduct is proved and a penalty has to be imposed, the extreme penalty of dismissal or discharge was not justified in the facts and circumstances of the case meaning thereby that the punishment was either disproportionately heavy or excessive.
In the instant case the charge against the appellant workman was that he had used threatening and abusive language against a senior officer unbecoming of a disciplined workman and had adopted a threatening posture, subversive of discipline.
An inquiry was conducted.
On the recommendations of the Inquiry officer the workman was dismissed from service.
The Labour Court upheld the order of dismissal and the High Court dismissed the appellant 's petition under Article 227.
649 On the question whether the order of dismissal was justified on the facts and in the circumstances of the case.
^ HELD: The order of dismissal was not justified.
[653 A] It is a well recognized principle of jurisprudence, which permits penalty to be imposed for misconduct, that the penalty must be commensurate with the gravity of the offence charged.
[653 C D] The appellant workman had put in more than 14 years of service and had been the Secretary of the workers ' union.
The management had not shown that there was any blameworthy conduct on his part during the period of his service.
The misconduct alleged against him consisted of use of language which was indiscreet and improper, disclosing a threatening posture.
[653 E F] When it is said that his language disclosed a threatening posture it was the subjective conclusion of the person who heard the language because voice modulation of each person in the society differs.
Indiscreet, improper, abusive language may show lack of culture.
But mere use of such language on one occasion unconnected with any subsequent positive action and not preceded by any blameworthy conduct cannot permit an extreme penalty of dismissal from service.
[653 F H]
