Independence of the judiciary is one of the basic tenets and a fundamental requirement of our Constitution.
Various articles of the Constitution provide or safeguarding the independence of the judiciary.
Article 50 provides separation of the judiciary from the executive.
For some time past there appears to be a trend of interference by the executive, both at the State and Central levels, in judicial appointments.
This has resulted in prolonged and unnecessary delay in making the appointments to judicial offices.
For various reasons judicial offices have ceased to attract talented members of the Bar and even when competent members of the Bar are persuaded to accept the office of a High Court Judge or of a District Judge they eventually withdraw their consent both because of the inordinate delay in making the appointments as well as of the various restrictions sought to be imposed.
594 Article 235 of the Constitution vests control of the judicial administration completely in the High Court except in certain circumstances.
In these matters the constitutional requirement is that the Governor must act in consultation with the High Court.
If, in the matter of these appointments, the High Court is sought to be ignored and the executive chooses to make the appointments, the independence of the judiciary would be affected.
It is necessary that healthy conventions and proper norms should be evolved for safeguarding the independence of the judiciary in conformity with the requirements of the Constitution.
Normally, as a matter of rule, the recommendations made by the High Court for the appointment of a District Judge should be accepted by the State Government and the Governor should act on the same.
Where the State Government does not agree with the recommendations of the High Court it should communicate its views to the High Court so that the High Court may consider the matter once again.
The State Government must have complete and effective consultation with the High Court in the matter.
Efficient and proper judicial administration being the main object of these appointments, there should be no difficulty in arriving at a consensus as both the High Court and the State Government must necessarily approach the question in a detached manner for achieving the objective of getting proper District Judges for the due administration of justice.
Facts : To fill up four vacancies of District Judges in the State, the High Court, after considering the merit and suitability of 12 eligible officers in the cadre of Sub Judges, recommended four names to the Governor.
The State Government asked the High Court to send the confidential reports of all the officers considered for the post.
While sending the reports, the High Court had also sent its comments justifying the selection and set out in detail the reasons for supersession of senior officers.
However on the basis of the recommendations of a Cabinet Sub Committee constituted by the State Government to make its recommendations on this point, the Law Secretary communicated to the Registrar of the High Court approval of the Governor for the promotion and appointment as District and Sessions Judges certain officers other than those recommended by the High Court.
While giving postings to them the High Court recorded a minute that their postings "should not be deemed as consultation with it in terms of Article 109 of Jammu & Kashmir Constitution.
Four of the Sub Judges whose names had been recommended by the High Court for appointment as District and Sessions Judges but were rejected by the Government, filed a writ petition in the High Court questioning the validity of the Government 's action.
In that petition, the High Court was made one of the respondents.
On the question whether it would be proper for the High Court to hear a writ petition impugning an order passed by it in its administrative capacity, with the consent of both the petitioners and the respondent State, the High Court declined to hear the petition.
Since, however, the respondent State did not 595 have any objection to grant to the petitioners a certificate of fitness to file an appeal in this Court, the High Court granted the certificate holding that the petition involved interpretation of Article 109 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir and also that it raised a substantial question of law of general public importance.
Meanwhile the State obtained special leave to appeal against the order of the High Court alleging that the High Court had not decided any point raised in the writ petition on the ground of judicial propriety and that therefore the High Court should not have granted the certificate of fitness to appeal.
The petitioners in the High Court had also filed a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution for substantially the same reliefs claimed by them in their writ petition in High Court.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that Article 233 (which corresponds to Article 109 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir and which has been judicially interpreted by this Court in a number of cases) deals with appointment, posting and promotion of District Judges but does not deal with promotion of subordinate judges to the post of District Judges and that promotion of subordinate judges is vested in the High Court and that therefore appointments made by the Government without consulting the High Court were void The State on the other hand contended that consultation contemplated by this Article does not mean either concurrence or recommendation and no particular form or procedure was necessary to be followed by the Governor for consultation with the High Court and that in this case all the material which the High Court had submitted to the Governor amounted to consultation within the meaning of the Article.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD : On a proper interpretation of Articles 109 and 111 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir, the Governor is the competent authority to appoint District Judges and the power of appointment is not vested in the High Court.
This is settled by a long line of decisions of this Court.
[609 E F] Merely because the power of appointing these officers is vested in the Governor, it cannot be said that it would lead to the subservience of the judiciary to the executive and the independence of the judiciary would be undermined.
The power to make the appointments conferred on the Governor has to be exercised by him in consultation with the High Court.
This provision has been incorporated in the Constitution to safeguard the independence of the judiciary.
[609 C D] It is equally well settled that consultation or deliberation is not complete or effective before the parties thereto make their respective points of view known to the other or others and discuss and examine the relative merits of 596 their views.
If one party makes a proposal to the other who has a counter proposal in his mind which is not communicated to the proposer, the direction to give effect to the counter proposal, without anything more, cannot be said to have been done after consultation.
[625 B C] Chandra Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1967] 1 S.C.R.77, Chandra mouleshwar Prasad vs Patna High Court & Ors., , High Court of Punjab and Haryana etc.
vs State of Haryana, [1975]3 S.C.R. 368; followed.
In the instant case the counter proposals sought to be made by the Government in the matter of these appointments were never communicated to the High Court and the High Court 's views on these proposals were never asked for.
The High Court was not at all consulted in the matter of the Government 's proposal to appoint the respondents as District Judges.
[624 G H; 625A] Secondly, the Government, without any discussion or deliberation with the High Court, refused to accept its recommendation and made the appointment on the basis of seniority.
Though seniority is a relevant factor in promoting subordinate judges as District Judges it is not the only criterion.
The true test is the suitability of the candidate.
If on a consideration of all the relevant factors the High Court comes to a conclusion that the performance of a senior officer was not meritorious enough to entitle him to promotion, it cannot be compelled to recommend such an officer merely on the ground of seniority because the High Court is primarily entrusted with the judicial administration in the State.
The High Court has the advantage of judging the suitability of a person, taking into consideration his overall performance in the previous job over a long period of time.
[627 B F] After declining to hear the petition on grounds of judicial propriety, the High Court granted the certificate with the consent of the parties since the petition involved interpretation of Article 109 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashmir.
It is unfortunate that the State, after having agreed to the course adopted by the High Court, should raise objections as to the validity of the certificate at the stage of appeal in this Court.
Undoubtedly the question raised is a substantial question of law of general public importance.
Even assuming that the certificate granted by the High Court was not proper this Court could always grant special leave where the question raised deserves to be considered by it.
[600 F H; 601 A B] In the instant case while declining to hear the matter the High Court vacated the stay granted earlier, the result of which was an eventual refusal to entertain the writ petition, In the facts and circumstances of this case this is a special case in which this Court can revoke the certificate and grant special leave to the petitioners for filing an appeal, [601 D E] Since the question involved in this case is substantially the same, both in the appeal as well as in the petition under Article 32 of the Constitution the question of maintainability of the writ petition becomes purely academic.
[601 H] 597 [Pathak, J. agreed with the observations of the majority in concurring the incompetence of the certificate granted by the High Court and the maintainability of the writ petition and in the order granting special leave to appeal.
On merits his Lordship agreed with the majority that the promotions made by the State Government were contrary to law inasmuch as there was no consultation between the State Government and the High Court before the promotions were made.
[628 G H; 629 A] His Lordship, however, did not propose to express any opinion on the appellants ' contention that the promotions fall outside the scope of Article 233 of the Constitution.
[629 B]
