Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo was the holder of an impartible estate, known as Nagaruntari estate, in the district of Palamau.
The succession to the estate was governed by the rule of lineal primogeniture.
Under the said rule the eldest male member of the eldest line was to succeed to the estate while the junior members were entitled only to maintenance grants subject to resumption on extinction of the male line of the eldest branch.
Rudra Pratap Deo Singh had a younger brother Harihar Pratap Deo who died in a state of jointness with his brother Rudra Pratap Deo in 1934 leaving behind his son Lalu Maheshanuj Pratap Deo alias Nila Bacha, and one other step son who also died in 1937 unmarried.
Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo executed a deed of maintenance (Khorposh) on 14th April, 1952 in respect of eight villages.
A dispute arose between the parties in respect of the agricultural plots of village Sigsigi.
The proceedings under section 145 Crl.
P.C. ended in favour of Nila Bacha.
Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo, therefore, filed a civil suit No. 16 of 1955, on the grounds that (a) a fraud was committed by including two villages, namely, Sigsigi and Patihari in the formal deed of khorposh dated 14th April, 1952 and (b) that F the khorposh grants are void under section 12A of the Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act and the provisions of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 and therefore, no title accrued to the defendant on that basis.
The suit was contested by the defendant on the grounds amongst others: The Nagaruntari estate was never an impartible estate governed by the rule of primogeniture, but in its origin it was a non heritable Ghatwala Jagir and it was subsequently made heritable and raised to the status of a revenue paying estate and thus it became an ordinary joint family property partible amongst the members; there was no fraud committed by any one; and with the enforcement of the , being a co sharer with the plaintiff, he was entitled to remain in possession of all the eight villages covered by the khorposh deed till partition was made.
The learned Subordinate Judge held that by the khorposh deed the defendant was given all the eight villages, but he did not acquire any interest in the 418 said land as the deed was against the provisions of section 12A of the Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act and the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act; that the Nagaruntari Estate was an impartible estate governed by the rule of primogeniture but it ceased to be so after the enforcement of the Hinda Succession Act, 1956 and since Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo died, during the pendency of the suit and after this Act had come into force, the succession would be governed by survivor ship and as such the legal representatives of the plaintiff as well as the defendant would succeed.
The first appellate court held that: (a) in as much as the khorposh grant was not made with the sanction of the Commissioner, the grant was void under section 12A of the Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act; and (b) because the possession of the ex proprietor with respect to the Bakasht land became that of raiyat under the State of Bihar and raiyati right was not transferable without a registered document, the possession of the defendant was on the basis of a void agreement; and (c) that after the death of Bhaiya Rudra ' Pratap Deo, section 6 of the became applicable and both appellants and the defendants were entitled to succeed as co sharers.
The second appeal by the plaintiffs was partly allowed inasmuch as the High Court found that the heirs of Rudra Pratap Deo were entitled to get a decree for possession of the suit land jointly with the sole defendant as also for mense profits for their share, i.e. One half in addition to the entire mense profits to which Rudra Pratap Deo was entitled in his life time.
Both the parties have come up in appeal to this Court against the judgment and decree of the High Court to the extent it went against them.
Dismissing the plaintiff 's appeal and allowing that of the defendant, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
A bare perusal of Section 4 of the indicates That any custom or usage as part of Hindu law in force will cease to have effect after the enforcement of with respect to any matter for which provision is made in the Act.
If rule of lineal primogeniture in Nagaruntari estate is a customary one it will certainly cease to have effect, even though it was part of Hindu law.
[426 D.E] 2.
Section S(ii) of the protects an estate which descends to a single heir by the terms of any covenant or agreement entered into or by the terms of any enactment inasmuch as is not applicable to such an estate.
Section 5(ii) stands as an exception to section 4 of the Act.
[426 G H] The rule of lineal primogeniture in the instant case, is not a statutory rule but a customary rule and therefore, it is not saved by section 5(ii) of the .
[426 H,427 A] 3.
Section 6 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act only contemplates that the land will be deemed to be settled by the State with such intermediary and he shall be entitled to retain possession thereof and hold it as a raiyat under the state having occupancy rights in respect of such land subject to payment of fair and equitable rent.
But if the intermediary was in possession in a representative capacity on behalf of the other coparceners as a necessary corollary 419 the land will be deemed to be settled with all those persons on whose behalf A one particular intermediary was in khas possession.
Consequently if the possession of Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo was on behalf of other coparceners the land will be deemed to be settled with all those coparceners and they shall all become raiyats.
Here, the joint status of the family continued and therefore, after the death of Bhaiya Rudra Pratap Deo, his interest developed on other coparceners as well.
[429 C F] 4: 1.
Admittedly the defendant was a member of a joint Hindu family.
Even in an impartible estate he was entitled to maintenance and the land in dispute had admittedly been given to the defendants by the impartible estate holders.
This possession therefore, cannot be taken the possession of a tresspasser.
[431 A] 4: 2.
Section 12A of the Chota Nagpur Encumbered Estates Act, 1876 would be attracted only when possession and enjoyment of the property is restored under the circumstances mentioned in the first or the third clause of section 12.
The onus to prove that the conditions contemplated by section 12 were satisfied lay on the plaintiff, which he failed to do.
[430 D E] 4: 3.
The maintenance deed can be looked into for collateral purpose of ascertaining the nature of possession.
Khorposh (maintenance) deed is a document which requires registration within the meaning of section 17 of the Indian Registration Act and as the document was not registered it cannot be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property.
Proviso to section 49, however, permits the use of the document, even though unregistered, as evidence of any collateral transaction not registered to be effected by registered instrument.
[430F H] 5 (a) A holder of an impartible estate can alienate the estate by gift intervivos or even by will, though the family is undivided, the only limitation on this power would flow from a family custom to the contrary or from the condition of the tenure which has the same effect.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that the impartible estate would go to holder s successors alone and not to the other members or the family by survivorship.
[431 B C, 435 C D] (b) It must be taken to be well settled that the estate which is impartible by custom cannot be said to be the separate or exclusive property of the holder of the estate.
If the holder has got the estate as an ancestral estate and he has succeeded by primogeniture, it will be a part of the joint estate of the undivided family.
[433 D E] In the case of an ordinary joint family property the members of the family can claim four rights: (1) the right to partition, (2) the right to restrain alienation by the head of the family except for necessity, (3) the right to maintenance, and (4) the right of survivorship.
It is obvious that from the very nature of the property which is impartible the first three rights cannot exist.
The fourth right viz., the right of survivorship, however, still remains and it is by reference to this right that the property, though impartible, has in the eyes of law, to be regarded as joint family property.
The right of survivorship which can be claim 420 ed by the members of the undivided family which owns the impartible estate should not be confused with mere spec successionis.
Unlike spec successionis the right of survivorship can be renounced or surrendered.
[433 G H, 434 A B] Rajah Velugoti Kumara Krishna Yachendra Varu and Ors.
vs Rajah Velugoti Sarvagna Kumara Krishna Yachendra Varu and Ors ; Raja Rama Rao vs Raja of Pittapur, [1918] L.R. 45 I A. 148; Hargovind Singh vs Collector of Etah, A I R. 1937 All 377 and Raja Rao Venkata Surya Mahipati Rama Krishna Rao Bahadur vs Court of Wards, [1899] L.R. 26 I.A. 83, discussed and distinguished.
Mirza Raja Shri Pushavathi Viziaram Gajapathi Raj Manne Sultan Bahadur and ors.
vs Shri Pushavathi Visweswar Gajapathi Raj and ors.
; , applied.
Chinnathayal alias Veeralakshmi vs Kulasekara Pandiya Naicker and Anr. ; , referred to.
The overwhelming evidence on the record, in the instant case, categorically proves: (a) that the disputed estate was an impartible estate till the death of the original plaintiff in 1957; and (b) it is open to a co sharer to remain in possession of the joint property and the proper remedy for the plaintiff in such case is to file a suit for partition where the equities of the parties would be adjusted and not a suit for possession of plots of one village and for mesne profits.
[436 B, 437 B D] Collector of Bombay vs Municipal Corporation of the City of Bombay and Ors. ; , held inapplicable.
