In 1951 three pieces of land belonging to the appellant situated in Bihar were acquired by the State of Bihar for a public purpose.
When appeals against the judgment of the District Judge enhancing the compensation payable in respect of these lands were pending before the Patna High Court the West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 came into force in consequence of which the acquired lands stood transferred to the State of West Bengal.
The appeals pending before the Patna High Court were, however, not transferred to the Calcutta High Court, nor was the State of West Bengal substituted in place of the State of Bihar.
The Patna High Court dismissed tho State 's appeals.
In the execution petitions the appellant impleaded the State of Bihar as the judgment debtor but the State of Bihar raised an objection that since the lands were then situated is the State of West Bengal it was that State which was liable to pay the decretal amounts.
Upholding this contention the executing court dismissed the execution petition.
This was upheld by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Section 17 of the Act enjoins that only such proceedings pending in the High Court of Patna immediately before the appointed day as are certified by the Chief Justice of that High Court having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, have to be transferred to the High Court of Calcutta which means that if there is no such certification they have to be disposed of by the High Court of Patna even though the cause of action might have accrued in any part of the transferred territories as that court continues to exercise jurisdiction over those cases.
[862 E G] In the instant case since there was no such certificate the High Court of Patna rightly disposed of the appeals.
[882 G] 879 Under section 47 of the Act the State of West Bengal should be deemed to have been substituted for the State of Bihar even though no such order had been passed on a formal application for substitution.
When the law says that something should be deemed to have been done, the legal fiction should be carried to its logical end to achieve the desired result.
The decrees must, therefore, be deemed to have been passed by the High Court of Patna against tho State of West Bengal when the appeals were dismissed by the Patna High Court.
[882 H; 883 A C] By virtue of Section 47 the State of West Bengal would be bound by the decrees or orders made in respect of matters referred to therein against the State of Bihar both before and after the appointed day even though the State of West Bengal is not formally brought on record in the place of State of Bihar.
In all such cases the State of Bihar should be considered as effectively representing the State of West Bengal.
[883 D E] There is no merit in the submission that the interest accrued on the amounts of compensation uptodate or upto the date on which the notices were served on the State of West Bengal should be disallowed.
The executing court cannot go behind the decree.
[883 B C]
