In June 1982 the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports issued export instructions on the subject of Export Policy of Niger Seeds during 1982 83.
Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the instructions stated that the Government had decided to allow export of Niger Seeds within an overall ceiling of 10,000 metric tonnes through the National Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India (NAFED) subject to a minimum export price of Rs. 8,500 per metric tonne.
In addition to NAFED, private exporters who registered their contracts with NAFED were also allowed to export the seeds on the basis of first come first served, against firm commitments backed by irrevocable letters of credit, subject to availability of ceiling.
It was also stated that the NAFED would be responsible to monitor the ceiling and ensure that export of the seeds did not exceed the overall quantity of 10,000 metric tonnes during the year.
A Trade Notice on these lines was issued by the Joint Chief Controller of Imports and Exports.
On the faith of the trade notice the petitioner entered into contract with a foreign buyer who opened a firm irrevocable letter of credit in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner thereupon requested the NAFED to register the contract and that one thousand tonnes of seed might be reserved for him for export.
About six weeks later the petitioner reminded the NAFED by letter and telegram about his request for allotment of the quota.
In the meanwhile the NAFED wrote to the Government of India, Ministry of Commerce that it was for NAFED and its Board of Directors to formulate guidelines regarding the release and modalities of export of the seeds and it forwarded two statements one showing names of 22 applicants whose requests for allotment of quotas were said to be backed by letters of credit and the other containing list of 34 names of applicants whose contracts were not backed by letters of credit.
The petitioner 's name was included in the first list.
Reiterating the earlier instructions the Government wrote to the NAFED that the allotment of quotas should be in conformity with the instructions and the Trade Notice and that it was not for the NAFED to issue another Trade Notice.
2 In disregard of the instructions the NAFED selected certain applicants and gave time to them to produce letters of credit.
The petitioners were not in this list.
The Delhi High Court dismissed in limine the petitioners ' petition under article 226 of the Constitution.
The petitioners thereupon filed their petition under article 136 of the Constitution.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: While the petitioners satisfy all the requirements of the Trade Notice some of the applicants chosen by the NAFED for allotment of quota did not furnish the letters of credit and the NAFED 's action in giving them time for their production was not in accordance with the terms stipulated by the Trade Notice.
[6H] The file produced by the Government of India exposed the statement made in the NAFED 's affidavit that the petitioners were not in the list of 22 as false.
Its counsel was misled and wrongly instructed to argue that the petitioners were not included in that list.
But the petitioners in fact figured in the statement entitled "enquiries received from private parties backed by letters of credit for export of Niger seeds" prepared by the NAFED and sent to the Government of India.
[7 E] Even if the claim of NAFED that the selected applicants had secured a higher price and that would help to earn more foreign exchange is correct, they were not eligible for registration firstly because their contracts were not backed by letter of credit in terms of the Trade Notice and secondly because the ceiling had already been reached.
[7 G] The counter affidavit filed by the Government of India fully substantiates the claim of the petitioners that the NAFED had disregarded the trade instructions issued by the Government of India as well as the Trade Notice which was issued pursuant to the trade instructions.
