The respondent was convicted and sentenced for an offence under the on a complaint that a sample of curd purchased from his shop had been found not to conform to the standard prescribed.
He preferred an appeal and the Sessions Judge acquitted his on the short ground that the sample was not homogeneous and representative of the curd purchased as the curd had not been churned properly before it was sent for analysis.
The High Court affirmed this conclusion and dismissed the appeals filed against the order of acquittal.
The High Court, in preference to the evidence of the complainant that the churning of the sample had been done with a spoon, placed reliance on the evidence led by the defence that the churning had not been done by any instrument but it had been done by the complainant with his hand.
The High Court stated that since the prosecution had not challenged the defence version that the churning of the sample had been done by means of hand alone, it had failed to prove that the churning had been done in a proper manner.
Declining to interfere with the acquittal of the respondent by the two lower courts after a lapse of six years and dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: In milk and milk preparations including curd, it is distinctly possible that the fat settles on the top and in order to find out whether the milk or its preparation such as curd has prescribed content, the sample must be homogeneous and representative so that the analysis can furnish reliable proof of nature and content of the article of food under analysis.
For this purpose churning is one of the methods of making the sample homogeneous and representative.
But, there is nothing in the Act or the Rules which prescribes that churning must be done by some instrument and that churning done by hand would not provide a homogeneous and representatives sample.
Commonsense dictates that articles of food like milk and curd when churned with hand would 10 properly mix up from top to bottom.
More so when the quantity is either 600 grams which was the quantity purchased or 2 1/2 kg.
which was the quantity in the container.
[14 C E] In the instant case, there was evidence that the churning was done by spoon.
But even if the High Court found that evidence unreliable and the evidence of defence witness so much reliable that it was prepared to act upon it disagreeing with the other evidence the evidence of defence witness was that churning was done with hand, and he did not say that the churning was not effective.
It is therefore difficult to subscribe to the view of the High Court that the churning done by hand would not meet with the requirements of making a sample homogeneous and representative.
There has to be a finding that the churning done with hand was not adequate.
There is no such finding.
The High Court was, therefore, not justified in confirming the acquittal on this ground.
[14 F H; 15 A]
