The prosecution case against the 12 accused persons was that, armed with deadly weapons, they waylaid and assaulted the deceased and three others accompanying him, and that someone among another group of 12 of their associates standing at some distance constantly incited the accused with the words "kill, kill".
The deceased received serious injuries and died on the following morning.
While the appellant was convicted under section 302 Indian Penal Code and sentenced to death, ten other accused were convicted and sentenced variously.
One of them was acquitted.
On appeal the High Court reduced the sentence of death passed on the appellant to imprisonment for life.
Convictions of four of the 11 accused were altered from under section 302/149 and section 307/149 to one under sections 302/34 and 307/34 I.P.C.
All of them were however acquitted of the offences under section 147 or section 148 I.P.C. The convictions and sentences against the other six accused were set aside and they were acquitted.
It was contended on behalf of the appellants that their conviction was unsustainable in law because the evidence of the eye witnesses, who were interested parties, could not be safely relied upon.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The High Court erred in stating that the testimony of the four eye witnesses suffered from numerous infirmities, that they made improvements in their testimony and that there were variations in their earlier and later statements.
On that count alone their testimony could not be held to be infirm.
It is the duty of the Court to remove the grain from the chaff.
[49 C D] 46 The parties were inimical for a long time.
The four witnesses were the injured persons and therefore, their presence at the time and place of occurrence could not be doubted.
The presence of all the four accused in the scene of occurrence and their participation in the crime had been proved beyond reasonable doubt despite the improvements and variations in the evidence of witnesses.
[49 E F] In a case of this kind it is not the number of witnesses examined or the quantity of evidence adduced by the prosecution that counts.
It is the quality that counts.
Eye witnesses, examined in the case were the best and natural witnesses.
The accused persons were known to the witnesses and they did not have any reason to omit the real culprits and implicate falsely accused persons.
[49 G H; 50 C] A statement, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, is called a dying declaration and is admissible in evidence under section 32 of the Evidence Act.
But when a person who has made a statement, even if it be in expectation of death but is not dead, it is not a dying declaration.
It is not admissible under section 32 of the Evidence Act.
[50 E F] In the instant case the two witnesses whose statements were erroneously called dying declarations by the High Court were alive and deposed in the case.
Such statements are admissible under section 157 of the Evidence Act as former statements made by them to corroborate their testimony in the Court.
[50 F G] Common intention is a question of fact and is subjective.
It can be inferred from facts and circumstances.
In the instant case the appellants who were related to one another were armed with deadly weapons when they waylaid and attacked the deceased and his companions, someone incited them to "kill", and after the assault they left the scene of occurrence together and they were arrested from the same place.
There was the therefore common intention and the High Court was justified in convicting them under section 302/34, IPC.
[52 A C]
