Seven or eight armed dacoits entered a bank at Bayana, terrorised and beat up its employees, looted currency notes worth Rs. 15, 253/ , put the same in a black box and drove away with the booty in an Ambassador car.
The F.I.R. was lodged within half an hour of the dacoity and wireless messages were sent out for interception of the car.
Soon thereafter, an Ambassador car having seven persons seated in it and being driven in panic arrived near Weir from the direction of Bayana and met with an accident.
The police and the public surrounded the occupants of the car when they came out but they tried to escape by firing from their pistols.
They were chased and arrested but not before some members of the public received injuries on account of the firing.
The prosecution case was that it was the respondents who looted the bank, escaped in the car and were chased and arrested; that each of them was carrying a bundle of hundred currency notes of Rs. 10/ each; that the black box found in the car contained currency notes of the value of Rs. 6,800 belonging to the looted bank; and that live cartridges and knives had been recovered from the possession of some of the respondents.
At the trial, the respondents admitted that they had been arrested near Weir but denied any hand in the dacoity.
The Sessions Judge rejected their plea and convicted them under section 395, I.P.C. The High Court acquitted the respondents on three grounds: (i) that the evidence regarding identification of the respondents was not convincing as some of the witnesses who had identified the dacoits in jail had failed to identify them before the trial court; (ii) that the evidence regarding recovery of stolen property was not acceptable as the recovery memos were not genuine, the knives and cartridges had not been produced before the court, and the story that each of the respondents was carrying currency notes worth Rs. 1000 while running away after leaving a sum of Rs. 6,800 in the black box was unnatural; and (iii) that the allegation that the respondents had escaped in the Ambassador car and had come out of that car after it met with an accident was not acceptable in the absence of an entry relating to the number of the car in the General Diary of the Police.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: If two views of the evidence were reasonably possible in this appeal by special leave against acquittal, the court would not have substituted 54 its own assessment of the evidence for that of the High Court.
But it is impossible on any hypothesis to accept the conclusion of the High Court.
It is difficult in an incident of this kind to have evidence as strong and clinching as it is before the Court.
The only conclusion which one can come to upon that evidence is that the charge has been brought home to the accused.
[57 E F; 60 B] (b) The judgment of the High Court is severely laboured and unrealistic.
Evidence which is incontrovertible has been rejected on suspicion and surmises.
Witnesses who had no axe to grind and had no personal motive to implicate the accused on a false charge have been disbelieved on feeble considerations.
And the recovery of incriminating articles has been by passed and disbelieved by characterising it as unnatural and incredible.
Different crimes have different patterns and the offenders improvise their strategy according to the exigencies of the occasion.
The prosecution story has been rejected as not fitting in with the common course of events on the supposition and insistence that a crime of the present nature had to conform to a pattern of the kind which the High Court harboured in its mind.
[57 F H] (i) The High Court gave exaggerated importance to the infirmities attaching to the ability of the witnesses to identify the respondents and overlooked the fact that they had been arrested red handed and on the spot.
The incident which took place in the bank, the attempt made by the offenders to escape and their pursuit by the police and the public, which had all been proved by the most clear and cogent evidence, were but links in the same chain of causation and were parts of one and the same transaction.
[58 A B & F] (ii) There was no infirmity attaching to the evidence of the Station House Officer, Bayana who was examined as a court witness by the High Court itself, regarding the recovery of the black box from the car and the High Court was not justified in rejecting his evidence.
The submission that the box could have been easily planted by the police after the respondents were arrested is wholly unjustified.
The box was not left in the car as a matter of sweet volition.
The respondents had no option save to abandon it in the car when they were surrounded by the police and the public.
What is natural by the test of common experience is that thieves, while running away in order to escape from those who are chasing them, would leave a biggish article containing the loot where it lies.
[59 D E] (iii) The circumstance that the number of the car was not mentioned in the police diary was a petty matter in the midst of a large mass of good evidence connecting the respondents with the crime.
[59 G]
