The prosecution case against the respondent was that after marrying for a second time he started ill treating his first wife, the deceased, and that on the day of the occurrence (10th April, 1983) he poured kerosene oil on her and set fire to her body.
When the deceased started screaming he gagged her and wrapped her with a quilt and threw her on the floor and in the process he himself received burn injuries on his hands.
A week later on the 18th April, 1973 when the uncle of the deceased called on her at the hospital and enquired as to how it happened, she told him that her husband poured kerosene oil and set fire to her body.
He then reported the matter to the police.
Since her condition was precarious, a Magistrate recorded her dying declaration.
The respondent 's case on the other hand was that on the day of the occurrence when his wife 's garments accidentally caught fire when his house caught fire he attempted to extinguish the fire by covering her with a quilt and in the process he himself had received burn injuries.
Believing the evidence of the son of the deceased, a boy of 7 years, and the dying declarations made to her uncle and the Magistrate, the Sessions Judge held that the charge under section 302 I.P.C. was established.
But the High Court did not find it safe to convict him on the basis of the dying declarations and the statement of the child witness and acquitted him of the charge.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the State that even if there was no evidence on record to corroborate the dying declarations the respondent 's conviction could be based on the dying declaration.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is well settled that, even in the absence of other corroborating evidence, there can be a conviction on the basis of a dying declaration provided that the Court is satisfied about the truthfulness of the dying declaration and that it is not vitiated in any other manner.
[246 B C] 242 Maniappan vs The State of Madras, ; , Khushal Rao vs State of Bombay, ; , and Lallubhai Devechand Shah & Ors.
vs State of Gujarat, A.I.R. referred to.
In the instant case even though the occurrence took place on 10th April and the deceased was alive till 18th April, she did not disclose either to the villagers who visited her or to the doctor or the nurse attending on her that her husband sprinkled kerosene oil and set her on fire.
There was no evidence that she was not in a position to speak or that she was unconscious between 10th April and 18th April.
It was only on the 18th April that she made an or dying declaration for the first time to her uncle and later to the Magistrate.
And secondly the name of the husband of the deceased in the dying declaration was shown as Mohain Ali and not the real name Mafijuddin Ahmed.
The doctor, in whose presence the dying declaration was recorded, did not state that the declarant was the deceased; he only stated that the Magistrate recorded the statement of a patient of his unit who had received the burn injury.
Therefore the probability of her statement being inspired by her uncle cannot be weeded out.
The aforesaid circumstances do cast doubt on the truthfulness of the dying declaration.
[246 D H, 247 A C] From the tenor of the evidence of the son of the deceased, a boy of about 7 years, it is evident that he was vacillating throughout and that he was not a free agent but he had been tutored.
He said that he was in the mango grove at the time of the occurrence; that his uncle taught him to tell the police that he was in the grove at the time of occurrence; that it was the house that caught fire first; that his father poured kerosene oil on his mother and set fire to her.
He also said that his father poured sented oil on his mother 's body and not kerosene oil.
On the application of Alimuddin Ahmed the son of the accused was kept in the custody of his wife and thus to all intents and purposes the custody of the boy remained with the uncle of the deceased and his wife.
[247 E H, 248 A, D E] The fact that the respondent covered the deceased with quilt to extinguish the fire and in the process had himself got burn injuries on his hands also lend support to the defence version.
[248F]
