Sixty five persons claiming to be members of the Sikh community moved an application before the State Government under Section 7(1) of the Sikh Gurudwara Act, 1925 to have a religious institution in village Ramgarh (also known as Bhagtuana of Faridkot tehsil, declared to be a Sikh Gurudwara.
The State Government notified the said application in the Punjab Government Gazette in terms of Section 7(3) of the Act on 18th October, 1963.
Upon this the appellant made an application under Section 8 and 10 of the Act claiming that the institution was not a Sikh Gurudwara but an Udasi institution known as Dera Bhai Bhagtu.
The application was referred to the Sikh Gurudwara Tribunal for adjudication.
The petition was resisted by the respondent Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee on three grounds: (i) that the appellant was not competent to move the petition under section 7 of the Act as he was not a hereditary office holder, (ii) that the provisions of the Act are not ultravires the Constitution; and (iii) that the institution in dispute was a Sikh Gurudwara.
The Tribunal held against the respondent and in favour of the appellant on contention(1).
Since the second contention was not pressed and the third question was the only issue, the Tribunal held that the institution was a Sikh Gurudwara.
In appeal, the Punjab and Haryana High Court confirmed the Tribunal 's findings.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1.
The religious institution, Dera Bhai Bhagtu is not Sikh Gurudwara.
On the materials on record, the findings recorded by the Tribunal as well as the High Court are wholly unsupportable to satisfy the tests indicated in law for determining the character of the institution.
[581D] 1.2.
The findings of the High Court clearly show that the four important and most relevant aspects of the case as disclosed in the evidence were completely overlooked or side tracked by the High Court.
They are: (i) there are Samadhs on the premises of the institution; (ii) there are idols and photos of Hindu deities; (iii) Bhai Bhagtu was a Udasi Saint; and (iv) succession was from Guru to Chela.
565 The petition filed by the appellant under s.8 of the Act contained a clear averment that the institution had been set up by Bhai Bhagtu who was a Udasi Saint and the presence of three Samadhs of (1) Bhai Bhagtu, (2) Baba Paras Ram Ji, and (3) Mahant Sahib Dass Ji, was also asserted.
In the written statement the respondent, after a vague denial, had admitted the institution to have been founded by Bhai Bhagtu.
Pritam Dass, the appellant did support his case.
Ordinarily his evidence would have been treated as interested as he happens to be the party but his assertions have been well corroborated.
The same is strengthened by the evidence of all respondent 's witnesses.
The evidence of witnesses clearly indicates: (i) that there are atleast two samadhs in the premises of the institution one being of Bhai Bhagtu and the other of his mother; (ii) the existence of the idol of Baba Srichand, the founder of the Udasi Sect in the premises.
Clearly the Sikhs would not permit the idol of Baba Srichand in a Gurudwara while Udasis would ordinarily install such an idol to perpetuate the memory of the founder of their sect; (iii) the succession was from Guru to Chela; and (iv) there are photos of Hindu deities in the institution.
These facts without anything more would be sufficient to reject the case of the respondent that the institution is a Sikh Gurudwara.
[579A C; G; 580G H] 1.4.
From the very fact that Guru Granth Sahib was recited in the institution no support can be drawn for the claim that the institution was a Sikh Gurudwara.
It is well established that Udasis are midway between Sikhs on the one hand and the Hindus on the other.
Srichand son of Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, had broken away and set up the Udasi sect.
[581B C] 2.1.
Although for the purpose of historical research and analysis on the subject like Sikhs and Sikh temples, the forum of a court of law is not ideal, yet, if the statute enjoins the court to decide such questions, the court has got to discharge the responsibility.
[569D] 2.2.
The court has been called upon to decide whether the institution in question is a Sikh Gurudwara.
While considering this question the Court has to take into consideration all the circumstances which favour or militate against the institution being a Sikh Gurudwara.
In the very nature of things and in view of the requirements of sub s.(2) of section 16 it becomes necessary to consider whether the institution being in charge of a Udasi saint, the existence of samadhs of Udasi saints and worship thereof, or the existence of the idols and absence of a granthi and succession to the institution from guru to chela are all relevant considerations and the Court has to consider them if there is evidence on the record.
In the instant case evidence has been adduced on behalf of the appellant about the existence of samadhs and the various idols, the absence of a granthi and succession to the institution from guru to chela.
The appellant cannot, therefore, be prevented from urging the aforesaid circumstances.
[573F H; 574A] 2.3.
Courts cannot discard the evidence of witnesses of one side by simply saying that the oral testimony is interested and hardly any credible, when witnesses on either side have come to depose on oath.
Here, the grounds on which the evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant has been discarded may equally apply to the evidence adduced on behalf of the respondent.
The Court should have considered the worth of the evidence of each witness and should have given reasons for disbelieving the same on merit.
A bald observation that the witnesses produced on behalf for the appellant are interested must be deprecated.
The courts had to decide the 566 question in view of the provisions of sub s.(2) of s.16 of the Act and they had to record a positive finding in the light of sub s.(2) of s.16.
Unless the claim falls within one or the other of the categories enumerated in sub section(2) of s.16, the institution cannot be declared to be a Sikh Gurudwara [577B D; 578C] 3.1.
One of the most fascinating aspects of Sikhism is the process which began with human Gurus, continued during the period of duality in which there were human Gurus and a collection of sacred writings and ended with the present situation in which full authority is enjoined by the scripture.
In every respect the scripture is what the Gurus were.
[569G] Both the Gurus and the Book deserve respect, which they are accorded because of the Bani which they express, the word of divine truth.
Therefore, it was possible for Guru Arjan, the fifth in the human line, to bow before the collection which he had complied and installed in the newly built Darbar Sahib in 1604 for he was acknowledged the higher authority of the Bani due to the personal importance and significance which he possessed as Guru.
[569H; 570A] The Sikh Gurus have much in common with other preceptors in Indian tradition but their history and contribution is distinctive.
They were not Brahmins, they did not see their calling to be that of expounding Vedas, they taught in vernacular not Sanskrit and their message was for everyone.
They were ten in number each remaining faithful to the teachings of Guru Nanak, the first Guru and when their line was ended by a conscious decision of Guru Gobind Singh, the last Guru, succession was invested in a collection of teachings which was given the title of Guru Granth Sahib.
This is now the Guru of the Sikhs.
[570B C] An important characteristic of the teachings of the Sikh Gurus is their emphasis upon the message, the Bani.
It is this stress which made possible the transfer of Guruship to the scripture.
The human Gurus were the instruments through whom the voice of the God became audible.
[570D] The holiest book of the Sikhs is Guru Granth Sahib complied by the Fifth Master, Guru Arjun.
It is the Bible of Sikhs After giving his followers a central place of worship, Hari Mandir, he wanted to give them a holy book.
So he collected the hymns of the first four Gurus and to these he added his own.
Now this Sri Guru Granth Sahib is a living Guru of the Sikhs.
Guru means the guide.
Guru Granth Sahib gives light and shows the path to the suffering humanity.
Wherever a believer in Sikhism is in trouble or is depressed he reads hymns from the Granth.
Whenever the Sikhs needed guidance or counsel, they should assemble before the Granth in all sincerity and decide their further line of action in the light of teachings of the Master, as embodied in the Granth.
The noble ideas embodied in the Granth would live for ever and show people the path to blisss and happiness.
[570E F; 571B] 3.2.
Temples are found almost in every religion but there are some differences between the Sikh temples and those of other religions.
The Sikh Gurudwaras have the following distinctive features: [571C] 1.
Sikh temples are not the place of idol worship as the Hindu temples are.
There is no place for idol worship in a Gurudwara.
The central object of worship 567 in a Gurudwara is Sri Guru Granth Sakib, the holy book.
The pattern of worship consists of two main items: reading of the holy hymns followed by their explanation by some learned man, not necessarily a particular Granthi and then singing of some passages from the Holy Granth.
The former is called Katha and the second is called Kirtan.
A Sikh thus worships the Holy Words that are written in the Granth Sahib, the words or Shabada about the Eternal Truth or God.
No idol or painting of any Guru can be worshipped.
[571C D] 2.
Sikh worship in the Gurudwara is a congregational worship, whereas Hindu temples are meant for individual worship.
A Sikh does the individual worship at home when he recites Gurbani daily.
Some scriptures meant for this purpose are Japji, Jaap, Rehras, Kirtan Sohila.
Sangat is the collective body of Sikhs who meet every day in the Gurudwara.
[571E F] 3.
Gurudwara is a place where a copy of Guru Granth Sahib is installed.
The unique and distinguishing feature would always be the Nishan Sahib, a flagstaff with a yellow flag of Sikhism flying from it.
This serves as a symbol of the Sikh presence.
It enables the travellers, whether they be Sikhs or not, to know where hospitality is available.
There may be complexity of rooms in a Gurudwara for the building may also serve as a school, or where children are taught the rudiments of Sikhism as well as a rest centre for travellers.
Often there will be a kitchen where food can be prepared though langar itself might take place in the yawning.
Sometimes the Gurudwara will also be used as a clinic.
But its pivotal point is the place of worship and the main room will be that in which the Guru Granth Sahib is installed where the community gathers for diwan.
The focal point in this room will be the book itself.
[571G H; 572A] 3.3.
The sine qua non for an institution being a Sikh Gurudwara is that there should be established Guru Granth Sahib and the worship of the same by the congregation, and a Nishan Sahib as indicated in the earlier part of the Judgment.
There may be other rooms of the institution meant for other purposes but the crucial test is the existence of Guru Granth Sahib and the worship thereof by the congregation and Nishan Sahib.
It is not necessary that there must be a granthi in a Gurudwara.
Any learned person can read Guru Granth Sahib and explain to the congregation.
[572B C] Hem Singh and Others vs Basant Das & Anr.
(1935 36) L.R. 631 IA 180; Bawa Ishar Dass & Others vs Dr. Mohan Singh and Others, Arjan Singh vs Inder Das ; Harnam Singh vs Gurdial Singh ; Mahant Dharam Das etc.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
; Sohan Das vs Bela Singh & Ors.
AIR 1934 Lah.
180 referred to,
