The respondent State in the public Works Department has engaged a large number of workers for the construction of Madanganj Harmara Road, close to Tilonia village with a view to providing relief to persons affected by drought and scarcity conditions.
The workers employed in this construction work are divided into gangs of 20 persons or multiple thereof and for each gang one muster roll is maintained.
The work done by each gang is measured every fortnight and payment is made by the Public Works Department to the Mate who is the leader of the gang according to the work turned out by such gang during each fortnight.
The Public Works Department has fixed a certain norm of work to be turned out by each gang before the workmen belonging to such gang can claim the minimum wage of Rs. 7 per day with the result that if any particular gang turns out work according to the norm fixed by the Public Works Department, the Mate would be paid such amount as would be on distribution give a wage of Rs. 7 per day to the workmen constituting such gang, but if less work is turned out by such gang, payment to be made to the mate of such gang would be proportionately reduced and in that event, the wage earned by each member of such gang would fall short of the minimum wage of Rs. 7 per day.
Further, this system of proportionate distribution of the wages adopted without any visible principle or norm enabled a workman who has put in less work to get more payment than the person who has really put in more work.
Hence the public interest writ petition filed by the Director of the Social Work and Research Centre, complaining violation of the provisions of the , Articles 14 and 23 of the Constitution, and the vires of section 3 of the Rajasthan Famine Relief Works Employees (Exemption from Labour Laws) Act, 1964.
Allowing the Petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Where a person provides labour or service to another for remuneration which is less than the minimum wage, the labour or service provided by him clearly falls within the meaning of the words 'forced labour ' and attracts the condemnation of Article 23.
Every person who provides labour or service to another is entitled at the least to the minimum wage and if anything less than the minimum wage is paid to him, he can complain of violation of his 272 fundamental right under Article 23 and ask the court to direct payment of the minimum wage to him so that the breach of Article 23 may be abated.
[280 D F] 2: 1.
The constitutional validity of the Exemption Act in so far as it excludes the applicability of the providing that minimum wage may not be paid to a workman employed in any famine relief work, cannot be sustained in the face of Article 23.
Article 23 mandates that no person shall be required or permitted to provide labour or service to another on payment of anything less than the minimum wage.
Whenever any labour or service is taken by the State from any person, whether he be affected by drought and scarcity conditions or not, the State must pay, at the least, minimum wage to such person on pain of violation of Article 23.
[280 F G, 282 B C] 2: 2.
When the State undertakes famine relief work, it is no doubt true, that it does so in order to provide relief to persons affected by drought and scarcity conditions but, none the less it is work which enures for the benefit of the State representing the society and if labour or service is provided by the affected persons for carrying out such work, the State cannot pay anything less than the minimum wages to the affected persons.
It is not as if dole or bounty is given by the State to the affected persons in order to provide relief to them against drought and scarcity conditions nor is the work to be carried out by the affected persons worthless or useless to the society so that under the guise of providing work what the State in effect and substance seeks to do is to give dole or bounty to the affected persons.
The State cannot be permitted to take advantage of the helpless condition of the affected persons and extract labour or service from them on payment of less than the minimum wage.
No work of utility and value can be allowed to be constructed on the blood and sweat of persons who are reduced to a state of helplessness on account of drought and scarcity conditions.
[281 B E, H, 282 A] 2: 3.
In the instant case, the Notification issued under the makes it clear that the minimum wage of Rs. 7 is fixed per day and not with reference to any particular quantity of work turned out by the workmen during the day.
The Notification does not empower the employer to fix any particular norm of work to be carried out by the workman with reference to which the minimum wage shall be paid by the employer.
The minimum wage is not fixed on piece rate basis, so that a particular minimum wage would be payable only if a certain amount of work is turned out by the workman and if he turns out less work, then the minimum wage payable would be proportionately reduced.
Here the minimum wage is fixed at Rs. 7 per day and that is the minimum wage which must be paid by the employer to the workman so long as the workman works throughout the working hours of the day for which he can lawfully be required to work.
The employer may fix any norm he thinks fit specifying the quantity of work which must be turned out by the workman during the day, but if the workman does not turn out work in conformity with such norm, the employer cannot pay him anything less than the minimum wage.
If the norm fixed by the employer is reasonable and the workman does not turn out work according to such norm, disciplinary action may be taken against the workman and in a given case he must even be liable to be thrown out of employment, but he cannot be paid less than the minimum 273 wage, unless, of course, the minimum wage fixed by the Notification under the is correlated with the quantity of work to be turned out by the workman.
Otherwise, it would be the easiest thing for the employer to fix an unreasonably high norm which a workman working diligently and efficiently during the day cannot possibly reach and thereby deprive the workman of the minimum wage payable to him.
[283 B G] Peoples Union for Democratic Rights & Other vs Union of India &.
Others [1983]1 S.C.R. 456 followed.
PER PATHAK, J. 1.
The workers employed in the construction of the Madanganj Harmara Road as a measure of relief is a famine stricken area are entitled to a minimum wage of Rs. 7 per day, and that wage cannot be reduced by reference to the Rajasthan Famine Relief Works Employees (Exemption and Labour Laws) Act 1964, because in so far as the provisions of section 3 of that Act countenance a lesser wage they operate against Article 14 of the Constitution and are, therefore, void.[286 D E] 2:1.
By prescribing the criterion which it has, the Public Works Department has effected an invidious discrimination bearing no reasonable nexus to the object behind the employment.
[286 C D] 2:2 The circumstance that employment has been given to persons affected by drought and scarcity conditions provides only the reason for extending such employment.
In other words, the granting of relief to persons in distress by giving them employment constitutes merely the motive for giving them work.
It cannot affect their right to what is due to every worker in the course of such employment.
The rights of all the workers will be the same, whether they are drawn from area affected by drought and scarcity conditions or come from elsehwere.
The mere circumstance that a worker belongs to an area affected by drought and scarcity conditions can in no way influence the scope and sum of those rights.
In comparison with a worker belonging to some other more fortunate area and doing the same kind of work, he is not less entitled than the other to the totality of those rights nor liable to be distinguished from the other by the badge of his misfortune.
[285 E G] 2: 3.
When the State employs workers for doing work needed on its development projects, it must find funds for such projects.
And the fund must be sufficient to ensure the prescribed minimum wage to each worker and this is particularly so having regard to the concept of a "minimum wage".
Therefore, the argument that the wages are drawn from a fund too limited to provide for payment of a minimum wage to all is not justified.
[286 B C]
