The Gujarat Panchayats Act, 1961 was enacted to consolidate and amend the law relating to village panchayats and district local boards with a view to reorganise the administration pertaining to local Government in furtherance of the object of democratic decentralisation of powers in favour of different classes of panchayats.
It was provided that the state Government should exercise control over panchayats either directly or through such officer or officers as it may appoint for that purpose.
The Panchayat organisation consisted of Gram Panchayats, Taluqa Panchayats and District Panchayats which are bodies corporate with perpetual succession and common seal.
Notwithstanding that they were separate bodies corporate, the panchayats formed part of the panchayat organisation set up for securing a greater measure of participation by the people in the local governmental functions.
They were enjoined to perform functions and duties assigned by or under the Act so as to conform to the State plans, National plans and the State policy in general.
The State Government was empowered to cause inspection to be made and to call for and examine the record of the proceedings of any panchayat.
On the enactment of the 1961 Act, the District Local Boards, village panchayats and municipalities constituted under earlier Acts stood transformed as District Panchayats, gram or nagar panchayats, depending on population.
Officers and servants of the District Local Boards were deemed to be transferred to the service of the district panchayats, Secretaries, Officers and servants in the employ of the old village panchayats became Secretaries, Officers and servants of the new gram panchayats and h officers and servants in the employ of municipalities became Officers and servants of the interim panchayats.
288 The gram panchayats were entrusted with the work of looking after sanitation and health, public works, community development, agriculture, preservation of forests and a number of other subjects.
They were entrusted with the work of collection of land revenue and do any or all the functions and duties of village accountant or Patel or other similar functions of any other person in relation to the collection of land revenue and dues recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
Provision had been made in the Act for the transfer to the District Panchayats of such powers, functions and duties relating to any matters as are exercised or performed by the State Government or any officer of the Government under any enactment which the State Legislature is competent to enact or otherwise in the executive power of the State.
The Act also provided that any functions and duties relating to any of the matters specified in the panchayat functions list, previously being performed by the State Government, shall be transferred to the District Panchayats together with the funds provided and the staff employed therefor.
On such transfer, the District Panchayat may delegate, with the approval of tho Government, to any panchayat subordinate to it any of the functions and duties so transferred.
A fund called the Gram Fund or Nagar Fund was created and the proceeds of any tax or fee imposed by or assigned to the Panchayat under the Act, sums contributed to the fund by the State Government and all other sums received by the Panchayat were to be credited in the fund.
The Act provided for appointment of a Secretary and such other servants as may be determined for every Gram Panchayat and Nagar Panchayat in accordance with rules prescribed by the Government.
Depending on the facts and circumstances of a case, the State Government may direct that a group of Panchayats shall have one Secretary only.
The Secretary and other servants were required to do all the administrative functions as may be conferred on them by the Panchayat.
The Act provided that there shall be a Secretary for every Taluqa Panchayat and that the Taluqa Development officer who shall be an officer belonging to the State service and posted under the panchayat, shall be ex officio Secretary of the panchayat.
The District Development officer posted under the District Panchayat was to be the ex officio Secretary of the District Panchayat.
For the purpose of bringing about uniform scales of pay and uniform conditions of service for persons employed in the panchayats, the Act provided for the constitution of a panchayat service which was declared to be distinct from the State service.
Power was given to the State Government to determine from time to time classes, cadres and posts of officers and their strength A servant belonging to district cadre was liable to be posted whether by promotion or transfer, to any post in any other cadre as provided in the rules.
The State Government was empowered to make rules regulating the mode of recruitment either by holding examinations or otherwise and their conditions of service.
Appointments to posts in the panchayat service were to be made by direct recruitment or by promotion or by transfer of a member of the State service to the Panchayat service.
The Stale Government was empowered to allocate to the Panchayat service the requisite number of officers and servants who shall be taken over by the panchayat in such cadre and on such tenure, remuneration and other conditions of service as the State Government may determine and the it expenditure on account of pay and allowances of officer and servants of the Panchayat was to be met from the funds of The panchayat.
The Act enabled 289 the State Government to direct the posting of officers of the Indian Administrative Service and of Class ll services of the State Government in panchayat institutions.
Provision was made for the constitution of a Panchayat Service Selection Board and District Panchayat Service Selection Committees for selection of officers and other members of staff.
After the coming into force of the 1961 Act the State Government made several sets of rules, one of which was the Gujarat Panchayat Service (Absorption, Seniority, Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1965.
The Rules provided for the equation of posts, fixation of seniority, scales of pay and allowances of "allocated employees".
An "allocated employee" meant a person allocated to the panchayats service Under the rules every allocated employee holding a corresponding post immediately before the appointed day shall be appointed to the equivalent post, that is, a post in the Panchayat service, which the State Government may, by order, determine to be generally corresponding to a post held by an allocated employee immediately before the appointed day (called corresponding post) having regard to the pay scales, minimum educational and other qualifications prescribed for the equivalent post and the corresponding post and the nature and magnitude of responsibilities attached to such posts.
Therefore, unless equivalence of posts was first determined by order of the State Government, the 1965 Rules could not be applied The State Government did not make any order regarding the equation of posts of the staff in the local cadre and the fixation of their scales of pay, although such orders were made in respect of posts of other cadres.
The Government did not extend to the staff borne on the local cadre, the benefit of revision of scales of pay made on the basis of the recommendations of the two Pay Commissions, though such benefit was extended to the District and Taluqa Cadres; nor did the Government make any order providing for promotional avenues to employees of the local cadre.
Aggrieved by the inaction of the Government, the employees of the local cadre of the panchayat service filed a writ petition in the High Court seeking various reliefs. 'The Government contended that members of the panchayat service were not Government servants and so were not entitled to claim the reliefs asked for by them.
Allowing the petitions the High Court held that the employees belonging to the local cadre were Government servants and directed the State Government to make suitable orders under the 1965 Rules to initially fix the pay scales and other conditions of service, lo revise the scales of pay in accordance with the recommendations of the Pay Commission.
Certain other reliefs were also given.
The State Government filed in this Court an appeal against the, judgment of the High Court.
In the meantime, the Governor promulgated the Gujarat Panchayats Amendment ordinance, 1978 which later became the Gujarat Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 1978.
The amending Act of 1978 was enacted to get over the effect of the judgment of the High Court.
It denied the status of Government servants to certain categories of employees and their allocation to the Panchayat service was cancelled with retrospective effect.
290 In their writ petitions the employees of the local cadre contended that the provisions of the Amendment, Act of 1978 were violative of Article 311 of the Constitution, that the Act was discriminatory and that the benefits acquired by them could not be taken away with retrospective effect.
In the appeal it was contended that having regard to the various provisions of the Act the members of the panchayat service were Government servants.
Dismissing the appeal and allowing the petitions, ^ HELD: The panchayat service constituted under the Act is a civil service of The State and the members of the service are Government servants.
[309 C] It is not possible to lay down any distinctive test to determine when a person may be said to hold a civil post under the Government.
The presence of all or some of the factors such as the right to select for appointment, the right to appoint, the right to terminate the employment, the right to take disciplinary action or determine the service, (he source from which wages or salary are paid and a host of such circumstances may have to be considered to determine the existence of the relationship of master and servant.
[ 306 B D] Gurugobinda Basu vs Sankari Prasad Ghosal, ; ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Audh Narain Singh, ; ; State of Assam vs Shri Kamakchandra Dutta, ; ; Gurushantappa vs Abdul Khuddus, ; S.L. Aggarwal vs Hindustan Steel Ltd., ; ; Jalgaon Zilla Parishad vs Duman Gobind and others, C.A. No. 24 & 25 of 1968 decided on December 20, 1968, referred to.
In the instant case, members of the service are required to perform functions in connection with those affairs of the State entrusted to the panchayats either by the Act itself or by transfer by the Government under the Act.
It may be that the pay and other allowances of the officers were paid out of the panchayats ' own funds but the sums consisted of funds contributed or lent by the State Government and of the proceeds of any tax or fee imposed by or assigned to the panchayats under the Act.
This imposition of a tax or fee J in the nature of a tax is essentially a function of the State.
So the salary and allowances of servants and officers are paid out of the funds contributed or lent by Government or raised by the discharge of an essential governmental function.
Officers and staff are to be appointed by an authority prescribed by the Government and their conditions of service shall be as may be prescribed by the Government.
The Act contemplates the constitution of a single centralised panchayat service, the classes, cadres and posts of which have to be determined by the Government from time lo time.
Such other topics like recruitment, conditions of .
service, transfer, promotions, disciplinary action to be taken against the officers and servants are to be regulated by rules made by the Government.
There cannot be any question of a rule providing for promotion from the panchayat service to the State service unless the panchayat service is also a service under the State.
The provisions 291 relating to inter district transfers of servants of the panchayat service and provisions which provide for promotion and transfer of servants belonging to the different cadres within the District, Taluqa and Gram or Nagar panchayat clearly show that these servants are not the servants of the individual panchayat but belong to a centralised service.
The provision relating to transfer and allocation of members of the State service to the panchayat service necessarily implies that the panchayat service is also a service under the State and such transfers would be impermissible unless the panchayat service is also a service under the State.
The very idea that there can be an allocation to the Panchayat service from a State service and a reallocation from the panchayat service to the State service is only consistent with the panchayat service also being a service under the State.
[306 G H, 307 A H, 308 E] The provision under the Act that the panchayat service shall be distinct from the State service does not indicate a disclaimer by the Legislature that the panchayat service is a service under the State; it is a distinct service from the state service because the panchayat institutions constitute an almost parallel but subsidiary Government.
Again Government servants do not cease to be Government servants merely because, for the time being, they are allocated to different panchayat institutions and are paid out of the funds of institutions which are declared to be bodies corporate.
[308 F H, 309 B C] G.L. Shukla vs State of Gujarat, approved.
The Gujarat Panchayats (Third Amendment) Act, 1978 is unconstitutional as it offends Articles 311 and 14 and is arbitrary and unreasonable.
The provisions are so intertwined with one another that it is impossible to separate the offending sections from the others.
[320 E G] The object of the 1961 Act was "democratic decentralisation of power and the consequent re organisation of tho administration of local Government" and even after the 1978 amendment this object continued to be the same.
Even so, section 11 (1) which declared that the different panchayats shall constitute a panchayat organisation was omitted.
The Statement of objects and reasons stated that the amendments were necessitated to get over the judgment of the High Court that the panchayat service was a State service.
That could not be a reason to go against the object of the principal Act and to abandon the constitution of the State panchayat organisation [312 E H] The effect of the amending Act was that non Talati Secretaries and other officers and servants of the Gram and Nagar panchayats were to be deemed to be the servants of the respective panchayats notwithstanding the judgments of courts declaring them to be Government servants.
The District panchayats were barred from transferring their staff to Gram and Nagar panchayats consequent on the delegation of functions, powers and duties to Gram and Nagar panchayats.
A panchayat service consisting of persons employed in connection with the affairs of Taluqa panchayats and District panchayats and of specified servants was constituted notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of any court and such persons and servants were deemed to have always been the officers and servants of tho Taluqa panchayats or tho District panchayats for the ostensible reason 292 of enabling the respective panchayats to exercise their powers and perform their functions efficiently.
In so doing it omitted the Gram and nagar panchayats which are at the very base of democratic decentralisation and on which the superstructure stands.
[314 C H, 315 E F] Before the Amending Act of 1978 was passed, ex municipal employees who had been allocated to the panchayat service as Secretaries, officers and servants of Gram and Nagar panchayats had achieved the status of Government servants.
The amending Act hag done away with their status as members of a service under the State without giving them an option.
Retrospectivity is given in order that they could not claim that they were ever Government servants.
But their status as Government servants could not be extinguished so long as the posts were not abolished and their services were not terminated in accordance with the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution nor was it permissible to single them out for differential treatment because that would offend Article 14 of the Constitution.
[319 B D] There is no force in the contention that some of the officers and servants of the Gram and Nagar panchayats were Government servants from the beginning while other officers and servants of Gram and Nagar panchayats were not and that a classification on the basis of source of their services was permissible.
Once they had joined the common stream of service and performed the same duties, it is not permissible to make any classification on the basis of their origin.
[319 D E] Undoubtedly, the Legislature is competent to legislate with retrospective effect to take away or impair any vested right but since laws are made under a written constitution and have to conform to the do 's and don 'ts of the constitution neither prospective nor retrospective laws can be made so as to contravene the fundamental rights.
A Legislature cannot legislate today with reference to a situation that obtained 20 years ago and ignore the constitutional rights accured in the course of 20 years.
A law which, if made today, would be plainly invalid as offending constitutional provisions in the context of the existing, situation cannot become valid by being made retrospective [319 G H, 320 B, E]
