In the State appeal against acquittal, appellant Babu, his father Munna and Tulaiyan were convicted by the High Court of Allahabad and sentenced to life imprisonment.
The prosecution case as unfolded in the First Information Report and the evidence is that Dhani Ram, the deceased who was living with his father in law in village Euretha came on 7th of October 1969 to tho house of his father Ajudhya in village Therro for getting his lands ploughed.
On the 8th October 1969 at about 9 A.M., he along with his father left village Therro for village Kurotha for getting seeds from one of Dhani Ram 's friends.
When the two reached the field of Malkhan which is said to be near the temple of Ram Kund, the appellants came out from inside the Jhunri field of Malkhan and started beating Dhani Ram with lathis.
While Tulaiyan, appellant No. 3 caught hold of Ajudhya and prevented him from having his son Dhani Ram rescued, the other two continued to beat him to death pursuant to the F.I.R. filed at S.30 p.m. at the police station which was about 12 miles away, Sub Inspector Prem Narain reached the spot at 3 A.M. on 9th October, found the dead body of Dhani Ram Iying between the fields of Halkha and Malkhan, sent it for postmortem and after investigation filed the chargesheet.
The prosecution produced three witnesses Ajudhya, father of deceased as PW 1, Arjun PW 2 and Kashi Ram PW 3, both PW 2 and PW 3 being neighbours of PW I and of the same caste.
to prove the case along with the post mortem report which showed the stomach and bladder of the deceased empty and the large intestine with faceal matter All the appellants entered a plea of non guilty.
Babu 's defence was that the case was foisted against him as he had earlier on 17th of July 1969 329 filed a complaint under section 498 I.P.C. against Dhani Ram, his brother Ghurka, their maternal uncle Halka and one Ram Charan for enticing Babu 's wife away.
Tulaiyan took tho plea that he was being implicated as he was one of the witnesses in the earlier case under section 498 I.P.C. On appraisal of evidence the Sessions Judge came to the conclusion that the evidence produced by the prosecution was too feeble to base any conviction on that.
In his opinion there was no motive on the part of the appellants, and the witnesses could not be said to be independent and they were mere chance witnesses.
Ho further found that tho probability of Dhani Ram being attacked while it was dark before he had evacuated or takeon his breakfast could not be weeded out and in all probability the occurrence had taken place not at tho place alleged by the Prosecution.
On those findings he acquitted all the accused.
On appeal, however, the High Court set aside the order of acquittal and convicted the appellants under section 302 road with section 34 I.P.C. and sentenced each of them to undergo imprisonment for life.
Hence tho appeal under section 2 of the Supreme Court (Enlargomont of Criminal Appellate Jurisdiction) Act 1971.
Allowing tho appeal, the Court D ^ HELD: 1:1 The appellate court should be slow in disturbing the finding of fact of the trial court and if two views are reasonably pos4sible of the evidence on the record, it should not interfere simply because it feels that it would have taken a different view if the case bad been tried by it, because the trial judge has the advantage of seeing and hearing the witnesses and the initial presumption of innocence in favour of the accused is not weakened by his acquittal.
[335 P G] State of U.P. vs Samman Dass, ; , followed.
1:2 In the instant cases a perusal of tho evidence produced and the two judgments of the courts below make it clear that tho conclusions arrived at by the Sessions court were fully justified and should not have been lightly set aside by the High Court.
The cumulative effect of the various circumstances in the opinion of the Sessions Judge did throw doubt on the prosecution case and if the learned Sessions Judge in the circumstances did not think it safe to rely upon the evidence produced on behalf of the Prosecution, he committed no error either as to the time of occurrence or the venue of the occurrence, or the motive for murder, or the motive of PW 1 to implicate tho appellants by treating the witnesses as interested and/or chance witnesses.
[336 D E, 334 B C]
