The respondent was an assessee under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963.
In determining the taxable turnover for the assessment year 1973 74, it claimed exemptions in respect of a 'service discount ' under r. 9(a) and an amount of Rs. 982.83 in respect of 'sales returns ' under r. 9(b)(i) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Rules, 1963.
The Assistant Commissioner disallowed the claim on both the counts stating that while the 'service discount ' had not been allowed as a discount in accordance with the terms of the sale but as an overriding commission and incentive to promote trade, the 'sales returns ' related to the sales completed in the assessment year 1972 73.
In appeal, the Deputy Commissioner allowed the assessee 's claim in respect of 'service discount ' in full and that in respect of 'sales returns ' to the extent of Rs. 552.70.
The Department 's appeal before the Appellate Tribunal and the revision filed by it before the High Court were dismissed.
The appellant contended that the 'service discount ' could not strictly be termed as discount as it was in lieu of services rendered by the respondent 's main distributors by way of popularisation of the sales and consumption of the products sold by the assessee and that it was either in the nature of a set off on account of reciprocal promises or it amounted to consideration for an agreement styled as "trading in"; and That the deduction claimed in respect of 'sales returns ' could not be allowed from the taxable turnover for the year 1973 74 as any deduction under r. 9(b)(i) could only be made from the total turnover or the assessment year in which the goods were actually sold.
Dismissing the appeal in so far as it concerned the 'service discount ', and allowing the same in respect of 'sales returns ', ^ HELD: Rule 9 (a) says that all amounts allowed as discount either in accordance with regular practice or in accordance with agreement would be deductible from the total turnover provided they are duly supported by the entries in the accounts of the assessee.
Ordinarily, any concession shown in 385 the price of goods for any commercial reason would be a trade discount which can legitimately be claimed as a deduction under r.9(a).
Such a concession is usually allowed with the object of improving prospects of one 's own business.
It is common experience that when goods are marketed through reputed concerns, the demand for such goods increases and correspondingly the business of the manufacturer or the wholesale dealer would become more and more prosperous.
Hence any concession in price shown in such circumstances by way of an additional incentive with a view to promote one 's own trade does qualify for deduction as a trade discount.
It cannot be termed as a service charge.
[389A D] In the instant case, the 'service discount ' in respect of which the deduction was claimed was the additional trade discount allowed by the assessee to its main distributors over and above the normal trade discount in consideration of the extra benefit derived by the assessee by reason of the marketing of its goods through them.
It is not disputed that there were such agreements between the assessee and the purchasers and the accounts of the assessee truly reflected the actual discount allowed to the purchasers.
Apart from buying the products of the assessee, no other service was rendered by the dealers to the assessee.
The additional discount or 'service discount ' is no other than the discount referred to in r.9 (a).
[388 E H; 389 D E] (b) 'Trade in ' contracts are those where goods ale transferred by the seller for consideration partly in money and partly in exchange of some other goods to be sold by the buyer to the seller.
In such cases there may be one contract of sale only of the principal goods coupled with a subsidiary agreement that if the buyer delivers to the seller the other goods, an agreed allowance will be made.
There may also be cases where the buyer may become entitled to an extra allowance for some service unconnected with the sale of the goods in question being rendered to the seller.
In such cases the allowance in the price of the goods sold given by the seller to the buyer either by way of consideration for the goods supplied by the buyer to the seller or for services rendered by the buyer to the seller would not be a trade discount as such which would qualify or deduction in the determination of the taxable turnover.
[389 P H; 390 A] In the instant case.
the service said to have been rendered by the buyers for securing the 'service discount ' is an integral part of the transaction of sale itself which incidentally confers on the assessee the benefit of popularisation of the assessee 's goods in the market.
The discount so allowed is merely a percentage of the price of the Goods sold which has nothing to do with any other goods supplied or other service rendered by the buyers to the assessee.
The fact that the discount is not allowed at the time of sale but on a later date at the end of the month would not make it any the less a trade discount.
The High Court rightly upheld the deduction of the 'service discount ' claimed in this case.[390A.C] 2.
The two important conditions which have to be satisfied for claiming the deduction under r. 9(b)(i) are that the goods in question must have been returned within three months from the date of delivery and that necessary entries are made in the accounts of the assessee If these conditions are satisfied, the amount allowed to the purchaser for the returned goods would be deductible from the total turnover.
Any deduction that can be made under 386 this rule can only be made from the total turnover of the assessment year in which the goods that are returned within three months of the date of delivery were actually sold.
Such deduction cannot be claimed from the total turnover of the succeeding financial year.
If The assessment for the relevant year is completed, the department has to comply with the demand for adjustment or refund by making necessary rectification in the order of assessment.
[390 E H. 391 F G] Jay Engineering Works vs State of Kerala, 43 S.T.C. 492, overruled.
