The proviso to section 8 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 (Principal Act) lays down that the same goods cannot be taxed under it at more than one point in the same series of sales or purchases by successive dealers.
In 1975 the State Legislature enacted the Orissa Additional Sales Tax Act (the Act) levying additional sales tax on certain classes of dealers.
In 1979 the State Legislature amended the Act by the Orissa Additional Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1979 by which sections 2 and 3 of the Act were substituted by new sub sections 2 and 3.
After the amendment section 3 of the Act provided that every dealer shall, in p addition to the sales tax payable by him for 3 year under the said Act be liable to pay additional tax at such rate not exceeding one per cent of his gross turnover (excluding the gross turnover which relates to sale and purchase of declared goods) for that year as may be notified from time to time by the State Government.
By a notification the State Government notified the rates of additional tax payable under section 3 of the Act as amended in 1979 at one half per cent of the annual gross turnover.
Sub section (2) of section 3 made it clear that the provisions of the Principal Act would mutatis mutandis apply in relation to the additional tax as if they apply in relation to the tax payable under the Principal Act.
Construing section 3 of the Act after its amendment, the State Government took the view that the new levy was in the nature of a multi point tax and that every dealer was liable to pay additional tax on his annual gross turnover irrespective of its taxability.
under the Principal Act.
364 In a number of writ petitions filled before the High Court by dealers it was A contended that section 8 of the Principal Act which prohibited the levy of tax at more than one point in the same series of sales or purchases by successive dealers was applicable to the additional tax leviable under the Act as amended in 1979.
Without referring to the effect of the provisions of section 3 of the Act the High Court held that since the Principal Act and the Act as amended in 1979 had been passed by a competent legislature providing for a different base and for a different scheme it was not open to the assessee to rely upon any of the provisions of the Principal Act relating to incidence and levy of tax.
In appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that wherever there was no express provision to the contrary in the Act the provisions of the Principal Act, including those relating to the incidence and levy of tax should apply to the additional tax also.
The Department on the other hand contended that section 3(2) of the Act was intended only to make those provisions of the Principal Act relating to assessment and collection of tax applicable to proceedings under the Act and no part of section 33 to section 8 of the Principal Act would be applicable to the levy of additional tax.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: If the contention of the Department that only the machinery provisions of the Principal Act become applicable to the proceedings under the Act is accepted it would lead to many anomalies.
[377 F] Section 8 of the Principal Act which begins with a non obstante clause is given an over riding effect over the rest of the provisions of the Principal Act.
Levy of tax at a single prescribed point and prohibition against levy of tax at more than one point is an important characteristic of the scheme of the Principal Act.
[370 C D] The Act was virtually in the nature of an amendment of the Principal Act.
The additional sales tax payable by dealers specified in section 2(a), (b) and (c) as originally enacted was in the nature of an enhancement of their liability to pay tax under the Principal Act by specified percentages but they were prohibited from passing on the incidence of additional tax to the purchasers.
[372 E F] Although the provisions of the Act could have been incorporated in the Principal Act itself, by the introduction of sections 2 and 3 in the Principal Act, the State Legislature passed a separate Act.
But it was made clear by section 3(2) of the Act that the provisions of the Principal Act would mutatis mutantis apply in relation to the additional tax as they apply in relation to the tax payable under the Principal Act.
The two Acts, i.e., the Principal Act and the Act as originally enacted had to be read together in order to make the provisions contained in the Act effective.
This position continued up to the coming into force of the Amending Act on April 1, 1979 by which sections 2 and.
3 of the Act wore substituted by new sections 2 and 3.
[373 G H, 374 A C] 365 With the substitution of section 3(2) in 1979 the prohibition of passing of the additional tax, which existed formerly was removed.
Secondly the additional tax, instead of being an enhancement of the tax payable by a dealer by a certain percentage, became a percentage of the annual turn over of a dealer.
Both the statement of objects and reasons and tho Amending Act were silent on the question whether the additional tax payable after the amendment was a multi point levy or a single point levy as also on the classes of dealers liable to pay additional tax.
[375 F H] 2.
The view of the High Court that the two Acts were independent of each other was not correct.
It is necessary to read and to construe the Principal Act and the Act together as if the two wore one, and while doing so to give effect to the provisions of the Act which is a later one in preference to the provisions of the Principal Act wherever the Act has manifested an intention to modify the Principal Act.
[377 B C] The definition of mutatis mutandis given in legal dictionaries is "with the necessary changes in points of detail meaning that matters or things are generally the same, but to be altered when necessary" as to names, offices and the like.
[378 E F] Extension of an earlier Act mutatis mutandis to a later Act brings in the idea of adaptation, but so far only as it is necessary for the purpose, making a change without altering the essential nature of the thing changed, subject to express provisions made in the later Act.
[378 H, 379 A] In the instant case section 3(2) of the Act shows that the State Legislature intended not to depart substantially from the Principal Act except with regard to matters in respect of which express provision had been made in the Act.
Though the Act had the usual features of a state, it could not be considered as an independent statute but must be read together with the Principal Act to be effective.
[379 A C] Earl Jowitt 's The Dictionary of English Law (1959); Black 's Law Dictionary (revised 4th edn.
(1968) Bouvier 's Law Dictionary (3rd Revision) Vol.
II, referred to The additional tax levied under the Act could be passed on to consumer after the amendment.
The object of the amendment made in 1979 as set out in the statement of objects and reasons was to rationalise the scheme of additional sales tax and to introduce flexibility in The implementation of the Act.
If the object of the amendment was to make the additional tax a multi point levy, nothing was easier than using the appropriate words in the Act by excluding the application of section 8 of the Principal Act expressly in section 3(2) of the Act.
In the absence of any such words in the Act, by reason of section 3(2) of the Act section 8 of the Principal Act must be construed as being applicable to the levy of an additional tax also.
The gross turnover referred to in section 3(1) should, therefore, be understood as that part of the gross turnover which is taxable under the Principal Act.
[380 A G] If section 3(1) is read as "every dealer (who is liable to pay tax under the Principal Act) shall in addition to the tax payable by him for a year under the 366 said Act, be liable to pay additional tax at such rate not exceeding one per cent of his gross turnover which is taxable under the Principal Act) for that year as may be notified from time to time by the State Govt. " there would not be any anomaly.
On the other hand it would effectuate the intention of the legislature.
[381 A B] It is true that if the words used in a statute are clear it is not open to the Court to go in search of the intention of the legislature and to arrive at a meaning different from what the words of the statute convey.
When the Act is read as a whole it becomes inevitable that it has to be read together with the Principal Act.
It is a well settled principle of construction that where the later of the two Acts provides that the two are to be read together every part of each Act must be construed as if the two Acts had been one, unless there is some manifest discrepancy making it necessary to hold that the later Act has, to some extent, modified the provisions of the earlier Act.
When section 3(1) of the Act is read in the light of sub section 2 thereof, section 8 of The Principal Act which prescribes a single point levy becomes immediately attracts.
[381 C f] The argument that since section 8 of the Principal Act opens with the words "notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 'this Act" the operation of that section should be confined to the tax payable under the Principal Act and could not be extended to the additional tax payable under the Act has no force.
When the Principal Act was enacted, section 8 could apply only to the liability under the Principal Act, but by reason of section 3(2) of the Act, section 8 has been made applicable to the levy, assessment and collection of additional tax under the Act.
If this argument is accepted many provisions of the Principal Act which are necessary for making the levy under the Act effective would become inapplicable, as for example section 13 relating to the machinery for recovery of tax and penalty.
[381 F H, 382 A] The second proviso to section 3(1) of the Act does not in any way curtail the effect of section 3(2) of the Act which forms an integral part of the charming section.
Consequently any exemption granted under sections 6 and 7 of the Principal Act would also be applicable in the case of levy of additional tax under the Act.
[382 C D]
