A 'stage carriage ' under the means a motor vehicle which carries more than six persons for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers either for the whole journey or for stages of the journey and for plying such a vehicle it is necessary to obtain a permit from the appropriate Transport Authority.
While considering an application for such a permit, the Transport Authority must, under cls.
(a) to (f) of sub section
(1) of section 47, have regard to the interest of the public generally, the advantages to the public of the service to be provided, the adequacy of other passenger transport services operating between the places to be served, the operation by the applicant of other transport services, etc., and also take into consideration the representations made by local or police authorities and by persons already providing passenger transport facilities by any means along or near the proposed route or area.
The State Government may, under sub section
(1) of section 43, having regard to the advantages offered to the public by the development of motor transport, the desirability of preventing uneconomic competition among motor vehicles, etc., issue appropriate directions to the Transport Authority The subject matter of regulation of motor vehicles being within the scope of entry 35 of the Concurrent List, the Act in its application to tho State of Uttar Pradesh was amended in 1972 by the U.P. Legislature by the introduction of section 43 A which was a new provision.
While sub section
(1) thereof conferred power on the State Government to issue directions of a general character in public interest in respect of any matter relating to road transport, sub section
419 (2) specifically conferred the power to issue directions regarding grant of stage carriage permits to all eligible applicants if the State Government was of the opinion that it was in the public interest to do so.
Further, under sub section (2) of section 43 A, the provisions of section 47 stood amended to the effect that while considering an application for permit, it was no longer necessary for the Transport Authority to have regard to the adequacy of other passenger transport services operating between the places to be served or to the operation by the applicant of other transport services; nor was the Transport Authority required to look into representations made by any one other than local or police authorities.
The State Government, acting under section 43 A, issued directions in March, 1972 for grant of permits to all eligible applicants without any restriction as to the number of permits to be issued on any route.
The validity of section 43 A and the directions issued thereunder were upheld by the Court in Hans Raj Kehar & Ors vs Srate of UP.
& Ors ; But, within a short time, the State Government realised the necessity of reviewing the policy of issuing permits to all eligible applicants and amended section 43 A with retrospective effect by the Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 1976.
While sub section (1) was retained as such, sub section
(2) was substituted by an entirely new sub section.
The Statement of objects and Reasons appended to the Amending Act stated that it had become necessary to reconsider the policy of granting bus permits liberally with a view to checking unproductive capital expenditure and unnecessary consumption of fuel, preventing elimination of small operators as a consequence of unreasonable competition, etc.
and authorising the State Government to issue necessary directions from time to time in regard to the number of permits that may be granted in respect of any route or area, the preference to be given to specifically deserving categories, etc.
The State Government thereafter issued directions to the Transport Authorities to ensure that the operation of the total number of stage carriages on any route was economically viable.
Section 47 was amended by the Central Act 47 of 1978.
The proviso to sub section
(1) of section 47 was amended by providing that in addition to a registered cooperative society, an application for a stage carriage permit from a person who has a valid licence for driving transport vehicles shall he given preference over applications from individual owners.
Parliament also introduced new sub sections
(1A) to (1H) in section 47 providing for reservation of certain percentage of stage carriage permits for the Scheduled Castes and Tribes and weaker sections of the community and empowered the State Government to frame rules for implementing sub sections
(1A) to (1H) of s 47.
These amendments came into force on January 16, 1979.
On January 10, 1981 the State Government issued a notification directing the Transport Authorities to issue stage carriage permits to all eligible applicants and specifying that there should be no upper limit to the number of stage carriages for which permits might be granted.
On January 23, 1981, by another notification, of the Transport Authorities were directed to have regard only to matters referred to in cls.
(a), (b), (d) and (f) of sub section
(l) of section 47 and to take into consideration representations made by local or police authorities only.
Tho appellants challenged the notifications under Article 226.
420 The High Court dismissed the petitions repelling the contention that in the absence of reservation of the required percentage of permits for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and weaker sections as provided in section 47 the grant of permits would be vitiated.
According to the High Court the question of reservation would arise only in those cases where the seats or articles are limited for distribution or allotment but where there is no limit or no fixed number, the question of reservation would not arise.
The High Court said that the Statement of objects and Reasons appended to the Amending Act 15 of 1976 cannot override the clear provisions of section 43 A as amended by that Act and held that though the two impugned notifications did not follow the procedure prescribed by sub section
(2) of section 43 A, they could be sustained under sub section
(1) of s.43 A.
It relied on the decision in Hans Raj Kehar 's case to hold that large number of buses operating on different routes would be for the convenience and benefit of the travelling public.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: Whenever a court is called upon to interpret an amended provision it has to bear in mind the history of the provision, the mischief which the legislature attempted to remedy, the remedy provided by the amendment and the reason for providing such remedy.
Section 43 A of the Act as in force in the State of U.P. was amended by the U.P. Act 15 of 1976.
By the substitution of the former sub section
(2) by the new sub s (2) in section 43 A the legislature clearly expressed itself against the policy of granting permits to all eligible applicants without any consideration to the needs of any particular locality or route or to the qualifications of applicants.
After the amendment, sub section
(1) of section 43 A did not comprehend within its scope the power to issue directions for issuing permits to all eligible applicants without any sort of restriction relevant to the scheme of the Act.
The sub section states that the State Government may issue such directions of a general character as it may consider necessary in the public interest. 'Public interest ' under the Act does not mean the interests of the operators or of the passengers only.
It takes within its fold several factors such as, the maximum number of permits that may be Issued on a route or in any area having regard to the needs and convenience of the travelling public, the non availability of sufficient number of stage carriages in other routes or areas which may be in need of running of additional services, the problems of law and order, availability of fuel, etc.
To say that larger the number of stage carriages in any route or area more convenient it would be to the members of the public is an over simplification of a problem with myriad facets affecting the general public.
The Act itself contains provisions relating to licensing of drivers and conductors, specifications of motor vehicles, co ordination of road and rail transport, prevention of deterioration of road system, prevention of Uneconomic competition among motor vehicles, etc.
Any direction given by the State Government under section 43 A should, therefore, be in conformity with all matters regarding which the statute has made provision.
In this situation to say that any number of permits can be issued to any eligible operator without any upper limit is to overstep the limits of delegation of statutory power.
[444 A H; 445 A E] In the instant case, a reading of the two notifications shows that the State Government ignored the legislative policy underlying the U.P. Act 15 of 421 1976 by which the new sub section
(2) of section 43 A was enacted in substitution of the former sub section
(2) with retrospective effect.
The new sub section
(2) was introduced by the State legislature after it had realised the mistake committed by the State Government in issuing the notification in the year 1972 directing the issue of bus permits liberally in favour of all eligible applicants which had resulted in investment of unproductive capital expenditure and under utilisation of capital and fuel and in unreasonable competition which eventually eliminated small operators from business.
[441 D F] (ii) The State Government also ignored the new policy governing the issue of permits introduced by Parliament by amending section 47 of the Act in 1978.
The High Court erred in not noticing that by issuing the notification containing a direction to the Transport Authorities to issue limitless number of permits, the State Government had attempted to circumvent sub sections
(1) and (IA) to (IH) of a section 47.
The observation of the High Court that preferences have to be shown and reservations have to be made only when there is scarcity of permits and since there were no restrictions on the number of permits to be issued there was no necessity to make any such provision is shocking.
Preference and reservations have value only when there is a limit on the number of permits to be issued and in the context of the Act there should necessarily be a limit on the issue of permits to operate motor vehicles in respect of any route or area.
By the D method adopted by it the State Government has virtually allowed the rich and well to do businessman who can bear the loss for some time to introduce any number of vehicles on a route or in any area until all the small operators who also may take the permits to leave the field owing to the inevitable loss that ensues by the operation of an unlimited number of vehicles.
The two notifications in question are clearly outside the scope of the Act.
[445 F H; 446 A E] (iii) The observations in Hans Raj Kehar 's case are inapplicable to the present cases.
In that case the Court was concerned with sub section
(2) of section 43 A as it stood then.
At that time, the sub section contained a clear legislative policy which considered that there could be no public prejudice if all eligible applicants were granted permits.
Whatever the Court may have observed while considering that provision would not apply now as There is a clear departure made by the legislature from that policy when it enacted the new sub section
(2) of section 43 A.
In the face of this amendment by which the former sub section
(2) of s.43 A which specifically authorised the State Government when it was satisfied that it was necessary to do so in the public interest to issue directions to the Transport Authorities to grant permits to all eligible applicants was deliberately taken away by the State legislature, the High Court was wrong in holding that such power was still available under sub section
(1) of section 43 A which was widely worded.
[443 C H] Hans Raj Kehar & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
; , held inapplicable.
