The appellant, Earabhadrappa hailing from village Mattakur, under the false name of Krishnappa and with a false address obtained employment of service as a domestic servant under PW 3 Makrappa, the husband of the deceased Bachamma, who was found murdered by strangulation on the night between March 21 22, 1979 after having been robbed of her jewellery, clothes, etc.
Based on circumstantial evidence, the appellant, who was found missing right from the early hours of the 22nd March, 1979 and who was apprehended a year later on March 29, 1980, was charged with and convicted for the offences under Sections 302, 392 IPC respectively.
He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a term of 10 years under section 392 IPC and to death under Section 302.
In appeal, the High Court confirmed both the conviction and sentences imposed upon him.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal and modifying the sentence, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.1 To sustain a charge under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code,the mere fact that the accused made a statement leading to the discovery of the stolen articles under section 27 of the Evidence Act, by itself is not sufficient.
There must be something more to connect the accused with the commission of the offence.
The circumstances relied upon by the prosecution in the instant case led to no other inference than that of guilt of the accused as murder and robbery are proved to have been integral parts of one and the same transaction and therefore the presumption arising under illustration (a) to section 114 of the Evidence Act is that not only the accused committed the murder of the deceased but also committed robbery of her gold ornaments which formed part of the same transaction.
The prosecution had led sufficient evidence to connect the accused with the commission of the crime.
[561 G H] 553 1.2 For the applicability of section 27 of the Evidence Act, two conditions are pre requisite, viz: (1) Information must be such as has caused discovery of the fact, and (2) The information must "relate distinctly" to the fact discovered.
" Under section 27, only so much of the information as distinctly relates to the facts really thereby discovered is admissible.
The word "fact" means some concrete or material fact to which the information directly relates.
[549A, 550B C] Pulukuri Kottayya vs Emperor, LR [1947] IA 65; Jaffer Hussein Dastgir V. State of Maharashtra, [1970] 2 S.C.R.332, referred to.
2.1 The nature of presumption under illustration (a) to section 114 of the Evidence Act from recent and unexplained possession must depend upon the nature of the evidence adduced.
As to the meaning of "recent possession", it was observed: No fixed time limit can be laid down to determine whether possession is recent or otherwise and each case must be judged on its own facts.
The question as to what amounts to recent possession sufficient to justify the presumption of guilt varies according as the stolen article is or is not calculated to pass readily from hand to hand.
The fact that a period of one year had elapsed between the commission of the crime and the recovery of the ornaments on a statement made by the accused leading to their discovery under section 27 of the Evidence Act immediately upon his being apprehended by the police, cannot be said to be too long particularly when the accused had been absconding during that period and the stolen articles were such as were not likely to pass readily from hand to hand.
There was no lapse of time between the date of his arrest and the recovery of the stolen property.
The accused had no satisfactory explanation to offer for his possession thereof.
On the contrary, he denied that the stolen property was recovered by him.
The false denial by itself is an incriminating circumstance.
[56 H, 562 A E] 3.
In Bachan singh V. State of Punjab, , the Supreme Court, moved by compassionate sentiments of human feelings has ruled that sentence of death should not be passed except in the "rarest of rare" cases.
The result now is that capital punishment is seldom employed even though it may be a crime against the society and the brutality of the crime shocks judicial conscience.
The test laid down in Bachan Singh 's case is unfortunately not fulfilled in the instant case.
That being so, the Court is constrained to commute the sentence of death passed on the appellant into one for imprisonment for life.
[562 F H, 563 A] Observation of Dissent [A sentence or pattern of sentence which fails to take due account of the gravity of the offence can seriously undermine respect for law.
It is the duty of the court to impose a proper punishment depending upon the degree of criminality and desirability to impose such punishment as a measure of social necessity as a means of deterring other potential offenders.
Failure to impose death sentence in such grave cases where it is a crime against society particularly in cases of murders committed with extreme brutality will bring to naught the sentence of death provided under Section 302 of the Penal Code.] [563 A B] 554
