The respondents were suspected of having committed an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life under section 302 I.P.C. triable exclusively by the Court of Session.
They surrendered before the Magistrate on November 2, 1974 and were taken into custody.
The investigating officer failed to submit the charge sheet/police report against them within the period of 60 days contemplated by the proviso to sub section
(2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 as it stood prior to its amendment in 1978.
However, the respondents did not apply to the Magistrate for being released on bail but approached the High Court under section 439 Cr.
According to the High Court, the charge sheet against the respondents was submitted on February 5 1975.
The High Court directed that the respondents be released on bail pending trial by the Court of Session holding: (i) that in a case triable exclusively by the Court of Session after the charge sheet has been submitted under section 170 and before committing the accused to the Court of Session the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to authorise the detention of an accused in custody under section 167 Cr.
P.C.; (ii) that in such a case section 209 would not confer power on the Magistrate to commit the accused to custody since after the enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the procedure before the Magistrate under Chapter XVI of the Code would not be an inquiry within the meaning of section 2 (g) thereof; 538 (iii)that in such a case section 309 would also not enable the Magistrate to A remand the accused to custody since he would not be competent to try the accused; and (iv) that in view of the provision contained in section 207 read with section 209 Cr.
P.C. the Magistrate has to commit the accused forthwith to the Court of Session and it is only after the order of commitment is made that the Magistrate will have power to remand the accused to the custody during and until the conclusion of the trial.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The view that after the accused is brought before the court along with the police report under section 170 Cr.
P.C. the Magistrate must forth with commit the accused to the Court of Session because the Magistrate would have no jurisdiction in the absence of any provision to remand the accused to custody till the order committing the case to the Court of Session is made.
is wholly untenable and must be set aside.
[550 F H] Section 170 Cr.
P.C. Obligates the investigating officer to submit the police report, if in the course of investigation sufficient evidence or reasonable ground is made out for the trial or for commitment for trial of the accused, to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report.
On this report being submitted, the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence disclosed in investigation as envisaged by S.190.
Cognizance of an offence even if exclusively triable by the Court of Session has to be taken by the Magistrate be cause section 193 precludes the Court of Session from taking cognizance of any offence.
Taking cognizance of an offence under section 190 is a purely judicial function subject to judicial review.
The statutory obligation imposed by section 207 read with section 209 on the Magistrate to furnish free of cost copies of documents mentioned in section 207 to the accused is a judicial function and it has to be discharged in a judicial manner.
It is distinctly possible that the copies may not be ready.
That makes it necessary to adjourn the matter for some time which may be spent in preparing the copies and supplying the same to the accused.
The Magistrate can proceed to commit the accused for trial to the Court of Session only after he judicially discharges the function imposed upon him by section 207.
This conclusion is fortified by the provisions contained in Ss. 226 and 227 of Chapter XVIII which prescribe the procedure for trial of a case by the Court of Session.
When the Magistrate is performing a judicial function under section 207, it would undoubtedly be an inquiry.
The making of an order committing the accused to the Court of Session will equally be a stage in the inquiry.
Thus from the time the accused appears or is produced before the Magistrate with the police report under section 170 and the Magistrate proceeds to enquire whether section 207 has been complied with and then proceeds to commit the accused to the Court of Session, the proceeding before the Magistrate would be an inquiry as contemplated by section 2(g), and section 309(2) would enable the Magistrate to remand the accused to custody till the inquiry to be made is complete.
[547 G H; 548 A B; 549 B H; 550A D] 539 In the instant case, when the matter was before the High Court, the charge sheet had not been submitted against the respondents by the investigating A officer meaning thereby that the investigation was still in progress.
If the High Court had no information when the application for bail moved by the respondents for being enlarged on bail was heard as to whether the charge sheet against the respondents had been submitted to the Magistrate or not, it was futile for the High Court to have undertaken an investigation of a point of law which did not directly arise in the facts before the High Court.
As the High Court had dealt with the matter, it became a precedent and, therefore, it became necessary for the Court to examine whether the view of the High Court was in consonance with the provisions of the Code.
[544 H; 545 A D] The High Court was right in holding that the jurisdiction to grant bail, in case investigation is not completed within the prescribed limit as incorporated in the proviso to section 167 (2) as it then stood, vests in the Magistrate if the accused applies for and is prepared to furnish bail.
Section 167 envisages a stage when a suspect is arrested and investigation is not complete within the prescribed period.
The investigation would come to an end the moment charge sheet is submitted as required under section 170 unless the Magistrate directs further investigation.
[545 E F] State of Bihar and Arn.
vs J.A.C. Saldanha and Ors. ; , referred to.
