The prosecution case against the accused was that on the night of the occurrence, which was a moonlit night, the deceased was sleeping in the western room of his house while his wife and children were sleeping in the eastern room, between the two of which there was a barotha.
In the room in which the wife was sleeping there was a lighted lantern hanging from a peg on the eastern wall of that room about 6 feet high from the floor.
P.W.8.
the brother in law of the deceased was sleeping in a tin shed situate to the west of the western room.
Sometime late in the night the deceased and his wife woke up on hearing some commotion.
They found that a number of armed men entered the eastern room and started breaking open the northern door whereupon the wife of the deceased raised the wick of the lantern to see what was happening.
By the time the deceased entered the eastern room the accused who were armed with pistols and other deadly weapons had entered the room after breaking open the northern door.
The 9 accused persons.
severely assaulted the deceased who as a result of the injuries fell down dead.
The accused also assaulted the wife of the deceased (P.W.2) and her brother (P.W. 8) and ran away with ornaments, cash and clothes.
In the meantime, some of the prosecution witnesses, who heard the commotion went towards the house of the deceased and saw in the moon light the assailants leaving the scene of occurrence.
The first information report was lodged by P.W. 1 in the police station which was six miles away from the village at 6.05 a.m.
On that day.
Before the Sessions Judge the accused contended that the dacoity was committed by an armed gang not known to the prosecution witnesses but that they had been falsely implicated on account of enmity between them and the deceased.
The Sessions Judge found that the first information report had been lodged at the police station without any inordinate delay or that there was 565 nothing on record to show that there was any oblique motive for concocting a false story of the occurrence.
He, however, doubted the veracity of the evidence of P.Ws. 1 and 7, that these witnesses could not have had sufficient glimpse of the miscreants to be able to identify them.
He also disbelieved the evidence of P.W. 8, the brother in law of the deceased.
He, however, believed the evidence of the wife of the deceased (P.W. 2) that she saw the accused in light of the lantern hanging on the eastern wall both when they entered her room as well as when they attacked her husband and thereafter carrying away properties from the house.
The Sessions Judge also accepted the evidence that P.Ws. 2 and 8 were present in the house at the time of the occurrence and since they had received injuries at the hands of the assailants they could see what had taken place and that the light of lantern and moon light were sufficient to identify the assailants.
He, therefore, acquitted some of the accused and convicted the appellants and sentenced them to undergo imprisonment for life.
On appeal the High Court did not think it safe to rely on any part of the evidence of P.W. 8 but believed the evidence of P.W. 2 on the ground that she had given straight forward evidence without an attempt at making any improvements to fit it with the testimony of the other prosecution witnesses.
the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentences awarded to the appellants.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: There is no substance in the contention that the first information report was ante timed; nor is there any requirement in section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure that the first information report should be despatched forthwith or that the time of despatch must be noted thereon.
The Sessions judge found that the first information report had been lodged at the police station without any inordiate delay and that no oblique motive for concocting a false story of the occurrence in the first information report had been established.
If the police had intended to obtain a concocted report, it is more likely that they would have obtained it from P.W. 8, who was in the house at the time of occurrence than take it from P.W. 1 who went there on hearing shouts and sounds.
[573 B D; 575 B] The evidence on record shows that the formal first information report was recorded in the police station at the earliest on the morning of the occurrence, that is, at 6.05 a.m.
This had been corroborated with the evidence of P.W. 11, Sub Inspector of Police, who reached the village which is about 6 miles away at 8 a.m. and immediately took up the investigation.
[575 B D; 575 B] There is no substance in the contention that, having regard to the size of the eastern room in which the dead body was found, it was not probable that the 9 appellants armed with various weapons could have all been present in it at the same time.
The room was sufficiently big and the first information report stated that the culprits were moving in and out of the house at the time of the occurrence.
It was not likely that all of them were in the room at 566 the same time and it was not improbable that they were seen by P.W. 2 at different times during the occurrence which went on for some time.
[575 F H] Although the explanation of the prosecution for its failure to examine the doctor who attended the injured persons was not satisfactory the fact that the witnesses had stated that they sustained injuries during the occurrence was not disputed.
Therefore, more non examination of the doctor for proving the injuries is not fatal to the prosecution case.
[576 C E] From the mere fact that none of the looted properties had been recovered from any of the appellants it could not be said that they were not the culprits in the case.
On the contrary, there is enough incriminating evidence against them.
[576 G H] There is no substance in the contention that there was no sufficient light in the room to identify the assailants.
Though, the prosecution had not got the lantern identified by P.W. 2, P.W.11 testified that the lantern was hanging on a peg on the eastern wall of the room and was in working condition.
This fact was mentioned in the first information report.
P.W.2 woke up on hearing the noise and raised the wick of the lantern.
It was a moon lit night.
All this apart it was not the case of the appellants that there was no lantern in the room at all.
Nor was it suggested that the night was cloudy and visibility was poor.
[577 H; B F] The submission that P.W.2 had modulated her evidence to fit in with the prosecution case is not well founded.
She had denied the suggestion that unknown persons came to commit decoity inside the house and that she had falsely implicated the appellants because she could not recognise the real culprits.
She was undoubtedly in the eastern room which was the scene of the occurrence and had sufficient opportunity to recognise the assailants, who were known to her.
During the occurrence she herself sustained many injuries.
[579 D E] Merely because P.W. I had not sustained any injury during the occurrence and had not mentioned the names of any of the accused to the villagers who entered the house soon after the occurrence, it is not possible to reject his evidence altogether.
[580 A B] The Sessions Judge erred in rejecting the evidence of P.Ws. 1 and 7 and the High Court erred in rejecting the evidence of P.W. 8.
There is no reason whatsoever for rejecting the evidence of these witnesses to the extent that their evidence was corroborated by the evidence of P.W. 2 whose evidence had been believed by both the courts below.
The evidence of P.Ws. 1, 7 and 8 in so far as it goes to prove the presence of the appellants at the scene of the occurrence lends assurance to the evidence of P.W.2 that the appellants entered the house and assaulted her husband fatally and that some of them caused injuries to her and committed decoity.
The prosecution had proved the case against the appellants beyond all reasonable doubt.
[580 D H] 567
