The petitioners were convicted under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. and were sentenced to death on November 26, 1977.
The High Court upheld the conviction and sentence on July 18, 1978.
The petitioners ' Special Leave Petition against the judgment of the High Court was dismissed on March 5, 1979 and the Review Petition against the dismissal of the Special Leave Petition was also dismissed on March 27, 1981.
The petitioners ' successive writ petitions challenging the validity of sections 302 and 34 I.P.C. were dismissed on January 20, 1981 and August 24, 1981 respectively.
The present writ petitions were filed on March 2, 1983 on the basis of the decision in T.V. Vatheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu which was rendered on February 16, 1983.
The contention on behalf of the petitioners was that more than two years had elapsed since they were sentenced to death by the trial court and therefore they were entitled in terms of the ruling in vatheeswaran to demand that the said sentence should be quashed and substituted by the sentence of life imprisonment. ^ HELD : Prolonged delay in the execution of a death sentence is unquestionably an important consideration for determining whether the sentence should be allowed to be executed.
But no hard and fast rule that "delay exceeding two years in the execution of a sentence of death should be considered sufficient to entitle the person under sentence of death to invoke article 21 and demand the quashing of the sentence of death" can be laid down as has been done in Vatheeswaran.
[594 E F] (i) No absolute or unqualified rule can be laid down that in every case in which there is a long delay in the execution of a death sentence, the 583 sentence must be substituted by the sentence of life imprisonment.
There are several other factors which must be taken into account while considering the question as to whether the death sentence should be vacated.
A convict is entitled to pursue all remedies lawfully open to him and get rid of the sentence of death imposed upon him and his taking recourse to them to ask for the commutation of his sentence even after it is finally confirmed by this Court is understandable.
But, it is, at least, relevant to consider whether the delay in the execution of the death sentence is attributable to the fact that he has resorted to a series of untenable proceedings which have the effect of defeating the ends of justice.
It is not uncommon that a series of review petitions and writ petitions are filed in this Court to challenge judgments and orders which have assumed finality, without any seeming justification.
Stay orders are obtained in those proceedings and then, at the end of it all, comes the argument that there has been prolonged delay in implementing the judgment or order.
The Court called upon to vacate a death sentence on the ground of delay caused in executing that sentence must find why the delay was caused and who is responsible for it.
If this is not done, the law laid down by this Court will become an object of ridicule by permitting a person to defeat it by resorting to frivolous proceedings in order to delay its implementation.
Further, the nature of the offence, the diverse circumstances attendant upon it, its impact upon the contemporary society and the question whether the motivation and pattern of the crime are such as are likely to lead to its repetition if the death sentence is vacated, re matters which must enter into the verdict as to whether the sentence should be vacated for the reason that its execution is delayed.
The substitution of the death sentence by a sentence of life imprisonment cannot follow by the application of the two years ' formula as a matter of "quod erat demonstrandum." [595 D H; 596 AE] T.V. Vatheeswaran vs State of Tamil Nadu.
overruled.
(ii) The period of two years purports to have been fixed in Vatheeswaran after making "all reasonable allowance for the time necessary for appeal and consideration of reprieve.
" It is not possible to agree with this part of the judgment in that case.
The fixation of the time limit of two years does not accord with the common experience of the time normally consumed by the litigative process and the proceedings before the executive.
A period far exceeding two years is generally taken by the High Court and this Court together for the disposal of matters involving even the death sentence.
Very often four or five years elapse between the imposition of death sentence by the Sessions Court and the disposal of the Special Leave Petition or an Appeal by this Court in that matter.
This is apart from the time which the President or the Governor, as the case may be, takes to consider petitions filed under article 72 or article 161 of the Constitution or the time which the Government takes to dispose of application filed under sections 432 and 433 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
[594 F H; 595 AC] (iii) Piare Dusadh is not an authority for the proposition that if a certain number of years have passed since the imposition of a death sentence, 584 that sentence must necessarily be commuted to life imprisonment.
In that case the Federal Court commuted the sentence of death to sentence of transportation for life for reasons other than that a long delay had intervened after the death sentence was imposed.
In Ediga Anamma, Piare Dusadh was regarded as a leading case on the point.
In the other judgments of this Court referred to in Vatheeswaran, this Court was hearing appeals against judgments of High Courts confirming the sentence of death.
However, the Court has not taken the narrow view that the jurisdiction to interfere with a death sentence can be exercised only in an appeal against the judgment of conviction and sentence.
In very recent times, the sentence of death has been commuted to life imprisonment by this Court in quite a few cases for the reason, inter alia, that the prisoner was under the spectre of the sentence of death for an unduly long time after the final confirmation of that sentence.
[589 B D H; 590 A D] Piare Dusadh, [1944] F.C.R. Vol.6 61; Ediga Anamma; , ; Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration, ; ; Maneka Gandhi [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621; Bachan Singh, , Hussainara Khatoon; , ; Hoskot; , ; Bhuvan Mohan Patnaik; , ; and Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri; , referred to.
(iv) Article 21 is as much relevant at the stage of execution of the death sentence as it is in the interregnum between the imposition of that sentence and its execution.
The essence of the matter is that all procedure, no matter what the stage, must be fair, just and reasonable.
It is well established that a prisoner cannot be tortured or subjected to unfair or inhuman treatment.
It is a logical extension of the self same principle that the death sentence, even if justifiably imposed, cannot be executed if supervening events make its execution harsh, unjust or unfair.
A prisoner who has experienced living death for years on end is entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court for examining the question whether, after all the agony and torment he has been subjected to, it is just and fair to allow the sentence of death to be executed.
That is the true implication of article 21 of the Constitution.
[593 B G] Bhuvan Mohan Patnaik; , ; Prabhakar Pandurang Sangzgiri; , ; and Sunil Batra vs Delhi Administration; , referred to.
(v) Traditionally, subsequent events are taken into account in the area of civil law.
There is no reason why they should not receive due consideration in other jurisdictions, particularly when their relevance on the implementation or execution of judicial verdicts is undeniable.
Principles analogous to res judicata govern all judicial proceedings but when new situations emerge, particularly factual, after a verdict has assumed finality in the course of the hierarchical process, advertence to those situations is not barred on the ground that a final decision has been rendered already.
That final decision is not a decision on new facts.
Courts are never powerless to do justice, that 585 is to say, to ensure that the processes of law do not result in undue misery, suffering or hardship.
That is why, even after the final seal of approval is placed upon a sentence of death, this Court has exercised its power to direct, ex debito justiciae, that though the sentence was justified when passed, its execution, in the circumstances of the case, is not justified by reason of the unduly long time which has elapsed since the confirmation of that sentence by this Court.
[590 E H] In the instant case, the sentence of death imposed upon the petitioners by the Sessions Court and which was upheld by the High Court and this Court cannot be vacated merely for the reason that there has been a long delay in the execution of that sentence.
Counsel for the petitioners have been asked to argue upon the reasons why, apart from the delay caused in executing the death sentence, it would be unjust and unfair to execute that sentence at this point of time.
The question will be decided after hearing the parties.
[596 G H; 597 A B] 2.
Petitions filed under articles 72 and 161 of the Constitution and under sections 432 and 433, Cr.
P.C. must be disposed of expeditiously.
A self imposed rule should be followed by the executive authorities that every such petition shall be disposed of within a period of three months from the date on which it is received.
[597 C]
