The assessee is a Hind undivided Family consisting of four members, namely, Sri Apoorva Shantilal Shah, his wife Smt.
Karuna and their minor sons Chintan and Tejal.
During the assessment pertaining to the assessment year 1975 76.
Shri Apoorva as a Karta of the H.U.F. made an application to the Income Tax officer for recognising partial partition under section 171 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) claiming that two partial partitions had taken place amongst the members of the said family, one on 24.12.1973 in respect of 200 shares of Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. and the other on 29.12.1973 in respect of 1?77 shares of the same Company.
The Income Tax officer refused to record them for three reasons, namely (i) the partitions have not been made at the instance of the minor sons; (ii) after making certain allocations in favour of the two minor sons.
he remaining shares were not allotted in their entirety to tho remaining third coparcener, normally Apoorva separately or Apoorva and Smt.
Karuna jointly describing them as U P. and (iii) the distribution of shares had not been made equally either amongst the three members including the two minor sons or amongst the four members of the U.P, as Apoorva s wife Karuna also became entitled to an equal share on partition between the father and sons.
The appeal preferred before the Assistant Appellate Commissioner was accepted.
The further appeal, by Revenue to the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was allowed since the Tribunal was of the opinion that the partial partitions in the instant case, beings outside the framework at the Hindu Law could not be recognised as valid for the purposes of Section 171 of the Income Tax Act.
All the questions refferd to in the reference under Section 256 (1) to the High Court were answered against the assessee.
The High Court held that under Hindu Law the father has no power or authority to effect any partial partition of joint family properties between himself and this minor sons.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court 493 ^ HELD: 1.1.
Partial Partition of the shares belonging to the Hindu A undivided Family cannot be said to be bad either under the Hindu Law or under the Indian Income Tax Act.
[514 H, 515 A] 1.2.
Partial partition of properties brought about by the father between himself and his minor sons is valid and binding under the Hindu Law.
This right of the father to effect a partial partition of joint family properties between himself and his minor sons, whether in exercise of his superior right as father or in exercise of the right as patria potestas has necessarily to be exercised bonafide by the father and is subject to the right of the sons to challenge the partition, if the partition is not fair and just.
[511 C E] 1.3.
The right of the father to bring about the disruption of the joint family properties in exercise of his superior right, as father or of his rights as patria potestas is recognised in ancient Hindu Law.
[509 D E] 1.4.
The stand taken by the High Court to the effect that the proportion laid down by judicial decisions to the effect that partial partition of a joint Hindu family qua some joint family properties or qua some members of the joint family is permissible and valid in law, will apply only when partial partition is effected with the consent of the members of joint family and cannot be extended to a case when partial partition is sought to be brought by father in exercise of his superior rights as father or his right as patria potestas is incorrect.
[509 F H] If the father in exercise of his superior right or of his right as patria potestas in entitled lo bring about a complete disruption of the joint family and to effect a complete partition of joint family properties of a Hindu joint family consisting of himself and his minor sons even against The wishes of the minors and if partial partition be permissible with the consent of sons when they have all become major, the power or authority of the father to effect the partition of properties cannot be limited only to a case where the partition is total.
Even if the test of consent is to apply, the father as the natural guardian of the minor sons will normally be in a position to give such consent and it cannot be said as matter of universal application that in all such cases of partition, partial or otherwise, there is bound to be a conflict of interest between the father and his sons.
If the father does Dot act bonafide in the matter when he effects partition of joint family properties between himself and his minor sons, whether wholly or partially the sons on attaining majority may challenge the partition and ask for appropriate reliefs including a proper partition.
In appropriate cases even during minority the minor sons through a proper guardian may impeach the validity of the partition brought about by the father either in entirety of the joint family properties or only in respect of part thereof, if the partition had been effected by the father to the detriment of the minor sons and to the prejudice of their interest.
[510 A H] Charandas Haridas vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay Kalloomal Tapeswari Prasad (HUF) vs Commissioner of Income J. J Tax.
Kanpur (1982)133 I.T.R. 690 (S.C.) followed: 494 1.5.
The provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961 before the amendment by Finance Act (No. 2 of 1980) also clearly recognise partial partition.
The definition of partial partition in Explanation (b) makes it clear that partial partition as regards the persons constituting the Hindu undivided family or as regards proper ties belonging to the Hindu Undivided family, or both, is recognised.
[514 P G] 2.1.
A partial partition of any joint family property by the father between himself and his sons does not become invalid on the ground that there has been Do equal distribution amongst the co sharers It is expected that the father who seeks to bring about a partial partition of joint family properties will act bonafide in the interest of the joint family and its members bearing in mind in particular the interest of the minor sons.
If, however, any such partial revision causes any prejudice to any of the minor sons and if any minor son feels aggrieved by any such partial partition, he can always challenge the validity of such partial partition in an appropriate proceeding and the validity of such partial partition will necessarily have to be adjudicated upon in the proceeding on a proper consideration of all the facts and circumstances of the case till such partial partition has been held to be invalid by any competent court, the partial partition must he held to be valid.
[515 D F] 2.2.
It is not open to the Income tax Authorities to consider a partial partition to be invalid on the ground that shares have not been equally divided and to refuse to recognise the same.
It is undoubtedly open to the Income tax officer before recognizing the partition to come to a conclusion on proper enquiry whether the partition is genuine or not.
If the Income tax officer on enquiry comes to a finding that the partition is sham or fictitious, he will be perfectly within his right to refuse to recognise the same.
[515 F G] 2.3.
In the instant case, there is no finding that the partial partition is sham or fictitious or that the partial partition is not a genuine one and has not been acted upon.
As there is no finding that the partial partition is sham or fictitious or not a genuine one, on enquiries made by the Income tax officer, and as the partial partition is otherwise valid under the Hindu Law, the partial partition has necessarily to be recognised under the provisions of section 171 of the Income Tax Act and the assessment must be necessarily made on the basis that there is partial partition of the said shares.
[515 H,.
516 A B]
