Respondent No. 1 in C.A. 38 of 1981 filed an election petition under the Representation of the People Act challenging the election of the appellant to the State Legislative Assembly on various grounds.
The petition was accompanied by a pre receipted challan prepared by the Accounts Department of the High Court on the basis of the lodgment schedule initialled by the Assistant Registrar II, showing that a sum of Rs. 2000/ had been credited to the account of the Registrar, High Court, Madras, in the Reserve Bank of India, Madras, as security for costs.
The facts are more or less similar to all the appeals.
In C.A. 38/81, which has additional facts, the respondent pleaded, inter.
alia, that the appellant was guilty of corrupt practice under sub s.(6) of section 123 of the Act.
He alleged that the appellant had erected about 50 fancy banners each costing not less than Rs. 1000/ and if this expenditure of Rs. 50,000/ was added to the amount already disclosed by him in his return of election expenses it would exceed the prescribed limit thus amounting to a corrupt practice.
The respondent filed a photograph of one such fancy banner with the election petition but did not annex a copy of this photograph to the copy of the election petition furnished to the appellant.
The appellant raised two preliminary objections as to the maintainability of the petition on the ground of non compliance with sub s.(1) of section 117 read with r. 8 of the Election Petitions Rules, and with sub s.(3) of section 81.
High Court overruled both the objections and held: (1) there was substantial compliance with sub section
(1) of section 117: and (2) the banner could not be treated as an integral part of the election petition but was merely a piece of evidence as to the nature and type of the fancy banners erected by the appellant and therefore failure 630 to supply a copy of its photograph to the appellant along with the copy of the election petition did not amount to a breach of sub s.(3) of of section 81.
On appeal, this Court by its order dated April 2, 1981 remitted back the issue with regard to non compliance of sub section (1) of section 117 read with r. 8 for a decision afresh on the basis of the evidence to be led by the parties.
After considering the evidence, the High Court adhered to its earlier view.
The appellant contended in this Court: (1) the provisions of sub section
(1) of section 117 were mandatory; there was no distinction between the requirement as to the making of security deposit and the manner of making such deposit; the words "in accordance with the rules of the High Court" in sub section 117 were mandatory; r. 8 must be read as forming part of sub section
(1) of section 117 by incorporation; in view of the definite stand taken by the respondent t at he had complied with r. 8 it was not possible to fail back on Order 31 of the Madras High Court (Original Side) Rules, 1956.
There was no compliance with r. 8 as the security amount was not deposited with the Registrar in cash.
(2) There was no compliance with the requirements of sub section
(3) of section 81 as the copy of the election petition served on him was not accompanied by a copy of the photograph of the fancy banner.
Dismissing all the appeals and special leave petitions except C.A. 38/81 which partly succeeds and is allowed.
^ HELD: 1(a).
Sub section
(1) of section 117 is in two parts.
The first part provides that at the time of presenting an election petition, the petitioner shall deposit in the High Court a sum of Rs. 2000 as security for the costs of the petition, and the second is that such deposit shall be made in the High Court in accordance with the rules of the High Court.
The requirement regarding the making of a security deposit of Rs. 2000 in the High Court is mandatory, the non compliance of which must entail dismissal in limine of the election petition under sub section (1) of section 86 of Act.
But the requirement of its deposit in the High Court in accordance with rules of the High Court is clearly directory.
The essence of sub.s.
(1) of section 117 is that at the time of filing an election petition the petitioner should furnish security for the costs of the petition.
Section 117 should not be strictly or technically construed and substantial compliance with its requirements should be treated as sufficient.
[645 F, 651 E, 652 B] 1(b).
A literal and mechanical interpretation of r. 8.
of the Election Petitions Rules would lead to manifest absurdity as it would imply that in every case the election petitioner shall have to pay to the Registrar a sum of Rs. 2000 in cash towards security for costs and obtain a receipt from him there for.
Rule 8 is silent as to how the cash is to be handled.
Inasmuch as r. 8 does not lay down the procedure regulating the manner of deposit of cash, the matter falls to be governed by r. 2 of Order 31 of the Madras High Court (Original Side) Rules, 1956 by reason of r. 12 of the Election Petitions Rules.
Although Order 31, r. 2 does not in terms apply because Order 31 relates to " payment into court of moneys to the credit of civil court deposits and account of suitors ' money", and though no lodgment schedule can be prepared under r. 2 except in pursuance of a decree or order passed by the High Court i.e. in relation to some proceeding pending, or disposed of, by the High Court, still 631 by virtue of r. 12 of the Election Petitions Rule that is the procedure to be adopted for deposit of Rs. 2000 in the High Court in cash i.e. by crediting the amount on the strength of a pre receipted challan prepared by the Accounts Department on the basis of a lodgment schedule.[649 A E] In the present case the Assistant Registrar II, Madras High Court, directed that the money be deposited to the credit of the Registrar of the High Court in the Reserve Bank of India.
The election petitioner deposited Rs. 2000 with a pre receipted challan issued by the Accounts Department to the credit of the Registrar of the High Court and the Reserve Bank of India made the endorsement "received in cash".
It must be regarded that the payment was made in the High Court and the pre receipted challan bearing the endorsement of the Reserve Bank must be treated as the receipt of the Registrar in terms of r. 8, the Reserve Bank acting as an agent of the High Court.
The procedure adopted by Assistant Registrar II, was in conformity with r.8.
There was due compliance with the requirements of sub section
(1) of section 117 of the Act read with r. 8 of the Election Petitions Rules.
[649 B, E H] K. Kamaraja Nadar vs Kunju Thevar & Ors., ; Chandrika Prasad Tripathi vs Siv Prasad Chanpuria & Ors.
, ; ; Om Prabha Jain vs Gian Chand Jadav, ; Charan Lal Sahu vs Nandkishore Bhatt & ors., [1974]1 SCR 294; Aeltemesh Rein vs Chandulal Chandrakar & Ors., ; , referred to. 2(a).
Sub section
(3) of section 81 of the Act is in two part.
The first part provides that every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies there of as there are respondents mentioned in the petition and the second part relates to the manner In which such copy shall be attested by the petitioner under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.
The first part is mandatory in character and non compliance with it was fatal to the petition in view of sub section
(1) of section 86.
E, 659 F] 2(b).
The words "copies thereof" in sub section
(3) of section 81 read in the context of sub section
(2) of section 83 must necessarily refer not only to the election petition proper but also to schedules or annexures thereto containing particulars of any corrupt practice alleged therein.
Sub section
(2) of section 83 applies only to a schedule or annexure which is an integral part of the election petition and not a document which is produced as evidence of the averments of the election petition.
[663 B C, 656 F G] In the instant case, the test to be applied in determining whether the photograph referred to in the election petition is an integral part of the election petition or was merely a piece of evidence in proof of the allegations contained therein, depends on whether it is a part of the pleadings.
The photograph which gives a visual description of the fancy banner, the cost of which at a mere look would show that the expenditure in setting up each such banner would be Rs. 1000/ or more, was not merely a document accompanying the election petition but was a part and parcel of the pleading contained therein.
The averment contained in the election petition would be incomplete as regards the allegation of the corrupt practice committed by the appellant without a 632 copy of the photograph being supplied with a copy of the election petition.
Merely alleging that the appellant had put up fancy banners would be of no avail unless there was a description of the banner itself together with the slogan.
The failure to supply a copy of the photograph along with a copy of the election petition to the appellant amounted to non compliance of sub section
(3) of section 81,[661 B, C, 654 C, 655 D, 663 A B, F G] Sahodrabai Rai vs Ram Singh Aharwar, ; , held inapplicable.] Ch.
Subbarao vs Member, Election Tribunal Hyderabad, ; ; Jagat Kishore Prasad Narayn Singh vs Raj Kumar Poddar & Ors.
[1971] 1 SCR 821; Satya Narain vs Dhuja Ram & Ors., ; and Kamalam (M) vs Dr. V.A. Syed Mohamad, ; , referred to.
Sharif ud din vs Abdul Gani Lone,[1980] 1 SCR 1176, distinguished.
It is always important to bear the distinction between mandatory and directory provisions of 3 statute.
The general rule of interpretation is well known and it is but an aid for ascertaining the true intention of the legislature which is the determining factor and that must ultimately depend on the context.
The question as to whether a statute is mandatory or directory, depends upon the intent of the legislature and not upon the language in which the intent is clothed.
The meaning and intention of the legislature must govern, and these must be ascertained not only from the words used, but also by considering its object and consequences which would follow from construing it one way or the other.
An absolute enactment must be obeyed or fulfilled exactly but it is sufficient if a directory enactment be obeyed or fulfilled substantially.
An enactment in form mandatory might in substance be directory and the use of the word "shall" does not conclude the matter.
[645 E H, 646 A C] N.P. Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Namakkal, ; ; Wolyerhampton New Water Works Company vs Hawkesford; , at 356; Jagan Nath vs Jaswant Singh & Ors., ; ; Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edn.
p. 314; Crawford on 'Statutory Construction ' p. 516; State of U.P. vs Manbodhan Lal Srivastva, ; ; State of U.P. & ors, vs
Babu Ram Upadhya; , ; Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. vs Municipal Board, Rampur, and Montreal Street Railway Company vs Normandin LR ; , referred to.
