On a complaint by the Food Inspector, who had purchased 1.5 k.g. of vanaspati as sample after opening one sealed tin of 16.5 k.g. out of 20 such tins kept by the vendor for sale, criminal proceedings were instituted against the vendor, the dealer and the manufacturer of vanaspati for violation of s.7 (i) of the on the ground that on analysis the vanaspati did not satisfy the prescribed standard.
The facts of all these cases are more or less the same.
When the process was issued, the dealer and the manufacturer filed petitions in the High Court contending: (1) as the complainant had taken the sample after opening a sealed tin, he had violated r.22 A of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955, (2) under section 20 A of the Act the dealer or a manufacturer could be proceeded against only after the vendor had set up a successful defence as contemplated under section 19(2) and therefore their prosecution along with the vendor was illegal.
The High Court allowed the petitions and quashed the proceedings on the ground that where the food was in sealed containers having identical lable declaration, the entire contents of one or more of such containers as may be required to satisfy the quantity prescribed in r. 22 should be taken as a part of the sample and since the sealed container had been opened to draw the sample the prosecution was not tenable.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: Rule 22 A states that where food is sold or stocked for sale or for distribution in sealed containers having identical lable declaration, the contents of one or more of such containers as may be required to satisfy the quantity prescribed in r. 22 shall be treated to be a part of the sample.
Rule 22 A does not state that where a sealed container contains a quantity larger 715 than what is required for purposes of section 11 read with r. 22 the sealed container as such should be taken as sample and that no sample can be taken after opening the sealed container.
This rule is enacted apparently to get over the difficulty that may arise in taking sample and in dividing it into three parts as required by section 11 (1) (b) where such sealed container containing the food in question contains a quantity less than the required quantity to be taken as sample for purposes of section 11 read with r. 22.
The matter is put beyond doubt by r. 22 B which, however, only reaffirms the legal position existing before that rule came into force.
Rule 22 A is only a corollary to r. 22 which prescribes the quantity of sample to be sent to the Public Analyst for analysis.
The inevitable consequence of the acceptance of the argument of the accused which has appealed to the High Court is that where a manufacturer or distributor sells food stuffs in large sealed containers containing quantities much larger than what is required to be taken as sample under the law and the contents of only one such container are exposed for sale by a vendor after opening the container, a Food Inspector would not be able to take a sample at all for proceeding under the Act against the manufacturer, distributor or even the vendor.
Any construction which would lead to such absurd result should be avoided while construing the provisions of the Act.
[718 F G, 719 A,718 G H, 719 G, 719 E, A C] State of Kerala etc.
vs Alaserry Mohammad etc.
, , referred to.
There seems to be no logically sound reason why, if a distributor or a manufacturer can be subsequently impleaded under section 20 A of the Act, he cannot be joined as a co accused initially in a joint trial if the allegations made justify such a course.
[722 C] Bhagwan Dass Jagdish Chander vs Delhi Administration.
[1975] Supp.
SCR 30, followed.
In the instant cases, the High Court committed a serious error in quashing the criminal proceedings in different magistrates ' courts in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction under section 482 of Criminal Procedure Code.
These are not cases, where there is no legal evidence at all in support of the prosecution.
The prosecution has still to lead evidence.
It is neither expedient nor possible to arrive at a conclusion at this stage on the guilt or innocence of the accused on the material before the court.
High Court should not have therefore interfered at this interlocutory stage.
[722 D F] State of Punjab vs Sat Pal, Criminal Appeal No. 199 of 1983 decided on March 25, 1983, referred to.
While construing food laws such as the courts should keep in view that the need for prevention of future injury is as important as punishing a wrong doer after the injury is actually inflicted.
Merely because a person who has actually suffered in his health after consuming adulterated food would not be before court in such cases, courts should not be too eager to quash on slender grounds the prosecutions for offences alleged to have been committed under the Act.
[718 D E] 716
