Admissions to the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh for the academic year 1982 83 granted to eight candidates by what is described as the spot test method, to seven wards of the employees of the Punjab Engineering College and another were struck down by the Punjab High Court as in violation of the rules and regulations governing admissions to the institution.
However, the students wrongly admitted were allowed to continue their studies on humanitarian grounds.
Hence the appeals after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Disposing of the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1 Since all the sixteen students wrongly admitted have already completed one or two semesters it will be unjust to cancel their admission at this stage and to remove their names from the rolls of the College, and therefore, they must be allowed to continue their studies as if their admission to the College suffered from no defect or illegality.
[803 F G] 1:2 Cases like these in which admissions granted to students in educational institutions are quashed raise a sensitive human issue.
It is unquestionably true that the authorities who are charged with the duty of admitting students to educational institutions must act fairly and objectively.
If admissions to these institutions are made on extraneous considerations and the authorities violate the norms set down by the rules and regulations, a sense of resentment and frustration is bound to be generated in the minds of those unfortunate young students who are wrongly or purposefully left out.
On the other hand, students who are wrongly admitted do not suffer the consequences of the manipulations, if any, made on their behalf by interested persons.
[804 B D F] 1:3 Law 's delays work their wonders in such diverse fashions with the result that the courts find it difficult to adjust equities between students who are wrongly admitted and those who are unjustly excluded.
Since by the time the High Courts take up the matter and finally decide the cases, students who are 802 wrongly admitted finish one or two semesters of the course and the courts are regretfully perforced to allow them to continue their studies.
[804 F G] The court observed that "this situation has emboldened the erring authorities or educational institutions of various States to indulge in violating the norms of admission with impunity.
They seem to feel that the courts will leave the admissions in tact, even if the admissions are granted contrary to the rules and regulations, which is a most unsatisfactory state of affairs.
Laws are meant to be obeyed, not flouted.
Some day not distant, if admissions are quashed for the reason that they were made wrongly, it will have to be directed that the names of students who are wrongly admitted should be removed from the rolls of the institution." [804 H, 805 A B] 2:1 The contention that the seats cannot correspondingly be increased since the State Government cannot meet the additional expenditure which will be caused by increasing the number of seats or that the institution will not be able to cope up with the additional influx of students cannot be accepted.
[805 C D] 2:2 Those who infringe the rule must pay for their lapse and the wrong done to the deserving students who ought to have been admitted has to be rectified.
The best solution under the circumstances is to ensure that the strength of seats is increased in proportion to the wrong admissions made.
[805 E F] The court directed that 8 seats should be for the students from the Chandigarh list and the other 8 seats from the General List of students which were prepared for the academic year 1982 83.
[805 G H] 3.
The reservation of the sixteen seats are not open exclusively to the writ petitioners.
The circumstance that they filed writ petitions in the High Court but others similarly aggrieved did not, will not justify the granting of admission to them by ignoring those others who were higher up in the merit list.
[806 A B] [The Court directed the authorities to fill up the additional vacancies "on the basis of open merit"] State of Kerala vs Kumari T.P.Roshana, ; ; Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehrawardi, ; Arti Sapru vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors., ; , followed.
