Appellant joined service as suspension in the year 1953 in what is styled as Military Engineering Service.
He came to be promoted as Assistant Executive Engineer in 1962.
In the seniority list of AEE drawn up in the year 1963 he was shown at serial No. 357.
In the seniority list of 1967 the appellant 's name was found at serial No. 234.
But as a result of the decision in Bachan Singh 's case the Union Government set aside the seniority lists of 1963 and 1967/68 and drew up a Fresh list on the criteria drawn from the decision in Bachan Singh 's case.
In the seniority list so drawn, the appellant 's name did not find a place at all because he was pushed down, treating still as surplus, after applying the quota from the date of the constitution of the service itself in 1951, applying the ratio of 9:1 between the direct recruits and the promotes.
If he were to be treated as surplus in this manner the appellant cannot be adjusted and treated as a member till 1989 by which he may retire, of the service within the definition of that expression found in the Military Engineers Services Rules (Recruitment, Promotion and Seniority) Rules 1949 as amended from time to time.
The Union of India understood the decision in Bachan Singh 's case to mean that there was a quota for recruitment in the cadre of AEE in MES Class I of 9 direct recruits to one promotee (9:1) since 1951 and that the quota must lead to rota for confirmation and thus redraw the seniority list with the startling result of the appellant and several others similarly situated unable to get a berth at all.
The appellant therefore, filed a writ petition No. 4293/79 questioning the validity and legality of the revised seniority list exhibit 'D ' circulated with letter dated June 14, 1974 and to cancel the panel af promotion prepared and communicated in E,E.C 's proceedings No. 65020/EE/74/EIR/dt January 13.1975 937 drawn up an the basis of the impugned revised seniority list.
The writ petition having been dismissed, the appellant has come up in appeal by special leave.
A Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD :1.
The seniority lists of 1963 and 1967168 were quite legal and valid and hold the field till 1969 having been drawn up on the basis of the principle which satisfies the test of Article 16.
Their revision can be made in respect of members who joined service after 1969 and the period subsequent to 1969.
[963 E F] 2.1 The seniority list 'exhibit D" circulated with the letter dated June 4, 1974 and the panel for promotion included in E E C 's proceedings No. 65020/EE/74/EIR dated January 13,1975 drawn up on the basis of that list are incorrect and stem from a misunderstanding and misinterpretation or the Supreme Court 's decision in Bachan Singh and Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors. ; [965 H, 906 A] 2.2 'There was no justification for redrawing the seniority list in 1974 affected persons recruited or promoted prior to 1969 when the rules acquired statutory character.
No doubt, it is open to the Government to prescribe principles for determining inter se seniority of persons belonging to the same service or cadre except that any such principle must meet the test of Article 16.
It is equally open to the Government to retrospectively revise rules, if the same does not adversely affect vested rights.
But if the rule for determining inter se seniority is revised or a fresh rule is framed, it must be constitutionally valid.
The criterion adopted is illegal and valid.
It overlooks the character of the appointments made during the period 1959 to 1969.
lt treats valid appointments as doubtful validity.
It pushes down persons validly appointed below those who were never in service and for reasons unknown with retrospective effect i.e. from 1951.
1965 G H, 966 B C] 3.
In Bachhan Singhs case, the Supreme Court, after reviewing the History of the MES rules from 1949 to 1969 held as follows: F (i) The '1949 Rules ' and the subsequent amendments acquired statutory character in 1969 because as a result of 1969 amendment, the entire body of rules of Class I became statutory rules by incorporation and till then they we e mere administrative instructions.
[952 A] (ii) Under rules 3 and 4 of the 1949 Rules, the recruitment to MES Class I could be made from two sources only, namely, by competitive examination held in India in accordance with Part II of the Rules, which makes extensive provisions for holding examination including the eligibility for admission to the same, and by promotion in accordance with Part II of the Rules.
[952 B] (iii) During the years 1962, 1963 and 1964 particularly and until the year 1969, the Class l Service.
Rules were not statutory in character.
The Union Government relaxed the Rules both in regard to recruitment by interview 938 and in regard to the quotas fixed by the Rules for direct recruitment and A recruitment by promotion to Class I Service, the quota rule being 9:1 as per Rule 4.
[953 A B, D] (iv) In 1962, there was a state of emergency.
Engineers were immediately required to fill the temporary posts in Class I service.
To meet the emergency the Union Government in consultation with the Union Public Service Com mission decided to directly recruit candidates by advertisement and selection by interview only by the Union Public Service Commission.
The Government with the aid of selection and interview by the UPSC directly recruited some respondents to Class I service in the years 1962,1963 and 1964.
[953 D E] (v) In respect of the vacancies that occurred between 1951 and 1971, because of the emergency, the quota rule for filling them was ignored both for departmental promotees and direct recruitment; and [953 E G] (vi) Therefore, the appointment of those direct recruits who were appointed after interview by the Union Public Service Commission, that is by a method not permitted by the rules was valid and legal in as much as that was done in relaxation of the rules both as to competitive examination and the promotions were given after relaxing the quota rule.
'I he direct recruits who were appointed by interview did fall within the class of direct recruits.
[954 B C] (vii) Rule 24 which was introduced in 1967 conferred power on the Union Government for the reasons to be recorded in writing and after consultation with the Union Public Service Commission to relax all or any of the rules with respect to class or category of persons posts.
As the 1949 rules were non statutory in character till 1969, the Government did make the recruitments from both sources after exercising the said power to relax the rules.
[954 G, 955 A, B] 4.1 If Rule 3 of M.E.S. (R.P.S.) Rules provided methods of recruitment indicating the sources from which recruitment could be made and if rule confers discretion on Government to make recruitment from either source because Rule 4 opens with a limitation, namely, that it is subject to Rule 3, now, if as held in Bachan Singh 's case, "1949 Rules", while prescribing the quota conferred power on the Union Government to make recruitment in relaxation of the rules, it is implicit in this power to make recruitment in relaxation of the quota rule and it is admitted that because of the emergency and because of the exigencies of service, recruitment was made in relaxation of the rules, in this case.
It is this emergency and the dire need of urgently recruiting engineers which led the Government to make recruitment in relaxation of quota rule by foregoing the competitive examination and promoting subordinate ranks to class I service.
Petitioners and similarly situated persons were thous promoted to meet the dire need of service in felaxation of the quota rule.
[955 F G] 4.2 It is true that where the rule provides for recruitment from two sources and simultaneously prescribes quota, unless there is power to relax the rule any recruitment in excess of the quota from either of the sources could 939 be illegal and the excess recruits unless they find their place by adjustment in subsequent years in the quota, would not be members of the service.
[955 G, H, 956 A] S.G. Jaisinghani vs Union of India ; at p. 718; B.S. Gupta vs Union of India (1st Gupta 's case), Suppl.
SCR 49; B.S. Gupta vs Union of India (2nd Gupta 's case ) ; ; referred to.
4.3 But, when recruitment is from two independent sources, subject to prescribed quota, but the power is conferred on the Government to make recruitment in relaxation of the rules, any recruitment made contrary to the quota rules would not be invalid, unless it is shown that the power of relaxation was exercised, malafide, that is not the contention in this case nor voiced in Bachan Singh 's case.
[957 C E] N.K. Chauhan & Others vs State of Gujarat and Others, ; ; referred to.
4.4 Now, if recruitment contrary to Rule 3, namely by interview by the Union Public Service Commission, which is not the recognised mode of recruitment, is held valid in Bachan Singh 's case on the ground that the same emergency compelled the Government to recruit by promotion engineers to the post of AEE class I in excess of the quota by exercising the power of relaxation and such recruitment ipso facto would be valid.
The promotees being validly promoted as the quoted rule was relaxed would become the members of the service.
[957 G H, 958 A] 4.5 The 1949 Rules do not throw any light on the composition of the service, except the fact that the expression "service" has been defined to mean Military Engineering Service, Class I.
If the recruitment is made from either of the sources and is otherwise legal and valid, persons recruited to temporary posts would nonetheless be members of the service.
Keeping in view the exigencies of service and the requirements of the State, unless it is made clear to the contrary that the temporary posts are fir a certain duration or the appointments to temporary posts are of an ad hoc nature till such time as recruitment according to rules is made.
In the absence of any such provision, persons holding permanent and temporary posts would become the members of the service provided the recruitment to the temporary posts is legal and valid.
Once the recruitment is legal and valid, there is no difference between the holders of permanent posts and temporary posts in so far as it relates to all the members of the service.
[958 B D] In the instant case, the question whether the vacancies were in the permanent strength or in the temporary cadre is irrelevant because none of the appellants and others similarly situated is reverted on the ground that no more vacancy is available.
[958 A] S.B. Patwardhan & Ors vs State Maharashtra & Ors, ; @ 795 followed.
940 5:1 It is well recognised principle of service jurisprudence that any rule A of seniority has to satisfy the test of equality of opportunity in public service as enshrined in Article 16.
Equally yet well recognised canon is that in the absence of any other valid rule for determining inter se seniority of members belonging to the same service the rule of continuous uninterrupted service since the entry would be valid and would satisfy the test of Article 16.
Apart from this general principle for determining inter se seniority in the instant case, there is a specific rule namely para 3(iii) of Appendix V of 1949 Rules, governing inter se seniority between direct recruits and promotees in MES, Class I Service and it was in force till 1974 when the impugned list was drawn up.
[960 F H] 5:2 In para 3(iii) of Appendix V of 1949 Rules, it was provided that a roster shall be maintained indicating the order in which appointments are to be made by direct recruitment and promotion in accordance with the percentages fixed for each method of recruitment in the recruitment rules.
The relative seniority of promotees and direct recruits shall be determined by the dates on which the vacancies reserved for the directs and the promotees occur.
This rule ' was related to the quota of 9:1 between direct recruits and promotees prescribed in Rule 4.
[951 A C] 5:3 A combined reading of Rule 4 and para 3(iii) of Appendix V would clearly show that a roster has to be maintained consistent with the quota so that the relative inter se seniority of promotees and direct recruits to be deter mined by the date on which vacancy occurred and the vacancy is for the direct recruit or for the promotee.
If quota prescribed by rule 4 was adhered to or was inviolable, the rule of seniority enunciated in para 3(iii) of Appendix V .
will have to be given full play and the seniorily list has to be drawn in accordance with it.
But as quota rule was directly inter related with the seniority rule and once the quota rule gave way, the seniority rule enunciated in para 3(iii) of Appendix V became wholly otiose and ineffective.
[961 C E] It is well recognised that where the quota rule is linked with the seniority rule, if the first breaks down or is illegally not adhered to giving effect to the second would be unjust, iniquitous and improper In the instant case, therefore, once time quota rule was wholly relaxed between 1959 and 1969 to suit the requirement of service and the recruitment made in relaxation of the quota rule and the minimum qualification rule for direct recruits is held to be valid, no effect can be given to the seniority rule enunciated in para 3(iii), Which was wholly inter linked with the quota rule and cannot exist apart from 'J it on its own strength.
Further, this position is impliedly accepted by the Union Government and is implicit in the seniority lists prepared in 1963 and 1967 68 in respect of AEES because both these seniority lists were drawn up in accordance with the rule of seniority enunciated in Annexure 'A ' to Army Instruction No. 241 of 1950 dated September 1, 1949 and not in compliance with para 3(iii) of Appendix V. [961 E H, 962 A B] B. section Gupta vs Union of India (1st Gupta 's case) referred to.
941 5:4 The principle of seniority enunciated in Army Instruction 241 of 1950 is that the rule for determining inter se seniority in the cadre of Assistants A should generally be taken as the model in framing the rules of seniority for other services and in respect of persons employed in any particular grade seniority should as a general rule be determined on the basis of the length of service in that grade as well as service in an equivalent grade irrespective of whether the latter was under the Central or provincial government in India or Pakistan.
This was the rule of seniority which would be applicable in the absence of any other rule specifically enacted for MES class I service.
Even a plausible contention that the seniority rule enunciated in para 3(iii) of Appendix V of 1949 Rules was the one specifically enacted for MES class I service and this special rule would prevail over the general rule issued in Army Instruction 241 would be of no avail in as much as (1) the rule in para 3 (iii) gave way when the quota rule was relaxed and (ii) in all the subsequent rules of 1953, 1961 and 1962, it was clearly stated that the "principles for determining seniority are under consideration".
[962 C A] 6:1 The two fundamental basic assumptions on which the impugned seniority list was drawn up are wholly untenable and contrary to the relevant rules.
The first assumption that there was a rigid quota rule and that the recruitment in excess of the quota would be invalid and the excess recruits from either source will have to be adjusted and regularised in succeeding years, was probably due to the authorities having been influenced by the observations in Jai Singhani 's case and the two successive B. section Gupta 's cases, all of which have no application to the facts of the present case.
The second assumption that there was an inviolable quota rule which could not be relaxed was due to overlooking the position that once the quota rule was relaxed, the rota for confirmation disappeared.
In the absence of any other rule coupled with the Army Instructions, upto 1968 continuous officiation would be the only available rule for determining the inter se seniority.
Further as far as the minimum educational qualification is concerned promisees and direct recruits are on par and the promotees cannot be looked upon as persons belonging to an inferior breed.
[963 D H, 964 A] 7.
The contention that the individuals likely to be affected by the decision not being impleaded, the writ petition should fail cannot be accepted.
Factually it is incorrect because by order of the High Court, names of respondents 3 to 419 were deleted and in the Supreme Court submissions were made by a counsel for them.
In the petition as well as in the appeal the relief is claimed against the Union of India and the concerned Ministry and not against any individual nor any seniority is claimed by anyone individual against G another particular individual.
The contention is that the criteria adopted by the Union Government in drawing up the impugned seniority list are illegal and invalid.
Therefore, even if technically the direct recruits were not before the Court, the petition is not likely to fail on that ground.
[966 G H, 967 A B] Vade Mecum It is unfortunate that very unjust, unfair and inequitable situation having a demoralising effect on public services probably ensuing from certain 942 rules framed by the Government and the decisions of this Court has emerged.
Even where the recruitment to a service is from more than one source and a quota is fixed for each source yet more often the appointing authority to meet its exigencies of service exceeds the quota from the easily available source of promotees because the procedure for making recruitment from the market by direct recruitment is long prolix and time consuming.
The Government for exigencies of service, for needs of public services and for efficient administration, promotee person easily available because in a hierarchical service one hopes to move upward.
After the promotee is promoted, continuously renders service and is neither found wanting nor inefficient and is discharging his duty to the satisfaction of all, a fresh recruit from the market years after promotee was inducted the service comes and challenges all the past recruitments made before he was born in service and some decisions especially the ratio in Jai Singhani 's case as interpreted in two B. section Gupta 's cases gives him an advantage to the extent of the promotee being preceded in seniority by direct recruit who enters service long after the promotee was promoted.
When the promotee was promoted and was rendering service, the direct recruit may be a schoolian or college going boy.
He emerges from the educational institution, appears at a competitive examination and starts challenging everything that had happened during the period when he has had nothing to do with service.
A mandamus issued in Jai Singhani 's case led to a situation where promotees of the year 1962 has to yield place to direct recruits of 1966 and the position worsened thereafter.
In the case in hand, appellant a promotee of September 27, 1962 is put below N. K. Prinza who appeared at competitive examination in April 1976 i.e. One who came 14 years after the appellant, and it does not require an intelligent exercise to reach a conclusion that 14 years prior to 1976 Mr. Prinza who is shown to be born on July 20, 1950 must be aged about 12 years and must have been studying in a primary school.
Shorn of all service jurisprudence jargon one can bluntly notice the situation that a primary school student when the promotee was a member of the service, barged in and claimed and got seniority over the promotee.
If this has not a demoralising effect on service one fails to see what other inequitous approach would be more damaging.
It is therefore, time to clearly initiate a proposition that a direct recruit who comes into service after the promotee was already unconditionally and without reservation promoted and whose promotion is not shown to be invalid or illegal according to relevant statutory or non statutory rules should not be permitted by an principle of seniority to score a march over a promotee because that itself being arbitrary would be violative of articles 14 and 16.
[968 D H, 959 A E]
