The Customs officials intercepted a ship off Bombay and seized from it various articles worth several lakhs of rupees.
None of the seven persons on board the ship possessed any documents authorising them to import the goods.
On August 19, 1981, section one of the seven persons on board the ship, was detained under the provisions of ; but the Advisory Board reported that there was in its opinion no sufficient cause for his detention.
He was therefore released.
By an order dated November 7, 1981 the petitioner, who was also one of the persons on board the same ship, was detained under the COFEPOSA in respect of the same transaction.
While dismissing the habeas corpus petition filed by the petitioner 's wife, the High Court was of opinion that three out of the four grounds on which the petitioner was detained were bad for one reason or the other but that the first ground was enough to sustain the order of detention in that important material relevant to that ground was neither placed before nor considered by the detaining authority while passing the order of detention.
In the petition under Article 32 of the Constitution it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that had the detaining authority in the instant case been apprised that the Advisory Board, on examining an identical ground in the case of S had reported that there was no sufficient cause for detention of S who was involved in the same transaction, it might not have passed the order of detention against the petitioner which is based on similar facts and that its failure to place such highly relevant and important material before the detaining authority has vitiated the order of detention.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: The failure of the State Government to place before the detaining authority the opinion which the Advisory Board had recorded in favour of another detenu who was detained partly on a ground relating to 615 the same incident deprived the detaining authority of an opportunity to apply its mind to a piece of evidence which was relevant, if not binding.
In other words, the detaining authority did not, because it could not, apply its mind to a circumstance which reasonably could have affected its decision whether or not to pass an order of detention against the petitioner.
[618 B H] The opinion of the Board may not have been binding on the detaining authority but it cannot be gain said that the fact that the Board had recorded such an opinion on identical facts involving a common ground was at least a relevant circumstance which ought to have been placed before the detaining authority in the case.
The ground on which the High Court upheld the order of detention was similar to one of the grounds on which S was detained, the transaction being one and the same as also the incident on which the two orders of detention were based.
This is why the opinion of the Board in the earlier case became relevant in the present case.
[618 D F] It may be that there were other grounds on which S was detained and that the Advisory Board might have come to the conclusion that since these grounds were not enough to justify his detention there was no sufficient cause for detaining him.
But it is not as if the opinion of the Board was binding on the detaining authority.
The substance of the matter is that the detaining authority in this case failed to apply its mind to a highly relevant circumstance that an order of detention passed on the ground on which the detention of the petitioner rested, in addition to something more, was not sustained by the Advisory Board in the case of section The reasonable probability that, since the Advisory Board had not sustained S 's detention on a ground which was common to him and the petitioner, the detaining authority would have, if at all, passed the order of detention against the petitioner on the remaining three grounds only cannot be excluded.
Those three grounds had been held to be bad by the High Court.
[619 E H] The explanation of the detaining authority that the Board 's opinion dated October 19, 1981 came into existence after he had passed the order of detention on October 8, 1981 is not correct.
When the order of detention was passed on November 7, 1981 the Board 's opinion in Ss ' case was available to the State Government nearly three weeks before that date and it was the duty of the State Government to place that opinion before the detaining authority.
[620 E F]
