As per the rates fixed in the year 1953 by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, the slaughtering fees were 0.25 paise for each animal, in the case of sheep, goats and pigs and rupees one for each animal in the case of buffaloes.
By a Notification dated 31.1.1968, the Corporation purported to enhance the slaughtering fee in both the categories eightfold, with effect from February 1 1968.
Some butchers of the city questioned the revision of rates on the ground that the proposed enhanced fee was wholly disproportionate to the cost of the services and supervision and was in fact not a fee, but a tax.
During the pendency of the writ petitions in the High Court, by virtue of an interim arrangement, the appellant, was permitted to collect slaughtering fees at double the rates fixed in 1953 and as a result thereof the Corporation realised a sum of Rs. 4,24,494/ .
The budget of the Corporation under item XIV B showed a sum of Rs. 2,56,000 as the expenditure involved in connection with the slaughter houses.
Comparing the amount of actual realisation of fee at the rates permitted by the court with the amount of expenditure as revealed by the budget and excluding from consideration all expenditure not shown in the budget from item XIV B, the High Court came to the conclusion that even if the original fee was doubled the amount realised would be more than sufficient to meet the expenditure involved and, therefore, there was no reason at all for increasing the fee eightfold and so the proposed fee was no fee but a tax for which there is no legislative mandate.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1;1 The increase of the slaughtering fee from 0.25 P to Rs. 2.00 per animal in the case of small animals and from rupee 1.00 to Rs. 8.00 in the case of large animals was wholly justified, in the Circumstances of the case.
[1008 C D] 1:2 True, the Municipal Corporation has realised a sum of Rs. 4,24,494 way of fees at the rate of Re. 00.50 per animal in the case of sheep, goats 1000 and pigs and Rs. 2 per animal in the case of buffaloes, whereas the budget of the M.C.D. showed under item XIV B that an amount of Rs. 2,56,000 was expended in connection with slaughter houses.
The Items of expenditure covered by item XIV B of the Municipal Budget are evidently those items of expenditure which are incurred directly and exclusively in connection with slaughter houses.
There are several other items of expenditure the whole or part of which is attributable to slaughter houses like the expenditure involved in the purchase, maintenance and the use of trucks and other vehicles for the removal of filth from slaughter houses, conservancy, petrol oil etc.
, the expenditure incurred in connection with the maintenance of supervisory staff like a fulltime Veterinary officer, Municipal Health officer, Deputy Health officer and Zonal Head officers, the cost of depreciation of the buildings and fittings in slaughter houses, expansion and improvement of slaughter houses for utilities etc.
but actually debited to other heads of account under the Municipal budget.
Apparently, the High Court was under an erroneous impression that the fees collected should be shown to be related to expenditure incurred directly and exclusively in connection with the slaughtering of animals in its slaughter houses and also, shown as such in the Municipal budget.
[1007 B H, 1008 A B] 2.
Vicissitudes of time and necessitudes of history contribute to changes of philosophical attitudes, concepts, ideas and ideals and, with them, the meanings of words and phrases and the language itself.
The philosophy and the language of the law are no exceptions.
Words and phrases take colour and character from the context and the times and speak differently in different contexts and times.
Words and phrases have not only a meaning but also a content, a living content, which breathes, and so, expands and contracts.
This is particularly so where the words and phrases properly belong to other disciplines.
"Tax" and "Pee" are such words.
They properly belong to the world of public finance but since the Constitution and the laws are also concerned with Public Finance, these words have often been adjudicated upon in an effort to discern their content.
[1002 D G] 3.
From the decided cases beginning from Commissioner of Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Shri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiyar ; till date, it is clear that: (i) There is no generic difference between a tax and fee, though broadly a tax is a compulsory exaction as part of a common burden, without promise of any special advantages to classes of tax payers whereas a fee is a payment for services rendered; benefit provided or privilege conferred; (ii) Compulsion is not the hall mark of the distinction between a tax and fee; (iii) That the money collected does not go into a separate fund but goes into the Consolidated Fund does not also necessarily make a levy tax; (iv) Though a fee must have relation to the services rendered, or the advantage conferred, such relation need not be direct; a mere casual relation may be enough; (v) Further neither the incidence of the fee nor the service rendered need be uniform, (vi) That others besides those paying the fees are also benefited does not detract from the character of the fee; (vii) In fact the special benefit or advantage to the payers of the fees may even be secondary as compared with the primary motive of regulation in the public interest; (viii) Nor is the court to assume the role of a Cost Accountant.
It is neither necessary nor expedient to weigh too meticulously the cost, of the services rendered 1001 etc.
against the amount of fees collected so as to evenly balance the two and (ix) A correlationship is all that is necessary.
Quid pro quo in the strict sense is not the only true index of a fee; nor is it necessarily absent in a tax.
[1006 E H, 1007 A B] Commissioner of H.R. & C.E., Madras vs Shri Lakshmindra Thritha Swamiyar, ; ; H. H. Sudhundra vs Commissioner for Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments, [1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 302; Hingir Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. and others vs The State of Orissa and others, [196] 2 S.C.R. 537; H. H. Swamiji vs Commissioner Hindu Religious & Chariiable Endowments Dept. and others, ; Southern Pharmaceuticals & Chemicals, Trichur and others etc.
vs State of Kerala and others; , referred to.
