By the operation of section 32 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act 1948 the respondent who was recorded as a tenant on the tillers ' day i e. 1st April, 1957 was deemed to have purchased the land from the appellant landlord subject to other provisions of the Act.
The respondent having refused to accept notice u/s 32G for determining the price of the land and failing to appear, the Tribunal declared the sale ineffective.
Subsequently the respondent made an application under section 32 PP that afforded a fresh opportunity to a tenant who had failed to appear before the Tribunal as a result of which the sale was held ineffective, requesting the Tribunal to determine purchase price of the land.
The Tribunal held that the respondent was not a tenant of the land and was not entitled to be declared a deemed purchaser and accordingly it is not necessary to determine the price The Deputy Collector dismissed the appeal preferred by the respondent.
The Revenue Tribunal in a revision petition held that once the notice was issued to a person who is shown to have purchased the land u/s 32 and if the sale is held ineffective because of his absence in the proceeding under section 32G, in a subsequent proceeding u/s 32 PP it is not open to the landlord to challenge that such a person was not tenant.
A petition under Article 227 of the Constitution moved by the appellant landlord was dismissed in limine by the High Court, Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The view of the Revenue Tribunal is not correct.
Section 32 PP confers a right upon a person claiming to be a tenant to make an application for determining the price and the pre condition is that he failed to appear before the Tribunal in a proceeding u/s 32G.
In such a situation, the landlord is a necessary party.
The landlord can and would be entitled to contend that the person claiming to be a tenant and making an application u/s 32 PP was not a tenant on April 1, 1957.
Undoubtedly only that person is entitled to make an application u/s 32 PP who having failed to appear before the Tribunal in a proceeding u/s 32G, the statutory sale was declared ineffective but on that account such person making an application under section 32 PP must be accepted as tenant without further enquiry and without permitting the landlord to challenge the status of the applicant is not warranted by the 993 language of section 32 PP.
The Revenue Tribunal 's view that unless the landlord challenged the order u/s 32G declaring the sale having become ineffective on the footing that a person to whom notice was sent was a tenant on April 1, 1957 and his failure to appear without anything more would clothe him with the status of a tenant overlooks the possibility of a person to whom notice is served not appearing because he had nothing to do with the land.
[996 H, 997 A H] The failure of the landlord to question the sale being declared ineffective on account of the absence of the person to whom notice was sent and who defaulted would not either on the general principle of res judicata or principle analogous to constructive res judicata preclude the landlord from challenging the status in the subsequent enquiry.
There is only one situation which may preclude the enquiry in that if on receipt of notice the tenant did not appear and the landlord appeared and unequivocally admitted that the defaulting person was a tenant on the relevant date and on his failure to appear the sale should be declared ineffective, the landlord in subsequent proceeding under section 32 PP would be estopped from challenging the status of the applicant tenant.
[998 A.C]
