The petitioner Bhagwant Singh a member of the Indian Revenue Service applied to the Court for intervention and necessary relief in the matter of the death of his married daughter Gurinder Kaur alleging that due to several circumstances he was convinced that his daughter was murdered in the house of her parent 's in law by burning her and that the police investigation was improper and irregular and ineffective.
According to the petitioner: (i) that he and his daughter were opposed to the evils of the dowry system and therefore, with a stipulation that no dowry should be demanded at the time of the marriage he gave his daughter to one Amarjit Singh, son of his colleague Kartar Singh Sawhney and a friend for over thirty years; (ii) that after the marriage his daughter came to be ill treated by her mother in law hinting that gifts and jewellery were expected from her parents and such oppressive tensions at home resulted in the mis carriage of a child, from which time onwards the mother in law taunted her saying that unless she observed the family tradition of presenting a necklace to her mother in law she would remain without a child; (iii) that sometime later, the son in law got it conveyed to Bhagwant Singh that he required Rs. 50,000 for financing his business which was not acceded to; (iv) that on August 9, 1980 i.e. ten months after the marriage his daughter was found dead of third degree burns from a kerosene fire in the bath room and was admitted in the Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital by her father in law at 12.15 P.M.; (v) that the police did not get the statement of his daughter recorded though she was able to speak; (vi) that the police added section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act to the charge on November 29, 1980 and only on May 15, 1981 a reference to section 306 IPC was included in the F.I.R.; and (vii) that the police failed to examine material witnesses and recover material objects and proceeded in a leisurely manner.
110 The Court admitted the writ petition and called for full details from the Inspector General of Police about the investigation of the case and the circumstances leading to the non filing of the report under section 173(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Disposing of the Writ Petition and directing the C.B.I. to complete the investigation within three months, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1 Disappointing as it may seem to those who have desired the institution of criminal action on the basis that a crime has been committed, the material on record does not, however, justify an order to that effect by the Supreme Court.
The investigation of the case now stands transferred to the C.B.I. at the instance of the petitioner.
[123 E F] 1:2.
It is not possible, in this case, nor indeed would it be right for the Court to do so, to enter into the question whether Gurinder Kaur committed suicide or was murdered.
That is a matter which is properly involved in the trial of a criminal charge by a court possessing jurisdiction.
[114 G H] 2:1.
The police did not display the promptitude and efficiency which the investigation of the case required.
There is much that calls for comment.
Though the CD entry made on August 9, 1980 indicates the visit of a sub inspector to the place of occurrence and seizure of several things, the blanket with which the fire is said to have been put out has not been seized.
On the next day when the experts from the Central Forensic Science Laboratory visited the place for getting any chance prints, the mirror was not taken possession of, nor was the report obtained for full five weeks.
In cases such as this, it would have been of the essence that on visiting the place of occurrence immediately on information of the incident, the mirror should have been taken into possession by the police and handed over forthwith to the Central Forensic Science Laboratory experts for an urgent report in regard to the existence and identification of the prints.
Delay in such a matter is vital and can often result in the loss of valuable clues.
Since Ramu the servant was reported to have helped in forcing open the door of the bathroom, he was a material witness for deposing whether the bathroom was latched from inside and had to be forced open or was in fact latched from outside.
It was only as late as January 25,1981, according to entry CD 13 of that date, that Ramu was examined by the Station House Officer.
Strangely he was allowed to leave the town and go to his village before he could be fully examined by the police.
There is no evidence that the police expressed any anxiety to put him through a thorough examination immediately or shortly after the date of the occurrence or at least before Shri Kartar Singh 's family allowed Ramu to leave the town for his village.
The fact that the investigation by the Delhi Police does not inspire confidence is clear from the memorandum dated May 12, 1981 issued by the Crime Branch to the Deputy Commissioner of Police to the effect that the statement of several material witnesses had not been recorded.
[118 B H, 119 A B, 120 B] 2:2 The investigation by the police following the occurrence was desultory and lackadaisical, and showed want of appreciation of the emergent need 111 to get at the truth of the case.
Whatever may be the reason, there is no doubt that the investigation of the case suffered from casualness, lack of incisiveness and unreasonable dilatoriness, and this is demonstrated most effectively by the manner in which the case was passed from one police official to another, being entrusted successively to sub Inspectors and Inspectors each of whom already had his hands full with the investigation of several other cases.
There is the admission that these police officers were not only preoccupied with numerous other cases in their hands but they were officers who were also required to look after the day to day work of the police station.
It was only when on the repeated and insistent petitions of Shri Bhagwant Singh the case passed into the control of the Crime Branch that the investigation showed some signs of speeding up.
Secondly, the haphazard maintenance of a police case diary not only does no credit to those responsible for maintaining it but defeats the very purpose for which it is required to be maintained.
It is of the utmost importance that the entries in a police Case Diary should be made with promptness, in sufficient detail, mentioning all significant facts, in careful chronological order and with complete objectivity.
[120 E H, 121 A.B] 2.3 In a case such as this, the death of a young wife must be attributed either to the commission of a crime or to the fact that.
mentally tortured by the suffocating circumstances surrounding her, she committed suicide.
Young woman of education, intelligence and character do not set fire to themselves unless provoked and compelled to that desperate step by the intolerance of their misery.
Such cases evidence a deep seated malady in our social order.
The greed for dowry, and indeed the dowry system as an institution, calls for the severest condemnation lt is evident that legislative measures such as the Dowry Prohibition Act have not met with the success for which they were designed.
Perhaps, legislation in itself cannot succeed in stamping out such an evil, and the solution must ultimately be found in the conscience and will or the social community and in its active expression through legal and constitution methods.
[121 C E] 3.
The Court suggested the following (i) Where the death in such cases is due to a crime, the perpetrators of the crime not infrequently escape from the nemesis of the law because of inadequate police investigation.
It would be of considerable assistance if an appropriately high priority was given to the expeditious investigation of such cases, if a special magisterial machinery was created for the purpose of the prompt investigation of such incidents, and efficient investigative techniques and procedures were adopted taking into account the peculiar features of such cases; [121 F G] (ii) A female police officer of sufficient rank and status in the police force should be associated with the investigation from its very inception.
There are evident advantages in that.
In a case where a wife dies in suspicious circumstances in her husband 's home its invariably a matter of considerable difficulty to ascertain the precise circumstances in which the incident occurred.
As the incident takes place in the home of the husband the material witnesses are 112 usually the husband and his parents or other relations of the husband staying with him.
Whether it was cooking at the kitchen stove which was responsible for the accident or, according to the inmates of the house, there was an inexplicable urge to suicide or whether indeed the young wife was the victim of a planned murder are matters closely involving the intimate knowledge of a woman 's daily existence.
[121 H, 122 A B] If the incident is the result of a crime by the husband or his family, the problem of ascertaining the truth is burdened by the privacy in which the incident occurred.
In the circumstances where it is possible to record the dying declaration of the victim, it would be more conducive to securing the truth if the victim made the declaration in the presence of a female police officer who can be expected to inspire confidence in the victim.
Psychological factors play their part, and their role cannot be ignored.
A young wife can be the subject of varying psychological pressures, and because that is so the nuances of feminine psychology support the need for including a female police officer as part or the investigating force; and [122 C E] (iii) The need to extend the application of the to other cities besides those where it operates already.
The application of the will make possible an immediate inquiry into the death of the victim, whether it has been caused by accident, homicide, suicide or suddenly by means unknown.
lt contains provisions which are entirely salutary for the purpose of such inquiry, and an inquiry under that enactment would be more meaningful and effective and complete than one under sections 174 and 175 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The procedure contemplated by the , ensures that the inquiry into the death is held by a person of independent standing and enjoying judicial powers, with a status and jurisdiction commensurate with the necessities of such cases and the assistance of an appropriate machinery.
[122 F H, 123 B C]
