Section 32 of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, as amended from time to time provided that on the 1st day of April, 1957 styled as the "tiller 's day" every tenant shall subject to other provisions of the next succeeding sections be deemed to have purchased from his landlord free from all encumbrance subsisting thereon, on the said date the land held by him as a tenant if other conditions of the section are satisfied.
By operation of this law, one Janardhan, the father of the respondent, became the "deemed purchaser" effective from April 1,1957, of the land bearing survey No. 1052 and F measuring 16 acres situated within the revenue limits of village Sonai Taluka Nawasa, District Ahmednagar which belonged to Tarachand Chopra.
Subsequent to this admitted fact, several incidents took place which have led to the present appeal raising the question of the legal effect of the several steps taken by different persons; ignorant of the factum of Janardhan having become the deemed purchaser".
They are (a) Landlord Tarachand died on August 12,1959, after two and a quarter years after Janardhan became the statutory purchaser; (ii) Tarachand executed a will, before his death, bequeathing the suit land to Ashoklal Gugale, a minor; (iii) the revenue authorities, who must be aware of the provisions of the Act, wrongly mutated the name of Ashoklal in the revenue records as the landlord in terms of the will; (iv) in spite of the mandatory duty imposed upon the Agricultural Lands Tribunal, under Section 32G, to issue notice to all tenants who under section 32 are deemed to have purchased the lands, all landlords of such lands and all other persons interested to appear before 238 it for the determination of the price of the land which is the subject matter of compulsory purchase, strangely accepted the plea for the postponement of the inquiry under section 32F of the Act and later again commenced the proceedings in the year 1967 and concluded the proceedings by its order dated July 13 1967 repeating the jurisdictional errors; (v) in the interregnum, Ashoklal through his next friend commenced proceedings in case No. 36 of 1967 in the Court of Tenancy Aval Karkoon for the recovery of the possession; (vi) the Tenancy Aval Karkoon, not only entertained the petition, but also got recorded two statements, on 5.10.1967, from Janardhan, "the deemed purchaser" to the effect that he had no objection to handing over the possession of the land to the landlord as he was old and could not cultivate the land personally and another from the present respondent to the same effect even though in the life time of his father Janardhan, he had no title to the land involved in the dispute, and, thereafter made the order dated October 6, 1967 exacting Janardhan from the land; (vii) this wholly null and void order enabled the minor landlord to sell the land by a registered deed on November 13, 1967 to one Haribhav and another, the former later transferred his interest in favour of some of the petitioners before the High Court; (viii) On October 6, 1971, Janardhan moved the Tribunal under section 32F of the Act to the effect that as the landlord Ashoklal had attained majority he was entitled to purchase the land; (ix) the Tribunal started the proceedings under section 32G and after bringing the present respondent on record due to the demise of Janardhan on November 29, 1976, went into the matter in depth, examined all previous orders and came to the conclusion that Janardhan having become the "deemed purchaser. ' all subsequent.
proceedings were null and void, which was affirmed by tho Assistant Collector, the Maharashtra Revenue Tribunal and the High Court later; (x) a parallel proceeding initiated by the respondent for the recovery of possession was decided in his favour by all Courts including the High Court Dismissing the appeals by the special leave, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1 on the tiller 's day, the landlord 's interest in the land gets extinguished and simultaneously by a statutory sale without anything more by the parties, the extinguished title of the landlord is kindled or created in the tenant.
That very moment landlord tenant relationship as understood ill common law or Transfer of Property Act comes to an end, the link and chain is broken.
The absent non cultivating landlord ceases to have that ownership element on the land and the cultivating tenant, the tiller of the soil becomes the owner thereof.
This is unquestionable, the landlord from the date of statutory sale is only entitled to receive the purchase price as determined by the Tribunal under section 32G.
In other words, landlord ceases to be landlord and the tenant becomes the owner of the land and comes in direct contact with the state.
Without any act of transfer inter vivos the title of the landlord is extinguished and is created simultaneously in the tenant making the tenant the deemed purchaser.
It is an admitted position that on April 1, 1957 Tarachand was the landlord and Janardhan was the tenant Tarachand landlord was under no disability as envisaged by Section 32F. Therefore or April 1, 1957 Janardhan became deemed purchaser.
[244 C G] 239 Sri Ram Ram Narain Medhi vs State of Bombay, [1959] Supp.
I S.C.R. 489 @ 518 followed.
If, in the instant case., Janardhan became the deemed purchaser on tillers ' day, the relationship of landlord and tenant between Tarachand and Janardhan came to be extinguished and no right could be claimed either by Tarachand or anyone claiming through him such as Ashoklal or the present purchasers on the footing that they are the owners of the land on or after April 1, 1957.
[244 G H, 245 A] 2:1.
Section 32F of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948, has no application to the facts of the ease.
Section 32F postponed the date of compulsory purchase by the tenant where the landlord is a minor or a widow or a person subject to mental or physical disability on the tillers ' day.
Section 32F has an overriding effect over Section 32 as it opens with a non obstante clause.
The combined effect of Section 32F and 32 would show that there the landlord is under no disability as envisaged by Section 32F the tenant of such landlord by operation of law would become the deemed purchaser but where the landlord is of a class or category as set out in section 32F such as a minor, a widow or a person subject to any mental or physical disability, the date o, compulsory sale would be postponed as therein provided.
Now, if Tarachand the landlord was under no disability and he was alive on April 1, 1957 and he was the owner, his tenant Janardhan became the deemed purchaser.
[245 A D] 2:2.
If Janardhan became the deemed purchaser on April 1, 1957 all subsequent proceedings in which the Tribunal held that the date of purchase was postponed because the recorded owner Ashoklal was a minor were without jurisdiction.
The Tribunal had absolutely no jurisdiction to proceed on the footing that date of sale was postponed.
It is neither an incorrect order nor an erroneous order as was sought to be made out but Tribunal lacked tho jurisdiction to proceed under section 32F because when the proceedings under Section 32F were commenced, Janardhan had long since become the deemed purchaser.
Therefore all subsequent proceedings were ab initio void and without jurisdiction.
[245 D F] 2:3.
When a Tribunal of limited jurisdiction clutches at a jurisdiction by ignoring a statutory provision and its consequences in law on the status of parties or by a decision wholly unwarranted with regard to the jurisdictional fact, its decision is a nullity and can be set up in collateral proceeding.
The Tribunal clutched at a jurisdiction not vested in it and in such a situation it can not be disputed that the Tribunal lacked the jurisdiction to entertain any proceeding purporting to be between landlord and tenant on the erroneous assumption that tenant was still a tenant though he had long since become the deemed purchaser, The tenant has ceased to be a tenant much prior to the orders passed by the Tribunal on April 24, 1961 and July 13, 1967 holding that the date of compulsory purchase was postponed.
The compulsory purchase by the operation of law had taken place as early as April 1, 1957 and that legal position cannot be wished away.
[245 F H, 246 A Bl 240 3:1 When several orders passed by different authorities are wholly null and void and hence non est, such orders cannot thwart subsequent proceedings.
The nullity can be set up in subsequent proceedings.
The plea of estoppel by conduct also cannot be allowed to be raised, since a measure of agrarian reform cannot be permitted to be defeated by such devious means of the landlords trying to take advantage of any statement made contrary to their legally protected interest, in the absence of legal literacy and by such jugglery of orders of low level revenue officers who hardly knew what they were doing.
[246 C H, 247 G] 3:2.
In the instant case, even assuming Janardhan relinquished his right as a tenant, even then Ashoklal cannot recover possession as the land would be at the disposal of the Collector under Section 32P.
Further, the posthaste steps taken by Ashoklal and others in transferring the lands to several others speak of malafides of the landlord.
[246E F]
