The prosecution case against the accused respondent was that when the deceased and his wife were returning home from their field, he and the co accused armed with a gun and a country made pistol fired at the deceased causing him injuries, that some passersby, including the two eye witnesses, overpowered the respondent but that he escaped from their hold and ran towards the co accused who then was standing at some distance, snatched the pistol from his hand and fired at the deceased while he was being carried towards the village.
As a result of this shot the deceased was killed instantaneously and one of the witnesses sustained injuries.
The defence version, on the other hand, was that on the date and time of the occurrence when the two accused were going out of the village the deceased, his servant and the injured witness assaulted them and on hearing their cries, the respondent 's father fired at the deceased in self defence and that this had resulted in the death of the deceased and injury to the witness.
The trial court found him guilty of the offence punishable under section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced him to death and the co accused with imprisonment for life.
Before the High Court the argument for the respondent was that since the injuries on the person of the witness were superficial, he could have been fired at only from a long distance and being an aged man of 60 years, he could not have run and caught hold of the respondent before the respondent could reload his gun.
To test the capacity of the witness to run and to assess the time taken in reloading a gun, the High Court conducted an experiment by asking the witness, who was present in the court, to move briskly to a certain distance.
A young lawyer present in the Court was asked to unload and reload a gun exactly of the same make as the gun used by the respondent.
On the basis of this experiment the High Court came to the conclusion that 295 even if the witness, after receiving gun shot injuries had run some distance towards the respondent; he could neither have caught hold of him nor could he have prevented him from reloading his gun.
Disbelieving the prosecution story, the High Court acquitted both the accused.
The State 's Special Leave Petition against the judgment of the High Court was granted only with respect to the respondent.
On the question whether the High Court was correct in conducting the experiment that it did and in coming to the conclusion that the respondent was not guilty of the offence of murder.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The procedure of conducting an experiment in Court two years after the incident with the aid of a young lawyer (about whose proficiency in handling a gun there is no authentic evidence) who was asked to handle a different gun altogether and using the conclusion based on that experiment to reject the truth of the evidence of the eye witness, was highly irregular.
The High Court has not addressed itself to the degree of efficiency or inefficiency of the respondent in handling a gun.
The time taken by any person to reload a gun depends upon several factors, including the condition of the gun and the surcharged atmosphere created by the firing bout which may have preceded the time of reloading the gun.
[301 F H] Ordinarily, this Court would not interfere with the judgment of acquittal on mere re appreciation of evidence.
But if there are glaring infirmities in the judgment of the High Court resulting in miscarriage of justice it is the duty of this Court to interfere.
[309 F G] In the instant case the High Court was wrong in conducting the experiment carried out by it at the hearing of the appeal.
Having been impressed by its result it first rejected the evidence of the eye witness on trivial omissions which would not affect the credibility of the prosecution version on imaginary grounds.
From the evidence it is obvious that the two accused were armed with fire arms and were the aggressors.
On a careful reading of the evidence, it is clear that the father of the accused respondent, out of love and affection towards his son, tried to shield him.
[306 F G] The plea of self defence cannot be accepted.
A person who was an aggressor and who sought an attack on himself by his own aggressive attack cannot rely upon the right of self defence if in the course of the transaction he deliberately kills another whom he had attacked earlier.
Having regard to the nature of the weapon used, the act by which death was caused by the respondent was done with the intention of causing death and there were no extenuating circumstances which would mitigate the offence committed by him.
[309 C D] State of Punjab vs Jagir Singh & Ors.
[1974] 1 S.C.R. 328; Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade & Anr.
vs State of Maharashtra ; followed.
296 The trial court was right in convicting the respondent.
The acquittal of the co accused did not effect the prosecution case against him.
There is no legal bar for convicting the respondent alone in this case on the facts and circumstances of the case.
The principle of issue estoppel is inapplicable here.
[309 D E]
