A feud between two families has resulted in tragic consequences.
Seventeen lives were lost in the course of a series of five incidents which occurred in quick succession in five different villages, situated in the vicinity of each other, in Punjab, on the night between August 12 and August 13, 1977.
The seventeen persons who lost their lives and the three who substained injuries included men, women and children related to one Amar Singh and his sister Piaro Bai.
In this connection one Machhi Singh and his eleven companions, close relatives and associates were prosecuted in five sessions cases, each pertaining to the concerned village in which the killings took place.
Machhi Singh was the common accused at each trial.
The composition of his co accused differed number wise and identity wise from trial to trial At the conclusion of the series of trials, the accused found guilty were convicted under appropriate provisions.
Four of them were awarded death sentence, whereas sentence of imprisonment for life was imposed on nine of them.
They were also convicted for different offences and appropriate punishment was inflicted on each of them in that behalf.
The order of conviction and sentence gave rise to five murder references and fourteen appeals by the convicts before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
Having lost their appeals and the death sentences having been con firmed, the appellants have come in appeal by way of special leave.
The Court considered the following: (a) What normal guidelines are to be followed so as to identify the "rarest of rare cases" formula for imposing death sentence, as spelled out in Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; (b) Reliability of eye witnesses to a crime under light shed by the lantern in a village to identify connect an accused to the crime; (c) invocation of the doctrine of benefit of doubt; 414 and (d) the effect of non summoning the magistrate for recording dying declaration.
Allowing the Criminal Appeals Nos. 79/81 and 86/81 and dismissing the other appeals, the Court ^ HELD : 1:1.
The extreme penalty of death need not be inflicted except in gravest cases of extreme culpability.
Before opting for the death penalty the circumstances of the 'offender ' also require to be taken into consideration alongwith the circumstances of the 'crime '.
Life imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.
In other words death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inadequate punishment having regard to the relevant circumstances of the crime, and provided, and only provided, the option to impose sentence of imprisonment for life cannot be conscientiously exercised having regard to the nature and circumstances of the crime and all the relevant circumstances.
A balance sheet of aggravating and mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up and in doing so the mitigating circumstances has to be accorded full weightage and a just balance has to be struck between the aggravating and the mitigating circumstances before the option is exercised.
[433 A E] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab , relied on, 1;2.
In order to apply these guidelines inter alia the following questions may be asked and answers : (a) Is there something uncommon about the crime which renders sentence of imprisonment for life inadequate and called for a death sentence ? (b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that there is no alternative but to impose death sentence even after according maximum weightage to the mitigating circumstances which speak in favour of the offender.
[433 E G] 1:3.
If upon taking an overall global view of all the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid proposition and taking into account the answers to the questions posed here in above, the circumstances of the case are such that death sentence is warranted, the court would proceed to do so.
[433 G H] 2.
The villagers living in villages where electricity has not reached as yet, get accustomed to seeing things in the light shed by the lantern.
Their eyesight gets conditioned and becomes accustomed to the situation.
Their powers of seeing are therefore not diminished by the circumstance that the incident is witnessed in the light shed by the lantern and not electric light.
Paucity of light cannot, therefore, improbablise the commission of the crime by the accused.
[417 C D] 3:1.
When a piece of evidence introduced and relied upon by the prosecution itself creates a doubt (a reasonable doubt) as regards the complicity of the accused, even if there are no infirmities in other evidence, the doctrine of benefit of doubt must be invoked by the court in favour of the accused.
[422 F G] 415 In the instant case, though there is no infirmity in the evidence of PW Amar Singh and PW Mohindo to connect Mohinder Singh to the crime, the fact that the second rifle used in the commission of crime having been originally issued to one Kashmir Singh does not satisfactorily establish the link.
[422 B, E F] 3:2.
When the deceased was making good recovery and having regard to the condition of his health, no danger to his life was apprehended and therefore in that fact situation, the magistrate was not summoned, no fault can legitimately be found on this score for getting the benefit of doubt in favour of the accused.
Any statement made to the police by such deceased can be subsequently allowed to be treated as dying declaration and evidence scanned.
[429 G H]
