Rule 151 of the Bombay Civil Service Rules 1959 provides for payment of normal subsistence allowance to a civil servant on his suspension from service for the reasons stated under the service rules.
While the first proviso to the Rule places a bar on the Government servant to take up any other avocation during the period of his suspension, the second proviso thereto reduces the subsistence allowance to rupee one per month when the Government servant is convicted by a competent authority and sentenced to imprisonment till date of his removal or dismissal or reinstatement by the competent authority unless he was acquitted by appellate court in the meanwhile in which case he will draw subsistence allowance and at the normal rate from the date of acquittal.
Chandrabhan Tale, the respondent in the Civil Appeal No. 1976/77, one Vithoba, the petitioner in C.M.P. 6117/80 who has sought to intervene in the Civil Appeal and Baban the petitioner in W.P. 607 of 1980 in the Supreme Court, were all civil servants of the State of Maharashtra the appellant and the respondent in the C.M.P. and W.P. at the relevant time.
Chandra Bhan Tale was a Head Constable while Vithoba was a Deputy Engineer and Personal Assistant to the Executive Engineer, Zilla Parishad, Nagpur and Baban was a Junior Clerk in the office of the Naib Tehsildar, Kamptee.
Chandrabhan Tale and Baban have been convicted under Section 161 I.P.C. and Section 5(1) (d) read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, while Vithoba has been convicted under Section 5(1) (e) read with Section 5(2) of that Act in separate cases.
All of them have been sentenced to various terms of imprisonment by the Trial Court.
Chandrabhan Tale was on bail pending trial, and he was released even after conviction to enable him to move the High Court in appeal and continued to be on bail till he was finally acquitted by the High Court and was, therefore, never lodged in prison on conviction by the Trial Court.
Vithoba was on bail pending the trial and on conviction and on 338 admitting the Criminal appeal, the High Court has granted bail with the result he too was not lodged in the prison on his conviction.
Baban was also convicted and sentenced by the Special Judge, Nagpur but since he has been granted bail by the Supreme Court in SLP (Crl.) 800 dated 14 3 1980, he too had not been lodged in prison.
All the three have been granted by their competent administrative authorities a reduced subsistence allowance of rupee one only from the date of their conviction when the constitutionality of the proviso to Rule 151 was challenged by Chandrabhan, the Bombay High Court, found (1) that the object and purpose of the rule is to provide subsistence allowance pending suspension of the civil servant and (2) the subsistence allowance mentioned in the main rule and the second proviso means a bare minimum amount which can be reasonably provided for a civil servant who is kept under suspension and without work and therefore not entitled to full wages.
The Court interpreted the words "sentenced to imprisonment" occurring in the second proviso to mean "condemned to prison upon conviction" and held that a civil servant who has been convicted and sentenced but has not been sent to prison and is otherwise free could not fall under the category of persons "sentenced to imprisonment" and, therefore the case of Chandrabhan who was on bail not falling under the proviso to Rule 151 would automatically entitle him to normal subsistence allowance.
The High Court did not consider the question whether the Writ Petition is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the Civil Appeal and allowing the two petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Chinnappa Reddy, J. (concurring) 1:1.
The second proviso to Rule 151 (i) (ii) (b) of the Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959 is void as it offends Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution.
The award of subsistence allowance at the rate of Rupee one per month, as provided for in the proviso to Rule 151, to a Government servant, who is convicted by a competent Court and sentenced to imprisonment and whose appeal against the conviction is pending can only be characterised as ludicrous.
Further it is a mockery to say that subsistence allowance is awarded and to award Rupee one per month.
[341 G H] Per contra: 2:1.
Though the view that public employment opportunity is national wealth in which all citizens are equally entitled to share and that no class of people can monopolise public employment in the guise of efficiency ' or other ground, is correct it is non sequitur.
As at present advised, the right to equal opportunity to public employment may not be treated as a new form of private property with its attribute of competitive exploitation.
The fundamental right to property has been abolished because of its incompatibility with the goals of 339 'justice, social, economic and political ' and 'equality of status and of opportunity ' and with the establishment of a socialist democratic republic, as contemplated by the Constitution There is no reason why a new concept of property should be introduced in the place of the old so as to bring in its wake the vestiges of the doctrine of laissez faire and create, in the name of efficiency, a new oligarchy.
Efficiency has many facets and one is yet to discover an infallible test of efficiency to suit the widely differing needs of a developing society such as ours.
There is a present inherent danger of a class dominated civil service resulting from the concept of employment opportunity as private property.
We have to guard ourselves against any such result.
[342 A E] Per Varadarajan J. 1.
The interpretation of the second proviso to Rule 151 of the Bombay Civil Service Rules, 1959 is artificial and unwarranted, for such an interpretation is not possible except by reading into it some words which are not there as it stands, namely, and "committed to prison" after the words "when the government servant is convicted by a competent authority and sentenced to imprisonment".
The proviso does not require for its application that the civil servant who has been convicted by the Trial Court and sentenced to imprisonment has to be actually lodged in prison pursuant to the conviction and sentence awarded to him.
[349 A B, 350 A] Kennedy vs Spratt, [1972] Appeal cases 83, quoted with approval.
The right to intervene in Civil Appeal 1976/77 filed by the State, of Vithoba in C.M.P. 5176 of 1980 has to be conceded and he has to be allowed to intervene, since he has the locus and is vitally interested in the result of the appeal as it would determine the fate of his writ petition No. 2617 of 1979 filed in the Bombay High Court and which has been stayed consequent to the orders of stay granted in the Civil Appeal in C.M.P. 3394 of 1977 by the Supreme Court on 26.8.1977.
[348 B E] 3:1.
The right to public employment is the property of the nation which has to be shared equally subject of course to the qualification necessary for holding the office or post.
But it should not be monopolised by any particular section of the people of this country in the name of efficiency, though efficiency cannot altogether be ignored.
[350 D E] District Manager, A.P.S.R.T.C. vs Labour Court, AIR 1980 AP.
132; approved.
The right to suspend an employee, whether he is in civil service or in service under a private individual or private management is well recognised as an incident to such service.
[350 E] Khemchand vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
The second proviso to Rule 151 of the Bombay Civil Service Rules 1959 is unreasonable and void and therefore violative of Articles 14, 16 and 21 340 of the Constitution.
A civil servant under suspension is entitled to the normal subsistence allowance even after his conviction by the Trial Court pending consideration of his appeal filed against his conviction until the appeal is disposed of finally one way or the other, whether he is on bail or lodged in prison on conviction by the Trial Court.
If the civil servant under suspension, pending a departmental enquiry or a criminal trial started against him, is entitled to subsistence allowance at the normal rate which is a bare minimum required for the maintenance of the civil servant and his family, he should undoubtedly get it even pending his appeal filed against his conviction by the Trial Court, and his right to get the normal subsistence allowance pending consideration of his appeal against his conviction should not depend upon the chance of his being released on bail and not being lodged in prison on conviction by the Trial Court.
Whether he is lodged in prison or released on bail on his conviction pending consideration of his appeal, his family requires the bare minimum by way of subsistence allowance.
[340 B E] 4:2.
If any provision in any rule framed under Article 309 of the constitution is illusory or unreasonable, it is certainly open to the civil servant concerned to seek the aid of the court for declaring that provision to be void.
[353 G H] 4:3.
Any departmental enquiry made without payment of subsistence allowance contrary to the provision for its payment, is violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
Similarly, any criminal trial of a civil servant under suspension without payment of the normal subsistence allowance payable to him under the rule would be violative of that Article.
Payment of subsistence allowance at the normal rate pending the appeal filed against the conviction of a civil servant under suspension is a step that makes the right of appeal fruitful and it is therefore obligatory.
Reduction of the normal subsistence allowance to the nominal sum of Re. 1 per month on conviction of a civil servant under suspension in a criminal case pending his appeal filed against that conviction, whether the civil servant is on bail or has been lodged in prison on conviction pending consideration of his appeal, is an action which stultifies the right of appeal and is consequently unfair and unconstitutional.
Just as it would be impossible for a civil servant under suspension who has no other means of subsistence to defend himself effectively in the Trial Court without the normal subsistence allowance there is nothing on record in these cases to show that the civil servants concerned in these cases have any other means of subsistence it would be impossible for such civil servant under suspension to prosecute his appeal against his conviction fruitfully without payment of the normal subsistence allowance pending his appeal.
353 B F] Ghanshyam Das Srivastava vs State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1975 S.C. 1183; Madhay Hayawandanrao Hoskot vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; applied.
The contention of the appellant that even the nominal sum of Re. 1 per month is subsistence allowance for a civil servant under suspension is as unreasonable as the contention of the appellant that what should be the subsistence allowance for a civil servant under suspension is for the authority 341 empowered to frame rules under Article 309 of the Constitution to consider and that the civil servant who has entered service is bound by the second proviso.
The sum of Re. 1 per month can never sustain a civil servant for even a day much less for a month.
[351 E G]
