The petitioner who was detained in prison for over 14 years after his acquittal filed a habeas corpus petition under article 32 of the Constitution praying for his release on the ground that his detention in the jail was unlawful.
He also asked for certain other reliefs including compensation for his illegal detention.
When the petition came up for hearing the Court was informed by the respondent State that the petitioner had already been released from the jail.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: The petitioner 's detention in the prison after his acquittal was wholly unjustified.
Article 32 confers power on the Supreme Court to issue directions or orders or appropriate writs for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution.
Article 21 which guarantees the right to life and liberty will be denuded of its significant content if the power of this Court were limited to passing orders of release from illegal detention.
One of the telling ways in which the violation of that right can reasonably be prevented and due compliance with the mandate of Article 21 secured, is to mulct its a violators in the payment of monetary compensation.
The right to compensation is some palliative for the unlawful acts of instrumentalities which act in the name of public interest and which present for their protection the powers of the State as a shield.
Respect for the rights of individuals is the true bastion of democracy.
Therefore, the State must repair the damage done by its officers to their rights.
[513 A C, 514 B E] In the circumstances of the instant case the refusal to pass an order of compensation in favour of the petitioner will be doing mere lip service to his fundamental right to liberty which the State Government has so grossly 509 violated.
Therefore, as an interim measure the State must pay to the petitioner a further sum of Rs. 30,000 in addition to the sum of Rs 5,000 already paid by it.
This order will not preclude the petitioner from bringing a suit to recover appropriate damages from the State and its erring officials.
[514 B,F,H]
