Respondent Dorothea and one Prafulla Kumar Mitra were married under the Special Marriage Act, 1872, in January 1952.
Respondent asked for a divorce in 1961 and obtained a decree on May 2, 1962 and as per the decree she was to be paid Rs. 300.0 per month as alimony until she remarries.
Respondent levied execution of the decree and the same was compromised and payment of arrears was undertaken to be made in instalments.
On March 31, 1965, Mitra executed a will but made no provision therein for the satisfaction of the maintenance decree.
He died on April 3, 1965 and the appellant who was the executrix under the will got it duty probated.
Since no payment was made by the executrix after December 1975, rcspmldent filed execution in Matrimoniai Case 1 of 1977 claiming recovery of Rs. 19,500.00.
Appellant objected to the claim under Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure by pleading that the order of alimony not being charged the claim under decree for alimony abated with the death of Mitra.
The executing court overruled the objection and the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court, while dismissing the revision petition, however, granted certificate of appeal to this Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD :1:1.
The language of Section 37 does not warrant the conclusion that there is extinguishment of the decree for alimony upon the death of the judgment debtor husband.
[519 G] 1:2.
The Special Marriage Act is a statute of 1954 made by the Indian Parliament after independence.
There is no ambiguity in Section 37 for the interpretation of which it is necessary to go beyond the provision itself.
It is one of the settled principles of interpretation that the Court should lean in favour of sustaining a decree and should not permit the benefits under a decree 517 to be lost unless there be Act, any special reason for it.
In incorporating a provision like Section 37 in the Act, Parliament intended to protect the wife at the time of divorce by providing for payment of maintenance.
If the husband has left behind an estate at the time of his death there can be no justification for the view that the decree is wiped out and the heirs would succeed to the property without the liability of satisfying ' the decree.
[523 A C] 1:3.
There is no doubt that matrimonial Proceedings abate on the death of either spouse and legal representatives cannot be brought on record and the proceedings cannot be continued any further and where maintenance has been made a charge on the husband 's estate, the death of the husband would not at all effect the decree and notwithstanding such death, the estate can be proceeded against for realisation of the maintenance dues for post death period.
But, there is no rationality in the contention that where the matrimonial proceedings have terminated during the lifetime of the husband and a decree has emerged such a decree for maintence or alimony gets extinguished with the death of the husband when any other decree even though not charged on the husband 's property would not get so extinguished.
A decrees against the husband is executable against the estate of the husband in the hands of the heirs and ' there is no personal liability.
In law a maintenance decree would not make any difference.
The decree indicates that maintenance was payable during the life time of the widow.
To make such a decree contingent upon the life of the husband is contrary to the terms and the spirit of the decree.
Therefore, the assets left behind by Mitra are liable to be proceeded against in the hands of his legal heirs for satisfaction of the decree for maintenance.
[522 C H] 2.
The phrase "at the instance of either party" occurring in sub section (2) of Section 37 of the Act are not confined to the spouses only.
Sub section 3 clearly provides that on remarriage or on a finding that the wife is not leading a chaste life, the order of maintenance can be rescinded.
Upon the husband 's death his estate passes on to his legal heirs and intention of the Legislature being clear that upon remarriage or non leading of a chaste life the benefit conferred by the statute should expire and the estate should become free from the liability of satisfying the decree for maintenance, the application for varying.
modifying or rescinding the order for maintenance can be made even by those who have succeeded to the husband 's estate and the estate can be freed from the liability.
Examining the scheme of the statute and the purpose for which such a provision has been made, it is clear; that the words `either party ' would also cover the legal heirs who have stepped into the shoes of the spouses under the law and such persons would also be competent to ask for variation, modification or rescission of the order for maintenance.
That term would also include the holders of the estate with lawful title for the time being.
[523 E H, 524 A B]
