The appellants filed a suit for damages for conversion against the respondents on the allegations that the respondents were the agents of the appellants, that the appellants had placed orders for certain goods with the respondents, and that the respondents had actually imported the goods but refused to deliver them to the appellants.
The suit was dismissed on the findings that the parties stood in the relationship of seller and purchaser, and not agent and principal and that the title in the goods could only pass to the appellants when the respondents appropriated them to the appellants ' contracts.
In appeal before the Supreme Court, the appellants applied for amendment of the plaint by raising, in the alternative, a claim for damages for breach of contract for nondelivery of the goods.
All the allegations necessary for sustaining a claim for damages for breach of contract were already present in the plaint and the only allegation lacking was that the appellants were, in the alternative, entitled to claim damages for breach of contract by the non delivery of the goods.
But a fresh suit on the amended claim was barred by limitation on the date of the application.
Held, that this was a fit case in which the amendment should be allowed.
The fact that a fresh suit on the amended claim was (1) A.I.R. [1954] Raj. 211.
439 barred by limitation is a factor to be taken into consideration in the exercise of the discretion as to whether the amendment should be ordered or not, and does not affect the power of the court to order it, if that is required in the interests of justice.
Charan Das vs Amir Khan, L.R. 47 I.A. 225 and Kisan Das vs Rachappa, Bombay 644, followed.
To maintain an action in trover the plaintiffs must establish that they had title to the goods in question and that further they were entitled to possession thereof when they called upon the defendants to deliver them.
If the parties stood in the relation of sellers and purchasers with reference to the transactions, then the plaintiffs must show that the property in the goods, which initially was with the defendants had passed to them in accordance with the provisions of the Sale of Goods Act.
If, however, the defendants imported the goods as agents of the plaintiffs, then the title to them would undoubtedly be with the latter, and the only question then would be whether the former were entitled to retain possession, as they would be if they had paid the price on behalf of the principals, and had not been reimbursed that amount.
