In order to promote all India and inter state tourist traffic, the Parliament amended the by introducing in it sec.
63(7) which enabled the State Transport Authority of every State to grant permits valid for the whole or any part of India, in respect of such number of tourist vehicles as may be specified by the Central Government.
Later the Central Government notified that each State Transport Authority could issue 50 all India permits for tourist omnibuses.
As each State had the right, within its territory, to levy a tax on a motor vehicle, it was found that unless tourist vehicles with all India permits were exempted from tax by other States than their home state the object of sec.
63(7) would be frustrated.
Therefore, the Central Government made a request in this behalf to all the State Governments.
In pursuance of that request the Government of Karnataka exempted tourist vehicles holding permits under sec.
63(7) from payment of tax, provided the tax payable to the State in which the vehicle was registered had already been paid and provided further that similar exemption from payment of tax was granted in respect of similar vehicles to the State of Karnataka.
Many transport operators from big and comparatively prosperous States flocked to some small and comparatively poor and less advanced States and after getting all India permits from them started plying their vehicles in other States like Karnataka and Maharashtra more or less as regular stage carriages.
Having found that the transport operators were misusing the all India permits and indulging in certain malpractices, the Government of Karnataka withdrew the exemption from payment of tax granted earlier.
The petitioners, who were transport operators holding all India permits, challenged the withdrawal cf exemption as unconstitutional and bad in law.
The petitioners submitted that sec.
63(7) of the was designed to promote all India and inter state tourist traffic and thus to advance trade, 625 commerce and inter course throughout the territory .
Of India.
By withdrawing the exemption, the object of sec.
63(7) was defeated and therefore, freedom of trade.
Commerce and inter course throughout the territory of India, guaranteed by article 301 of the Constitution was impaired.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: By withdrawing the exemption there is no impairment of the freedom under article 301.
[637 B] Taxes of a compensatory and regulatory character are outside the expanse of article 301 of the Constitution.
Regulatory measures and compensatory taxes far from impeding the free flow of trade and commerce, often promote such free flow of trade and commerce by creating agreeable conditions and providing appropriate services.
All that is necessary to uphold a tax which purports to be or is claimed to be a compensatory tax is, the existence of a specific, identifiable object behind the levy and a nexus between subject and the object of a levy.
Once the nexus between the levy and service is seen, the levy must be upheld unless the compensatory character is shown to be wholly or partly a mere mockery and in truth a design which is destructive of the freedom of inter state trade, commerce and inter course.
[635 C D, 636 A] International Tourist Corporation vs State of Haryana, ; referred to.
By virtue of the power given to them by Entries 56 or 57 of List II every one of the States has the right to make its own legislation to compensate it for the services, benefits and facilities provided by it for motor vehicles operating within the territory of the State.
Taxes resulting from such legislative activity are by their very nativity and nature, cast and character, regulatory and compensatory and, are therefore, not within the vista of article 301, unless the tax is a mere pretext designed to injure the freedom of inter state trade, commerce and inter course.
The nexus between the levy and the service is so patent in the case of such taxes that one need say no more about it.
The Karnataka Motor Vehicles Taxation Act and the Motor Vehicles Taxation Acts of other States are without doubt regulatory and compensatory legislation outside the range of article 301 of the Constitution.
[635 B D] `Taxes on vehicles . suitable for use on roads ' is a State legislative subject and it is for the State Legislature to impose a levy and to exempt from the levy.
Entry 57 of the State List is subject to Entry 35 of the Concurrent List and, it is therefore open to the Parliament to lay down the principles on which taxes may be levied on mechanically propelled vehicles.
But the Parliament while enacting sec.
63(7) of the refrained from indicating any such principles, either expressly or by necessary implication.
The State 's power to tax and to exempt was left uninhibited.
It may be that a State Legislation, plenary or subordinate, which exempts "non home state tourist vehicles" from tax would be advancing the object of sec.
63(71, but 626 the State Legislature are not obliged to fall in line line and to so arrange their tax laws as to advance the object of sec.
63(7), be it ever so desirable.
The State is obliged neither to grant an exemption nor to perpetuate an exemption once granted.
There is no question of impairing the freedom under article 301 by refusing to exempt or by withdrawing an exemption.
[636 E 637 A]
