The Chairperson of the Punjab Public Service Commission made a complaint to the President of India alleging that a certain member of the Commission had committed gross misbehaviour towards her by slapping her on her face in the presence of three other members of the Commission.
In exercise of the power conferred by Article 317(1) of the Constitution, the President had referred for consideration of this Court the question whether on the ground of gross misbehaviour the member ought to be removed from the office of Member of the Public Service Commission.
Certain persons who claimed to have knowledge of the incident filed their affidavits.
The Member 's wife, who had also filed an affidavit, alleged that the then Chief Minister was not happy with her husband 's appointment as a member of the Commission, that the Chairperson 's husband, who was running classes for training students for the Public Service Commission examinations, wanted certain students of his to be favoured in these examinations and that when her husband refused to accede to the request he was falsely implicated in this incident.
It was contended on behalf of the Member that before making the reference the President (1) ought to have referred the case to a fact finding body to ascertain whether a prima facie case had been made out for obtaining the report of this Court on the question of alleged misbehaviour and (2) the function of this Court is limited to determining whether the person concerned was guilty of misconduct of such a nature as would require his removal from the office OF Member of the Public Service Commission.
^ HELD: on the facts of this case, obtaining a preliminary opinion of yet another body would be needless duplication of work and avoidable waste of public time and money.
The power of the President to make a reference to this Court under Article 317(1) is not subject to the condition precedent that he must first have the facts examined by some other body or authority.
There is no justification for reading into the Article a provision which is not to be found in it, especially a provision in the nature of a condition precedent.
The material before the President was of a kind and nature enough to justify his opinion that a prima facie case existed for an enquiry and report by this Court.
[643 G H, 644A, C D] 640 (2) The enquiry which this Court is required to hold is not into the limited question whether the charge of misbehaviour was made out and whether the misbehaviour was of such a nature as to warrant his removal from office but is an enquiry into the facts themselves and facts also so as to enable this Court to pronounce whether the allegations levelled against the Chairman or Member were proved at all.
The purpose of this Article is to ensure independence of the members and to give protection in the matter of their tenure.
Certain dignitaries of the State like Judges of this Court and High Courts, the Comptroller and Auditor General and the Chief Election Com missioner can be removed from their offices only in accordance with tho procedure prescribed in the relevant provisions of the Constitution.
In the case of Members of the Public Service Commission a higher degree of protection is given by the elimination of political pressures in the matter of their removal.
While in the case of these dignitaries removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity depends upon the will of the Parliament, any allegation of misbehaviour made against members of the Public Service Commission has to be examined by this Court on merits.
It is impossible to accept that this Court in one case and the Parliament in the case of others are entrusted by the Constitution with the limited power of determining whether the facts found by some other body establish misbehaviour in one case and misbehaviour or incapacity in those others.
Their function is to find upon facts and their duty is to pronounce whether the facts found by them establish the charge of misbehaviour or incapacity as the case may be.
[644 F H, 645 A D] (3) Their would be no unfair advantage to either side if the questions of fact are decided by this court straightaway.
So long as the essential safe guards of a fair adjudication are observed no grievance can be made that the facts which establish the charge are found by the highest court and not by the lowest.
[645 F G] (4) (a) As regards procedure, order XXXVlll rule (2) provides that while making an enquiry into the matter referred to it by the President, this court has power to summon witnesses and record their evidence.
But having regard to the nature and gravity of the matter, it would not be conducive to justice to decide the reference on a consideration of affidavits only, because it would not be known at this stage whether the allegation that the member was falsely implicated in the incident is true or not.
Those allegations cannot be adjudicated upon on a consideration of the affidavits only.
Having regard to the important nature of the question, the parties whose interests are affected should be permitted to cross examine the opposing witnesses.
Again keeping in view the grave nature of the allegations and counter allegations it will be impossible to consider in isolation the evidence bearing directly on the alleged incident of slapping but the entire evidence would have to be taken into account for deciding whether the allegations against the member can be held to be proved.
Therefore it is only fair that an opportunity should be given to the member to prove that the charge against him was false, inspired and motivated.
[646E H] (b) order XXXVIII, Rule 2 of the Supreme Court Rules confers power on this Court to summon and examine witnesses but it does not enjoin that 641 the evidence must be recorded by this court itself.
Although a provision like Order XLVII, Rule 6 which preserves the power of the court to act ex debito justiciae is not incorporated in order XXXVIII, it has to be read in the latter Order to enable this Court to pass proper orders in the interest of justice.
[648 E H] Considering the overwhelming commitments of this Court, the Court delegated the duty of recording evidence to the District Judge with a direction that he should record evidence treating the affidavits filed in this Court as examination in chief of the respective witnesses and (2) that the evidence recorded should be limited to cross examination only of witnesses who had filed affidavits before this Court.
[649 A B]
