For the offence of murder of Smt.
Gyani, her husband Virbhan Singh his mother Smt.
Gyani Devi (both appellants before the Supreme Court) alongwith his father Sileti Singh were arraigned before life Sessions Judge, Etawah, section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code.
According to the prosecution the motive was the selfish animal nature in the husband and his parents which has come out in the form of their determination that the husband should remarry after doing away with the obstacle in the shape of his existing wife on the sole ground that she was inauspicious due to the fact that she did not bear children for four or five years after the marriage and that even though thereafter she conceived twice and successfully gave birth to two male babies, both those babies did not survive beyond a few weeks or days.
The further evidence of the prosecution were that the accused assaulted the deceased and then hung her with a rope to give the impression of suicide, did not inform anyone and kept the body in the room, that an attempt made by Sileti Singh to remove the body in a lorry failed, that when P.W.1, the sister of the deceased went along with P.W.4 her brother in law to see the deceased on the 14th of August, 1968, the husband and the mother told a lie that the deceased had gone out to get medicine, that again on the 15th August, 1968 after P.W,l 's repeated insistence, the dead body was shown to her in a decomposed condition, that Sileti Singh only thereafter lodged a report at the police station Jawaharnagar to the effect that the deceased committed suicide which version was accepted by the Police and the Panchas; that on the insistance of P.W.1, the dead body was sent for postmortem, that the postmortem revealed (a) five antemortem injuries including the breakage of the right side hyoid bone under the ligature mark, (b) death should have taken place between 5.30 P.M.
On August 13th, 1968 and 5.30 A.M: on August 14th, 1968, (c) death was due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of injury to liver aud stomach as well as asphyxia due to hanging and (d) inview of the antemortem injuries found, there was little possibility of the deceased hanging herself.
The Sessions Judge found, on a careful and analytical consideration of the evidence, all the accused guilty, convicted them under Section 302 I.P.C. and sentenced the three of them to life imprisonment.
In the appeal filed the 601 High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence of the present appellants and acquitted Sileti Singh, the father.
There was no appeal by the State against the acquittal.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
The conviction and senctence of the appellants are perfectly correct and sound, as they are guilt of the murder of the deceased in a brutal and heinous fashion.
The case no doubt turns purely on circumstantial evidence.
But the circumstances are so telling that the only conclusion reasonably possible is the one arrived at by the courts below that the deceased did not commit suicide by hanging hereself but was done to death by being brutally assaulted and thereafter hung by the neck with a rope.
The medical evidence clearly goes to prove that it would not have been possible for the deceased, who had sustained severe injuries of the type and nature described in the post mortem report in the stomach and liver, to hang herself.
The husband, Virbhan Singh and his mother, Smt.
Gyani Devi, were throughout present in the house and no outsider had come to the house at the relevant time.
According to the opinion of the doctor, the latest point of time at which the death of the deceased could have taken place was 5,30 a.m.
On 14.8.1968 but even on the evening of that day when P.W.1, Shrimati Ram Kumari, sister of the deceased went to their house and enquired for the deceased, she was told by Virbhan Singh and his mother that the deceased had gone out with the father in law for getting some medicine.
On the next day (15th August, 1968) rumours spread in the village that the deceased had been done to death and it was only when P.W. l accompanied by her brother in law, P.W. 4 went to the house of the accused and insisted on being shown the body that she was finally allowed to see the dead body of her sister which, by then, was already in a state of decomposition.
Significantly, it is only subsequent thereto that Sileti Singh went to the police Station and lodged the report stating that the deceased had committed suicide by hanging.
The conduct of the appellants is consistent only with their active involvement in the commission of the crime.
It has come out in the evidence that on the evening of the 14th August 1968 at about 7.30 or 8.00 p.m. Sileti Singh had made attempts to remove clandestinely the dead body from the locality for which purpose he had met Brahma Nand (P.W. 3), a truck owner, and unsuccessfully tried to hire his truck to transport the dead body.
[605 G H, 606 A E] Observations (i) If society should be ridden of this growing evil, it is imperative that whenever dastardly crimes of this nature are detected and the offence brought home to the accused, the courts must deal with the offender most ruthlessly and impose deterrent punishment.
[602 E] (ii) Most strangely, in spite of the body being in a fairly advanced state of decomposition, thereby clearly indicating that the death had taken place a long time prior to the report given by Sileti Singh, which should have normally aroused serious suspicion in the mind of any reasonable person about the 602 version of suicide given by him, the Sub Inspector and the panchas were inclined to record the cause of death as suicide by hanging and close the case without any further investigation.
[603 H 604 A] (iii) Though the reasons stated by the High Court in acquitting Sileti Singh by giving the benefit of doubt are not sound and convincing since the State has not preferred an appeal, his acquittal will stand.
[606 F G]
