The respondent, official liquidator, after being appointed by the Company Judge of the High Court, as Liquidator of a Company, took possession of the office premises of the Company.
The Liquidator sought direction of the Company Judge whether the premises should be let out on lease or licence.
The Company Judge gave a direction that the premises be given on caretaker basis.
Under that direction the Liquidator entered into an agreement with the second respondent and gave possession of the premises to the second respondent.
The appellants, who were the land lords of the building OF which the office premises of the Company formed part, took out Judge 's summons praying for a direction to the Liquidator to terminate the caretaker 's agreement and to hand over vacant possession of the premises to the appellants.
The appellants contended that the so called caretaker 's agreement was in contravention of the various provisions of the Bombay Rents, Hotel, and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 as amended in 1973 ( 'Rent Act ' for short).
The Company Judge held that in substance and in form the agreement entered into by the Liquidator with the second respondent was a caretaker 's agreement which was permissible.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellants.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The Company Judge could not have authorised the Liquidator to enter into caretaker 's agreement with the second respondent.
The Liquidator does not need the use of the premises for carrying on the winding up activities of tho Company because he sought direction for parting with possession.
The only course open to the Company Judge was to direct the Liquidator to surrender possession of the premises to the appellants.[664 F; B C; H] 658 Section 457(1) (b) of the gives power to the Liquidator in a winding up by the Court, with the sanction of the Court, to carry on the business of the Company so far as may be necessary for the beneficial winding up of the Company.
If the Liquidator wanted to exercise power under sec.
457(1) (b) to carry on business of the company so far as necessary for its beneficial winding up, the business which was to be carried on must be the business of the Company.
Giving premises on lease, licence or under caretaker 's agreement was not the business of the Company.
Since the Company 's business of floating prize chit schemes came to a stand still, the moment the Company was ordered to the wound up, there was no question of the business of the Company to be carried on by the Liquidator and that too for the beneficial winding up of the Company.
[661 H; 663 C G] In re Batey; Ex parte Emmanuel, [1881] 17 Ch.
Division 35 and Panchmahals Steel Ltd. vs Universal Steel Traders, at 722, referred to.
The company was a tenant or a lessee of the premises of which the appellants are the land lords.
The date of the commencement of the lease is not made available, but it is also not claimed on behalf of the Liquidator that there was lease of long duration.
If so, the Company was a statutory tenant under the Rent Act.
The statutory tenancy confers the right to be in possession but if the tenant does not any more require use of the premises, the provisions of the Rent Act and especially Secs.
13 and 15 completely prohibit giving the possession of the premises on licence or on sub lease.
The Company Judge, therefore, spelt out a third mode of parting with possession of the premises by the Liquidator namely, a caretaker s agreement.
This appears to be a facade to wriggle out of the provisions of the Rent Act.
The Rent Act is no doubt enacted for protecting the tenants, and indisputably its provisions must receive such interpretation as to advance the protection and thwart the action of the landlord in rendering tenants destitutes.
But this does not imply that the court should lend its aid to float the provisions of the Rent Act so as to earn money by unfair and impermissible use of the premises.
[663 H; 664 A F]
