The Government of Andhra Pradesh, in exercise of powers conferred under the promulgated the Andhra Pradesh Catering Establishments (Fixation and Display of Prices of Foodstuffs) Order, 1978 fixing the maximum prices of seven items of cooked food listed in the Schedule thereto.
As the hoteliers in the State raised a hue and cry, the State Government effected an upward revision of the prices fixed by an Amending Order dated December 11, 1980.
The hoteliers were not satisfied with that and negotiations were held between them and the Minister of Civil Supplies and as a consequence another order dated January 5, 1981 was issued effecting yet another upward revision in the maximum prices fixed and also reducing the number of scheduled items from seven to six.
Ignoring this order which replaced the earlier orders, the petitioners approached this Court questioning the validity of the earlier orders and obtained an ex parte stay.
The contentions raised were: (i) that the State Government was not competent to issue any price control measure in respect of 'cooked food ' as the expression 'foodstuffs ' under the Act means raw foodstuffs only; and (ii) that the fixation of maximum prices of scheduled items under the impugned orders was arbitrary and violative of article 14 inasmuch as the prices were economically unprofitable as the same had been arrived at without scientifically examining the prices of inputs, over head charges, etc.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
The expression 'foodstuffs ' in section 2(a) (v) of the includes cooked food.
If power to control prices of raw foodstuffs such as rice or wheat in conferred by section 3, there is no justification for that power not comprehending within its fold the power to regulate prices of articles made out of such raw foodstuffs.
[678 A C] (i) The has the same object as the 1946 Act and therefore the expression 'foodstuffs ' in the 1955 Act must receive 675 the same construction which it received under the 1946 Act.
Expressions such as 'food crops ', 'spices ' and 'condiments ' indicate different spices of articles of food but the general expression 'foodstuffs ' was interpreted in the context of the 1946 Act to include spices and condiments also.
It was pointed out that although expressions 'food ' and 'foodstuffs ' could be used in both a wide and a narrow sense, the expression 'foodstuffs ' had been used in a wider sense in the 1946 Act.
[679 D G] State of Bombay vs Virkumar Gulabchand Shah, ; referred to.
(ii) The expression 'food ' has generally been understood to mean nutritive material absorbed or taken into the body of an organism which serves for purposes of growth, work or repair and for the maintenance of the vital process.
What human beings consume is styled as food and what animals consume is described as animal feed.
This distinction has to be borne in mind.
The expression 'foodstuffs ' is made of two expressions, 'food ' and 'stuff '.
In other words, the stuff which is used as food would be foodstuff.
Therefore, foodstuff is that which is taken into the system to maintain life and growth and to supply for waste of tissue.
If raw foodstuff with a view to making it consumable by human beings undergoes a change in its condition by the process of cooking, the derivative is none the less foodstuff.
[679 H, 680 A B] (iii) That the expression 'foodstuff ' as used in the 1955 Act comprehends cooked food is also clear from the fact that 'food crop ' has been separately defined in the Act.
[680 D] 2.
(a) The mechanics of price fixation has necessarily to be left to the judgment of the executive and unless it is patent that there is hostile discrimination against a class of operators, the processual basis of price fixation has to be accepted in the generality of cases as valid.
[681 G H] Prag Ice & Oil Mills & Anr.
vs Union of India, ; relied on.
(b) The petitioners ordinarily do not serve only the scheduled items, but they have large establishments catering to various tastes and delicacies.
No price fixation order need guarantee profit to an establishment in respect of each unit of article served or sold.
It is the overall picture in the trade or commerce that needs to be examined.
The petitioners have not shown that in their overall turnover they have since the promulgation of impugned orders suffered losses.
And this situation never fructified because the 1978 Order was kept in suspended animation for a period of two years and when the latest order dated January 5, 1981 was promulgated, it was still born at the hands of the Court because of the ex parte stay order obtained by the petitioners.
[681 D F]
