In a petition for special leave to appeal filed by him, the petitioner indulged in wild and vicious diatribe against the Chief Justice of the High Court who had passed the order sought to be appealed from.
In answer to the notice issued to him under the he prayed for two weeks ' time to file an affidavit (which was granted) and stated that he was not prepared to withdraw the allegations but desired to make amends.
When the matter came up again, his counsel placed before the Court an affidavit said to contain the sincere and unconditional apology of the petitioner and pleaded that the Court should accept it and refrain from sending him to prison.
Council, relying on In re: Shri section Mulgaonkar; , suggested that "a normative guideline for the judges to observe in this jurisdiction" was not to be hypersensitive where distortions and criticism overstep the limits, but to deflate vulgar denunciation by dignified bearing, condescending indifference and repudiation by judicial rectitude".
Rejecting the plea and sentencing the contemner to suffer simple imprisonment for a period of two months.
^ HELD: There is never any risk of judicial hypersensitivity.
The very nature of the judicial function makes judges sympathetic and responsive.
Judges more than others realise the foibles, the frustrations, the undercurrents and the tensions of litigants and litigation.
But, as elsewhere, lines have to be drawn.
The strains and mortification of litigation cannot be allowed to lead litigants to tarnish, terrorise and destroy the system of administration of justice by vilification of judges.
It is not that judges need be protected; judges may well take care of themselves.
It is the right and interest of the public in the due administration of justice that has to be protected.
The question has to be approached not from the point of view of the judge whose honour and dignity require to be vindicated, but from the point of view of the public who have entrusted to judges the task of due administration of justice.
A contumacious disregard of all decencies, such as that exhibited by the contemner in this case can only lead to a serious disturbance of the system of administration of justice, unless duly repaired at once by inflicting an appropriate punishment on the 720 contemner which must be to send him to jail to atone for his misconduct and thereafter to come out of prison a chastened but a better citizen.
[722 D G; 723E G] Advocate General of Bihar vs M. P. Khair Industries, ; , referred to.
