In order to promote tourism, the (Act for short) was amended in 1970 and sub sec.
(7) was inserted in section 63 empowering the State Transport Authority in each state to grant permits valid for the whole or any part of India in respect of such number of tourist vehicles as may be specified by the Central Government.
The Central Government specified that every State Transport Authority may grant such permit not exceeding 50 in number.
The State Transport Authority of Karnataka issued 36 such permits and there were 14 vacancies.
Several persons applied for temporary all India tourist permits to the State Transport Authority.
The State Transport Authority rejected the applications.
On appeal the State Transport Appellate Tribunal purporting to exercise power under section 62 of the Act granted temporary all India tourist permits.
On writ petitions filed by some of the holders of regular permits under section 63(7) the High Court quashed and set aside the decision of the State Transport Appellate Tribunal.
The appellants and the petitioners who had obtained or were desirous of obtaining temporary all India tourist permits challenged the correctness of the decision of the High Court.
The appellants urged: (1) that the Regional Transport Authority can grant temporary all India tourist permits for the reasons mentioned in sec.
62; (2) that the State Transport Authority of Karnataka can grant temporary permits for the vacancies till regular all India tourist permits were granted; (3) that in view of the provisions of sec.
44(3), the expression Regional Transport Authority would either comprehend State Transport Authority or would not at least exclude the power conferred on the lower authority to be enjoyed by the higher authority; (4) that as far as the State of Karnataka was concerned, on the issue of notification under sub sec.
(2A) of sec.
45 the expression 'Regional Transport Authority ' in sec.
62 will also comprehend State Transport Authority.
and, (S) that the expression 'such permit ' in sec.
63(7) could only mean regular or all India tourist permit and the temporary all India tourist permit was not to be catered to by sec.
63(7) but by sec.
62 and therefore sec.
62 was rightly omitted from the array of sections set out in sec.
63(7).
Dismissing the appeals, special leave petitions and writ petitions, 741 ^ HELD: There is no power to grant temporary all India tourist permit under sec.
[757 E] An Authority having jurisdiction over a comparatively small area is favourably placed to notice a situation as contemplated by sec.
Therefore, sec.
62 confers power on the Regional Transport Authority, the jurisdiction of which extends over a region which ii usually a small part of the State to grant temporary permits to operate vehicles for a short period to meet some temporary or emergency requirement or pending the renewal of an already granted permit.
There is intrinsic evidence in the language of sec.
62 that this power was meant to be used by Regional Transport Authority for dealing with a situation within its small area.
If Regional Transport Authority is not competent to grant regular all India tourist permit, no canon of construction would permit the Court to clothe him with power to grant temporary all India tourist permit.
[752 A D] The Madhya Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation vs the Regional Transport Authority, Raipur, [1965] 3 S.C.R. 786 referred to.
Section 62(1)(d) does not provide for grant of temporary permits pending grant of a regular permit.
On the contrary the first proviso to Sec.
62(1) makes what is implicit in cl.
(d) explicit by providing that a temporary permit under sec.
62 shall, in no case, be granted in respect of any route or area specified in an application for the grant of a new permit under sec.
46 or sec.
54 during the pendency of the application.
It may be recalled that sec.
46 provides for an application for a stage carriage and sec.
54 provides for an application for public carrier 's permit.
Therefore, in no case a temporary permit can be granted under the section pending grant of or renewal of a contract carriage permit.
Sub sec.
(2) of sec.
62, however, carves out an exception where a temporary contract carriage permit can be granted in respect of any route or area where no permit could be issued by reason of an order of the court or, other competent authority restraining the issue of the same.
That is not the case here.
Therefore, there is no power to grant a temporary contract carriage permit and ipso facto the temporary all India tourist permit under sec.
[753 D G] Sec.
44(3) merely provides that a State Transport Authority can perform the duties of a Regional Transport Authority where there is no such Authority or where, if it thinks fit or if so required by a Regional Transport Authority, to perform those duties in respect of any route common to two or more regions.
In the instant case none of these conditions under which a State Transport Authority can perform the functions and discharge the duties of a Regional Transport Authority are satisfied, and therefore, it is difficult to accept tho submission that the expression 'Regional Transport Authority ' used in sec.
62 will comprehend State Transport Authority.
Even if in its application, the Act with its local amendment to the State of Karnataka sec.
62 would enable the State Transport Authority to issue a temporary permit this would hardly make any difference because the power to grant temporary permit under sec.
62 in the circumstances and eventualities therein mentioned would not comprehend 742 the power to grant temporary all India tourist permit because none of the conditions under which the same can be granted would be attracted and the State Transport Authority will have no material for satisfaction of one or the other conditions set out in Sec. 62 which would enable it to grant such a permit.
There is no express provision in the Act which provides that the State Transport Authority can always and without any fetter enjoy the power of the Regional Transport Authority and in the absence of such provision it is difficult to read merely on the basis of vertical hierarchy wherever the lower authority is mentioned in the statue, the higher authority be included therein.
[752 E H; 753 A B] The whole concept of granting temporary all India tourist permit is foreign to the concept of all India tourist permit.
An all India touris permit is none the less a contract carriage permit but while contract carriage permit can be granted for any vehicle not required to be specially adopted for the purpose, a contract carriage permit for all India operation as envisaged by sec.
63(7) can only be granted in respect of tourist vehicle, and it appears that it requires a substantial financial investment for adapting a vehicle as a tourist vehicle.
This intrinsic evidence shows that such huge or heavy outlay cannot be imposed on an applicant by giving him temporary all India tourist permit which can if at all be granted for a period extending 4 months [756 E G] If sec.
62 were to be a proviso to sec.
63(7) and therefore, one can conceive of granting a temporary all India tourist permit for meeting a particular temporary need, it is difficult to envisage a particular need of an all India variant which can be noticed by State Transport Authority of one State and such authority can proceed side tracking all relevant provisions to grant temporary all India tourist permit.
[756 H; 757 A]
