A landlord can make an application for recovery of possession under .
Clause (e) of the proviso to section 14(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, on the ground that the premises let for residential purposes are required by him bona fide for occupation as a residence for himself or for any member of his family dependent upon him, provided he has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation.
Sub section (S) of section 25B lays down that the Controller shall give to the tenant leave to contest the application, if the affidavit filed by the tenant "discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord From obtaining on order for recovery possession" of the premises on the ground specified in Cl.
(e) of the proviso to section 14(1).
The respondent, a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), filed a petition under Cl.
(e) of proviso to section 14(1) through the constituted attorney of its karta for an order for recovery of possession of the premises in question alleging that the premises had initially been given to the appellant on leave and licence, that the landlord (the karta of the HUF) who had gone out of the country had since settled down in Delhi, that the landlord had called upon the appellant in May, 1974 to vacate the premises as he had no other suitable accommodation and that 499 the landlord bonafide required the same for his personal occupation.
The appellant sought leave to contest the petition and filed an affidavit denying the allegation that it had entered the premises initially as a licensee and contending that according to cl. 6 of the lease agreement the premises were let for residential as well as commercial purpose, that the landlord had been residing in a house as spacious as the demised premises and equally spacious accommodation in an identical unit located at the back side of the demised premises was available to, him which had been let successively to three tenants during the period 1970 to 1976, each time raising the rent, and further that the landlord owned spacious accommodation at another place in Delhi.
An affidavit in reply was filed on behalf of the landlord stating that the landlord had no interest in the building in which he was residing, that the identical unit located on the back side of the demised premises had been let to a tenant upto 1981 and that the accommodation located at another place in Delhi and referred to by the appellant was only a garage block.
The Controller decided all questions of fact taking the affidavits as unquestioned evidence and refused to grant leave to the appellant to contest the petition and passed an order of eviction in favour of the landlord.
The revision petition filed by the appellant against the order was rejected by the High Court.
The question before the court was: What is the jurisdiction of the Controller under Sub section
(S) of s.25B while dealing with an affidavit of the tenant seeking leave to contest an application for eviction filed by a landlord under cl.
(e) of he proviso to section 14(1) ? Allowing the appeal.
^ HELD: (By the Full Court) Leave to contest the petition for eviction under cl.
(e) of proviso to s.l4(1) must be granted to the appellant under sub s (S) of sub section
25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
(per Desai and Baharul Islam JJ ) 1.
(a) While examining the question whether leave to defend ought or ought not to be granted, the limited jurisdiction which the Controller enjoys is prescribed within well defined limits.
The language of sub section
(5) of section 25B casts a statutory v duty on the Controller to give to the tenant leave to contest the application, the only pre condition for exercise of jurisdiction being that the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of possession of the premises on the ground mentioned in B. 14(1)(e).
The legislature has used the expression "the Controller shall give leave to the tenant to contest the application.
" When the language of a statute is plain the principle that legislature speaks its mind in the plainest language has to be given full effect.
The legislature has used the plainest language namely "facts disclosed in the affidavit of the tenant" and avoided the phraseology of the 500 analogous provision in order XXXVII, C.P.C., namely "substantial defence" and "vexatious and frivolous defence".
E; 513 G: 514 B D] (b) Undoubtedly, the rules of natural justice, apart from the adversary system we follow must permit the landlord to contest the affidavit filed by the tenant and he can do so by Sling an affidavit in reply.
If the averments made in the affidavit of the tenant are controverted by the landlord, that fact may be borne in mind but if the facts disclosed in the affidavit of the tenant are contested by way of proof or disproof or producing evidence in the form of other affidavits or documents that would not be permissible.
The Controller has to confine himself to the affidavit filed by the tenant under sub section
(4) of section 25B and the reply, if any and on perusing these, he has to pose to himself the only question: Does the affidavit disclose, not prove, facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for the recovery of possession on the ground specified in section 14(1)(e) ? on browsing through the affidavit of the tenant, if there emerges averment of facts which, on a trial, if believed would non suit the landlord, leave ought to be granted.
The Controller is not to record a finding on disputed questions of facts or his preference of one set of affidavits against other set of affidavits as it is clear from the language of sub section
(S) of section 25B that he has to confine himself to the affidavit filed by the tenant disclosing such facts as would primafacie and not on contest disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for recovery of possession.
It is wholly impermissible for the Controller to proceed to examine the rival contentions on the basis of affidavits untested by cross examination and unproved documents.
The regular trial required to be held by a Court of Small Causes as contemplated by sub section
(6) read with sub section (7) of section 25B is not to be substituted by affidavits and counter affidavits.
The scheme of section 25B does not introduce a trial for arriving at the truth at the stage of proceeding contemplated by sub section
(4) of section 25B.
It is immaterial that facts alleged and disclosed are controverted by the landlord because the stage of proof is yet to come.
Plausibility of the defence raised and proof of the same are materially different from each other and one cannot bring in the concept of proof at the stage when plausibility has to be shown.
[524 B; 523 H; 524 A; SIS G H; 514 A; 516 A C; 517 E G; 518 B; 516 E] Santosh Kumar vs Bhai Mool Singh ; , relied on.
section Kanjibhai & Ors.
vs Mohanraj Rajendra Kumar A.I.R. 1970, Gujarat 32 and Kishan Singh vs Mohd. Shafi & Ors., A.I.R. 1964 J & K 39; approved.
(c) Section 14(1) starts with a non obstante clause which would necessarily imply that the Controller is precluded from passing an order for recovery of possession in favour of the landlord unless the case is covered by any of the clauses of the proviso.
Upon a true construction of cl.
(e) of the proviso to section 14(1) it would appear that the burden is on the landlord to satisfy the Controller that the premises are let for residential purpose, that possession is required by him bonafide for occupation as residence for himself or for any member of his family and that he has no other reasonably suitable residential accommodation.
This burden, the landlord is required to discharge before the Controller gets jurisdiction to make an order for eviction.
On a combined reading of section 14(1)(e) and sub sections
(1) and (4) of section 25B, the legal position that emerges is that on a proper application being made in the prescribed manner which is required to be 501 supported by an affidavit, unless the tenant obtains leave to defend as contemplated by sub sections
(4) and (S) of section 25B, the tenant is deemed to have admitted all the averments made in the petition filed by the landlord and the Controller would act on the admission of the tenant presuming every averment in the petition of the landlord as unchallengeable and truthful.
This consequence itself is sufficient to liberally approach the prayer for leave to contest the petition.
[514 E H; 515 D E; 513 E] (d) The underlying thrust of all rent restriction legislation is to check profiteering by owners of property and to protect weaker sections.
Their provisions are not to be so construed or interpreted as would make the protection conferred on the tenant illusory.
[512 E F: 510 E F] Bahadur Singh & Anr.
vs Muni Sabrat Das & Anr., p[1969] 2 S.C.R. 432, Kaushalya Devi & Ors.
vs Shri R.L. Bansal, ; , Bega Begum & Ors.
vs Abdul Ahad Rehman ; referred to.
(e) A code of procedure is something designed to facilitate justice and further its ends.
Our laws of procedure are grounded on a principle of natural justice which requires that men should not be condemned unheard.
Too technical construction that leaves no room for reasonable elasticity of interpretation should be guarded against lest the very means designed for the furtherance of justice be used to frustrate it.
The procedure prescribed in Chap.
IIIA is harsh and weighted against the tenant.
The Controller is the final arbiter of facts.
Once leave is refused no appeal is provided against the order refusing leave.
No one should be in doubt about the narrow constricted jurisdiction of the High Court while interfering with findings of facts in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
Wisdom, sagacity and the consequence of refusal to grant leave coupled with limited scope of inquiry being confined to facts disclosed in the affidavit of the tenant should guide the approach of the Controller.
[527 B C; 513 D; 527 F G H; 528 A] Sangram Singh vs Election Tribunal, Kotah & Anr., [1955 Z S.C.R. I and Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621, referred to.
In the instant case, the Controller had overlooked disclosure of important facts which put the bona fides of the landlord in issue and necessitated grant of leave to the appellant: The leave and licence agreement had been renewed in 1972 and 1973 though the landlord had been in Delhi since 1972; the landlord had admitted that the identical unit at the back of the demised premises which had fallen vacant in 1973 had been let out to another tenant; no action had been taken till 1979 on the notice seeking eviction served in 1974; every time a fresh letting had been indulged into, it had been done after raising the rent; and the landlord who had sought possession for himself and was admittedly in Delhi had not stated a single word on oath about his requirements and as to in what right he was occupying the premises in which he was staying.
[529 B H; 530 A E] The High Court had adopted an incorrect approach as to how the matter had to be examined at the stage of granting or refusing to grant leave under sub 502 section (S) of 8.
25B. It had failed to ascertain as to when the licence had been terminated and a contract of lease entered into and what were the terms of the lease as alleged by the landlord and whether the rules of the local authority permitted use of the premises for non residential purposes.
The High Court had dismissed the contention that the landlord had other suitable accommodation by an observation that the Controller had rightly come to the conclusion that the premises in which the landlord was residing belonged not to the landlord but to his brother.
This approach was unjustified because the question was not whether the landlord was the owner of the premises occupied by him but the substantial question was in what right he was occupying it for a period extending over 7 years and how it had become imperative for him to vacate the same.
[530 F H; 531 A H] 2.
The contention that the non obstante clause in sub section (7) of section 25B excludes the application of sub section
(2) of section 37 but not of sub s.(l) of 8. 37 and therefore it was obligatory for the Controller to not only hear the landlord but examine evidence at the stage of granting or refusing to grant leave to contest cannot be accepted.
Sub section
(2) of section 37 provides that subject to any rules that may be made under the Act, the Controller shall, while holding an inquiry in any proceedings before him, follow as far as may be, the practice and procedure of a Court of Small Causes.
including the recording of evidence.
The very fact that sub section
(7) of section 25B provides that while holding an inquiry in a proceeding to which Chap.
IIIA applies, the Controller has to follow the practice and procedure of a Court of Small Causes including the recording of evidence indicates the legislative intention of treating Chap.
IIIA and especially section 25B as a self contained code and this conclusion is buttressed by the provision in sub section
(1) of section 25B which provides that every application by landlord for recovery of possession of any premises on the ground specified in cl.
(e) of the proviso to section 14(1) shall be dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified in section 25B.
That is why sub section
(7) of section 25B opens with a non obstante clause.
Any other section, including sub section
(t) of s 37 prescribing procedure for disposal of an application covered by sub section
(l) of section 25B is therefore excluded.
The exclusion of section 37(1) also necessarily follows from the provision contained in sub section
(10) of section 25B which makes it clear that the procedure prescribed for holding.
an inquiry consequent upon the granting of leave to contest shall be the same as required to be followed by the Controller for disposal of applications.
Sub section
(10) of section 25B operates to bring ins 37(1) after leave to contest is granted.
If sub section
(1) of section 37 were to govern all proceedings including the application for leave to contest the proceedings, both sub section
(7) and sub section
(10) of section 25B would be rendered redundant.
[525 C; 524 E F; 526 A B; 525 A B; 525 E F H] 3.
Neither the argument that the scope and ambit of sub section
(S) of section 25B of The Act in its comparison with O. XXXVII, r. 3 sub r.
(S) C.P.C. is no more res integra in view of the decision in Busching Schmitz (P) Ltd. vs P.T. Menghani & Anr.
nor the interpretation of the observations therein to the effect that the scope for granting leave under sub section
(S) of section 25B is narrower than the one under o. XXXVII, r. 3 can be accepted.
It is not clear from the decision whether the Court took note of the whole of the re structured r. 3 or it was keeping in view the unamended r. 3 of o. XXXVII.
The provisoes to o. XXXVII, r. 3 make it clear that leave to defend shall not be refused unless the Court is satisfied that the facts disclosed by the defendant do not indicate that he has a substantial defence to raise or that the defence intended to be put up by the defendant is 503 frivolous or vexatious.
On the other hand, sub section
(S) of section 25B makes it obligatory upon the Controller, by use of mandatory language, to give leave if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for recovery of possession.
Under o. XXXVII, r. 3, defence has to be substantial before leave can be obtained.
Mere disclosure of facts is the sine qua non under sub section (S) of section 25B.
Further, the Court can grant conditional leave or leave limited lo the issue under O. XXXVII, r. 3; no such power is conferred on the Controller under sub section
(S) of section 25B.
Assuming that o. XXXVII, r. 3 (S) confers wider discretion on the Court that, by mere comparison, cannot cut down or narrow or limit the powercoupled with the duty conferred on the Controller under sub section (S) of section 25B. [519 D H; 520 A G; 519 A B; 521 F] Busching Schmitz (PJ Ltd. vs P.T. Menghani & Anr., ; ; B.N. Mutta & Ant.
vs T.R. Nandi, ; ; Charan Dass Duggal vs Brahma Nand (C.A. No. 179/82 decided on 11 1 1982) and Om Prakash Saluja vs Smt.
Saraswati Devi (C.A. No. 527/82 decided on 8 2 1982), referred to.
Sarwan Singh & Anr.
vs Kasturilal, ; , distinguished.
Mohanlal v Tirath Ram Chopra & Anr.
22 (1982)Delhi Law Times 1, disapproved.
(per Sen, 1., dissenting) 1.
(a) There is a definite public purpose behind enactment of Chap.
IIIA and sub section
(S) of section 25B must be construed in a sense which would carry out that purpose.
section 14A was enacted to ensure that all government servants to whom residential accommodation had been allotted by the Government vacated such accommodation if they had any house of their own in the Union Territory of Delhi and the section conferred upon them the right to recover immediate possession of their own houses.
Further, experience in the past had shown that landlords who were in bonafide requirement of their accommodation for residential purpose under cl.
(e) of the proviso to sub section
(1) of section 14 were being put to great hardship due to the dilatory procedure of the suit.
The object behind enactment of Chap.
IIIA was that these two classes of landlords should not be at the mercy of law 's delays but there should be a quick and expeditious remedy available to them against their own tenants.
The provisions in Chap.
IIIA confer a real, effective and immediate right to obtain possession by confining the trial only to such cases where the tenant has such a defence as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for eviction under s.l4(1)(e) or under section 14A. Chap.
IIIA seeks to strike a balance between the competing needs of a landlord and a tenant and has therefore provided that the tenant shall have a right to apply for leave to contest.
The words "if the affidavit filed by the tenant discloses such facts" used in sub section
(S) of section 25B must therefore take their colour from the context in which they appear.
[533 A D E F H; 534 A; 536 D; 535 C D; 535 A B] Sarwan Singh vs Kasturi Lal, ; , referred to.
(b) The Controller obviously cannot come to a decision as to whether or not leave to contest should be granted under sub section
(S) of section 25B without 504 affording the parties an opportunity of hearing.
The Controller must conform to the rules of natural justice.
Once it is conceded that the landlord has a right to be heard, the Controller is bound to give him an opportunity to refute the facts alleged by the tenant in his affidavit filed under sub section
(4) of section 25B. The Controller must apply his mind not only to the averments made by the landlord in his application for eviction, but also to the facts alleged by the tenant in his affidavit for leave to contest as well as the facts disclosed by the landlord in his affidavit in rejoinder, besides the other material on record i.e., the documents filed by the parties in support of their respective claims, in order to come to a conclusion whether the requirements of sub section
(I) of section 25B are fulfilled.
To ask Controller to confine himself only to the affidavit filed by the tenant is to ask him not to apply his mind in a judicial manner even if he feels that tho justice of the case so demands.
The Controller must endeavour to resolve the competing claims of landlord and tenant to the grant or refusal of leave by finding a solution which is just and fair to both the parties.
It is not that the proceedings initiated on an application by the landlord under section 14(1) (e), or under section 14A must undergo trial at two stages.
Under sub section
(S) of section 25B, the Controller must prima facie be satisfied that the facts alleged by the tenant are such as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an order for recovery of possession.
The word 'disentitle ' is a strong word, and the Controller must be satisfied that the tenant has such a defence as would defeat the claim of the landlord under section 14 (1) (e) or under section 14A. It cannot be that the Controller would set down the application for trial merely on perusal of the affidavit filed by the tenant without applying his mind to the pleadings of the parties and the material on record.
If he finds that the pleadings are such as would entail a trial, then the Controller must grant the tenant leave to contest as the words "shall grant to the tenant leave to contest" in sub section
(S) of section 25B make the grant of leave obligatory.
[536 G; 537 B H; 538 A B] 2.
The scope of sub section
(S) of section 25B is restricted and the test of "triable issues" under O. XXXVII.
r. 3 (5), C.P.C. is not applicable, as the language of the two provisions is different.
The use of the word 'such ' in sub section (5) of 6.
25B implies that the Controller has the power to limit the grant of leave to a particular ground.
A tenant may take all kinds of pleas in defence.
The whole object of sub section
(5) of section 25B was to prevent the taking of frivolous pleas by tenants to protract the trial.
Where the tenant seeks leave to contest the application for eviction under section 14(1) (e), or under section 14A, he must file an affidavit under sub section
(4) of section 25B raising his defence which must be clear, specific and positive.
The defence must also be bonafide and if true, must result in the dismissal of landlord s application.
Defences of negative character which are intended to put the landlord to proof or are vague, or are raised mala fide only to gain time and protract the proceedings, are not of the kind which will entitle the tenant to the grant of leave.
The Controller cannot set down the application for hearing without making an order in terms of sub section
(5) of section 25B. The trial must be confined only to such grounds as would disentitle the landlord to any relief.
