section obtained a decree of, ejectment against the third respon dent and while attempting to take possession of the properties ir execution of the decree he was obstructed by the appellant and the application for removal of the obstruction was dismissed by the Court on April 12, 1947.
He thereupon filed the present suil on March 12, 1948, under 0.
XXI, r. 103, of the Code of Civil Procedure, for a declaration that he was entitled to recovery possession of the suit properties, impleading the appellant and the third respondent.
In the plaint, apart from the decree obtained in the earlier suit no particular averments were made as to the facts or grounds on which the plaintiff based his title to the suit properties as against the appellant.
Both in his application dated November 2o, 1948, and in his written statement, the appellant,objected to the maintainability of the suit on the grounds that he was not a party to the previous suit and that the plaint disclosed no cause of action against him.
On March 20, 1950, when the suit was taken up for trial on the preliminary issue as to whether the suit as framed was tenable, an application was made by the plaintiff for the amendment of the plaint by giving further and better particulars of the claim made in the plaint.
The trial judge rejected the application and dismissed the suit, but the High Court, on appeal, allowed the application.
The appellant appealed by special leave and contended that the application for amendment should not have been allowed because (1) on the date of the application for amendment, the period of limitation for a suit under 0.
XXI, r. 103, Code of Civil Procedure, had already expired, and (2) though the attention of the plaintiff to the defect in the original plaint 'had been drawn as early as November 2o, 1948, no application for amendment was made till.
March 29, 1950.
Held, that the application for amendment was rightly allowed by the High Court, because the amendments did not really introduce any new case nor alter the nature of the reliefs sought, and, though the application was made after the expiry of the period of limitation for a suit under 0.
XXI, r. 103, Code of Civil Procedure, the appellant did not have to 77 596 meet anew case and he was not taken by surprise; nor did he have to meet a new claim set up for the first time after the expiry of the period of limitation.
Charan Das vs Amir Khan (L. R. 47 I.A. 255), relied on.
L. J. Leach & Co. vs Jardine Skinner & CO.
([1957] S.C.R. 438), followed.
Observations of Batchelor J. in Kisandas Rupchand vs Rachappa Vithoba (I.L.R. , 649), approved.
