With a view to encourage national integration, a few States including respondent states agreed upon an arrangement by which a certain percentage of the seats in medical colleges was reserved for candidates from other States on a reciprocal basis.
In the year 1982 83 the respondent States made some nominations under the above arrangement.
The validity of these nominations was challenged in these writ petitions and civil appeals on the ground, inter alia, that these nominations had been made by the State Governments in their absolute and arbitrary discretion, without reference to any objective criterion, or any controlling norms or guidelines.
Partly allowing the writ petitions and the appeals, ^ HELD: The principle adopted by the State Governments of nominating candidates in their absolute and unfettered choice to seats in Medical Colleges outside the State is invalid.
But the nominations already made will not be affected.
[991 F G; E] The exercise of all administrative power vested in public authority must be structured within a system of controls informed by both relevance and reason relevance in relation to the object which it seeks to serve, and reason in regard to the manner in which attempts to do so.
article 14 of the Constitution is violated by powers and procedures which in themselves result in unfairness and asbitrariness.
There is no doubt that in the realm of administrative power the element of discretion may properly, find place, where the statute or the nature of the power intends so.
But there is a well recognised distinction between an administrative power to be exercised within defined limits in the reasonable discretion of designated authority and the vesting of an absolute and uncontrolled power in such authority.
One is power controlled by law countenanced by the Constitution, the other falls outside the Constitution altogether.
Proceeding from there, it is evident that if the State 986 Government desires to advance the objective of national integration it must adopt procedures which are reasonable and are related to the objective.
In this Age of Reason, all law must measure upto that standard, and necessarily so also must all executive acts.
[989 E F; 989 G; 990 A D] In the present cases, viewed in this context and tested on the touchstone of our constitutional values, the claim of the State Government that the nature of the objective and the means adopted to serve it entitle it legitimately to vest in itself an absolute power in choosing candidates for nomination is to deny a fundamental principle of our constitutional life and cannot be allowed to prevail.
[990 D E] Chitra Ghosh and Anr.
vs Union of India and Ors.
, ; , 420; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621; and Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., , referred to.
The Medical Council of India is directed to formulate a proper constitutional basis for determining the selection of candidates for nomination to seats in Medical Colleges outside the State in the light of the observations contained in this judgment.
Until a policy is so formulated and concrete criteria are embodied in the procedure selected, the nominations shall be made by selecting candidates strictly on the basis of merit, the candidates nominated being those, in order of merit, immediately below the candidates selected for admission to the Medical Colleges of the home State.
[991 G H; 992 A]
