An industrial dispute concerning the termination of services of the appellant in 1969 was referred for adjudication by the Labour Court under sections 10 (1) (c) and 12 (5) of the Industrial Disputes Act in the year 1970.
The Management of the company in which he was employed questioned the reference itself by filing a petition under article 226 and when it was rejected, the Management raised a preliminary contention before the Labour Court that the appellant was not a 'workman ' and therefore the reference was incompetent.
The Labour Court, after a detailed and careful examination of the oral and documentary evidence produced by both the appellant and the Management came to the conclusion that the appellant was a 'workman ' under section 2 (s) of the Act as he was employed mainly for clerical duties.
This finding was challenged by the Management once again by filing a petition under article 226 and a Single Judge of the High Court allowed the same and quashed the order of the Labour Court as well as the reference made by the Government.
On his appeal having been rejected by a Division Bench of the High Court, the appellant approached this Court under article 136.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The nature of jurisdiction under article 226 is supervisory and not appellate while that under article 136 is primarily supervisory but the Court may exercise all necessary appellate powers to do substantial justice.
In the exercise of such jurisdiction neither the High Court nor this Court is required to be too astute to interfere with the exercise of jurisdiction by special tribunals at interlocutory stages and on preliminary issues.
[951 G H] Tribunals like Industrial Tribunals are constituted to decide expeditiously special kinds of disputes and their jurisdiction to so decide is not to be stifled by all manner of preliminary objections and journeyings up and down.
Tribunals and Courts who are requested to decide preliminary questions must 950 ask themselves whether such threshold part adjudication is really necessary and whether it will not lead to other woeful consequences.
There was a time when it was thought prudent and wise to decide preliminary issues first.
But the time appears to have arrived for a reversal of that policy.
It is better that tribunals, particularly those entrusted with the task of adjudicating Labour disputes where delay may lead to misery and jeopardise industrial peace, should decide all issues in dispute at the same time without trying some of them as preliminary issues.
Nor should High Courts in the exercise of their jurisdiction under article 226 stop proceedings before a Tribunal so that a preliminary issues may be decided by them.
Neither the jurisdiction of the High Court under article 226 nor the jurisdiction of this Court under Art 136 may be allowed to be exploited by those who can well afford to wait to the detriment of those who can ill afford to wait by dragging the latter from Court to Court for adjudication of peripheral issues, avoiding decision on issues more vital to them.
Articles 226 and 136 are not meant to be used to break the resistance of workmen in this fashion.
[951 F, C D] The instant case relates to a dispute originating in 1969 and referred for adjudication in 1970 which is still at the stage of decision of a preliminary objection.
The Labour Court considered the entire evidence and recorded a positive finding that appellant who was discharging duties of a clerical nature was a 'workman '.
The Single Judge of the High Court did not refer to a single item of evidence while reversing the finding of the Labour Court.
He appeared to differ from the Labour Court on a question of fact on the basis of a generalisation without reference to specific evidence.
The Division Bench which affirmed the judgment of the Single Judge also read the judgment of the Labour Court in a similar unfair fashion and did not consider any of the evidence considered by the Labour Court and yet characterised the conclusion of the Labour Court as perverse.
No appellate Court is entitled to do that less so, a Court exercising supervisory jurisdiction.
[951 C, 953 B, 954 C D, 955 C]
