The appellant who was found guilty of a charge in an enquiry was served with a notice to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service.
A second charge was also framed against the appellant.
The appellant filed a suit for declaration and an injunction and obtained an exparte order restraining the respondent and its officers from dismissing him.
The Subordinate Judge dismissed the suit as not maintainable.
The appellant filed an appeal before the Senior Subordinate Judge.
In reply to the stay application it was stated that the stay application had become infructuous as the appellant had been dismissed from service.
The Senior Subordinate Judge dismissed the appeal.
The appellant filed a second appeal in the High Court and during the pendency moved an application for amendment of the plaint.
The High Court rejected the amendment application and dismissed the appeal.
In this appeal the appellant urged that among the reliefs claimed in his amendment application filed in the High Court he had included the relief for declaring the order of dismissal invalid.
The appellant filed an application praying for amendment of the plaint by the inclusion of such a relief.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: The appeal is not maintainable.
Once an order of dismissal was passed against him, a different cause of action arose and it was not possible for the appellant to maintain the proceedings on the original cause of action.
The original reliefs claimed in the suit consisted of a decree of declaration that the proceedings taken against the appellant upto the framing of the second charge on October 15/16, 1975 were invalid, and a decree for perpetual injunction restraining the respondents from dismissing the appellant.
At no stage upto the dismissal of his second appeal did the appellant attempt to include a relief in his plaint against the order of dismissal.
On the contrary, the reliefs sought to be included through the amendment application filed in the High Court proceeded on the assumption that the appellant was still continuing in service.
[156 E F; B C] 154 The Court is constrained to reject the application praying for leave to amend the plaint inasmuch as it is for the first time throughout this protracted proceeding commencing with the institution of the suit in 1975 that the appellant is now seeking to include the relief although he had come to know several years ago that he had been dismissed.
No circumstance has been shown explaining why the appellant should be permitted at this late stage to amend the plaint.
It has also not been established by the appellant that if a suit is a filed now against the order of dismissal it would be within the period of limitation.
[156;H 157 A B]
