The petitioners who had been sentenced to death for the offence of murder were awaiting execution of the sentence.
Their plea was that hanging by rope is a cruel and barbarous method of executing of the sentence and section 354(5) Cr. P.C. which prescribes that method is violative of article 21 of the Constitution The respondents raised a preliminary objection that the question had already been concluded by the decision in Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1983]1 S.C.R. 145.
The objection was overruled.
Counsel for petitioners contended that section 354(5), Cr.
P.C. is bad because it is impermissible to take human life even under the decree of a court since it is human to take life under any circumstances; that by reason of the provision contained in article 21, it is impermissible to cause pain or suffering of any kind whatsoever in the execution of any sentence, much more so while executing a death sentence; that the method of hanging prescribed by section 354(5) for executing the death sentence is barbarous, inhuman and degrading; that it is the constitutional obligation of the State to provide for a humane and dignified method for executing the death sentence, which does not involve torture of any kind; and that if the method prescribed by section 354(5) does not meet this requirement, no death sentence can be executed since no other method for executing that sentenced is prescribed by or is permissible under the law.
Counsel also referred to the judgment in Machhi Singh vs State of Punjab, and suggested that it virtually overrules Bachan Singh.
2 Counsel for respondents contended that a sentence lawfully imposed by a court can and has to be executed, though by causing the least pain and suffering and by avoiding torture or degradation of any kind; that the method prescribed by section 354(5), Cr.
P.C. for executing the death sentence is a humane and dignified method involving the least amount of pain and cruelty; that no other method of executing the death sentence is quicker or less painful; and that article 21 does not postulate that no pain or suffering whatsoever shall be caused in the execution of a sentence lawfully imposed by a court, including the sentence of death.
Counsel further submitted that unless on the face of it, the method prescribed by for executing law a sentence is revolting to conscience, courts must surrender their discretion to legislative judgment when the challenge to the constitutionality of the law is based on considerations which the court is not equipped to evaluate by manageable judicial standards, and contended that the court 's evaluation of the method of hanging prescribed by law shall have to be inevitably subjective, almost to the point of being legislative in character, which must be avoided at all costs.
Dismissing the petitions, HELD: 1.
The method prescribed by section 354(5), Cr.
P.C. for executing the death sentence does not violate the provision contained in article 21 of the Constitution.
[59 E] (a) The material placed before the Court shows that hanging by rope is not a cruel mode of executing the death sentence: the system consists of a mechanism which is easy to assemble; preliminaries to the act are quick and simple and are free from anything that would unnecessarily sharpen the poignancy of the prisoner 's apprehension; the chances of accident during the course of hanging can safely be excluded; the method is quick and certain and eliminates the possibility of a lingering death; unconsciousness supervenes almost instantaneously after the process is set in motion and death follows as a result of dislocation of the cervical vertebrae.
The system of hanging, as now used, avoids to the full extent the chances of strangulation which results on account of too short a drop or of decapitation which results on account of too long a drop.
The mechanics of the method of hanging have undergone significant improvement over the years and hanging has been almost perfected into a science.
The system is consistent with the obligation of the State to ensure that the process of execution is conducted with decency and decorum without involving degradation or brutality of any kind.
At the moment of final impact when life becomes extinct, some physical pain would be implicit in the very process of the ebbing out of life.
But, the act of hanging causes the least pain imaginable on account of the fact that death supervenes instantaneously.
The conclusion that the system of hanging is as painless as is possible in the circumstances, that it causes no greater pain than any other known method of executing the death sentence and that it involves no barbarity, torture or degradation is based on reason, supported by expert evidence and the findings of modern medicine.
[58 C H, 59 A] Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment (U.K.), September, 1953; 35th Report of the Law Commission of India on Capital Punishment, 3 September 30,1967; George R. Scott: Hanging Through the Ages (Torchstream Books, London); J W. Cecil Turner (Ed.) Kenny 's Outlines of Criminal Law, 19th Ed., 1966; Harry Elmer Barnes and Negley K. Teeters: New Horizons in Criminology, 3rd Ed., 1966; U.N. Department of Economic and Social Affairs: Capital Punishment, (New York, 1962); and Bachan Singh; , referred to.
(b) On the question of pain involved in a punishment, the concern of law has to be to ensure that the various steps which are attendant upon or incidental to the execution of any sentence, more so the death sentence, do not constitute punishments by themselves.
Humaneness is the hall mark of civilized laws.
If a prisoner is sentenced to death, it is lawful to execute that punishment and that only.
He cannot be subjected to barbarity, humiliation, torture or degradation before the execution of that sentence, not even as necessary steps in the execution of that sentence.
The process of hanging does not involve any of these directly, indirectly or incidentally.[59 B D] (c) Hanging by rope was the only method of executing the death sentence which was known to the Constituent Assembly and yet it did not express any disapproval of that method, though it touched upon the question of death sentence while dealing with the President 's power of pardon under article 72(1)(c) of the Constitution.
[58 B] (d) The system of hanging by rope is in operation in large parts of the civilized world and there is a responsible body of scientific and legal opinion which holds that hanging by rope is not a cruel mode of executing the death sentence.
[57 H, 58 A] (e) Hanging as a mode of execution is not relentless in its severity.
Judges ought not to assume that they are endowed with a divine insight into the needs of a society; they should heed the warning that, as history amply proves, the judiciary is prone to misconceive the public good by confounding private notions with constitutional requirements.
[62 G H, 63 A] (f) The Court is not required to determine the merits and demerits of the alternative methods of execution which are in vogue elsewhere because the Court cannot substitute any other method of execution for the method prescribed by law.
However, an understanding of the process involved in the competing methods used for executing the death sentence is not altogether pointless because if some other method has a real and definite advantage over a the method of hanging, arbitrary rejection of that method by the state may not answer the constitutional prescription.
However, neither electrocution, nor lethal gas, nor shooting, nor even the lethal injection has any distinct or demonstrable advantage over the system of hanging.
The general belief that death by electrocution is entirely painless is not free from doubt.
That apart, failure of electrical energy.
supplied by commercial undertakings has been considered in America as an impediment in the use of the electric chair.
With frequent failures of electric power in our country, the electric chair will become an instrument of torture.
Lethal injection is by and large an untried 4 method.
The injection is required to be administered intravenously which is a delicate and skilled operation.
The Royal Commission on Capital Punishment (U.K.) was not satisfied that executions carried out by the administration of lethal injections would bring about death more quickly, painlessly and decently in all cases.
Shooting by a firing squad, apart from being unreliable, is an uncivilised method of extinguishing life.
It is the favourite pastime of military regimes which trample upon human rights with impunity.
It is most recklessly and wantonly used for liquidating opposition and smothering dissent in countries which do not respect the rule of law.
Murders by shooting are becoming a serious menace to law and order in our country.
Shooting by the State in order to kill for executing the order of a court will unwittingly confer respectability on the 'shooting to kill ' tactics which are alarmingly growing in proportion, The suggestion that a death convict may be put to sleep by a sleep inducing injection before applying other methods such as electrocution or gas chamber, is not only impracticable but would appear to involve complications and torture to an uncommon degree.
[50 F H, 57 E, B, G H, 56 A B, 56 G, 57 A] (g) Matters of policy are certainly for the legislature to consider and therefore, by what mode or method the death sentence should be executed, is for the legislature to decide.
But the function of the legislature ends with providing what it considers to be the best method of executing the death sentence.
Where the function of the legislature ends, the function of the judiciary begins.
It is for the courts to decide upon the constitutionality of the method prescribed by the legislature for implementing or executing a sentence.
Whether that method conforms to the directs of the constitution is a matter not only subject to judicial review but it constitutes a legitimate part of the judicial function.
The question whether the particular method prescribed by law for executing the death sentence is in consonance with the Constitution inevitably involves a value judgment based upon a comparative evaluation of alternate methods for executing the death sentence.
But more than any such comparative evaluation, the court 's plain and primary duty is to examine whether, even if the method selected by the legislature is the least objectionable, it is still open to the objection that it involves under torture, degradation or cruelty.
The Court 's task will end with pointing out why, if at all, the method at present provided by law is contrary to the mandate of the constitution.
To pronounce upon the constitutionality of the law is not legislating, even if such pronouncement involves the consideration of the evolving standards of the society.
[35 A C; E F] 2.
(a) The contention that it is inhuman to kill under any circumstances and that article 21 imposes a total prohibition on the taking of human life has to be rejected.
If the argument were to be accepted, the imposition of death sentence would become an exercise in futility.
Indeed, if carried to its logical conclusion, the argument will make it impossible to execute any sentence whatsoever, particularly of imprisonment because of every sentence of imprisonment necessarily involves pain and suffering to a lesser or greater degree.
A constitution so carefully conceived as ours cannot be construed to produce such a startling result.
Painless punishment is a contradiction in 5 terms.
If it is lawful to impose the sentence of death in appropriate cases, it would be lawful to execute that sentence in an appropriate manner.
The mandate of article 21 is not that the death sentence shall not be executed but that it shall not, be executed in a cruel, barbarous or degrading manner.
When the sentence of death is constitutionally valid, not even the sophisticated sensitivities can justly demand that those upon whom, the extreme penalty of law is imposed because of the magnitude of their crime should not be made to suffer the execution of that sentence, unaccompanied by torture or degradation of any kind.
If the larger interests of the community as opposed to the interests of an individual require that a death sentence should be imposed in an exceptional class of cases, the same societal interests would justify the execution of that sentence, though in strict conformity with the requirements of article 21.
[59 G, 60 C D, 59 H, 60B F G] (b) The argument that either death sentence is barbarous or that the method of hanging is cruel, inhuman or degrading cannot draw any sustenance from the Eighth Amendment Clause of the U.S. Constitution.
The American Supreme Court has formulated a sophisticated definition of that clause which has a dynamic content.
Several concurring opinions show that, in America, capital punishment is not considered to be violative of the Eighth Amendment.
What the Eighth Amendment prohibits is "something inhuman and barbarous and something more than the mere extinguishment of life".
The suffering necessarily involved in the execution of death sentence is not banned by the Eighth Amendment though the cruel form of execution is.
[62 F G, D E] Kemmler; , ; O ' Neil vs Vermont, 144 U,S. 323; Trop vs Dulles, ; ; and Louisiana vs Resweber, ; ; referred to.
(a) There has to be finality to litigation, criminal as well as civil, if law is not to lose its credibility.
No one of course can question that law is a dynamic science, the social utility of which consists in its ability to keep abreast of the emerging trends in social and scientific advance and its willingness to readjust its postulates in order to accommodate those trends.
But, that is not to say that judgments rendered by this Court after a full debate should be reconsidered every now and then and their authority doubted or diluted.
That would be doing disservice to law since certainty over a reasonably foreseeable period is the hall mark of law.
[11 F G] The question that, in the circumstances mentioned in Bachan Singh, it is permissible to impose the sentence of death for the offence of murder must be treated as concluded and not any longer open to argument.
In Machhi Singh, the learned Judges have but formulated broad guidelines to assist the Courts in deciding the vexed question as to whether the death sentence is at all called for.
Evidently, the judgment does not enlarge the scope of the rule in Bachan Singh by broadening the narrow field of cases which call for the death sentence.
The constraints of Bachan Singh deserve to be preserved but that means that it is only a rare degree of malevolence which invites and justifies the imposition of death sentence.
[11 B D] 6 Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab ; ; and Machhi Singh vs State of Punjab,[1983]; 3 S.C.C. 470 referred to.
(b) Both the majority and the minority in Bachan Singh considered the question of the validity of the death sentence from the procedural aspect also, with special reference to the method of hanging prescribed by law for executing the death sentence.
Nevertheless, the question whether the particular mode of executing the death sentence prescribed by sec.
354(5) Cr. P.C., violates the provisions of article 21 of the Constitution was not directly and substantially in issue in Bachan Singh and it was not considered specifically by the majority as an independent issue.
It would not be proper to sidetrack that the question and refuse to examine it fully because of the incidental consideration which it received in Bachan Singh.[14 D, H, 15 C D] (c) The retribution involved in the theory 'tooth for tooth ' and 'an eye for eye ' has no place in the scheme of civilized jurisprudence and the court cannot turn a deaf ear to the petitioners ' claim for justice on the ground that the enormity of their crimes has resulted in grave injustice to the victims of those crimes.
The court is concerned to ensure due compliance with constitutional mandates, no matter the occasion.
Justice has to be done dispassionately in accordance with the constitutional attitudes whether it is a murdered or a smuggler who asks for it.
Law cannot demand its pound of flesh.[16 E G] Per Chandrachud, C.J. and Pathak, J. (Sabyasachi Mukharji,J. reserving his opinion on the point) In cases arising under article 21 of the Constitution, if it appears that a person is being deprived of his life or has been deprived of his personal liberty, the burden rests on the State to establish the constitutional validity of the impugned law.
[32 F] There is a fundamental distinction between cases arising under article 14 and those which arise under articles 19 and 21.
In the generality of cases under article 14, the challenge is based on the allegation that the impugned provision is discriminatory since it singles out the petitioner for hostile treatment from amongst persons who, being situated similarly, belong to the same class as the petitioner and the petitioner has to plead and prove that there are others who are situated similarly as him and that he is singled out and subjected to unfavourable treatment.
Whether there are other persons who are situated similarly as the petitioner and whether he is subjected to hostile discrimination are questions of fact and the burden to establish the existence of these facts rests on the petitioner.
In a challenge based on the violation of article 19 or article 21 the petitioner has undoubtedly to plead that, for example, his right to free speech and expression is violated or that he is deprived of his right to life or personal liberty.
But once he shows that, which really is not a part of the burden of proof, it is for the State to justify the impugned law or action by proving that, for example, the deprivation of the petitioner 's right to free speech and expression is saved by cl.
(2) of article 19 since it is in the 7 nature of a reasonable restriction on that right in the interests of matters mentioned in cl.
(2), or that, the petitioner has been deprived of his life or personal liberty according to a just, fair and reasonable procedure established, by law.
In cases arising under article 19, the burden is never on the petitioner to prove that the restriction is not reasonable or that the restriction is not in the interests of matters mentioned in cl.
Likewise, in cases arising under article 21, the burden is never on the petitioner to prove that the procedure prescribed by law which deprives him of his life or personal liberty is unjust, unfair or unreasonable.
As soon as it is shown that the Act invades a right guaranteed by article 21 it is necessary to inquire whether the State has proved that the person has been deprived of his life or personal liberty according to procedure established by law, that is to say by a procedure which is first, fair and reasonable.
[23 D H] Any case, even a locus classicus is an authority for what it decides.
It is permissible to extend the ratio of a decision to cases involving identical situations; factual and legal, but care must be taken to see that this is not done mechanically, that is without a close examination of the rational of the decision which is cited as a precedent.
Human mind, trained even in the strict discipline of law, is not averse to taking the easy course of relying on decisions which have become famous and applying their ratio to supposedly identical situations.[21 G H] Saghir Ahmed vs State of U.P., ; , Khyerbari Tea Co. vs State of Assam, ; ; Western U.P. Electric Power & Supply Co. Ltd. vs State of U.P., ; ; Mohd. Faruk vs State of M.P., ; ; Laxmi Khandsari vs State of U.P., ; ; and Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, ; ; referred to.
Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Justice S.R. Tendolkar, ; ; Mohd, Hamif Quareshi vs State of Bihar; ; ; Madhu Limaye vs Sub Divisional Magistrate, ; ; and Pathumma vs State of Kerala, ; explained and distinguished.
B Baneriji vs Anita Pan, ; ; decided per incurium.
In the instant case the impugned statute, on the face of it, provides for a procedure for extinguishing life.
Therefore, not even the initial obligation to show the fact of deprivation of life or liberty rests on the petitioners.
The State must establish that the procedure prescribed by section 354(5), Cr. P. C. for executing the death sentence is just, fair and reasonable.
[33 A B] Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.
As soon as it is shown that a Statute or Act in question invades a right guaranteed by article 21, it is necessary to enquire whether the State has proved that the prisoner has been deprived of his life or personal liberty according to procedure established by law.
However, at present I would not express my 8 opinion whether in all such cases, the State has a further initial burden to prove that procedure established by law is just, fair and reasonable.
[63 E L]
