On the failure of the judgment debtor to satisfy the decree passed against him the property in dispute was sold in execution of the decree.
The surety made an application under section 151 Code of Civil Procedure, without mentioning the order under which the application was made.
The Subordinate Judge treated the application as one under order XXI, r.89.
The surety in that application prayed for time to deposit the amount but failed to make the deposit.
In the meantime, he died.
A total stranger to his estate purporting to be his grand nephew made an application for substitution claiming that he was the surety 's successor in interest and that before his death the surety had executed a will in his favour.
On the same day the decree holder made an application stating that the surety had made payment of the decretal amount before the sale was held and prayed that full satisfaction of the decree be recorded.
The respondent who was the auction purchaser, contested the genuineness of the will and stated that the alleged adjustment could not in any event affect his right or title to the property in dispute as auction purchaser.
The Subordinate Judge refused substitution of the petitioner.
Some time later, the petitioner moved another application under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, for setting aside the sale on the ground of material irregularity in conducting the sale but that application was rejected by the Subordinate Judge.
The petitioner thereupon moved the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution contending that fraud was perpetrated by the decree holder in bringing the property in dispute to sale although there was full satisfaction of the decree by the surety before his death.
The High Court declined to interfere with the impugned orders of the Subordinate Judge on various grounds.
On the question whether it was proper for the petitioner to have moved a petition under article 227 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the petition 212 HELD: The petition under article 227 was wholly misconceived.
The supervisory jurisdiction conferred on the High Courts under article 227 of the Constitution is limited "to seeing that an inferior Court or Tribunal functions within the limits of its authority", and not to correct an error apparent on the face of the record, much less an error of law.
In the instant case, there was no error of law or error apparent on the face of record.
From an order under O.XXI, r.92 an appeal lay to the District Judge.
That apart the petitioner 's application raised a question relating to execution which fell within the purview of section 47 Code of Civil Procedure which prior to February 1, 1977 was appealable because then a decision under section 47 was deemed to be a decree under section 2(2) of the Code.
Therefore, the petitioner had the remedy of appeal to the District Judge: Even if no appeal lay against the impugned orders of the Subordinate Judge, the petitioner had the remedy of filing a revision before the High Court under section 115 of the Code.
Upon any view of the matter the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution had no jurisdiction to interfere with the impugned orders passed by the Subordinate Judge.
A mere wrong decision without anything more is not enough to attract the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 227.[215 E: 216B C; 215F H;216 A]
