The first respondent who lost to the appellant by 24 votes in the Assembly Elections filed an election petition in the High Court under section 81 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 asking for the appellant 's election to be set aside and for declaration that he should be declared as the successful candidate.
In para 9(i) of the petition the respondent pleaded that 74 ballot papers cast in his favour were wrongly rejected on the ground that they did not contain the signature of the Presiding Officer.
The High Court ordered inspection of these ballot papers.
The High Court held that the rejection of these 74 ballot papers for want of the Presiding Officer 's signature was not justified and gave the respondent No. 1 credit of all those votes and on that basis while setting aside the election of the appellant, declared the first respondent to have been duly elected.
Hence this appeal.
The appellant urged that the pleading in para 9(i) of the Election petition did not amount to a concise statement of the material facts as required by law; the High Court went wrong in allowing inspection of the ballot papers; the 74 ballot papers in dispute did not contain the signature of the presiding officer and were rightly rejected at the counting in view of the mandatory provision in rule 56(2) of the Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 and the High Court 's view that in the absence of a prayer for recrimination under section 97 of the Act, the appellant was precluded from asking for a recount of the other rejected ballot papers is not tenable in law.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: An election petition is presented in terms of section 81 of the Act.
Section 83 prescribed as to what the petition should contain.
Clause (a) of sub section
(1) of section 83 states that an election petition shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies.
In the instant 119 case the number of ballot papers alleged to have been wrongly rejected has been furnished, the counting table number has been given, the booth number has also been disclosed and the ground for rejection has even been pleaded.
The only specific detail which was wanting was the serial number of the ballot papers.
This particular was not available to the election petitioner in spite of attempts made on his behalf.
The Court, therefore, agrees with the High Court that in the facts and circumstances of the case the pleading in paragraph 9(i) set out the material facts in a proper way and no defect can be found with it.
The High Court had rightly ordered the inspection of the ballot papers.
[126 B C; H; 127 A; 128 F G; 127 F] Samant N. Balakrishan etc., vs George Fernandez and Ors, etc.; , explained and distinguished, Bhabhi vs Sheo Govind and Ors., [1975] Suppl.
S.C.R. 202, referred to.
Rule 38(1) of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 provides inter alia that every ballot paper before it is issued to an elector shall be stamped on the back with a distinguishing mark and shall be signed in full on its back by the presiding officer.
The distinguishing mark can be put by anyone but the signature has got to be of the presiding officer and obviously he has to personally do that job.
Rule 56(2)(h) provides that the returning officer shall reject a ballot paper if it does not bear both the distinguishing mark and the signature as mentioned in sub rule (1) of rule 38.
There is a proviso to sub rule (2) of rule 56 which says that where the returning officer is satisfied that any such defect as is mentioned in clause (h) has been caused by any mistake or failure on the part of a presiding officer or polling officer, the ballot paper shall not be rejected merely on the ground of such defect.
The proviso, once it is applicable is a mandate that the ballot paper is not to be rejected.
[129 F G; 130 G; 129 E F; 130 E; 131 H] In the instant case the 74 ballot papers in dispute were rejected because they did not contain the signature of the presiding officer as required under rule 38(1).
To see whether the proviso to sub rule (2) of rule 56 was applicable, it has to be found out whether the absence of the signature of the presiding officer on these ballot papers was on account of mistake or of his failure.
On the submissions at the bar, the question of mistake does not arise.
It was the obligation of the presiding officer to put his signature on the ballot papers before they were issued to the voters.
Every voter has the right to vote and in the democratic set up prevailing in the country no person entitled to share the franchise can be denied the privilege.
Nor can the candidate be made to suffer.
Keeping this position in view the Court is of the definite view that the present case is one of the failure on the part of the presiding officer, who had been taken ill on the date of poll and was away from the place of polling for quite some time, to put his signature on those ballot papers so as to satisfy the requirement of law.
The ballot papers therefore were not liable to be rejected as the proviso applied and the High Court came to the correct conclusion in counting these ballot papers and giving credit thereof to the respondent No. 1.
[130 C; F G; 131 F H; 130 H; 131 E; H; 132 A] 120 In a case in which the election petition claims that the election of the returned candidate is void, and also asks for a declaration that the petitioner himself or some other person has been duly elected, section 100 as well as section 101 of the Act would apply, and it is in respect of the additional claim for such declaration that section 97 comes into play.
Section 97(1) thus allows the returned candidate to recriminate and raise pleas in support of his case that the other person in whose favour a declaration is claimed by the petition cannot be said to be validity elected, and these would be pleas of attack and it would be open to the returned candidate to take these pleas, because when he recriminates, he really becomes a counter petitioner challenging the validity of the election of the alternative candidate.
The result of section 97(1) therefore is that in dealing with a composite election petition, the Tribunal enquires into not only the case made out by the petitioner, but also the counter claim made by the returned candidate.
That being the nature of the proceedings contemplated by section 97(1), it is not surprising that the returned candidate is required to make his recrimination and serve notice in that behalf in the manner and within the time specified by section 97(1) proviso and section 97(2).
If the returned candidate does not recriminate as required by section 97, then he cannot make any attack against the alternative claim made by the petition.
[135 A F] Kum.
Shradha Devi vs Krishna Chandra Pant & Ors.
, ; ; Jabar Singh vs Genda Lal, ; and P. Malaichami vs M. Andi Ambalam & Ors. ; referred to.
In the instant election petition two reliefs had been claimed, firstly, for setting aside the election of the returned candidate, i.e. the appellant, and secondly, for a declaration that the election petitioner (respondent No. 1) was the duly elected candidate.
The relief claimed was in terms of section 100(1)(d) (iii) and section 101(a) of the Act.
Admittedly no application for recrimination was filed by the appellant.
In the absence of a recrimination petition conforming to the requirement of section 97 of the Act the appellant who happens to be an advocate and is presumed to know the law, was not entitled to combat the claim of the election petitioner on the ground that if the remaining rejected ballot papers had been counted the election petitioner would not have been found to have polled the majority of the valid votes.
[132 D E; 133 A; 138 C D]
