On the basis of a complaint made against the appellant, a Branch Manager of the first respondent Bank, the Head Office of the Bank ordered a preliminary inquiry and after considering the report of the preliminary inquiry directed one of its officers to carry out investigation under the rules governing the service of the officers of the Bank.
The Investigating officer conducted the investigation and also framed charges against the appellant.
The Investigating officer held that the appellant had committed certain irregularities wilfully, violated the established practices and defied the Bank 's instructions.
On the basis of the report of the Investigating officer the appellant was served with a charge sheet.
The charge against the appellant was that he had acted in violation of procedure of the Bank, he had disregarded all safeguards in sanctioning the overdrafts, encashing bills and his conduct had exposed the bank to grave risks and that he had flagrantly violated the bank rules and instructions with a view to cover up attempts to misappropriate bank 's money after defrauding the bank.
In his reply to the charge sheet the appellant did not ask for any opportunity to lead evidence in support of his defence and for cross examination of any of the officers in respect of the matters stated against him.
The appellant merely asked for a personal hearing which was granted to him.
The Local Board of the Bank, after considering all the relevant documents submitted to it, resolved that the appellant be dismissed, Thereafter the appellant was served notice to show cause why he should not be dismissed from service in terms of rule 49(f) of the State Bank of India (Officers and Assistants) Service Rules.
In his reply the appellant stated inter alia that the inquiry was in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The Executive Committee of the Central Board of the Bank after going through all the necessary papers submitted to it, directed that the appellant be dismissed from service.
On being dismissed, the appellant challenged his dismissal in the High Court alleging contravention of the rules.
The High Court dismissed the 185 writ application on the ground that the rules had no statutory effect.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The appellant contended that the impugned order should be struck down as having been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
He submitted that rule 50 of the Rules implied reasonable opportunity which required that materials against a person should not be gathered behind his back and he should be given an opportunity to cross examine, if necessary, the persons who had supplied the materials or given evidence against him and since in his case the materials against him were gathered in his absence and he was not allowed to cross examine the witnesses, and that evidence against him was not recorded in his presence, the requirements of rule 50 had not been fulfilled.
The appellant also submitted that no loss or damage had been caused to the Bank and that the final order did not contain the reasons.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: Referring to rule 49(f) and sub rules (1), (2) and (3) of rule 50 of the State Bank of India (officers and Assistants) Service Rules, in the instant case the relevant rules have been complied with.
Even if the rules are read as requiring due compliance with the principles of natural justice or even if such basis principles of natural justice were taken as implied in any case there has been no violation of the principles of natural justice in respect of the impugned order.
[200 G H] All actions against a party which involve penal or adverse consequences must be in accordance with the principles of natural justice but whether any particular principles of natural justice would be applicable to a particular situation or the question whether there has been any infraction of the application of that principle, has to be judged, in the light of facts and circumstances of each particular case.
The basic requirement is that their must be fair play in action and the decision must be arrived at in a just and objective manner with regard to the relevance of the materials and reasons.
The rules of natural justice are flexible and cannot be put on rigid formula.
In order to sustain a complaint of violation of principles of natural justice on the ground of absence of opportunity of cross examination, it has to be established that prejudice has been caused to the appellant by the procedure followed.
[206 H; 207 A C] Neither cross examination nor the opportunity to lead evidence by the delinquent is an integral part of all quasi judicial adjudications.
[207 H] J. R. Lucas "On Justice" (page 86) and Wade 'On Administrative Law ' 5th Edition at pages 472 475, referred to.
In respect of an order involving adverse or penal consequences against an officer or an employee of statutory corporations, there must be an investigation into the charges consistent with the requirements of the situation in accordance with the principles of natural justice as far as these were applicable to a particular situation.
So whether a particular principle of natural justice has been violated or not has to be judged in the background of the nature of 186 the charges, the nature of the investigation conducted in the background of any statutory or relevant rules governing such enquiries.
[200 H; 201 A B] In the instant case the infraction of the natural justice complained of was that the appellant was not given opportunity to rebut the materials gathered in his absence.
The appellant was associated with the preliminary investigation that was conducted against him.
He does not deny or dispute.
Information and materials undoubtedly were gathered not in his presence but whatever information was there and gathered namely, the versions of the persons, the particular entries which required examination were shown to him.
He was conveyed the information given and his explanation was asked for.
He participated in that investigation.
He gave his explanation but he did not dispute any of the facts nor did he ask for any opportunity to call any evidence to rebut these facts.
He did ask for a personal hearing and he was given such opportunity of personal hearing.
His explanations were duly recorded.
He does not allege that his version has been improperly recorded nor did he question the veracity of the witnesses or the entries or the letters or documents shown to him upon which the charges were framed and upon which he was found guilty.
Indeed he was really consulted at every stage of preliminary investigation upon which the charges were based and upon which the proposed action against him has been taken.
In that view of the matter, it cannot be said that in conducting the enquiry or framing of the charges or arriving at the decision, the authorities concerned have acted in violation of the principles of natural justice merely because the evidence was not recorded in his presence or that the materials, the gist of which was communicated to him, were not gathered in his presence.
[201 B; 202 H; 203 A E] In the instant case the charge against the appellant was that he had so conducted himself which exposed the Bank to grave risk and for which his explanation was not accepted, after considering his explanation, and after personal hearing reasonably an opinion may be formed that his conduct was such that defrauding of the Bank might have been caused.
These were the charges against him and these are the charges upon which he was accused.
Therefore, whether actual loss or damage had been caused or not, is immaterial.
[204 C D] In the view of the matter being taken, it is not necessary to express any opinion on the question whether these rules under which the enquiry was conducted were statutory rules or not and as such whether the appellant has any statutory remedy against the orders.
[204 E] In the instant case though reasons have not been expressly stated, these reasons are implicit namely, the nature of the charges, the explanation offered and the reply of the appellant to the show cause notice.
These appear from a fair reading of the order impugned in this case.
It, further, appears that there was consideration of those facts and the decision was arrived at after consideration of those reasons.
[200 D E] Phulbari Tea Estate vs Its Workmen, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. p. 1111; Khem Chand vs The Union of India and Ors., [1959] S.C.R. p. 1080; Jankinath Sarangi vs 187 State of Orissa; , ; Union of India & Anr.
vs P. K. Roy & Ors., [1968] 2 S.C.R. p. 186; Channabasappa Basappa Happali vs State of Mysore, [1971] 2 S.C.R. p. 645; Siemens Engineering & Manufacturing Co. of India vs Union of India & Anr., [1976] Supp., S.C.R. p. 489; Union of India vs H. C. Goel, [1964] 4 S.C.R. p. 718 and The Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Company Law Board & Ors., [1966] Supp.
S.C.R. p. 311, referred to.
