The prosecution case against the appellant was that he, along with five workers migrated from Nepal and that at the time of occurrence all of them were working in Punjab as agricultural labourers.
Out of a large sum of money earned by them as wages they spent a part and the balance was left with one of the five deceased.
On the evening prior to the day of occurrence the appellant was found by the employer cooking food for himself and his companions but when he went to his field the following morning he noticed the five dead bodies of the co workers were smouldering in the pit of his tube well.
Post mortem examination of the dead bodies revealed several ante mortem injuries, most of which were lacerated wounds.
Prom that day onwards the apellant was found missing.
The trial Court, accepting the circumstantial evidence, convicted and A sentenced the appellant to death.
The High Court affirmed the conviction on three grounds: (i) since the money was not found on the person of the deceased with whom it was kept, the motive was theft; (ii) the appellant was last seen in the company of all the deceased and (iii) the appellant absconded thereafter to conceal his presence.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is impossible to believe that the crime was committed in the manner alleged by the prosecution or that the appellant could possibly have committed it in the circumstances alleged.
[826 C D] In a case which depends wholly upon circumstantial evidence, the circumstances must be of such a nature as to be capable of supporting the exclusive hypothesis that the accused is guilty of the crime of which he is charged.
That is to say, the circumstances relied upon as establishing the involvement of the accused in the crime must clinch the issue of Built.
Very often, circumstances which establish the commission of an offence in the abstract are identified as circumstances which prove that the prisoner before the Court is guilty of a crime imputed to him.
An a priori suspicion that the accused has committed 823 the crime transforms itself into a facile belief that it is he who has committed the crime.
Human mind plays that trick on proof of the commission of a crime by resisting the frustrating feeling that no one can be identified as the author of that crime.
[826 G H] In the instant case the circumstances attendant upon the incident militate entirely against the conclusion that the five murders were committed R by the appellant.
Tho fact that the assailant robbed the victims of the mopey cannot necessarily lead to the conclusion that it was the appellant who robbed them of their money.
That the appellant and his co workers were paid a fairly large sum of money was known to others apart from the appellant and his Companions.
No part of the money was traced to the appellant and therefore be could not be connected with the crime.
[825 C E] Assuming that the deceased were administered liquor, medical evidence did not know that tho liquor consumed would have induced such stupor verging upon hypnosis It is also incredible that the five persons done to death by a single individual were under such a heavy spell of sleep that none of them woke up when the other or others were attacked.
[826 D F] The fact that the appellant was last seen in the company of the deceased and that he was not present at the place from which the dead bodies were recovered the next morning are equivocal circumstances on which it is hazardous to base the conviction.
[827 D] The circumstance that the appellant absconded from the place of occurrence does not lead to the conclusion that he had made himself scarce in order to conceal his presence.
If he was found by the team of investigating officers in Nepal going about openly, it is difficult to hold that he had absconded to Nepal.
[825 G H]
