Allowing the State appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
In section 10 of COFEPOSA, both in the first and the second part of the section, it has been expressly mentioned that the detention will be for a period of one year or two years, as the case may be, from the date of detention and not from the date of the order of detention.
If the submission that the appeal has become infectious in view of the fact that the maximum period of detention mentioned in section 10 of the Act has expired, was accepted, two unintended results follow: (1) if a person against whom an order of detention is made under section 3 of the Act, he can successfully abscond till the expiry of the period and altogether avoid detention; and (2) even if the period of detention is interrupted by the wrong judgment of a High Court, he gets the benefit of the invalid order which he should not.
The period of one or two years, as the case may be, as mentioned in section 10 will run from the date of his actual detention, and not from the date of the order of detention.
If he has served a part of the period of detention, he will have to serve out the balance.
[741 H, 742 A C] 2.
The High Court in its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution is to see whether the order of detention has been passed on any materials before it.
If it is found that the order has been based by the detaining authority on materials on record, then the Court cannot go further and examine whether r the material was adequate or not, which is the function of an appellate authority or Court.
It can examine the material on record only for the purpose of seeing whether the order of detention has been based on no material.
The satisfaction mentioned in section 3 of the Act is the satisfaction of the detaining authority and not of the Court.
[742 E F] 3.
By implication, the High Court has erroneously imported the rule of criminal jurisprudence that the guilt of an accused must be proved beyond reasonable doubt to the law of detention.
[742 D] 741
