The appellant, with its head office at Kanpur in U.P., runs two woollen mills one of which is in Dhariwal in the State of Punjab.
The raw material purchased by the head office at Kanpur was sent from various centres to the mills and no raw material used in the mills was purchased locally or within the area of the Market Committee.
On demand of market fee by the Committee under section 23 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961 the appellant stated that no purchase or sale of the raw material received by the mills took place within the area of the Market Committee and that for this reason the Committee had no jurisdiction to levy any fee in respect of those materials.
A Writ Petition filed by the appellant in the High Court was dismissed a infructuous since the Market Committee agreed to withdraw the assessment and to make fresh assessment according to the rules.
Some time later, however, the Market Committee once again levied market fee and penalty.
A single Judge of the High Court quashed the demand notice of the Market Committee on the ground that the assessment order was not in accordance with the provisions of the Act and Rules.
But a Division Bench of the High Court allowed the Committee 's Letters Patent Appeal.
On the question whether the Market Committee was competent to levy fees.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: Clauses (b) and (c) of rule 29 (7) of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets (General) Rules, 1962 would be attracted bringing the transaction within the term 'bought or sold ' if in pursuance of the agreement of sale or purchase, even if entered at the head office of the mills at Kanpur, the agricultural produce was weighed in the market area or if in pursuance of the 160 agreement of sale or purchase the agricultural produce was delivered in the said area to the purchaser or to some other person on behalf of the purchaser.
[163 E F] In the instant case both clauses (b) and (c) would be applicable provided the transaction of sale was completed immediately on the delivery of the goods to the mills on weighment within the market area, if the delivery and/or weighment are such that without both or either of them there will no sale at all in law.
[164 A B]
