An industrial dispute with regard to the raising of the age of retirement of the clerical staff employed in the Refinery Division of the respondent oil Company at Bombay from 55 to 60 years was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The workmen contended that there was a trend in the Bombay region to fix the age of retirement of clerical employees at 60 years and in the comparable concerns as well as in the Marketing Division of the Company itself the age of the clerical employees was above 55 years.
The Company contended that the wage scales of their clerical employees were far better than those of similar categories of employees in comparable concerns and that the company took a generous view in the settlement dated 31 10 1973 and arrived at a package deal and revised the benefits of the employees taking into consideration the agreement of the employees to continue the age of retirement of the clerical employees of the Refinery Division at 55 years.
Neither party led any oral evidence but filed their respective comparative statements.
The Tribunal found as a fact that the wage scales of the Company were not much better than the wage scales of other comparable concerns.
The Tribunal also noticed that the age of retirement of the clerical staff of the Company in its Marketing Division both at Bombay and other places was fixed at 58 years.
But the Tribunal found that the Company 's contention regarding the settlement being a package deal in regard even to the age of retirement after taking other benefits into consideration was not without substance and observed that it was, however, not sufficient to reject the workmen 's demand in toto and that it had to be taken into account while considering the extent to which the age of retirement should be raised.
Having regard to the circumstances of the case and in the interest of industrial harmony, the Tribunal raised the age of retirement to 58 years only.
In appeal to this Court the workmen relied on the 'trend ' in the Bombay region while the Company relied on the position in other oil Companies.
252 Allowing the appeal and fixing the age of retirement at 60 years, by majority.
HELD (Per Desai and Chinnappa Reddy, JJ.) In fixing the age of superannuation, the most important factor that has to be taken into consideration is the trend in a particular area.
From the various decisions rendered by this Court and by the Tribunals, it is obvious that in the early sixties the trend in the Bombay region was to raise the age of superannuation to 60 years.
Industrial and labour conditions do not remain stagnant despite the passage of time.
Industrial labour relations need revision from time to time to fit and suit changing conditions.
That there was an upward trend to raise the age of retirement to 60 in the early sixties may not necessarily mean that the same trend has continued till today.
[259 H; 260 D E; 260 G H] Guest, Keen, Willians Private Ltd. vs P. J. Sterling & Ors. ; ; Dunlop Rubber Company Limited vs Workmen & Ors. ; ; Imperial Chemical Industries (India) Pvt. Ltd. vs Workmen ; ; British Paints (India) Ltd. vs Its workmen [1961] 2 S.C.R. 523; G.M. Talang vs Shaw Wallace & Co. ; Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distributing Company of India Ltd. vs Their Workmen [1970] I LLJ 363, referred to.
In the instant case, the Company did not plead that there was any reversal of the trend nor did the Company urge that there was any such reversal of the trend.
On the other hand, it may very well be said that there has been much progress in the last two decades in the matter of better living conditions and availability of medical and health facilities and, therefore, a further raise of the age of retirement may be considered necessary and justified.
[260 H; 261 A] In the instant case while raising the retirement age of the clerical staff of the Refinery Division to 58 years instead of 60 years since the retirement age of the clerical staff of the Marketing Division of the Company had been fixed at 58 years, the Tribunal fell into a serious error in failing to notice the relevant and outstanding fact that the clerical staff of the Marketing Division have a pension scheme while the clerical staff of the Refinery Division have no such scheme.
The general terminal benefits on attaining the age of superannuation are pension, gratuity and provident fund.
It is not in dispute that while the clerical staff of the Marketing Division have all the three benefits, the clerical staff of the Refinery Division are not entitled to any pension.
This must necessarily have an impact on the raising of their retirement age.
On the material available the Court thinks that the retirement age in the case of clerical staff of the Refinery Division should be fixed at 60 years.
[262 E H] In applying the region cum industry formula the emphasis to be placed on region or industry depends upon varying factors.
Where there are no comparable industries in the region, the regional aspect of the region cum industry formula must be given precedence.
G] Greaves Cotton and Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen 1964 (I) L.L.J. 342; Workmen of Hindustan Motors vs Hindustan Motors 1962 (II) L.L.J. 352; 253 French Motor Car Company vs Their Workmen 1962 (II) L.L.J. 744; Workmen of Orient Paper Mills Ltd. vs Orient Paper Mills Ltd. 1969 (II) L.L.J. 398 referred to: It is observed that nowadays, because of better conditions of living and availability of medical and health facilities, the average span of life has increased and a person between 55 and 60 years of age is alert, active, hale and healthy may be said to be at the prime of his life.
That is also the time when he has to meet several financial commitments and demands.
To retire him at that age may mean virtually throwing him to the wolves.
Can the nation afford to throw away the knowledge and experience of these people by retiring them when they are still capable of turning out some years of good work and have on its hand several families unable to fully support themselves ? On the other hand, can the nation afford to have an army of unemployed youngmen necessarily leading bitter and frustrated lives by allowing them to fritter away their energies in unhealthy pursuits to which they may be tempted ? But then arises the broader question, is the retirement of men of experience at an age when they are still useful to the community the proper solution to the problem of unemployment among the young ? Is not the solution the creation of greater employment opportunities, by increasing production and its modes ? All these questions are difficult to answer and require deep investigation, research and study.
[261 D H] (Per Varadarajan, J.
Though the trend in a particular area is the most important factor to be taken into account for fixing the age of retirement of employees, it is only one of the several factors like the nature of work assigned to the employees, the wage structure of the employees, the retirement benefits and other amenities available to the employees, the nature of climate where the employees work and the age of superannuation fixed in comparable industries in the region.
Moreover, the trend must undoubtedly be in comparable industries.
[272 D E; F] Guest Keen Williams Private Ltd. vs Sterling and Ors.
1959 (II) L.L.J. 405; Burmah Shell (Delhi region) (1971) (I) L.L.J. 363 referred to.
In the present case, the employees have not placed any material on those factors before the Tribunal apart from relying upon the trend in the Bombay region.
They have also not placed any material on record to show that there is any trend in the Refinery Division of any other oil company in the Bombay region to fix the age of retirement of clerical employees at 60 years.
They have relied upon the trend generally and not in any comparable industry.
There is no evidence to show that there is any other Refinery in the Bombay region than that of the Company.
From the comparative statements filed by the Company, it appears that the trend in the Refinery Division of the Company throughout the country is to fix the age of retirement of the clerical employees at 58 years.
There is nothing in the award of the Tribunal to show that the employees contended before it that the "trend in the Bombay region" heavily relied upon by them, could be general in nature and not in comparable industries in the region.
[272 F; G; 273 B C] 254 Unfortunately, very limited material is available on record for arriving at a decision in this case.
The comparative statements filed by the Company show that the pay scales of junior grade clerical employees in the Refinery Division of the respondent company are better than those in another oil company.
The pay scales of junior grade clerical employees and senior grade clerical employees of the company in the Refinery Division at Bombay compare favourably with pay scales of junior grade clerical employees and senior grade clerical employees in the Marketing Division of the Company at Bombay Therefore, in considering the absence of a pension scheme for the clerical employees of the Company in the Refinery Division one has to take note of the fact that the pay scales of those employees are more advantageous and compare favourably with the pay scales of clerical employees of the company in the Marketing Division at Bombay.
There is no material on record to show the quantum of disadvantage to which the employees in question are subjected by the absence of a pension scheme compared with the section of clerical employees of the Company 's Marketing Division at Bombay who have the benefit of a pension scheme in addition to gratuity and provident fund benefits to which alone the employees concerned in this appeal are entitled as retirement benefits.
In those circumstances, there is no satisfactory reason for interfering with the Tribunal 's award raising the age of retirement of the clerical employees of the Company 's Refinery Division at Bombay from 55 years to 58 years.
[270 A; 271 A; E F; 272 B C; 273 H; 274 A B]
