The petitioner who was detained under sec.
3(2) of the , was conveyed seven grounds of detention by the Detaining Authority.
The first two grounds related to the incidents that occurred more than 5 years and about 3 years respectively prior to the date of the order of detention.
The petitioner challenged the order of detention as vitiated on account of the grounds of detention being vague and stale.
Allowing the writ petition by majority, HELD: The order of detention is quashed.
(Per Chinnappa Reddy and Varadarajan, JJ.) It is not open to the Detaining Authority to pick up an old and stale incident and hold it as the basis of an order of detention under S 3(2) of the Act.
Nor it is open to the Detaining Authority to contend that it has been mentioned only to show that the detenu has a tendency to create problems resulting in disturbance to public order, for as a matter of fact it has been mentioned as a ground of detention.
[327 E F] Shalini Soni vs Union of India, ; ; Mehdi Mohamed Joudi vs State of Maharashtra, ; Taramati Chandulal vs State of Maharashtra AIR 1981 SC 871; and Shibban Lal Saksena vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, referred to.
In the instant case the first two incidents which are of 1978 and 1980 are mentioned as grounds of detention in the order dated 6 5 1983.
There can be no doubt that these grounds especially grounds No. 1 relating to an incident of 1978 are too remote and not proximate to the order of detention.
[327 D E] There is no provision in the similar to s.5A of the which says that where a person has been detained in pursuance of an order of detention under sub sec.
(1) of S.3 which has been 318 made on two or more grounds, such order of detention shall be deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds and accordingly (a) such order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one or some of the grounds is or are vague, non existent, non relevant, not connected or not proximately connected with such persons or invalid for any other reason, and it is not therefore possible to hold that the Government or officer making such order would have been satisfied as provided in sub sec.
(1) of s.3 with reference to the remaining ground or grounds and made the order of detention and (b) the Government or officer making the order of detention shall be deemed to have made the order of detention under the said sub sec.
(1) after being satisfied as provided in that sub section with reference to the remaining ground or grounds.
[327 F H; 328 A] In the present case, therefore, it cannot be postulated what view would have been taken by the Detaining Authority about the need to detain the petitioner under sec.
3(2) of the Act if he had not taken into account the stale and not proximate grounds 1 and 2 into consideration in arriving at the subjective satisfaction.
[328 A B] (Per Desai J.) When criminal activity of a person leads to such a drastic action as detention without trial, ordinarily a single stray incident may not unless contrary is shown be sufficient to invoke such drastic power of preventive detention.
In order to avoid the charge that a stray incident was seized upon to invoke such drastic power of preventive detention the authority charged with a duty to maintain public order of assure security of the State, may keep a close watch on the activities of the miscreant for some time and repeated indulgence into prejudicial activity may permit an inference that unless preventive detention is resorted to, it would not be possible to wean away such person from such prejudicial activity.
[319 G H; 320 A B] In the instant case therefore, when in 1983, an action was proposed to be taken under sub sec.
(2) of sec.
3, the Detaining Authority examined the history of the criminal activity of the detenu and took into account a continuous course of conduct which may permit an inference that unless interdicted by a detention order, such activity cannot be put to an end the power under sub sec.
(2) of sec.
3 is exercised.
[320 B C] If there is a big time lag between the last of the events leading to the detention order being made and the remote earlier event, the same cannot be treated as showing a continuity of criminal activity.
But if events in close proximity with each other are taken into account for drawing a permissible inference that these are not stray or spasmodic events but disclose a continuous prejudicial activity, the reference to earlier events cannot be styled as stale or remote which would vitiate the order of detention.
[320 D E] In the instant case if each event is examined in close proximity with each other, the events of 1978 and 1980 referred to in grounds Nos. 1 and 2 cannot be rejected as a stray or not proximate to the making of the detention order.
319 But they provide the genesis of the continuity of the prejudicial activity of the detenu and they appear to have been relied upon for that limited purpose.
[321 A B] Gora vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Smt.
Rekhaben Virendra Kapadia vs State of Gujarat and Ors.
,[1979] 2 S.C.C. 566; and Firrat Raza Khan vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., , referred to.
