The appellants held stage carriage permit granted to them by the Regional Transport Authority for the route Dabra Karera Via Lodi Mato extended upto Gwalior.
On 22 6 1978, this route for which the permit was held by the appellants was modified, at their own request, by deleting the portion of the route from Karera to Shivpuri.
By a notification dated 4 8 1978 certain routes were nationalised under Scheme No. 11 M which came into effect from 25 9 1978, including deletion of the portion of the route from Shivpuri to Satanwara, with the result the permit of the appellants remained operative only for the remaining portion of the route namely, Satanwara Gwalior Via Dabra.
Effective from 19 12 1978, the State Government issued another Notification making modifications in the route schemes.
Since this modification permitted plying of stage carriages by private operators even on a portion of a nationalised route connecting a district headquarters and not more than 20 KMs in length, the appellants made an application to the Regional Transport Authority for restoring the portion of the route from Shivpuri to Satanwara on the ground that Shivpuri was a district headquarter and the portion of the route from Shivpuri and Satanwara was less than 20 KMs.
The Regional Transport Authority rejected the said application on the ground that the Notification dated 18 12 1978 did not have any retrospective effect and therefore, the appellants were not entitled to automatic restoration of the portion of the route from Shivpuri to Satanwara.
The appellants thereupon filed an application in the prescribed form for extension of the route specified in their permit from Satanwara to Shivpuri.
The said application was rejected after hearing the objections on two grounds, namely (i) the specific order of the State Govt.
Curtailing the Satanwara Shivpuri portion of the applicants ' permit, while approving Scheme 11 M cannot be treated as having been amended by the General Amendment to the Scheme, and (ii) no extension of the route could be granted without following the procedure laid down in Section 47(3) of the Act.
This order of the Regional Transport Authority was challenged by the appellants in a writ petition filed in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
The High Court rejected the petition holding that by reason of the express language of Sub Section (8) of Section 57, an application for extension of the route specified in an existing permit was tantamount to an application for grant of a new permit and hence 289 it was subject to the provisions of Section 47(3) and it could not be considered without following the procedure prescribed by Section 47(3).
Hence the appeal after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court HELD: 1.1 The application made by the appellants for extension of the route specified in their permit from Satanwara to Shivpuri could be considered by the Regional Transport Authority without following the procedure prescribed under Sub Section (3) of Section 47.
[297 E H] 1.2 However, under the terms of Sub Section (8) of Section 57 this application of the appellants was liable to be treated as an application for the grant of a new permit, since in effect and substance, it was an application for varying the condition of the permit by extending the route from Shivpuri to Satanwara.
But the question is for what purpose ? [297 G H] 2.1 Having regard to the several decisions of the Supreme Court and particularly the decision in Mohd. Ibrahim vs State Transport Appellate, Tribunal, Madras, , the law is well settled that an application for grant of a new permit cannot be entertained by the Regional Transport Authority under Section 48, unless the limit of the number of stage carriages for which permits may be granted is first determined under section 47(3).
There are two independent steps required to be taken in connection with the grant of a permit, the first being the determination by the Regional Transport Authority under Section 47(3) of the number of stage carriages for which permits may be granted and the second being that "thereafter applications for stage carriage permits can be entertained" and, therefore, it would mean that before an application for grant of a permit can be entertained by the Regional Transport Authority, there should be a determination under Section 47(3).
Therefore, if an application for varying the condition of a permit by extension of the route specified in the permit were equated wholly with an application for grant of a new permit and the permit for the extended route were to be regarded as a new permit, the procedure prescribed in Section 47(3) would have to be followed and the number of stage carriages for which permits may be granted on the extended route would have to be determined before the application could be entertained by the Regional Transport Authority.
[298 C E; 299 E F] 2.2 But, the prescription in Sub Section (8) of Section 57 that an application for varying the condition of a permit by extension of the route shall be treated as an application for grant of a new permit has not the effect of equating of such an application with an application for grant of a new permit for all purposes so as to attract the applicability of Sub Section (3) of Section 47.
[299 F G] 3.1 Section 57 deals with the procedure in applying for and granting permits and Sub Sections (3) to (7) lays down the procedure which must be followed in considering and deciding, inter alia, an application for grant of a stage carriage permit.
Sub Section (8) follows upon Sub Sections (3) to (7) 290 and is a part of the same Section which has a definite object and Scheme of providing the procedure for considering and granting an application and therefore, when it provides that an application to vary the conditions of a permit by the inclusion of new route or routes or new area or by increasing the number of trips above the specified maximum or by altering the route covered by it shall be treated as an application for grant of a new stage carriage permit, it is obviously intended to incorporate and make applicable the procedure set out in the preceding Sub Sections (3) to (7) to such an application.
The context in which Sub Section (8) occurs and its juxtaposition with Sub Section (3) to (7) in Section 58 clearly indicate that what is sought to be made applicable to an application referred to in Sub Section (8) by treating it as an application for grant of a new permit is the procedure set out in Sub Section (3) to (7) of Section 58 and nothing more.
[299 G H; 300 A C] 3.2 The requirement spelt out in Sub Section (3) of Section 47 that the number of stage carriages for which permits may be granted on any particular route must be first determined before an application for grant of a stage carriage permit can be entertained by the Regional Transport Authority under Section 48, is obviously not a part of the procedure for considering an application for grant of a permit; it is a condition precedent before an application for grant of a permit can be considered and granted.
This condition cannot be said to have been incorporated by reference under Sub Section (8) of Section 57.
An application to vary the conditions of a permit as set out in Sub Section (8) of Section 57 is undoubtedly to be treated as an application for grant of a new permit, but that is only for the purpose of applying the procedure set out in Sub Sections (3) to (7) of Section 57.
It is not an application for a new permit and if it is granted, the permit for the extended route does not become a new permit in the hands of the applicant.
It is the same permit which now after granting of the application covers the extended route.
[300 C F] 3.3 Where a totally new route is sought to be included by an application to vary the conditions of a permit or the alteration of the route sought by such an application is of such a drastic character that it becomes substantially a new route, the application, though in form an application to vary the conditions of the permit, would in effect and substance, be an application for grant of a new permit and in such a case, a view may conceivably be taken with some degree of plausibility that the number of stage carriages for which permits may be granted on such new route should first be determined under Sub Section (3) of Section 47 before the application to vary the conditions of the permit can be entertained.
[300 F H] An applicant for a permit on a route which is not merely technically, but in truth and reality a different route, distinct from the original route, may not be permitted to defeat the provision, enacted in Sub Section (3) of Section 47, by labelling his application as one for varying the conditions of the permit and in such a case, the procedure set out in Section 47 (3) may have to be complied with before the Regional Transport Authority can consider and grant the application.
[300 H; 301 A] 291 But where an application merely seeks a short extension of the route specified in the permit, as in the present case, it would not be appropriate to say that it is an application for grant of a new permit, though technically the extended route may not be regarded as the same as the original route and where such is the case, it would not be necessary to comply with the procedure set out in Sub Section (3) of Section 47 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
[301 B C]
