The Indian Statistical Institute was registered under the Societies Registration Act, and governed by the Indian Statistical Institute Act, 1959.
Its control completely vested in the Union of India, respondent No. 5 in the appeal.
The Institute had been declared as an 'Institute of National Importance.
The chief executive body of the Institute was the Council, respondent No. 2 which consisted of 25 members of whom three were representatives of the Central Government.
The Council was headed by a chairman who was elected.
In order to discharge the administrative and academic responsibility of the Institute a Director was appointed by the Council.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed as a Director.
The petitioner in his Writ Petition challenged the appointment of respondent No. 4 on the ground that he was a person] of much higher academic and other accomplishments and far superior to the said respondent.
396 In the Writ Petition it was contended: (i) Bye law 2 expressly requires that the vacancy of Directorship should be suitably publicised but in the present case no publicity whatsoever was given to the vacancy of Directorship.
Publicity was necessary if the appointment was to be fair and free from partiality and that many were not aware of the vacancy of the post of Director till the actual order of appointment was made.
(ii) He was eminently suitable for being appointed to the post in view of the various contributions in the field of his work and the active part played by him in resolving the administrative problems of the Institute, and (iii) no bio data or information was placed before the Council which under the bye laws was the appointing authority to enable the members to gauge the comparative suitability of various candidates.
The petition was resisted on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 by contending: (i) the petition is not maintainable under Article 32 of the Constitution as respondents Nos. 1 and 2 are not 'state ' or 'other authority ' within the meaning of article 12 of the Constitution.
(ii) Even assuming that there has been a violation of bye law 2 no writ can lie to correct the same as the alleged bye law has no statutory basis inasmuch as the Institute has been declared as an Institution of National Importance ', the bye laws not being statutory the respondents are under no obligation to observe the procedure Laid down therein, and (iii) the petitioner was duly and properly considered for selection to the post.
Allowing the writ petition, ^ HELD: (i) The order of appointment dated August 3, 1979 of Respondent No. 4 as the Director of Respondent No. 1 is quashed and set aside.
Before Respondent No. 1 proceeds to select a new Director, it will comply will the requirement of bye law 2 by giving suitable publicity to the vacancy in the office or Director.
[413 F] (ii) There can be no doubt that respondent No. 2 is an 'authority ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and, therefore, the writ petition filed by the petitioner is competent and maintainable.
[409 G] In the instant case, the money required for funding the Institute is provided entirely by the Central Government and even if any other moneys are to be received by the Institute it can be done only with the approval of the Central Government, and the accounts of the Institute have also to be submitted to the Central Government for its scrutiny and satisfaction.
The Society has to comply with all directions as may be issued by the Central Government.
The control of the Central Government is deep and pervasive and, therefore, it is an instrumentality of the Central Government and as such is an 'authority ' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
It is, therefore, subject to the constitutional obligations under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
[408 C D] Ajay Hasia etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. etc. ; referred to 397 2.
(i) It is obligatory on the part of respondent No. 1 to follow the bye laws for the bye laws have been framed for the conduct of its affairs to avoid arbitrariness.
[410 G] (ii) Compliance with bye law 2 seems to be necessary in the name of fair play.
If the vacancy in the post of Director had been publicised as contemplated by bye law 2, all the persons eligible for the post may have applied and in that case, the field of consideration would have been enlarged and the selection committee or the Council would have had a much larger field from which to choose the best available reason and that would have removed all doubt of arbitrariness from the mind of those eligible for the post.
[411 B] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs International Airport Authority of India ; ; Viteralli vs Seton 3 Law Fd.
Second Series 1012; A.S. Ahluwalia vs Punjab ; ; Sukhdev vs Bhagatram ; referred to.
(iii) In the case of appointment of a Director, bye law 2 clearly provides for publicity, the object being that all concerned may know about the vacancy and either applications or recommendations may be made for the post and the names of the eligible candidates may be brought before the selection committee for its consideration.
[412 H 413 A] (iv) It is not suggested that appointments to every post must be made only after advertising or publicising the vacancy.
That would not be right, for there are quite a few posts at the top level as for example Commander of Armed Forces or the Chief Justice or the Judges of the Supreme Court or the High Court, which cannot be and should not be advertised or publicised, because they are posts for which there should be no lobbying nor should any applications be allowed to be entertained.
[411 C D] (v) It is not for the Court to determine who is the superior of the two candidates and who should be selected.
It is for the authorities concerned to select from amongst the available candidates.
The members of the selection committee as also the members of the Council were eminent persons and they may be presumed to have taken into account all relevant considerations before coming to a conclusion.
But in the absence of publicity as contemplated by bye law 2, it cannot be said that all other qualified persons like the petitioner were also considered by the selection committee for appointment, in the absence of any application by them for the post or any recommendation of them by any other authority or individual.
[412 C E] 3.
It is always desirable that in public bodies the minutes of the proceedings regarding selection should be properly maintained in order to obviate any suspicion or doubt and such minutes along with the relevant documents should be placed before the final authority entrusted will the task of selection for appointment.
[412 A] In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that the Council was at any time informed as to what names had been considered by the selection committee or that the names of the petitioner had been considered but respondent No. 4 was found superior.
[411 H] 398
