In fulfilment of an ante nuptial promise made on the occasion of the settlement of the terms of marriage of her daughter, a Hindu widow, governed by the Benares School of Hindu Law, executed a registered deed of gift in respect Of 4 houses allotted to her share by a partition decree, in favour of her daughter as her marriage dowry about two years after the marriage.
The partition decree gave her a, right to the income, but no right to part with the corpus of the property to the prejudice of the reversioners.
Her step sons brought a suit for a declaration that the deed of gift was void and inoperative beyond her lifetime and could not bind the reversioners.
The trial court found that the gifted properties constituted a reasonable portion of the estate, but that the gift not having been made at 453 the time of the marriage or on the occasion of the Gowna (Dwiragaman) ceremony in accordance with the provisions of section I 23 Of the Transfer of Property Act, was not binding on the reversioners beyond the lifetime of the widow and decreed the suit.
The High Court found that the widow had made the ante nuptial promise, but that the gift having been made about two years after the marriage or the Gowna ceremony, the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act relating to gifts stood in the way of considering the same as having been made on the occasion of the marriage but implemented later, and affirmed the decision of the trial court, although the gifted houses were found to constitute a reasonable portion of her husband 's estate.
The contentions in appeal on behalf of the widow and the daughter were (1) that the widow had the power in Hindu Law, as it stood before the enactment of the , to execute the deed of gift in question and (2) that section 14 Of the said Act bad the effect of making them full owners of the property in suit.
Held, that the deed of gift in favour of the daughter was valid in law and binding on the reversioners and the appeal must succeed.
Under the Benares School of Hindu Law, as it stood prior to the enactment of the , as also under the partition decree, the properties allotted to the widow constituted her widow 's estate as on inheritance and she had no absolute right of disposal over them.
Bhugwandeen Doobey vs Myna Baee, (1868) II M. 1.
A, 487, referred to.
Debi Mangal Prasad Singh vs Mahadeo Prasad Singh, (1912) L. R. 39 1.
A. 121, followed.
In Hindu Law the marriage of a daughter is a pious act and confers direct spiritual benefit on the father and a widow has the power to make a gift of a reasonable portion of her husband 's estate as marriage dowry to the daughter, even after the marriage, in fulfilment of an ante nuptial promise, whether she makes the I sankalpa ' at the time of the marriage or not.
Ganga Bisheshar vs Pirthi Pal, (1880) 1.
L. R. 2 All. 635, disapproved.
Case law reviewed.
This power of the widow is one conferred on her by Hindu Law and is not affected by the provisions of section 123 of the Transfer of Property Act, though the gift to be legally effective must be made in the manner prescribed by that section.
Although there is no doubt that sub section
(1) Of section 14 Of the , gives a retrospective operation to the provisions of that section so as to make a fermale Hindu a 454 full owner of immoveable property acquired either at a partition or by way of gift, it is not necessary in the present case to examine the true nature and scope of section 14 Of the Act.
