The assessee while computing his net wealth claimed a deduction in respect of debts which included amounts representing estimated liabilities on account of income tax, wealth tax and gift tax.
The Wealth Tax Officer rejected the claim on the ground that as those liabilities were claimed on the basis of an estimate they could not be regarded as debts owed on the valuation date.
In appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed part of the deductions claimed.
The Revenue 's appeal to the Appellate Tribunal was dismissed.
On a reference being made the High Court held against the Revenue.
In this Court the Revenue contended that on a true construction of sec.
2 (m) of the Wealth Tax Act defining the expression "net wealth" the tax liability disclosed by the assessee in his returns should.
be taken as representing the debts owed by the assessee on the valuation date.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: It is settled law that an income tax liability becomes crystallized on the last day of the previous year corresponding to the particular assessment year, and a wealth tax liability becomes crystallized on the valuation date corresponding to the particular assessment year.
In each case the liabilities are perfected debts on the last day of the previous year or the valuation date, as the case may be.
Likewise, a gift tax liability becomes crystallized, and therefore a perfected debt, on the last day of the previous year relevant to the particular assessment year.
[487 F G; 488 A] Kesoram Industries and Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax (Central), Calcutta; , ; H.H. Setu Parvati Bayi vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Kerala, ; and Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Madras vs K.S.N. Bhatt, Civil Appeals Nos. 384 to 387 of 1978, Judgment delivered on October 21, 1983 referred to.
When, in the course of a wealth tax assessment, the assessee makes a claim to deduction on account of income tax, wealth tax and gift tax liabilities 486 subsisting as debts owed by him on the valuation date, it is the final quantification of the particular tax liability which must be taken into account.
Where the wealth tax assessment so made is carried in appeal, there is no doubt that the appellate authority will take into account the ultimate quantification of the tax liability even though such ultimate quantification has been reached after the relevant valuation date and during the pendency of the wealth tax appeal.
[488 F G]
