During the course of the hearing of an appeal against an assessment order made under the Wealth Tax Act for the assessment year 1964 65, the respondent who was the assessee, claimed deduction of an amount in the computation of net wealth which inter alia included the income tax and wealth tax liabilities created in consequence of certain rectification orders made under section 154 of the Income Tax Act and section 35 of the Wealth Tax Act.
The rectification order related to assessment of income tax/wealth tax for the previous years and had been made after the completion of the assessment proceedings under the Wealth Tax Act for the assessment year 1964 65.
The deduction claimed was allowed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and his decision was upheld by the Appellate Tribunal and the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The rectification of an assessment must be treated on the same basis as an original assessment for the purpose of a claim to deduction in the computation of the assessee 's net wealth.
The rectification merely quantifies the true tax liability which had already been crystalized and become a debt on the last day of the previous year in the case of income tax liability, and, on the valuation date in the case of a wealth tax liability.
[484 C D] Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Gujarat vs Shri Vadilal Lallubhai (C.A. Nos.
1524 to 1527 of 1973 decided on 21.10.1983) referred to.
When an appeal is filed against an assessment order before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the assessment case is thrown open and the appellate proceeding constitutes a continuation of the assessment proceeding.
Even if the tax liabilities, of which a deduction is claimed, are created by rectification orders or by assessment orders made after the date of the wealth tax assessment order under appeal, the law requires the claim to deduction being considered on the same basis as if it had been made in the original wealth tax assessment proceeding.
[483 F H] 481 In the instant case, it is true that the rectification orders related to tax liabilities which were not claimed by the assessee in the course of the original assessment proceeding before the Wealth Tax officer but as the Appellate Assistant Commissioner permitted the claim to be made during the hearing of the appeal, there is no reason why the assessee should be denied consideration of his claim.
[483 H; 484 A]
