The petitioner in the Special Leave Petition was the holder of a Stage carriage permit on an inter State route He held several permits for operation of the said route and as the period prescribed for a few of them had expired, he applied for renewal under section 58 of the to the Regional Transport Authority which granted renewal.
In the meanwhile, the State Road Transport Corporation the 5th respondent made an application for grant of a stage carriage permit for operation on the said route.
This application was advertised and the matter was taken up for consideration.
During the pendency of this application the petitioner was granted temporary permits under section 62 which were renewed from time to time.
When the application of the petitioner for renewal of permits and the application of the State Road Transport Corporation for allotment of new permit were taken up for consideration, an objection was raised on behalf of the Corporation that as the route was an inter State route it was entitled to the permit in preference to the petitioner in view of section 47 (1 H).
On behalf of the petitioner it was contended that section 58 entitled the petitioner to renewal of permit in preference to the Corporation.
The Regional Transport Authority negatived the petitioner 's contention and allotted the permit to the Road Transport Corporation.
465 The petitioner in his writ petition to the High Court contended that section 47 (1 H) was constitutionally invalid and no preference could be granted in favour of the State Road Transport Corporation.
The Single Judge dismissed the writ petition and the Division Bench upheld the order.
In the Special Leave Petitions to this Court it was contended on behalf of the petitioners that the State Road Transport Corporation must either take recourse to the provisions contained in Chapter IV A of the Act, which makes special provisions relating to State Transport Undertaking or otherwise if it wants to compete without recourse to chapter IV A it must stand in competition with other applicants for allotment of stage carriage permits.
Any preference that the State Road Transport Corporation may enjoy in respect of an interstate route under sub section (1 H) is violative of Article 14 and the fundamental freedom to carry on trade under Article 19 (1) (g).
Section 58 entitled the petitioners to renewal of permit in preference to the application for grant of a new permit made by the State Transport Undertaking.
In the connected Special Leave Petitions, it was contended on behalf of the petitioner that Rule 155 A of the Tamilnadu Motor Vehicles Rules provides for a marking system under different heads to objectively assess who is the best suited for grant of the permit, and consequently an ad hoc assignment of marks and failure to weed out the application of the State Transport Corporation on the ground of disqualification for not providing night halt cleaners vitiated the decision of the Transport Authority.
Dismissing the Petitions.
^ HELD: 1.(i) Section 47 (1 H) would not deny equality before law and hence would not offend Article 14.
[474 E] (ii) The Regional Transport Authority under section 47 upon a judicious consideration of merits and demerits of every applicant must in a fair and reasonable manner decide who amongst the applicants would perform the duty and carry out the obligations under the permit.
However, sub section (1 H) carves out an exception, that where an application for stage carriage permit on an inter state route is made by a State Transport Undertaking it must be accorded preference.
But while granting preference, the Regional Transport Authority must satisfy itself that the Corporation would be able to operate on the inter state route without detriment to its responsibility for providing efficient and adequate road transport service.
[471 C D] Dosa Satyanarayanamurty etc.
vs The Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation [1961]1 S.C.R. 642 referred to.
(iii) While considering the application for stage carriage permit under section 47, the private operator has an equal chance to get a permit even on an inter State route if it shows that the Undertaking is either unable to provide efficient and economical service or that the private operator is better equipped to render the same.
Preference in this context would mean that other things 466 generally appearing to be qualitatively and quantitatively equal though not with mathematical accuracy, statutory provision will tilt the balance in favour of the Undertaking.
[474 D] (iv) Section 47 (1 H) provides that in the case of inter State route, the Undertaking will have preference in the matter of stage carriage permit.
The expression `preference ' amongst others, means prior right, advantage, precedence etc.
It signifies that other things being equal, one will have preference over the other.
[473 B] (v) When an application for the stage carriage permit is being processed as required by sec.
47, the application of the Undertaking for an inter State route shall be examined as an application of any other private operator.
Their merits and demerits must be ascertained keeping in view the requirements of clauses (a) to (f) of sec.
47 (1) and after comparing the merits and demerits of both the application of the Undertaking will have preference over others.
[473 C D] (vi) Qualitative and quantitative comparison on broad features of passenger transport facility such as fleet, facilities to travelling public and other relevant consideration may be undertaken and after balancing these factors other things being equal, the application of the Undertaking shall be given preference over other applicants.
There is no question of eliminating private operators merely because the Undertaking applies for a stage carriage permit under Chapter IV.
[473 E] (vii) In an application under Chapter IV, the Corporation has to enter the arena like any other applicant, face the competition and come up to the level of other Private operators intending to obtain stage carriage permits and then in respect of the route in question claim preference.
Competition is the essence of improved commercial Service.
[473 F] 2.
(i) There is no substance in the contention of the petitioner that sec.
47(1 H) is violative of article 19 (1) (g) in that it denies the fundamental freedom to carry on trade because the petitioner has not been denied his free dom to carry on trade.
The petitioner is entitled to make an application under Chapter IV for a stage carriage permit and must compete with other private operators as also the Undertaking.
[474 F] (ii) The Undertaking whose nett profits are required to be spent for the provision of amenities to the passengers using road transport services, welfare of labour employed by the Undertaking, for financing the expansion programmes of the Undertaking, and the balance to be made over to the State Government for the purpose of road development must receive in larger public interest preference for a permit compared to a private operator whose profits would go to argument his private income.
[475 A B] Lachhman Das vs State of Punjab & Ors.[1963] 2 S.C.R. 353; Mannalal & Anr.
vs Collector of Jhalawar and Ors. ; referred to.
467 3 (i) If an application for renewal of a permit was to be trated differently than the application for a permit made under section 45 and perocessed under section 47 and other connected provisions, it was absolutely unnecessary for the legislature to provide that an application for renewal of a permit shall be made and disposed of as if it were an application for a fresh permit.
[476 E] (ii) The expression "as if" occurring in Section 58 (2) in the phrase "as if it were an application for a permit . " would mean and imply that the application for renewal must be made in the same manner and to the same extent as an application for a fresh permit and must be processed as such.
This means that even where an existing permit holder applies for renewal, it has to be advertised and fresh applicants can apply for a permit.
[476F] (iii) Section 47 (1 H) would also came into play when an application is for renewal of a permit on an inter State route.
There is no conflict between Section 47 (1 H) and Section 58 (2).
[476 G] 4.
Once the assignment of 5 marks to the State Transport Undertaking, is held to be valid the Transport Authority was perfectly justified in refusing renewal of permits to the petitioners.
Regarding failure to explain absence of nighthalt cleaners, in the absence of concrete evidence, no inference can be drawn.
[478 G H] D.R. Venkatachalam & Ors.
vs Dy Transport Commissioner
