The Education Society of Bombay (respondent No. 1) has been running a recognised Anglo Indian School called Barnes High School at Deolali which receives aid from the State of Bombay.
J and G are its Directors.
English is used in the said school as the medium of instruction.
The mother tongue of the Anglo Indians is English.
The State of Bombay issued a circular order on 6th January, 1954, headed " Admission to Schools teaching through the medium of English.
" The operative portion of the order enjoined that no primary or secondary school shall from the date of the order admit to a class where English is used as the medium 569 of instruction any pupil other than a pupil belonging to a section of citizens the language of which is English namely, Anglo Indians and citizens of non Asiatic descent.
One P, a citizen of India and member of Indian Christian Community alleging English to be the mother tongue of his daughter, and one M, a citizen of India and member of Gujrati Hindu Community alleging Gujrati to be the mother tongue of his son, were refused admission to the school for their respective wards on the basis of the aforesaid order dated 6th January, 1964.
The Society and its two Directors presented an application under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court of Bombay praying for the issue of a Writ in the nature of Mandamus restraining the State of Bombay and its officers from enforcing the said order and to allow the petitioners to admit in the school any children of non Anglo Indian citizens or citizens of the Asiatic descent and to educate them through the medium of English.
Similar applications were made by P and his daughter and by M and his son.
All these applications were consolidated, heard together and accepted by the High Court which made an order as prayed.
The State of Bombay came in appeal before the Supreme Court.
Held: (1) that the impugned order denying the right of students who are not Anglo Indians or are of Asiatic descent to be admitted to a recognised Anglo Indian School (in this case the Barnes High School) which receives aid from the State and which imparts education through the medium of English is void and unenforceable as it offends against the fundamental right guaranteed to all citizens by article 29(2) of the Constitution, because (a)The language of article 29(2) of the Constitution is wide and unqualified and covers all citizens whether they belong to the majority or minority group.
(b)The protection given by the said article extends against the State or anybody who denies the right conferred by it.
(a)The said article confers a special right on citizens for admission into the educational institutions maintained or aided by the State.
(d)The marginal note referring to minorities does not control the plain meaning of the language in which article 29(2) has been couched.
The word " namely " imports enumeration of what is comprised in the preceding clause.
In other words it equates what follows with the clause described before.
(2)Barnes High School at Deolali and other Anglo Indian School shave a right to admit non Anglo Indian students and students of Asiatic descent inasmuch as article 337 proviso 2 imposes an obligation on the Anglo Indian Schools to make available at least 40 per cent.
of the annual admissions to non Anglo Indian students as a condition precedent of their receiving grant from the Government and the impugned order is unconstitutional as it 73 570 prevents the Anglo Indian schools from performing their constitutional obligation and exposes them to the risk of forfeiting their constitutional right to the special grant.
In view of the fundamental right guaranteed to a minority like the Anglo Indian community under article 29(1) to conserve its own language, script and culture and the right to establish and administer educational institutions of its own choice under article 30(1) there is implicit therein the right to impart instruction in its own institutions to the children of its own community in its own language and the State by its police power cannot determine the medium of instruction in opposition to such fundamental right.
Bhola Prasad vs The King Emperor ([1942] F.C.R. 17, 25), The Queen vs Burah , The State of Madras vs Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan ( [1951] S.C.R. 525), Pierce vs Society of Sisters of Holy Names (268 U.S. 508), Yusuf Abdul Aziz vs State (A.I.R. , Sm.
Anjali Boy vs State of West Bengal (A.I.R. , The State of Bombay vs Narasu Appal Mali (A.I.R. 1952) Bom.
84), Srinivasa Aiyar vs Saraswathi Ammal (A.I.R. 1952 Vad. 193), Dattatraya Motiram More vs State of Bombay (A.I.R. , Punjab Province vs Daulat Singh (1946 L.R. 73 I.A. 59), Robert V. Meyer vs State of Nebraska (262 U.S. 390), August Bartels vs State of Iowa ; and Ottawa Separate Schools Trustees vs Mackell (L.R. 1917 A.C. 62) referred to.
