The Revenue who had seized the books of account and documents of the assessee under sec.
132(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 did not return the same to the assessee after a period of 180 days of the seizure.
The assessee filed a writ petition in the High Court inter alia praying for a direction to the Revenue to return the said books of account.
The assessee submitted that the retention of the seized books of accounts and documents beyond the period of 180 days was illegal and invalid inasmuch as neither the approval accorded by the Commissioner of Income Tax for such extended retention nor the recorded reasons of the Income Tax Officer on which such approval was based had been communicated to him.
A single Judge of the High Court held that the retention of the books and documents beyond 180 days was unlawful.
A Division Bench dismissed the Revenue 's appeal.
In these appeals the Revenue submitted that sec.
132(8) of the Act did not impose any obligation on the Revenue to communicate the approval of the commissioner or the recorded reason of the Income Tax Officer on which it is based to the person from whose custody the books of accounts and documents had been seized.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: It is true that sub sec.(8) of sec.
132 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 does not in terms provide that the Commissioner 's approval of the recorded reasons on which it might be based should be communicated to the concerned person but since the person concerned is bound to be materially prejudiced in the enforcement of his right to have such books and documents returned to him by being kept ignorant about the factum of fulfilment of either of the two conditions laid down therein it is obligatory upon the Revenue to communicate the Commissioner 's approval as also the recorded reasons to the person concerned.
In the absence of such communication the Commissioner 's decision according his approval will not become effective.
[823 H; 824 A] Moreover, sub sec.(10) of sec.132 confers upon the person legally entitled to the return of the seized books and documents a right to object to the 818 approval given by the Commissioner under sub sec.(8) by making an application to the Central Board stating therein the reasons for such objection and under sub sec.(12) of sec.132 it is provided that the Central Board may, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard pass such orders as it thinks fit.
It is obvious that without the knowledge of the factum of the Commissioner 's approval as also of the recorded reasons on the basis of which such approval has been obtained it will not be possible for the person to whom the seized books or documents belong to make any effective objection to the approval before the Board and get back his books or documents.
[824 B C] The scheme of sub secs (8), (10) and (12) of sec.132 makes it amply clear that there is a statutory obligation on the Revenue to communicate to the person concerned not merely the Commissioner 's approval but the recorded reasons on which the same has been obtained and that such communication must be made as expeditiously as possible after the passing of the order of approval by the Commissioner and in default of such expeditious communication any further retention of the seized books or documents would become invalid and unlawful.
It is obvious that such obligation arises in regard to every approval of the Commissioner that might have been accorded from time to time.
[824 D F]
