The petitioner asked for a writ of habeas corpus under article 32 of the Constitution to be issued to the respondents to produce the two persons, C. Daniel and C. Paul in the Court, who, according to the petitioner, were whisked away by the army jawans from Huining village to Phungrei Camp and unauthorisedly detained by the Officer incharge of 21st Sikh Regiment and were held incommunicado and whose whereabouts were not made known.
The petitioner averred that some jawans attached to 21st Sikh Regiment visited village Huining on March 5, 1982 and rounded up some villagers.
These villagers were released on March 6, 1982.
On March 7 the Deputy Commissioner accompanied by the Additional District Magistrate of that area visited Huining village to enquire about the incidents of the previous day.
Some of the army jawans who had obtained, under duress, certificates from some villagers exonerating them of the allegation of ill treatment and praising the conduct of the jawans, showed these certificates to these officers.
On March 10, 1982 C. Daniel C. Paul were arrested by the army jawans and were taken away from Huining village.
At the same time some jawans had obtained signatures on blank papers from Machihan, village headman and from one Shangnam, a member of the village authority.
On the next day Machihan reported this fact to the Deputy Commissioner.
As C. Daniel and C. Paul did not return, their wives went to the Phungrei Camp in search of their respective husband and while waiting there they saw C. Daniel and C. Paul being led away by four army jawans towards the West.
The village headman and others made a written complaint to the Deputy Commissioner.
They also complained that they had not issued any certificate showing that C. Daniel and C. Paul were released in their presence on March 11, 1982.
The Deputy Commissioner had an enquiry made into the complaint by the Superintendent of Police and reported to the Chief Secretary of the State that the village headman and other members of the village authority had given in writing that it was not correct that C. Daniel and C. Paul were released in their presence and that both of them were still missing.
In response to the notice the respondents stated that both C. Daniel and C. Paul were called to the army camp for the purpose of identification of certain suspects on March 10, 1982 and after spending the night at the army camp they were allowed to go on March 11, 1982 in 905 the company of Machihan and Shangnam, their friends, and since then the security force had no knowledge about their whereabouts.
The respondents denied that the respective wives of C. Daniel and C. Paul ever visited the army camp on March 15, 1982.
They further denied having obtained signatures on blank papers from the village headman and others.
In response to the rule the respondents reiterated their earlier stand.
The respondents contended that once they had adopted the position the C. Daniel and C. Paul had come to the army camp at the request of the army authority and they left that place on their request in company of their friends, a writ of habeas corpus cannot be issued, and the respondents cannot be called upon to file a return to the writ.
Allowing the petition, ^ HELD: A writ of habeas corpus be issued to the respondents 1, 2 and 4 commanding them to produce C. Daniel and C. Paul before this court and file the return.
[626 B] When a petition for a writ of habeas corpus under article 32 of the Constitution is moved before the court, ordinarily the court would not issue ex parte a writ of habeas corpus unless the urgency of the situation so demands or issuing of a notice of motion was likely to result in defeat of justice.
Further, the court will be reluctant to issue a writ of habeas corpus ex parte where the facts of detention may be controverted and it may become necessary to investigate the facts.
The normal practice is that when a petition for a writ of habeas corpus is moved, the court would direct a notice to be served upon the respondents with a view to affording the respondents to file evidence in reply.
If the facts alleged in the petition are controverted by the respondents appearing in response to the notice by filing its evidence, the court would proceed to investigate the facts to determine whether there is substance in the petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
If on investigation of facts, the court rejects the contention of the respondents and is satisfied that the respondent was responsible for unauthorised and illegal detention of the person or persons in respect of whom the writ is sought, the Court would issue a writ of habeas corpus which would make it obligatory for the respondents to file a return.
[923 A D] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 11, para.
1482 referred to.
Even if upon a notice of motion, it is contended by the person against whom the writ is sought that the person alleged to be in the custody of the respondents has long since left the custody, a writ can be issued and return insisted upon.
[923 E] Thomas John Barnardo vs Mary Ford and Reg.
vs Barnardo Tye, referred to.
In the instant case, when the petition was moved before this Court, rule nisi was issued calling upon the respondents to submit their version about the detention of C. Daniel and C. Paul.
The respondents 1, 2 and 4 in their various affidavits adopted a positive stand that C. Daniel and C. Paul were taken by the army jawans on March 10, 1982, though not under arrest, to the army 906 camp for the purpose of identifying Rashing and that they spent the night at the army camp and that they left the army camp on March 11, 1982 in company of H.L. Machihan and C. Shangnam, The petitioner and those filing affidavits in support including H.L. Machihan, C. Shangnam and Smt.
Thingkhuil wife of C. Daniel and Smt.
Vangamla wife of C. Paul denied that C. Daniel and C. Paul left army camp on March 11, 1982 and returned to the village, therefore, an issue squarely arose to ascertain whether the positive stand of respondents was borne out by the facts alleged and proof offered.
The burden obviously was on the respondents to make good the defence.
In view of the direct evidence furnished by the affidavit of H.L. Machihan and C. Shangnam, coupled with the suspicious circumstances discussed in the judgment and effort made to bolster up the stand by entries of dubious character in the register kept at the gate of Phungrei Camp as also the eloquent silence maintained by the respondents in the earlier stage of the proceedings about existence of any record leave the Court with no alternative but to hold that the respondents have failed to prove that C. Daniel and C. Paul left the army camp on March 11, 1982 around 10.00 A.M.
Now that the facts are clearly established which led to the rejection of the contention of the respondents that C. Daniel and C. Paul ever left the army camp on March 11, 1982 around 10.00 A.M., the necessary corollary being that they were last seen alive under the surveillance, control and command of the army authority at Phungrei Camp, it would be necessary not only to issue a writ of habeas corpus thereby calling upon the respondents 1, 2, and 4 but to file the return.
[924 D H; 918 H; 919 A; 925 A]
