The respondent landlords had let out a shop to a tenant who had, with the consent of the landlords, sub let the same to the appellant.
The landlords moved an application under section 21 of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 against the tenant and the sub tenant for release of the premises on the ground of bonafide requirement.
The prescribed authority allowed the application against the appellant and dismissed against the tenant.
In appeal the District judge confirmed the order of the prescribed authority.
In a writ petition the appellant challenged the order of the District Judge.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition observing that the fourth proviso to s.21 contemplated the consideration of the likely hardship of the tenant or the landlord only and not of the sub tenant.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: All that the relevant proviso to s.21 requires is that the comparative hardship of the tenant as also that of the landlord shall be taken into account before passing any order of release or refusal to release.
If the sub tenancy had been created without the consent of the landlord the position might have been different.
The sub tenant for the purposes of the fourth proviso to s.21 would virtually be a tenant inasmuch as rent is payable by him to the tenant in chief, who to all intents and purposes will be a landlord qua the sub tenant: To interpret the section in the way as the High Court has interpreted would be defeating the very salutary purpose of the Act.
[33 H; 34 A B] Bhullan Singh vs Babu Ram referred to.
In the instant case, the appellant was entitled to the protection of the fourth proviso to section 21 and the comparative hardship of the appellant as well as that of the landlords should have been taken into account before disposing of an application under s.21 of the Act.
The Courts below have failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in them in not considering the likely hardship of the appellant.
[34 C D]
