The respondent challenged the order of his detention passed by the District Magistrate, Ludhiana on October 3,1983 under section 3 (3) read with section 3 (2) of the , through Criminal Writ Petition No. 516 of 1983.
According to the petitioner respondent, the grounds of detention served on him on Oct. 6, 1983 showing that he was detained on the basis of two speeches made by him on 8.7.1983 and 20.9.1983 as recorded by the Crime Investigation Department of the Punjab Police contained certain particulars, which were totally absent from the supporting material and therefore no reasonable person could have possible passed the detention order on the basis of such material.
The High Court accepted the contention and made the rule absolute.
Hence the appeal by the State after obtaining special leave.
Allowing the appeal and remanding the matter to the High Court of Punjab, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
While passing orders of detaining great care must be brought to bear on their task by the detaining authorities.
Preventive detention is a 51 necessary evil but essentially an evil.
Therefore, deprivation of personal liberty, if at all, has to be on the strict terms of the Constitution.
Nothing less.
[61 B C] 1:2.
In the instant case, the detaining authority should not have adopted a somewhat casual and unimaginative approach to his task.
The original version contains almost every one of the material details pertaining to the meeting, which are mentioned in ground No.1.
The detaining authority needlessly applied his scissors excising the data which mentioned the date, place, the time and the occasion of the meeting.
It is this lack of thoughtfulness on the part of the detaining authority which furnished to the respondent the semblance of an arguments.
[61 A B] 2.
The contention of the respondent that he could not make an effective representation in behalf of ground No.1 because of the inadequacy of data in the supporting particulars supplied to him is incorrect.
The inadequacies from which the supplementary particulars furnished to the respondent along with ground No.1 suffer, cannot affect that position because, they do not introduce any obscurity in the facts stated in that ground or detract from the substance of the allegations mentioned in that ground.
The first ground of detention mentions that the detenu was right only formally or technically.
That is because, the C.I.D. Report was supplied to him along with the grounds of detention with the express stipulation that it formed "the base of the grounds of detention.
" The grounds mention every one of the details which need have been mentioned.
The C.I.D. report was furnished to the detenu as forming the source of information leading to the conclusion that he had made a speech which necessitated his detention in the interests of public order.
In the circumstances, the grounds and the material furnished to the detenu have to be read together as if the material in the form of the C.I.D. report was a continuation of the grounds of detention.
[57 C E, 60 F H] Dr. Ramakrishna Bhardwaj vs The State of Delhi, ; , Khudiram Das vs The State of West Bengal, ; , @ 838 & 840; Mohammed Yusuf Rowther vs The State of J & K, ; @ 268, 269; State of Bombay vs Atmaram, ; Shibbanlal Saxena vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Dwarkadas Bhatia vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, ; ; referred to.
The detenu is not entitled to be informed of the source of information received against him or the evidence which may have been collected against him as for example, the evidence corroborating that the report of the C.I.D. is true and correct.
His right is to receive every material particular without which a full and effective representation cannot be made.
If the order of the detention refers to or relies upon any document, statement or other material, copies thereof have, of course, to be supplied to the detenu.
It is not the law that evidence gathered by the detaining authority against the detenu must also be furnished to him.
[62 G H; 63 A B] Beni Madhob Shaw vs The State of West Bengal, A.I.R. Har Jas Dev Singh vs State of Punjab, ; @ 288; Vakil Vakil Singh vs State of Jammu & Kashmir, A.I.R. 1974 2337 @, 2341; Icchu Devi Choraria vs Union of India; , @ 650; referred to.
The failure to furnish the counter affidavit of the District Magistrate who had passed the order of detention, was an impropriety though in most of the cases 52 it may not be of much consequence, especially if there was no allegation of mala fides against the detaining authority.
There are no allegations of mala fides against the District Magistrate and so, his failure to file a counter affidavit will not vitiate the order of detention.
[65 A B] Shaik Hanif vs State of West Bengal, [1974]3 SCR 258; Naranjan Singh vs State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 2215, referred to.
[The Court emphasised the importance of the detaining authority filing his own affidavit in cases of the present nature and observed that "There are degrees of impropriety and the line which divides grave impropriety from illegality is too thin to draw and even more so to judge.
Conceivably, there can be cases in which such impropriety arising out of the failure of the detaining authority in filing his own affidavit may vitiate the order of detention.] [65 C D] 5.
It is desirable that the final order which the High Court intends to pass should not be announced until a reasoned judgment is ready for pronouncement.
If the object of passing such orders is to ensure speedy compliance with them, that object is more often defeated by the aggrieved party filing a special leave petition in this Court against the order passed by the High Court.
That places this Court in a predicament because, without the benefit of the reasoning of the High Court it is difficult for this Court to allow the bare order to be implemented.
The result inevitably is that the operation of the order passed by the High Court has to be stayed pending delivery of the reasoned judgment.
[65 H; 66 A C]
