On October 11, 1973, the Central Government in exercise of power under cl.
(3) of the Fertilizers (Control) order, 1957 promulgated under s.3 of the , issued a notification fixing the maximum retail selling price of certain fertilizer which dealers could charge from consumers leaving with the dealers a very low margin of profit.
Some time later in order to compensate the manufactures for the higher cost of inputs, the Central Government issued another notification on June 1, 1974 fixing a very high retail selling price of the fertilizer to be charged by the dealers from the consumers.
The dealers started charging the higher price fixed by notification dated June 1, 1974 at the lower rate thus earning fabulous profit.
On June 14, 1974 the State of Uttar Pradesh issued a notification (Uttar Pradesh Fertilizer Price (Supplementary) Order, 1974) in exercise of power under rule 114 of the Defence of India Rules, 1971 promulgated under the Defence of India Act, 1971.
This notification stated that the stocks of fertilizer acquired upto May 31,1974 by the dealers and which remained unsold with them should be sold only at the price fixed by the Central Government 's notification dated October 11, 1973 and not by notification of June 1,1974.
The appellants (dealers) challenged before the High Court the legality and validity of the State Government 's notification dated June 14, 1974 on the grounds: (1) that the fertilizer in question having been declared an essential commodity under the , an Act specially enacted inter alia for regulating prices of essential commodities, its price could be regulated only under that Act and not under the Defence of India Rules: (2) that the notification being inconsistent with the Central Government 's notification dated dated June 1, 1974 was invalid : and (3) that the notification being discriminatory was violative of article 14 of the Constitution.
The High Court upheld the 349 validity of the impugned notification and dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence these appeals.
Dismissing the appeals by majority.
^ HELD: (Per Murtaza Fazal Ali and Thakkar, JJ.) Both the , as also the Defence of India Rules of 1971, are Central legislations enacted by the Parliament.
There is no constitutional or jurisprudential limitation on the competence of the Parliament to create two avenues or sources of power for the regulation of prices of articles.
Since Parliament can constitutionally and validly enact two statutes creating two sources of power, and since, under both the statutes prices of fertilizers can be regulated, there is no illegality in acting under either or both.[357 D E] Under the DIR power has been conferred, inter alia, to regulate the price of any article.
The expression `any article ' is wide enough in its amplitude to envelope `fertilizers '.
The fact that `fertilizers ' have been declared as an essential commodity under the and its price can be regulated under the powers conferred by that Act, is altogether immaterial.
[357 H; 358 A] The Centre and the State both cannot speak on the same channel and create disharmony.
If both speak, the voice of the Centre will drown the voice of the State.
The State has to remain `silent ' or it will be `silenced '.
But the State has the right to `speak ' and can `speak ' (with unquestionable authority) where the Centre is `silent ', without introducing disharmony.
If the Centre sits only on a portion of the Chair, the state can sit on the rest of the portion with arms thrown on the shoulders of each other.
While the State cannot sit on the lap or on the shoulders of the Centre, both can certainly walk hand in hand, lending support to each other, in a friendly manner, towards the same destination.
If the Centre. has built a wall, had has left a gap from which intruders can infiltrate, the state can fill the gap in the wall, and thus make its own contribution to the common cause.
What is more, each in theory and principle.
must be presumed to be conscious of the need for accord and need for accommodating each other in the interest of `NATIONAL HARMONY '.
[360C F] A general statute applies to all persons and localities within its jurisdictional scope, prescribing the governing law upon the subject it encompasses, unless a special statute exists to treat a refinement of the subject with particularity or to prescribe a different law for a particular locality.
Where, however, the later special or local statute is not irreconcilable with the general statute to the degree that both statutes cannot have a conterminous operation, the general statute will not be repealed, but the special or local statute will exist as an exception to its terms.
[361 B C] sutherland 's Statutory Construction, 3rd Edition.
Vol, 1.
page 488, referred to One of the tests for ascertaining whether the inconsistency is an irreconcilable or intolerable one, is to pose this question: Can the State law be obeyed or 350 respected without flouting or violating the Central law in letter and spirit? If the answer is in the affirmative, the State law cannot be invalidated.
Not at any rate when the State law merely `promotes ' the real object of both the laws, and is in the real sense `supplementary ' or complementary ' to the Central law.
In the present case, the Central notification is altogether silent on the ramification regarding sales from out of existing stocks acquired by the dealers at lower rates.
The impugned State notification, on the other hand, deals exclusively with this aspect.
The State notification speaks on a refinement of the subject about which the Central notifications is blissfully.
unaware and on which it is altogether silent.
Both notifications can therefore safely be construed as supplementary and friendly rather than inconsistent or hostile.
[360 B C] In the instant case, assuming that there is inconsistency between the Central Government 's notification and that of the State Government, it does not appear to be an irreconcilable or intolerable one, so as to invalidate the State Government 's notification.
In the present case the test answers in favour of the validity of the impugned State notification.
The Central notification is not violated if the dealers sell the fertilizers from out of the existing stocks acquired at the lower rates, for both the notifications fix the minimum selling price and the maximum selling price fixed under the State notification is not higher than that fixed under the Central notification.
What is more, the state notification `promotes and serves ' the object and purpose of both the Centre and the State.
`Promotes and serves ' in the sense, that the manifest object of fixing maximum ceiling price is to make available to the cultivators who grow the food for the NATION to obtain the inputs at reasonable prices and to protect them from exploitation so that the food production is not retarded.
[362 A C] article 254(2) does not envision Presidential assent to `notifications ' issued under an Act (as distinguished from `laws made by legislature).
[363 F] Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Co. ; at p. 478, referred to.
The impugned notification is not violative of article 14 of the Constitution since the very basis of the challenge on the score of hostile discrimination is found to be non existent.[364 D] (Per Vardarajan J. dissenting) It cannot be assumed that Parliament which had already legislated in the , a permanent measure, in respect of fertilizer intended to legislate once again and could have felt the need to legislate once again in the temporary Defence of India Act, 1971 in respect of the same article especially because what could be done under the Defence of India Act and the Rules which may be framed thereunder could as well be done with equal force under the and orders which may be passed thereunder.
[377 B C] Section 3(2) of the lays down that the Central Government may, having regard to the local conditions of any area and other relevant circumstances, fix different prices or rates in respect of different areas 351 and for different classes of consumers.
The State Government could have requested the Central Government to act under s.3(2) of the and fix a different price or rate for the sale by dealers in that State of fertilizer carried over from the stock held on 31.5.1974.
Section 5(b) of the provides for delegation of powers and says that the Central Government may, by notified order, direct that the power to make or issue notifications under s.3 of that Act shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction be exercisable also by such State or such officer or authority subordinate to a State Government as may be specified in the direction.
The Central Government has not issued any direction under section 5(b) of the delegating its power to issue notification under s.3 of that Act to the State Government or any officer or authority of that Government.
The State Government has thus not resorted to the provisions contained in s.3(2) or s.5(b) of the , but the proceeded of fix the price of fertilizer on its own under the Defence of India Rules, 1971 which it cannot do under those Rules and the Defence of India Act, 1971 in respect of the essential commodity.
[377 H; 378 A D] The Defence of India Act, 1971, which was a general and temporary Act, and the Rules framed thereunder cannot apply to fertilizer which is an essential commodity government by the and the Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1957 made under the provisions of that Act.
Therefore the State Government cannot without delegation issue any notification under the Defence of India Act and Rules, 1971 in regard to the price of fertilizer, an essential commodity governed by the and the Fertilizer (Control) order, 1957.
[378 H; 379 A B] There does not appear to be any provision in article 254(2) of the Constitution for placing any notification made by a State Government under the Defence of India Rules, 1971 for consideration by the President.
[380 C] If the State Government 's impugned notification is assumed to be a law enacted by that State 's Legislature on Entry 26 of List II, since the Act of Parliament passed on Entry 33 of List III and the Fertilizer (Control) order, 1957 passed under that Act were already in force, the assent of the President had to be received in order that the State Government 's notification assumed to be a law enacted by the State 's Legislature may prevail in the State as required by Article 254(2) of the Constitution.
There is nothing on record to show that the impugned notification of the State Government was placed before the President for his assent and that his assent has been received.
Therefore, the State Government 's impugned notification even as a law cannot prevail over the earlier notification of the Central Government.
[389 F G; 380 C] Zaverbhai Amaidas vs State of Bombay.
[1955] 1 SCR 799, referred to.
There is a clear conflict between the two notifications is respect of the same essential commodity, fertilizer, for under the Central Government 's notification dated 1.6.1974 the price at which a dealer can sell fertilizer of the concerned variety is Rs. 2000 per ton while under the State Government 's notification dated 14.6.1974 is only Rs. 1050 per ton though no doubt it is restricted to the stock carried over from 31.5.1974 which is immaterial in judging the power of the State Government to fix the price of an essential commodity by a notification 352 made under the Defence of India Rules, 1971 in respect of which the Central Government had already fixed the price under the Fertilizer (Control) order, 1957.
Once the Central enactment and the Central Government 's notification govern the price of an essential commodity the State Government 's notification issued in exercise of the delegated authority under the Defence of India Act and the Rules framed thereunder cannot prevail.
[380 F H] The two enactments have to be read in such a way that there is no conflict between them while giving effect to them in their respective fields.
of operation.
If the and the Fertilizer (Control) order, 1957 are considered to apply exclusively to fertilizer, an essential commodity, and the Defence of India Act, 1971 and the Defence of India Rules, 1971 are considered to apply to other commodities excluding essential commodities there would be no conflict whatsoever between the and the Defence of India Act and between the notification issued under Fertilizer (Control) order, 1957 and the Defence of India Rules, 1971.
[381 A; 383 D E] The author of the two enactments, and Defence of India Act, 1971 is the same, namely, Parliament, and Parliament must be held to have not intended to contradict itself while dealing with distinct matters or situations under those enactments.
If the State Governments are free to fix their own prices in notifications issued by them under the Defence of India Rules, 1971 when the Central Government 's notification fixing a single price for the whole country in respect of an essential commodity is in force that notification of the Central Government will become otiose.
The question whether Parliament would have intended such a consequence.
The answer can only be an emphatic No. [382 D E] Craies on Statute Law (seventh edition) at Page 222 and Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes, referred to.
What has been done by the State Government under the impugned notification is utterly lacking in power and cannot be allowed to stand merely because it relates only to a comparatively small quantity of fertilizer carried over from the stock of 31.5.1974 and was intended to benefit and protect agricultural consumers and prevent dealers from making undue profits.[384 F]
