The appellant was granted a permit for stage carriage by the Regional Transport Authority under the provisions of the , but on appeal to the appellate authority, the Central Road Traffic Board, by the unsuccessful applicants the order granting the permit was set aside and the order of the Central Road Traffic Board was approved by the Government in revision.
The appellant, thereupon, moved the High Court for a writ of certiorari to quash the proceedings of the Central Road Traffic Board and the Goverment.
During the pendency of these proceedings there was a stay of operation of the order setting aside the grant of the permit to the Appellant, with the result that be continued to run his buses notwithstanding the cancellation of his permit.
Before the expiry of the period fixed in the original 664 permit, he applied for and got a renewal of the permit from the Regional Transport Authority under section 58 of the Act.
The High Court finally dismissed the application for a writ of certiorari and 'the question arose as to the validity of the renewal of the permit in view of the High Court 's decision.
The matter was raised before the High Court once again by proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution and the High Court held that the renewal having been obtained on the basis of a permit which had been subsequently cancelled, it could not be regarded as a fresh permit, that when the original permit was set aside, it must be taken to be non est for all purposes, and I that the renewal must therefore be held to be a nullity.
The appellant appealed to the Supreme Court.
Held:(1) Under the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1949 and the rules framed thereunder, a renewal is a continuation of the original permit.
When the original permit was renewed in favour of the appellant it was subject to the decision of the High Court in the proceedings under article 226 of the Constitution which were then pending and, therefore, when the order granting the original permit was fin ally set aside the renewed permit became void.
Anjiah vs Regional Transport Officer, Guntur, 1956 Andhra Law Times, 347, disapproved.
(2)When the appellant applied for a renewal of his permit under section 58 of the Act and not merely for a fresh permit the order of the Regional Transport Authority granting the renewal must be held to have been made subject to the implied condition that the right of the appellant to the original permit is recognized by the High Court and that accordingly, in the event that had happened, the renewed permit ceased to, be effective.,.
Veerappa Pillai vs Raman & Raman Ltd., ; , explained and distinguished.
