A news item appeared in the newspaper of which respondent No. 2 was its editor, that while addressing a rally of Judicial Employees ' Welfare Association, the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir denounced and ridiculed the judiciary stating that "Justice is being bought in judicial Courts" and that he would never honour the Court 's stay orders because justice could be bought with money.
The news item also stated that the Chief Minister expressed his regret to the Chief Justice and other Judges who were present at the meeting, explaining that the strong words used by him were the voice of his conscience and that he had the greatest regard for the judiciary.
The petitioner filed the contempt petition against the Chief Minister.
Although a show cause notice was issued under the to the Chief Minister (respondent) on March 18, 1983 no counter affidavit was filed till September 26, 1983.
When the contempt petition was called out on that day his advocate accepted the notice on behalf of the respondent.
Eventually on November 21, 1983 the affidavit of the Chief Minister dated November 9, 1983 was taken on record.
While the Chief Minister denied having made the statements attributed to him, the Editor asserted that the version published in the newspaper was true.
On the question whether the statements published in the newspaper amounted to contempt of court.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: What is involved in this case is criminal contempt and therefore it is necessary to apply the particular standard of proof required to be established in a criminal case.
Respondent, No.1, on the material placed on record, cannot be held to be guilty of the charge.
[764F] 761 In matters involving allegations of criminal contempt, the Court has to act both as a prosecutor and as a Judge.
It does so to uphold the authority of law and not in defence of a particular Judge.
Secondly, the right of free speech is an important right of the citizen and bona fide criticism of any system or institution is aimed at inducing the administrators of that system or institution to look inwards and improve its public image.
Courts do not like to assume the posture that they are above criticism.
At the same time though law does not restrain the expression of disapprobation against what is done in or by Courts of law, the liberty of free expression is not to be confounded with a licence to make unfounded allegations of corruption against the judiciary.
The abuse of the liberty of free speech and expression carries the case nearer the law of contempt.
Those who criticise the judiciary must remember that they are attacking an institution which is indispensable for the survival of the rule of law but which has no means of defending itself.
Therefore, Judges must receive the protection of law from unfounded attacks on their character.
[765H; 766A, B E; F G] If the Chief Minister said what was alleged in the news item he was in contempt; if he had not, the Editor had committed a contempt by publishing a false report of a scurrilous speech that was never made.
In the face of denial by one and an assertion by the other without more, it is difficult to decide who is right.
On the one hand is the tendency to ridicule the system of justice and malign those who administer it, on the other is the propensity of the fourth estate for some little sensation and its political involvement.
When political considerations pollute the stream of life, sifting truth from falsehood becomes a formidable and forbidding task.
In these circumstances it is difficult to record a positive finding that the allegation that the Chief Minister made the particular statement is proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
[764D F] Although the petitioners had asserted that the Judges of the High Court were present at one of the functions and that they walked out of the meeting on hearing the abusive language used by the Chief Minister no attempt was made to establish the truth of that assertion.
A walkout by Judges of the High Court during the speech of the Chief Minister or soon thereafter would have lent considerable weight to the allegation that the statements made by the Chief Minister were open to grave objection.
[764G H] When a Chief Minister makes a formal speech an official record of the speech, if it were a prepared speech, or even if it were an extempore speech, should have been kept.
No one taped or took down the speeches of a person as important as the Chief Minister.
No written record kept contemporaneously or prepared soon after is cited to contradict the allegation that the Chief Minister scandalised the Courts and assailed the character of Judges.
[765B D]
