The appellant was elected to the State Legislative Assembly and the first respondent, the defeated candidate filed an Election Petition for setting aside the election as being void on account of improper rejection of the nomination papers of one of the candidates by the Returning Officer.
It was contended that the Returning Officer rejected four nomination papers submitted by the candidate, three on the ground that the serial number and part number of the candidates were wrong with reference to the electoral roll, and the fourth on the ground that there was difference in the age of the candidate.
The High Court held that no nomination paper could be rejected unless the defect was of a substantial character, and that the difference in the age of the candidate as given in the electoral roll and the nomination paper was not a material error and no opportunity having been given to the candidate when the nomination papers were filed to remove any defect, the rejection of the nomination papers by the Returning Officer was improper, and the election of the appellant was set saside as being void on that ground.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The rejection of the nomination paper on the ground of difference in the age was improper, for having regard to the provisions of section 36(4) of the of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 the defect is not of a substantial character.
The appellant 's election is consequently void under section 100 (I)(c) of the Act on the ground of improper rejection of the nomination paper.[564 E F] In the instant case, the difference in the age of the candidate, as entered in the electoral roll and the nomination paper would fall under the category of `inaccurate description ' mentioned in the proviso to section 33(4) and it was therefore obligatory on the part of the Returning officer to have it corrected or to overlook it having regard to the language of the said proviso.
[563 H; 564 A] 2.
A person to be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for a constituency should be 21 years of age on the qualifying date and a person to be chosen 559 to fill a seat in the Legislature of a State should not be less than 25 years of age.
The substantial requirement as regards the question of the age of the candidate, at the time of scrutiny of nomination paper is that he should have completed 25 years of age and should have been registered in the electoral roll for that constituency and not whether there was a difference of 4 years in the age of the candidate as mentioned in the electoral roll and the nomination paper as in the instant case.
The difference in age is not an error of substantial character.
[562 G H; 564 C D]
