The State Government issued an advertisement inviting application for admission to the first year MBBS course in the two medical colleges in the State.
It was mentioned therein that the candidates would have to appear in a written test which would be followed by a Viva voce test and that 85 points were allowed for the written test and 15 points were Viva voce test.
The Selection Committee for the selection was constituted to consist of the Chairman of the State Public, Service Commission as Chairman, and two members, viz, the Principals of the two Medical Colleges.
The quorum for a meeting of the Committee was stipulated as the Chairman and one member.
When the Selection Committee held its first meeting one of the members, the Principal of the College informed the Committee that as his daughter was one of the candidates competing for admission, it would not be desirable for him to be associated, at any stage, with the written test, and that he would not like to be present when his daughter was interviewed.
The Committee took note of the information and agreed with the suggestion.
The petitioners in their writ petitions under Article 32, questioned the selection of candidates for admission : It was contended on their behalf that: (1) the entire selection was vitiated by the presence on the Committee of the father of a candidate, and this was a gross violation of one the principles of natural justice: (2) the entire procedure was bad as the marks obtained by the candidates at the qualifying examination (T.DC Part I Medical group) were not taken into account and not given any weightage; (3) the viva voce test provided for 7 points for general knowledge and general intelligence whereas it would have been more appropriate to test general knowledge and general intelligence of candidate by holding a written instead of a viva voce test; (4) general knowledge and general intelligence were not matters to be tested in a written examination; (5) there was delay in the announcement of the results and the delay made the selection suspect, and (6) the regulations made by the Indian Medical Council prescribed that the marks obtained in the qualifying examination should be taken in to consideration.
Dismissing the writ petition; ^ HELD: 1.
It is not unusual for candidates related to members of the Service Commission or other Selection Committee to seek employment.
Whenever such a 583 situation arises.
the practice generally is for the member concerned to excuse himself when the particular candidate is interviewed.
In the instant case, the Principal of the Medical College, whose daughter was a candidate for admission to the Medical College informed the Selection Committee at the very outset about this fact and told them that he would not have anything to do with the written test and would not be present when his daughter was interviewed.
The other members of the Selection Committee accepted the suggestion of the Principal and did not address the Government to appoint a substitute member of the Selection Committee, since the Government had fixed the quorum for a meeting of the Selection Committee, as the Chairman and one other member and it was possible to have a quorum without the Principal.
The procedure adopted by the Selection Committee and the member concerned was in accord with the quite well known and generally accepted procedure adopted by the Public Service Commissions everywhere.
Nagarajan vs State of Mysore, [1966]3 S.C.R. 682, referred to.
[596A C] 2.
It is not for the Court to sit in judgment over the nature of the questions to be put by the members of the Selection Committee.
It is for the members of the Selection Committee to decide what they should ask and so long as the questions are not such as to indicate that the interview was nothing but a make believe, the matter must be allowed to rest there.
It is not the function of the Court to weigh each question to find out the extent to which it is related to aptitude, general knowledge or general intelligence.
If the question is not flippant, it is not for the Court to say that the question was irrelevant and should not have been asked at any interview.
Perhaps irrelevant questions may also be asked to explore the candidate 's capacity to detect irrelevancies.
It is not for the Court to claim to itself the test of determining the nature of the questions to be put to candidates appearing at an interview.
The persons constituting the Selection Committee who may generally be assumed to be men of experience and knowledgeable in regard to men and matters may surely be expected to put the right questions.
In the absence of malafides, the matter is best left to them.
[589 E G] 3(i) The question as to the subjects in which an entrance test may be held is hardly a matter for the Court, unless, of course, the subjects are so arbitrarily chosen as to have not the slightest connection with the object of the examination.
Such a situation is not likely to arise as the authorities may be expected to act reasonably.
Again it is not for the Court to lay down whether an interview test should be held at all or how many marks should be allotted for the interview test.
Of course, the marks must be minimal so as to avoid charges of arbitrariness but not necessarily always.
There may be posts and appointments where the only proper method of selection may be by an interview test Even in the case of admission to higher degrees courses, it may sometimes be necessary to allot a fairly high percentage of marks for the Interview test.
That is why rigid rules cannot be laid down in these matters, and not by courts.
The experts are generally the best judges.
The Courts duty lies in preventing arbitrariness and denial of equal opportunity.
[592C E, 592B] 3(ii) There is interfere when the risk of arbitrariness is so high that arbitrariness is inevitable.
Again the Court is not the best judge of what questions may be asked at the inter view.
All that is necessary is that the questions should not be amere pretence.
[592F] 584 Ajay Hasia 's case; , ; Chitra Lekha and Ors.
vs State of Mysore and Ors.
, ; ; A. Peeriankaruppan vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., [1971] 2 S.C.R. 430; and Lila Dhar vs State of Rajasthan, [1982] 1 S.C.R. 320 referred to.
4(i) The Selection Committee apparently thought it would be better to have a common entrance test.
It appears to be a perfectly reasonable procedure.
Even otherwise it is always open to a Selection Committee to insist on taking into consideration marks obtained in the examination held by it and excluding from consideration marks obtained in examinations held by other bodies.
There is nothing wrong in this procedure.
[595C D] 4(ii) It was a matter for the Selection Committee to decide whether general knowledge and general intelligence could be more appropriately tested in the viva voce test or in the written test.
That is not a matter for the court to decide.
[595F] 5.
There was in fact no delay in the announcement of results and the suspicion, if any, was unfounded.
[595G] 6.
The regulation of the Indian Medical Council prescribing that the marks obtained at the qualifying examination should be taken into consideration has no application because there are two Medical colleges in the state.
Though only one Board conducted the qualifying examination, the examinations were conducted separately for Jammu and Srinagar areas and on two different occasions.
Moreover, the regulations of the Council have been held to be directory and not mandatory by this Court.
[597 D E] Madhya Pradesh vs Kr.
Nivedita Jain [1981] 4 S.C.C. 296, referred to.
