The assessee is an individual and his estate stood vested in the State of Bihar under the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 as and from 1st of July 1952, and he is entitled to receive compensation under the Act from the Government.
The assessors during the relevant assessment years had obtained two monetary decrees from his debtors, but the amounts receivable by the assessee were attached by two garnishee orders issued by the Calcutta High Court on 13th January 1960 and 21st June 1961.
The assessee also had some claim decrees but as they were not yet executed, they were shown in his book of accounts as still outstanding.
The assessee had to pay Agricultural Income Tax to the Government and this debt has to be deducted from the compensation receivable by the assessee.
In these five appeals by certificate of fitness, question arose as to whether the answers of the High Court of Patna given in the Tax references on the question of correctness of valuation of the "net wealth" under section 7 of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 are correct.
The Revenue urged the following five propositions: (l) For the purposes of computation of net wealth of an assessee each Asset belonging to him and each debt owed by him has to be valued separately.
(2) The difference between the aggregate value of the assets and the aggregate value of the debts represents his net wealth.
626 (3) In determining the market value of an asset (or the residue of the asset diminished by an over riding title on the asset itself), any liability or debt incurred in relation to it has to be ignored as the debt or liability has to he separately evaluated.
(4) What is the market value of a certain asset or the residue asset as referred to above, is a question of fact, to be determined finally by the Income tax Appellate Tribunal taking into account the relevant evidence and considerations put forward by both the sides and the High Court cannot interfere with such a fielding of fact unless it is found to be based on irrelevant consideration or is arrived at by ignoring , relevant evidence (5) When the debt is represented as an asset, its market value has to be determined in the same manner as the market value of any other asset irrespective of the fact whether such an asset debt is encumbered by another debt owed from the assessee, because the later mentioned debt can qualify for deduction at its market value independently.
Dismissing the appeals the.
Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 Section 7 and 2(M} of the Wealth Tax Act, 1957, though must be read harmoniously, apply at two different stages.
Section 7 deals with the estimation of the market value of the asset, while section 2(M) enjoins that from the same, the debt owned by the assessee to be deducted.
The debts may be deducted from the value of assets but the valuation of an asset has to he done in terms of Section 7(1) taking into consideration all the hazards including the possibility of an amount on account of debt being deducted from the value of the asset is a factor which will influence a prospective buyer in the open market, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
[633 EF 1.2.
Agricultural income tax dues from the assessee which are deductible from the compensation under Section 4(c) of the Bihar Land Reforms Act.
1950, if the same has not been deducted before the issue of the compensation bond, then the possibility and the hazard of its being deducted from the compensation involved is a factor which has to be taken into account in estimating the value of the right of compensation for the purpose of estimating the net wealth of the assessee on the valuation date under the Wealth Tax Act.
The arrears of agricultural income tax is not to be deducted from the net wealth as such but is a factor which willing purchaser will take into consideration in estimating the value of these ' assets and that is a factor which should be taken into consideration.
The Tribunal will estimate the values taking into consideration the possibility of deduction on account of the liability of the assessee on account of agricultural income tax if it had not been already deducted in accordance with the provisions of the Act and determine the net value of the assets of the assessee, accordingly.
[629A D] 627 kumar Kamal Singh (Civil Appeal Nos. 1238 to 1240 (NT)/1973 decided on 20 2 84 relied on.
If there is an asset which is subject to certain hazards including, the liability of certain debt to be deducted from the said asset, then that factor would be a relevant factor diminishing the market value of the asset in open market and has to be estimated taking into consideration that factor.
[633D] B 2.2.
Merely because the assessee had shown the full decretal amounts in his books as still due, would not upso facto lead to the conclusion that they 'should be valued at those slums without taking into consideration the lizards of realisation of the decrees.
These decrees had not been executed and in the process of execution there may be hazards and the Wealth Tax officer must estimate the price of the decree by anticipating what a willing purchaser would have paid for those decrees taking the hazards into consideration in open market on the valuation date and should estimate the price of the asset in question accordingly.
[631C D] 2.3 When assesses had a claim decree against its debtor, the Wealth Tax officer should ascertain the price that a reasonable person would have paid ' for it on the relevant date, and value in open market considering that this claim decree can only be satisfied, wholly opartly from the compensation which the debtor would receive under the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950.
The claim decree is an asset, but it should be valued by estimating that it would fetch in the open market on the valuation date taking into consideration all the hazards.
[631H, 632A] 3.1.
For the purposes of computation of net wealth of an assessee each asset belonging to him and each debt owed by him has to be valued separatly.
[632E] 3.2.
The difference between the aggregate value of the assets an the aggregate value of the debts represents his net wealth [632F]
