The petitioner, an advocate of the Supreme Court addressed a letter in public interest to the Court, complaining of malpractices indulged in by social organisation and voluntary agencies engaged in the work of offering Indian Children in adoption to foreign parents, the petitioner alleged that not only Indian Children of tender age are under the guise of adoption "exposed to the long horrendous journey to distant foreign countries at great risk to their lives but in cases where they survive and where these children are not placed in the shelter and Relief Houses, they in course of time become beggars or prostitutes for want of proper care from their alleged foster parents.
" The petitioner, accordingly, sought relief restraining Indian based private agencies "from carrying out further activity of routing children for adoption abroad" and directing the Government of India, the Indian Council of Child Welfare and the Indian Council of Social Welfare to carry out their obligations in the matter of adoption of Indian Children by Foreign parents.
Being a public interest litigation, the letter was treated as a writ petition.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, after indicating the principles and norms to be observed in giving a Child in adoption to foreign parents, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
Every child has a right to love and be loved and to grow up in an atmosphere of love and affection and of moral and material security and this is possible only if the child is brought up in a family.
The most congenial environment would, of course, be that of the family of his biological parents.
But if for any reason it is not possible for the biological parents or other near relative to look after the child or the child is abandoned and it is either not possible to trace the parents or the parents are not willing to take care of the child, the next best alternative would be to find adoptive parents for the child so that the child can grow up under the loving care and attention of the adoptive parents.
The adoptive parents would be the next best substitute for the biological parents.
[813E F] 1: 2.
When the parents of a child want to give it away in adoption or the child is abandoned and it is considered necessary in the interest of the child 796 to give it in adoption, every effort must be made first to find adoptive parents for it within the country, because such adoption would steer clear of any problems of assimilation of the child in the family of the adoptive parents which might arise on account of cultural, racial or linguistic differences in case of adoption of the child by foreign parents.
If it is not possible to find suitable adoptive parents for the child within the country, it may become necessary to give the child in adoption to foreign parents rather than allow the child to grow up in an orphanage or an institution where it will have no family life and no love and affection of parents and quite often, in the socioeconomic conditions prevailing in the country, it might have to lead the life of a destitute, half clad, half hungry and suffering from malnutrition and illness.
[8 4B D] 2: 1.
The primary object of giving the child in adoption should be the welfare of the child.
Great care has to be exercised in permitting the child to be given in adoption to foreign parents, lest the child may be neglected or abandoned by the adoptive parents in the foreign country or the adoptive parents may not be able to provide to the child a life or moral or material security or the child may be subjected to moral or sexual abuse or forced labour or experimentation for medial or other research and may be placed in a worse situation than that in his own country.
[815G H; 816A] 2: 2.
Since there is no statutory enactment in our country providing for adoption of a child by foreign parents or laying down the procedure which must be followed in such a case, resort is had to the provisions of the for the purpose of facilitating such adoption.
[ 824G] 2: 3.
The High Courts of Bombay, Delhi and Gujarat have laid down by Rules and Instructions certain procedure when a foreigner makes an application for adoption under the Guardian and Wards Act including issuing of a notice to the Indian Council of Social Welfare and other officially recognised social welfare agencies with a view to assist the court in properly and carefully scrutinising the applications of the foreign parents for determining whether it will be in the interest of the child and promotive of its welfare, to be adopted by the foreign parents making the application or in other words, whether such adoption will provide moral and material security to the child with an opportunity to grow into the full stature of its personality in an atmosphere of love and affection and warmth of a family health and home.
This Procedure is eminently desirable and it can help considerably to reduce, if notice imitate, the possibility of the child being adopted by unsuitable or undesirable parents or being placed in a family where it may be neglected, maltreated or exploited by the adoptive parents.
[828B E] Rasiklal Chaganlal Mehta 's case A.I.R. 1982 Gujarat 193, approved.
The requirements which should be insisted upon so far as a foreigner wishing to take a child in adoption and the procedure that should be followed for the purpose of ensuring that such inter country adoptions do not lead to abuse maltreatment or exploitation of children and secure to them a healthy, decent family life are as under: (1) Every application from a foreigner desiring to adopt a child must be 797 sponsored by a social or child welfare agency recognised or licensed by the government of the country in which the foreigner is resident.
No application by a foreigner for taking a child in adoption should be entertained directly by any social or welfare agency of India working in the area of inter country adoption or by any institution or centre or home to which children are committed by the juvenile court.
This is essential primarily for three reasons.
[831G H] Firstly, it will help to reduce, if not eliminate altogether, the possibility of profiteering and trafficking in children, because if a foreigner were allowed to contact directly agencies or individuals in India for the purpose of obtaining a child in adoption, he might, in his anxiety to secure a child for adoption, be induced or persuaded to pay any unconscionable or unreasonable amount which might be demanded by the agency to individual procuring the child.
Secondly it would be almost impossible for the court to satisfy itself that the foreigner who wishes to take the child in adoption would be suitable as a parent for the child and whether he would be able to provide a stable and secure family life to the child and would be able to handler trans racial, trans cultural and trans national problems likely to arise from such adoption, because where the application for adopting a child has not been sponsored by a social or child welfare agency in the country of the foreigner, there would be no proper and satisfactory home study report on which the court can rely.
Thirdly, in such a case, where the application of a foreigner for taking a child in adoption is made directly without the intervention of a social or child welfare agency, there would be no authority or agency in the country of the foreigner who could be made responsible for supervising the progress of the child and ensuring that the child is adopted at the earliest in accordance with law and grows up in an atmosphere of warmth and affection with moral and material security assured to it.
[832A E] Every application of a foreigner for taking a child in adoption must be accompanied by a home study report and the social or child welfare agency sponsor in such application should also send along with it a recent photograph of the family, a marriage certificate of the foreigner and his or her spouse as also a declaration concerning their health together with a certificate regarding their medical fitness duly certified by a medical doctor, a declaration regarding their financial status alongwith supporting documents including employer 's certificate where applicable, income tax assessment orders, bank references and particulars concerning the properties owned by them, and also a declaration stating that they are willing to be appointed guardian of the child and an undertaking that they would adopt the child according to the law of their country within a period of not more than two years from time of arrival of the child in their country and give intimation of such adoption to the court appointing them as guardian as also to the social or child welfare agency in India process.
sing their case, and that they would maintain the child and provide it necessary education and up bringing according to their status and they would also send to the court as also to the social or child welfare agency in India reports relating to the progress of the child alongwith its recent photograph, the frequency of such progress reports being quarterly during the first two years and half yearly for the next three years.
The application of the foreigner must also be accompanied by a Power of Attorney in favour of an officer of the social or child welfare agency in India which is requested to process the case and such 798 Power of Attorney should authorize the Attorney to handle the case on behalf of the foreigner in case the foreigner is not in a position to come to India.
The social or child welfare agency sponsoring the application of the foreigner must also certify that the foreigner seeking to adopt a child is permitted to do so according to the law of his country.
These certificates, declarations and documents must accompany the application of the foreigner for taking child in adoption, should be duly notarised by a Notary Public whose signature should be duly attested either by an officer of the Ministry of External Affairs or Justice or Social Welfare of the country of the foreigner or by an officer of the Indian Embassy or High Commission or Consulate in that country.
The social or child welfare agency sponsoring the application of the forefingers must also undertake while forwarding the application to the social or child welfare agency in India, that it will ensure adoption of the child by the foreigner according to the law of his country within a period not exceeding two years and as soon as the adoption is affected, it will send two certified copies of the adoption order to the social or child welfare agency in India through which the application for guardianship is processed, so that one copy can be filed in court and the other can remain with the social or child welfare agency in India.
The social or child welfare agency sponsoring the application must also agree to send to the concerned social or child welfare agency in India progress reports in regard to the child, quarterly during the first year and half yearly for the subsequent year or years until the adoption is effected, and it must also undertake that in case of disruption of the family of the foreigner before adoption can be effected, it will take care of the child and find a suitable alternative placement for it with the approval of the concerned social or child welfare agency in India and report such alternative placement to the court handling the guardianship proceedings and such information shall be passed on both by the court as also by the concerned social or child welfare agency in India to the Secretary, Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India.
[833C H; 834A E] 3: 2.
The Government of India shall prepare a list of social or child welfare agencies licensed or recognised for inter country adoption by the Government of each foreign country where children from India are taken in adoption and this list shall be prepared after getting the necessary information from the government of each such foreign country and the Indian Diplomatic Mission in that foreign country.
Such lists shall be supplied by the Government of India to the various High Courts in India as also to the social or child welfare agencies operation in India in the area of inter country adoption under licence or recognition from the Government of India.
[834E F; [835 B] 3: 3.
If the biological parents are known, they should be helped to understand all the implications of adoption including the possibility of adoption by a foreigner and they should be told specifically that in case the child is adopted, it would not be possible for them to have any further contact with the child The biological parents should not be subjected to any duress in making a decision about relinquishment and even after they have taken a decision to relinquish the child for giving in adoption, a further period of about three months should be allowed to them to reconsider their decision.
But once the decision is taken and not reconsidered within such further time as may be allowed to them, it must be regarded as irrevocable and the procedure for 799 giving the child in adoption to a foreigner can then be initiated without any further reference to the biological parents by filling an application for appointment of the foreigner as guardian of the child.
Thereafter there can be no question of once again consulting the biological parents whether they wish to give the child in adoption or they want to take it back.
But in order to eliminate any possibility of mischief and to make sure that the child has in fact surrendered by its biological parents, it is necessary that the Institution or Centre or home for Child Care or social or Child Welfare Agency to which the child is surrendered by the biological parents, should take from the biological parents a document of surrender duly signed by the biological parents and attested by at least two responsible persons and such document of surrender should not only contain the names of the biological parents and their address but also information in regard to the birth of the child and its background, health and development.
If the biological parents state a preference for the religious upbringing of the child, their wish should as far as possible be respected, but ultimately the interest of the child alone should be the sole guiding factor and the biological parents should be informed that the child may be given in adoption even to a foreigner who professes a religion different from that of the biological parents.
The biological parents should not be induced or encouraged or even be permitted to take a decision in regard to giving of a child in adoption before the birth of a child or within a period of three months from the date of birth.
This precaution is necessary because the biological parents must have reasonable time after the birth of the child to take a decision whether to rear up the child themselves or to relinquish it for adoption and moreover it may be necessary to allow some time to the child to overcome any health problems experienced after birth.
[835 H; 836A D; 836G H] 3: 4.
It should not be open to any and every agency or individual to process an application from a foreigner for taking a child in adoption and such application should be processed only through a social or child welfare agency licensed or recognised by the Government of India or the Government of the State in which it is operating.
Since an application for appointment as guardian can be processed only by a recognised social or child welfare agency and none else, any unrecognised institution, centre or agency which has a child under its care would have to approach a recognised social or child welfare agency if it desires such child to be given in inter country adoption, and in that event it must send without any undue delay the name and must send without any undue delay the name and particulars of such child to the recognised social or child welfare agency through which such child is proposed to be given in inter country adoption.
The Indian Council of Social Welfare and the Indian Council for Child Welfare are clearly two social or child welfare agencies operating at the national level and recognised by the Government of India.
But apart from these two recognised social or child welfare agencies functioning at the national level, there are other social or child welfare agencies engaged in child care and welfare and if they have good standing and reputation and are doing commendable work in the are of child care and welfare they should also be recognised by the Government of India or the Government of the State for the purpose of inter country adoptions.
But before taking a decision to recognise any particular social or child welfare agency for the purpose of inter country adoptions the Government of India or the Government of a State would do well to examine whether the social or child welfare agency 800 has proper staff with professional social work experience, because otherwise it may not be possible for the social or child welfare agency to carry out satisfactorily the highly responsible task of ensuring proper placement of a child with a foreign adoptive family.
The Government of India or the Government of a State recognising any social or child welfare agency for inter country adoptions must insist as a condition of recognition that the social or child welfare agency shall maintain proper accounts which shall be audited by a chartered accountant at the end of every year and it shall not charge to the foreigner wishing to adopt a child any amount in excess of that actually in cured by way of legal or other expenses in connection with the application for appointment of guardian including such reasonable remuneration or honorarium for the work done and trouble taken in processing, filing and pursuing the application as may be fixed by the Court.
[837B H; 838A D] 3:5.
Every recognised social or child welfare agency must maintain a register in which the names and particulars of all children proposed to be given in inter country adoption through it must be entered and in regard to each such child, the recognised social or child welfare agency must prepare a child study report through a professional social worker giving all relevant information in regard to the child so as to help the foreigner to come to a decision whether or not to adopt the child and to understand the child, if he decides to adopt it as also to assist the court in coming to a decision whether it will be for the welfare of the child to be given in adoption to the foreigner wishing to adopt it.
The child study report should contain as far as possible information in regard to the following matters: (1) Identifying information, supported where possible by documents.
(2) Information about original parents, including their health and details of the mother 's pregnancy and birth.
(3) Physical, intellectual and emotional development.
(4) Health report prepared by a registered medical practitioner preferably by a paediatrician.
(5) Recent photograph.
(6) Present environment category of care (Own home, foster home, institution etc.) relationships routines and habits.
(7) Social worker 's assessment and reasons for suggesting inter country adoption.
[838G H; 839A E] 3:6.
The recognised social or child welfare agency must insist upon approval of a specific known child and once that approval is obtained the recognised social or child welfare agency should immediately without any undue delay proceed to make an application for appointment of the foreigner as guardian of the child.
Such application would have to be made in the court within whose jurisdiction the child ordinarily resides and it must be accompanied by copies of the home study report, the child study report and other certificates and documents forwarded by the social or child welfare agency 801 sponsoring the application of the foreigner for taking the child in adoption.
It is also necessary that the recognised social or child welfare agency through which an application of a foreigner for taking a child in adoption is routed must before offering a child in adoption, make sure that the child is free to be adopted.
The recognised social or child welfare agency must place sufficient material before the court to satisfy it that the child is legally available for adoption.
It is also necessary that the recognised social or child welfare agency must satisfy itself, firstly, that there is no impediment in the way of the child entering the country of the prospective adoptive parent; secondly, that the travel documents for the child can be obtained at the appropriate time and lastly, that the law of the country of the prospective adoptive parent permits legal adoption of the child and that on such legal adoption being concluded, the child would acquire the same legal status and rights of inheritance as a natural born child and would be granted citizenship in the country of adoption and it should file alongwith the application for guardianship, a certificate reciting such satisfaction.
[841C D; 842H; 843A D] 3: 7.
In cases where a child relinquished by its biological parents or an orphan or destitute or abandoned child is brought by an agency or individual from one State to another, there should be no objection to a social or child welfare agency taking the child to another State, even if the object be to give it in adoption, provided there are sufficient safeguards to ensure that such social or child welfare agency does not indulge in any malpractice.
There should also be no difficulty to apply for guardianship of the child in the court of the latter State.
because the child not having any permanent place of residence would then be ordinarily resident in the place where it is in the care and custody of such agency or individual.
[843H; 844A F] Section 11 of the provides for notice of the application to be issued to various persons including the parents of the child if they are residing in any State to which the Act extends.
But, no notice under this section should be issued to the biological parents of the child, since it would create considerable amount of embarrassment and hardship if the biological parents were then to come forward and oppose the application of the prospective adoptive parent for guardianship of the child.
Moreover, the biological parents would then come to know who is the person taking the child in adoption and with this knowledge they would at any time be able to trace the whereabouts of the child and they may try to contact the child resulting in emotional and psychological disturbance for the child which might affect his future happiness.
For the same reasons, notice of the application for guardianship should also not be published in any newspaper.
If the court is satisfied, after giving notice of the application to the Indian Council of Child Welfare or the Indian Council for Social Welfare or any of its branches for scrutiny of the application, that it will be for the welfare of the child to be give in adoption to the foreigner making the application for guardianship, it will only then make an order appointing the foreigner as guardian of the child and permitting him to remove the child to his own country with a view to eventual adoption.
The Court will introduce the following conditions in the order, namely: [846A H; 848A B] (i) That the foreigner who is appointed guardian shall make proper 802 provision by way of deposit or bond or otherwise to enable the child to be repatriated to India should it become necessary for any reason.
[847C] (ii) That the foreigner who is appointed guardian shall submit to the court as also to the Social or Child Welfare Agency processing the application for guardianship, progress reports of the child alone with a recent photograph quarterly during the first two years and half yearly for the next three years.
[847D] (iii) The order appointing guardian shall carry, attached to it, a photograph of the child duly counter signed by an officer of the court.
[817F] Where an order appointing guardian of a child is made by the court, immediate intimation of the same shall be given to the Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India as also to the Ministry of Social Welfare of the Government of the State in which the court is situate and copies of such order shall also be forwarded to the two respective Ministries of Social Welfare.
The Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India shall maintain a register containing names and other particulars of the children in respect of whom orders for appointment of guardian have been made as also names, addresses and other particulars of the prospective adoptive parents who have been appointed such guardians and who have been permitted to take away the children for the purpose of adoption.
The Govt.
of India will also sent to the Indian Embassy or High Commission in the country of the prospective adoptive parents from time to time the names, addresses and other particulars of such prospective adoptive parents together with particulars of the children taken by them and requesting the Embassy or High Commission to maintain and unobtrusive watch over the welfare and progress of such children in order to safeguard against any possible maltreatment exploitation or use for ulterior purposes and to immediately report and instance of maltreatment, negligence or exploitation to the Government of India for suitable action.
[847G H; 848A C] 3:8.
The social or child welfare agency which is looking after the child selected by a prospective adoptive parent, may legitimately receive from such prospective adoptive parent maintenance expenses at a rate of not exceeding Rs. 60 per day (this outer limit being subjective to revision by the Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India from time to time) from the date of selection of the child by him until the date the child leaves for going to is new home as also medical expenses including hospitalization charges, any, actually incurred by such social or child welfare agency for the child.
But the claim for payment of such maintenance charges and medical expenses shall be submitted to the prospective adoptive parent.
[842C D] 3:9.
If a child is to be given in inter country adoption, it would be desirable that it is given in such adoption as far as possible before it completes the age of 3 years.
The reason is that if a child is adopted before it attains the age of understanding, it is always easier for it to get assimilated and integrated in the new environment in which it may find itself on being adopted by a foreign parent.
Children above the age of 3 years may also be given in inter country adoption.
There can be no hard and fast rule in this connection.
Even children between the ages of 3 to 7 years may be able to assimilate themselves in the new surroundings without any difficulty.
Even children 803 above the age of seven years may be given in inter country adoption but their wishes may be ascertained if they are in a position to indicate any preference.
[845D G] 3:10.
The proceedings on the Application for guardianship should be held by the Court in camera and they should be regarded as confidential and as soon as an order is made on the application for guardianship the entire proceedings including the papers and documents should be sealed.
[841C D] 3:11.
The social or child welfare agency which is looking after the child selected by a prospective adoptive parent, may legitimately receive from such prospective adoptive parent maintenance expenses at a rate of not exceeding Rs. 60 per day (this outer limit being subject to revision by the Ministry of Social Welfare, Government of India from time to time) from the date of selection of the child by him until the date the child leaves for going to its new home as also medical expenses including hospitalisation charges, if any, actually incurred by such social or child welfare agency for the child.
But the claim for payment of such maintenance charges and medical expenses shall be submitted to the prospective adoptive parent through the recognised social or child welfare agency which has processed the application for guardianship and payment in respect of such claim shall not be received directly by the social or child welfare agency making the claim but shall be paid only through the recognised social or child welfare agency.
However, a foreigner may make voluntary donation to any social or child welfare agency but no such donation from a prospective adoptive parents shall be received until after the child has reached the country of its prospective adoptive parent.
[842C G]
