With the purported object of inhibiting the influx of cattle belonging to owners of neighbouring States passing through the State of Madhya Pradesh, the State Government issued a notification under rule 7 of the M.P. Grazing Rates Rules, 1979 prescribing the route to be followed by such cattle (described as 'foreign cattle ') while in transit.
The notification also stipulated that 'foreign cattle should leave the State within a period of 45 days after the issue of the licence, that the owner should pay grazing charges of Rs. 10 per buffalo and Rs. 5 per goat or sheep for the period of transit.
A notification issued under rule 6, however, prescribed grazing charge of Re. 1 per year for each goat or sheep belonging to residents of the State of Madhya Pradesh.
No charge was prescribed in respect of buffaloes.
The petitioners, nomad graziers of Gujarat and Rajasthan who pass through the State of Madhya Pradesh with their cattle en routes to other neighbouring States, in their petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution contended that tile notification issued under rule 7 contravened their fundamental rights under Articles 14, 19 (1) (e), ( f ) and (g) and also their right under Article 301 of the Constitution and that therefore it was invalid.
Allowing the petitions, ^ HELD: There was no rational basis for the distinction made between owners of cattle belonging to Madhya Pradesh and owners of cattle belonging to other States and the levy of prohibited grazing rates on owners of 'foreign cattle '.
There was equally no justification in prescribing the ceiling of 45 days during which the cattle must pass through the State.
While in the case of cattle belonging to the residents of the State of Madhya Pradesh the levy was for one year there was no reason why the charge should be for 45 days in the case of cattle belonging to graziers of other States.
[127 G H, 128 A B] Under our Constitution a citizen has the right to move freely throughout the territory of India subject to reasonable restrictions.
To whichever State a grazier may belong, he has the right to pass and repass through the State of 125 Madhya Pradesh with his cattle in pursuit of his occupation.
Forests of the State are not the grazing grounds reserved for cattle belonging to residents of A that State only.
[128 D F] There was, however, nothing wrong in prescribing the route along which the cattle had to pass while in transit because its object was to prevent cattle straying and causing indiscriminate damage to forests.
[128 H]
