The judicial service of the State of Maharashtra consists of two branches namely, (i) the Junior Branch and (ii) the Senior Branch, The Junior Branch consists of the following Class I Officers (i) Judges of the Small Causes Courts at places other than Bombay, (ii) Civil Judges (Senior Division), (iii) Judges of the Small Causes Courts at Bombay and Metropolitan Magistrates and (iv) Civil Judges (Junior Division) and Judicial Magistrates of the First Class.
The Senior Branch consists of (i) District Judges, (ii) the Principal Judge and Judges of Bombay City Civil Court, (iii) the Chief Judge and the Addl.
Chief Judge of the Small Causes Court, Bombay (iv) the Chief Presidency Magistrate and the Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate, Bombay, and (v) the Assistant Judges.
There is no separate cadre of selection grade District Judges or of Inspecting District Judges referred to in the Rules which are framed under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
The scale of pay of District Judges prior to July 1, 1962 was Rs. 900 50 1000 60 1600 50 1800.
On the recommendation of the High Court, the State Government passed two resolutions one on 21 10 1963 and another on July 20, 1974 sanctioning one post under the former with effect from 1 7 62 and five posts under the latter with effect from 1st August 1974 of District Judges in the Selection Grade of Rs. 900 100 2000, which is specifically stated to be a part of the pay scale of Rs. 900 1800 applicable to the cadre of District Judges.
Consequent upon the revision of Pay scales 704 of officers of the cadre of the Indian Administrative Service the State Government modified the pay scale of the selection grade District Judges with effect from January, 1, 1973 by the resolution dated August 21, 1975 revising the Selection Grade Pay scale to one of 2000 125 2250.
By its earlier Resolution dated 23 9 1969, the Government also sanctioned five temporary posts of District Judges in the same scale of Rs. 900 1800 for inspection of subordinate Courts and tackling the problem of corruption.
The High Court had laid down certain guidelines for posting a District Judge as an Inspecting District Judge and they are (i) that the District Judge should have put in at least three years as District Judge and should have worked as such in any of the districts, (ii) that his administrative capacity should be relatively high and (iii) that he should have a reasonable length of service ahead of him as a District Judge till his retirement.
The appellant was enrolled as an Advocate on December 14, 1951.
In response to the Notification inviting applications for the purpose of recruiting member of the Bar directly as District Judges under Rule 5(2) (1) (b) of the Rules, the appellant applied for one of the posts and was also successful in getting selected and appointed as an Assistant Judge by notification issued on 2 1 1967.
On February 19, 1973, the appellant was appointed to officiate in the cadre of District Judges and later confirmed as a District Judge with effect from August, 1, 1975.
The seniority of the appellant was fixed on the basis of his actual appointment as District Judge in April 1973.
The appellant filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the constitution contending: (1) that he was entitled to reckon for purposes of his seniority in the cadre of District Judges the period during which he worked as an Assistant Judge in accordance with the proviso to sub clauses (b) of clause (i) of sub rule (2) of Rule 5 of the Bombay Judicial Recruitment Rules, 1956, and (ii) that he was entitled to get the salary and allowances in the Selection grade scale or to be posted as an Inspecting Judge.
Both the contentions were negatived by the High Court and hence the appeal by special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court, ^ HELD 1.
Due to laches and absence of satisfactory explanation for the delay of nearly nine years, the question of the correctness of the seniority assigned to the petitioner appellant in the year 1973 cannot be looked into.
The appellant is entitled to the pay in the selection grade pay scale from 'the date on which the immediate Junior (seniority being counted on the length of 705 continuous officiation in the cadre of District Judges) commenced to draw salary in the selection grade pay scale.
He is also entitled to all other consequential relief flowing therefrom.
[718 C D] 2.2.
The two Resolutions of the Government sanctioning six posts of selection grade District Judges did not indicate that there was any process of promotion by selection or otherwise from the cadre of District Judges to the cadre of selection grade District Judges involved while sanctioning the selection grade pay scale.
There was no question of even crossing the efficiency bar.
The said selection grade scale was sanctioned only to mitigate the hardship caused by stagnation at the highest level of the original pay scale i.e. Rs. 1800.
It was just a time scale and an extension or projection of the pay scale of Rs. 900 1800 applicable to the cadre of District Judges but confined to six persons in all.
The sanctioning of selection grade pay scale for District Judges has nothing to do with the creation of the posts of Inspecting District Judges either.
The true legal position is that the first six persons in the seniority list of judges based on the length of continuous officiation in the cadre of District Judges can only be recipients of salary in the selection grade pay scale, there being only six such selection grade sanctioned.
[710 G H, 711 A B] 2.3.
When it is held that the selection grade District Judges do not constitute a separate cadre, the High Court cannot in exercise of its general powers of control under Article 235 of the Constitution withhold the increment beyond Rs. 1800 in the selection grade pay scale unless there is a rule or an executive instruction which authorises it to do so.
The selection grade post is not a post to which promotion has to be made nor is there any efficiency bar rule attached to it.
Further it is not shown that the Governor had issued any executive instructions, enabling the High Court to withheld increments in the extended pay scale which is in this case called as election grade pay scale.
The pay scale to which a judicial officer is entitled is a condition of service which can be regulated by a statute or rules made under the proviso to Article 309 or by executive instructions issued under Article 162 of the Constitution.
It cannot come within the range of the expression 'control ' in Article 235 of the Constitution.
It is only where there is such a law, rule or executive instruction, the High Court may act under Article 235 of the Constitution to sanction it or to refuse to sanction it.
[717 C F] In the present case the mere nomenclature given to the extended pay scale as the selection grade pay scale does not lead to the inference that there is an element of selection involved in sanctioning it.
In the circumstances it should be treated as just an extended pay scale which forms part of the pay scale of Rs. 900 1800 as clarified in the two Government orders sanctioning the selection grade posts.
The refusal on the part of the High Court to Sanction the selection grade pay scale to the 706 appellant when it became due automatically on the ground that he was not found fit to be sanctioned that scale of pay is erroneous.
[717 G H 718 A] Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan & Anr. ; ; Lalit Mohan Deb & others vs Union of India & Others AIR 1972 SC 951 B.S. Yadav & Others etc.
vs State of Haryana & others etc.
[1981] I S.C.R. 1024 referred to.
The High Court had not created any new cadre of Inspecting District Judges and that it was only for the purpose of facilitating a brief and easy reference to such officers as were doing inspection work under a scheme evolved by the High Court for maintaining the efficiency of the Judicial Service that they were being referred to in common parlance as Inspecting District Judges.
No rule was evolved by the High Court to the effect that either the senior most Judges or those promoted by selection to that cadre should be posted as Inspecting District Judges.
Taking the these guidelines together, it is possible to post any District Judge who satisfies the three conditions as an Inspecting District Judge even though there may be many District Judges who are senior to him and who also satisfy the above conditions.
Since admittedly the posts of Inspecting District Judges do not constitute a separate cadre superior to the cadre of District Judges, no person posted as an Inspecting District Judge can claim seniority over a District Judge who is not holding such a post on that ground alone.
[712 E H] 3.2.
The High Court in the Judgment under appeal has committed an error in virtually treating the Inspecting District Judge as equivalent to selection grade District Judges.
The creation of the posts of five Inspecting District Judges had nothing to do with the sanctioning of selection grade pay scale for District Judges.
While the selection grade pay scale was sanctioned for six posts of District Judges by the two Government Resolutions dated October 21, 1963 and July 20, 1974, the five posts of Inspecting District Judges were created by the Government Resolution dated September 23, 1969.
These five posts were not posts with the selection grade pay scale which had already been brought into force by the Government Resolution of October 21, 1963.
It could not also have been the intention of the High Court as well as of the Government at the time of the creation of these posts of Inspecting District Judges that the five senior most District and sessions Judges in the State should instead of disposing of important judicial work be engaged in inspecting a minimum of 35 courts during a year, in writing reports and in carrying out other administrative work which would leave very little time to engage themselves in judicial work.
That is also clear from the guidelines laid down for the posting of an officer as an Inspecting Judge which could be easily satisfied by younger and active members working in the cadre of District Judges.
H, 716 C D] 3.3.
The High Court also overlooked that the specific case of the High Court being that no separate cadre of Inspecting District Judges had been created, there 707 could be no occasion to consider the case of the appellant or any other District Judge for such promotion.
The selection grade District Judges are only those who draw pay in pay scale of Rs. 1800 100 2000 for which no promotion is contemplated and that mere posting as an Inspecting District Judge by itself does not make an officer so posed superior to other District Judges.
The true legal position is that while the first six persons in the seniority list of District Judges based on the length of continuous officiation in the cadre of District Judges can be recipients of salary in the selection grade pay scale, the posts of Inspecting District Judges and of the Registrar need not necessarily be held by them.
Therefore, the question whether the appellant can be posted as an Inspecting District Judge is within the discretion of the High Court only.
[716 F H, 717 A B, H]
