Respondents in each of these appeals could not clear the LLM examination in accordance with Regulation 7 of the Punjab University Regulations either in the first attempt or later while taking on compartmental basis even after addition of grace marks as laid down in Rule 27(1)(b) of the University Regulations.
The respondents filed separate writ petitions praying for a direction to give the benefit of moderation grace mark as calculated under Rule 27(1)(a).
The High Court rejected the plea of the Appellant University holding that it was Rule 27(1)(b) that applied and not Rule 27 1(a).
Hence the appeal by Special Leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD : A bare reading of the Rule 27 (referred to as the Regulations by the High Court) makes it clear that clause (a) is applicable where the full examination is taken and clause (b) is attracted where the candidate reappears to clear the compartment or subject and part in which he has been declared eligible to reappear.
In each of these cases the candidate was reappearing to clear the paper in which he or she had failed; clause (b) was clearly attracted and the benefit under clause (a) was not available.
The language of clause (b) is such as would squarely apply to such a situation.
The provision in clause (b) is clear and on reappearing the candidate becomes entitled to grace marks of up to one per cent of the total marks of the subject/subjects in which he reappears.
Once clause (b) applies no reference is available to the performance in the regular examination taken earlier and the benefit of grace marks to the extent indicated has to be confined to the performance at the reappearance.
Once this is the position each of the candidates was not eligible to pass.
[34GH, 35B C] [In view of the declaration dated 19.6.1980 made before the court, that irrespective of the result of the appeals, the candidates will be declared to have passed, the Court as a special case did not want to disturb the result.] [35D] 32 Observation: The position obtaining in the Punjab University in respect of Post Graduate degrees namely grace marks being awarded is disapproved.
A Master 's degree in any speciality is considered to be the highest qualification in the normal run.
It is very much necessary that such a degree should be conferred only on the deserving students who having studied the subject and taken the appropriate examination conducted by the University at the end of such studies have deserved the degree on the basis of their performance.
There should be no scope for looking for grace marks at such level and the sooner the Punjab University abandons the practice of awarding grace marks in respect of post graduate examinations the better it would be in the interest of higher education in this country.
[35F H]
