The respondent filed an Election Petition for setting aside the election of the appellant to the State Legislative Assembly.
The appellant filed a petition for rejection of the said Election Petition in limine under Section 86 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 on the ground that the copy of the petition served on him was neither attested to be a true copy nor a correct copy of the original petition, as contemplated by the provisions contained in section 81(3).
The case of the respondent election petitioner was that two sets of copies were filed, one set being correct as required by the Act and the other set incorrect containing vital omissions and mistakes, the appellant having got a correct copy as required by section 81(3) there was compliance with the requirement of the section.
The High Court held that as the respondent had filed correct copies, the provisions of section 81(3) were not violated and it was for the appellant to have chosen the correct copy from the two sets and invoked the doctrine of benefit of doubt in order to cure the non compliance of the mandatory provisions of section 81(3), and rejected the application to dismiss the Election Petition.
In the connected appeals, the 1st Respondent had filed separate Election Petitions for setting aside the election of the appellants to the Rajya Sabha.
When the said petitions came up before the High Court for hearing an application was made by the respondent for amendment of the original petition by insertion of page 17 which was allowed.
The appellants filed petitions before the Election judge for rejecting the Election Petition on the ground that no amendment could be allowed which would have the effect of defeating or bypassing the provisions of section 81(3) of the Act, and that the original petition served on the appellants did not contain page 17 and hence was not the correct and exact copy of the election petition.
The High Court rejected the application to dismiss the Election Petition.
Allowing the Appeals.
23 ^ HELD: 1.
The mandate contained in section 81(3) is clear and specific and requires that every copy of the election petition must be a true and exact copy of the petition.
The consequences of this mandatory provision cannot be got over by praying for an amendment of the election petition because that would defeat the very object and purpose of section 81(3).
B] In the instant cases, the judgment of the High Court are set aside, and the election petitions dismissed in limine under section 86 of the Act.
[30 D] Sharif ud Din vs Abdul Gani Lone, ; ; referred to.
Section 81(3) and 86 of the Act do not contemplate the filing of incorrect copies and if an election petitioner disregards the mandate contained in section 81(3) by filing incorrect copies, he takes the risk of the petition being dismissed in limine under section 86.
It is no part of the duty of the respondent to wade through the entire record in order to find out which is the correct copy.
If out of the copies filed, the respondent 's copy is found to be an incorrect one, it amounts to non compliance of the provisions of section 81(3) which is sufficient to entail a dismissal of the election petition at the behest of the respondent.
[27 B; C] 3.
If an election petitioner files a number of copies, some of which may be correct and some may be incorrect, it is his duty to see that the copy served on the respondent is a correct one.
[27 A] In the instant case, it has not been proved by the respondent that correct copies of the election petition had been filed or, that the appellant got the correct copy and not the incorrect one, in the face of the clear and categorical assertion by him that he did not receive the correct copy.
[27 F] 4.
The mandate contained in Section 81(3) cannot be equated with section 537 of the Code of Criminal Procedure which makes certain omissions as a curable irregularity.
No. such concept can be imported into the election law because the object of the law is that the electoral process should not be set at naught and an elected candidate should not be thrown out unless the grounds mentioned in the Act are clearly and fully proved.
[27 D] 5.
Parliament in its wisdom has not made any attempt to interfere with the preemptive and mandatory provisions of section 81 (3) resulting in the consequence of dismissal of the petition under section 86 despite the observations in Satya Narain.
vs Dhija Ram & Ors. ; [30 C]
