Prem Chand Sharma was admitted into tenancy of the suit premises under a lease deed dated 5th January, 1968, clause 12, thereof provided.
"That the lessee shall use the premises for the purpose of Residential Personal office only and not for commercial purposes.
" The landlord, appellant, applied to the Rent Controller on March 4, 1972, for eviction of the Respondent under section 14(1) (e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The respondent tenant obtained leave to contest and pleaded inter alia that the premises were let out both for residential as also for office and the composite purpose of the tenancy took the premises out of the purview of residential accommodation.
The Controller did not accept the defence and passed an order for eviction.
In revision, however, the High Court rejected the land lord 's submission holding that the use of the word "personal" before "office" was intended to convey the idea that the tenancy was not for the purpose of accommodating a place of business and reversed the decision of eviction.
Hence the appeal by the landlord, after obtaining special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (1) The word "office" is used in different senses and in each case that meaning must be assigned to it which conforms with the language used.
Therefore, in the instant case, the High Court was not right in picking one of the meanings given in the chamber 's dictionary and proceeding to the conclusion that "office" is certainly "not residence" and a letting purpose which includes office must be understood to include a purpose other than residence only.
[54 A, 55A B] Macmillan vs Guest ; Smt.
Kanta Kathuria vs Manak Chand Surana, , referred to.
52 2:1.
Law is fairly settled that in construing a document the ordinary rule is to give effect to the normal and natural meaning of the words employed in the document itself.
[55 D E] Krishna Biharilal vs Gulab Chand and Others, [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 27; D.D.A. vs D.C. Kaushish, (1974) 1 S.C.R. 535; Monypenny vs Monypenny, ; ; In re: Meredith, ex parte Chick, , referred to.
In the instant case it is clear that the parties to the document were anxious enough and took proper care in order to keep the user of the premises confined to residential purpose; that is why it was expressly stipulated in the lease to prohibit commercial user.
Even while permitting an office to be located, equal care was taken to put the word 'personal ' before 'Office ' to convey the idea that the tenant would not be entitled to transact official business connected with his avocation.
Although ordinarily an office would mean the place where official business is transacted, a personal office in contradistinction to an office simpliciter or a commercial office would be a place where an outsider would not normally be admitted; commercial transactions would not take place; there would be no fixity of the location and the tenant would be entitled to use any portion of the premises as his personal office and the like.
Such a place is referred to as personal office would essentially be residential and obviously while entering into the present lease deed, the parties were not trying to create a lease of premises for any other purposes.
In para 2 of the document, there was no description of any existing office room and available for such use to the tenant, nor was space earmarked for any personal office out of this accommodation.
It was in the discretion of the lessee to use any part as a personal office.
Every lessee, or for the matter of that every person maintaining an acceptable standard of living does set apart a portion of the accommodation available to him which can answer the description of a personal office.
Even the clause relating to payment of tax by the lessor do not support the stand of the lessee.
As contemplated under the Transfer of Property Act a document of lease normally provides the rights and obligations of both the lessor and the lessee.
In stipulating the rent payable for the use and occupation of the premises the lessor had undertaken the liability of payment of taxes as described therein as long as the premises were used for residence only.
This clause necessarily means that what had been stipulated was only residential user.
In fact, the lessor had been paying the taxes and the lessee had not been called upon to share the burden.
This clause is an added provision to clinch the point in dispute against the tenant.
Therefore the High Court, went wrong in reversing the decision of the Rent Controller by merely relying upon clause 12 of the lease deed.
[55C, 56F G, 57A B, D E, GH, 58 A B] 3.
Though the fact that the tenant has been in occupation for more than 14 years after the litigation began will disentitle him to any further time to vacate, taking judicial notice of the fact that these days an alternative premises would be very difficult to find, the Court considered it appropriate to grant time to the Respondent to vacate the premises upto 31st December, 1984 subject to furnishing usual undertaking within four weeks or to face eviction after four weeks.
