As a result of proceedings taken and settlement arrived at in 1952 under the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 certain sums were determined as payable by the respondents assessee companies on its secreted profits, and schemes for the payment of the said liability by instalments were laid down.
The assessee companies claimed that the balance of the demand that had remained unpaid was a debt owed by it and should be allowed as a deduction while computing its net wealth for the concerned year of assessment.(1957 58) The Wealth tax Officer computed the net wealth of each company by adopting the figures of assets and liabilities as shown in their balance sheets as on their respective valuation dates after making such adjustments as considered necessary but in both the cases he disallowed the aforesaid claim for deduction on the ground that the liability was outstanding for more than 12 months on the valuation dates.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the disallowance.
He took the view that the tax liabilities assessed by the Income tax Investigation Commission had no relation to the assets or the declared wealth of assessee companies, which were the basis of the wealth tax assessment and since the assets on which the said liability was assessed, namely, the secret profits, were not included in the declared assets the disallowance was justified.
In further appeals by the assessee companies to the Tribunal, the Tribunal confirmed the disallowance on the ground that sections 2(m) (i), 2 (m) (ii), 5 (1) and 5 (2) indicated a scheme of the Act which suggested that debts which qualified for deduction in computation of the net wealth were only those which were incurred in relation to the assets declared by the assessee, that is to say, in computing the net wealth the principle to be adopted was that when any assets were included the corresponding debts should be allowed, but that when such assets were excluded or were liable to be excluded from the net wealth the corresponding debts should also be excluded.
38 In the References to the High Court, at the instance of the assessee companies the Tribunal 's conclusion was overruled and the High Court opined that the deductions claimed were allowable in computing the net wealth of the assessee companies.
In the appeals to this Court, by the Revenue on the question whether the balance of the payments payable by the companies as a result of the findings and orders of the Income Tax Investigation Commission in the settlements made under the Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act 1947 are deductible as debts owed by them in determining the net wealth of the companies.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: [By the Court] Section 2 (m) (iii) requires that the tax liability must be one which is "payable in consequence of any order passed" under any law relating to taxation on income or profits etc.
such liability so payable under an order must remain "outstanding for a period of more than 12 months on the valuation date".
The expression `outstanding ' in section 2 (m) (iii) (a) and(b) will have to be construed in the background of the phrase "amount of tax payable in consequence of an order," and in that context it must mean remaining unpaid after the obligation to pay is incurred.
[48D, 48G] In the instant case, it was the admitted position before the Tribunal that under the scheme of instalments sanctioned in the settlements the two sums, in respect thereof deductions were claimed, had not become due for payment before the valuation dates.
The deductions claimed, therefore, do not fall within the exclusionary part contained in section 2 (m) (iii) of the Act.
[48H 49A] Per Tulzapurkar, J.
The scheme emerging from the key provisions of the Act, Sections 2 (m), 3 and 4 clearly show that barring those debts which fall within the exclusionary part of section 2 (m) all other debts owed by the assessee have to be deducted from the aggregate value of the assets belonging to him on the valuation date.
In order to get disqualified for the purposes of deduction a debt must fall within the exclusionary part and there is nothing in the exclusionary part which suggests that the debt must either by relatable to any asset at all or if it is relatable to any asset, such asset must be included in the books of accounts or the balance sheet of the assessee before a deduction in respect thereof is allowed.
[45C D] In the instant cases, the secret profits admittedly earned by the assessee companies related to an assessment year prior to September, 1948 (as proceedings under Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act.
1947 could be taken only in respect of the assessment year prior to 1.9.1948) and the tax liability in respect thereof was determined in 1952, but the valuation dates are 30.6.1956 and 31.12.1956.
[47D] Annamma Paul Perincherry vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Kerala and Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Kanpur vs J.K. Jute Mills Co.Ltd., , approved 39 [Per Sabyasachi Mukharji J.] There is no evidence to show whether the profits had remained with the assessee companies either in the form of assets in the Balance sheet or otherwise.
The relevant valuation dates were much later.
Had there been any finding that these profits, in some form, either as assets in the Balance Sheet or otherwise were with the assessee.
It could have perhaps been examined whether so long as the assessee does not bring those profits in the computation of the wealth, the assessee would be disentitled to the deductions of liabilities in respect of the same.
These should have been examined by the Wealth tax Officer with the aid of the principles of section 106 and section 114 of the Evidence Act.
Had that been done it could have, perhaps been examined whether by the principle of purposive interpretation, in order the give effect to the intention of the legislature in enacting the Wealth Tax and evolving the scheme of settlement under Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission Act, 1947, whether the assessee was entitled to the deduction of these two tax liabilities.
[50 A D] Commissioner of Wealth Tax, West Bengal III vs Banarashi Prashad Kedia, and Commissioner of Wealth Tax, U.P. and others vs Padampat Singhania, 84 I.T.R. 799, approved.
