By these two petitions, the petitioner challenged the constitutional validity of the Bombay Land Requisition Act, 1948, as amended by the two amending Acts of 1950, and the enforceability of an order of requisition made by the Governor of Bombay under section 6 (4) (a) of the Act.
The petitioner as the widow of the tenant claimed to be in possession, while the case made on behalf of the Government was that the tenant had before his death vacated the premises and handed over possession to a lodger.
A copy of the order of requisition was affixed to the premises and the petitioner moved the High Court for a writ of mandamus, but the petition was dismissed.
The Act was passed by the State Legislature on April 11, 1948, and by the first amending Act its life was extended for two years and by the second the words " the purpose of the State or any other public purpose" were substituted for the words ,,any purpose" occurring in section 5 of the Act with retrospective effect from the date of the Constitution.
The Act came up for consideration in a previous decision of this Court and arguments were confined to grounds other than those specifically covered by that decision.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the Act was in conflict with article 3I (2) and became invalid at the commencement of the Constitution and the amending Acts, for which the assent of the President had admittedly not been obtained, were ineffective under article 31 (3) of the Constitution.
It was further contended that sections 5 and 6 of the Act which made the relevant findings of the Government conclusive had the effect of impairing the powers of the Court, that it was nevertheless open to the Court to judge whether the facts found constituted vacancy in law and, lastly that the order in question was ineffective as the tenant was dead on the date it was made.
Held, that the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner must be negatived.
93 722 The constitutional validity of the Act was no longer open to question under articles 19 (1) (f) and 31 (2) of the Constitution in view of the decision of this Court in State of Bombay vs Bhanji Munji (1955) 1 S.C.R. 777.
The Act, which did not obviously come within the mischief of cl.
(6) of article 31, fell within the saving clause, cl. 5 (a), of the Article and was an existing law within the meaning of the Constitution and, therefore, valid at the commencement of the Constitution, although it did not contain the expression " for a public purpose " as required by cl.
(2) of the Article.
Clause (3) of the Article, which in terms applied to laws made after the commencement of the Constitution, had no application to the amending Acts which were in no way concerned with the main substantive provisions of the Act already passed, and the want of the President 's assent in no way affected their validity.
As the Act was valid at the commencement of the Constitution and continued to be so thereafter, not being in any way inconsistent with the provisions of Part III of the Constitution so as to attract the operation of article 13, the Amending Acts were equally valid in law.
Held further, that although in a proper case the High Court or this Court in the exercise of their special jurisdictions under the Constitution had power to determine how far the provisions of the Act had or had not been complied with, the finding of the State Government under section 5 Of the Act that the tenant had not actually resided in the premises for a continuous period of six months immediately preceding the date of the order,and that under s.6, the premises had become vacant at about the time indicated in the order, are conclusive and not collateral so as to be liable to be re opened and could not, therefore, be questioned either in this Court under article 32 or in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
Rai Brij Raj Krishna vs section K. Shaw, ; applied.
Hubli Electricity Co. Ltd. vs Province of Bombay, (1948) L.R. 76 I.A. 57, held inapplicable.
Mohsinali Mohomed Ali vs The State of Bombay, (1951) 53 Bom.
L.R. 94: A.I.R. 1951 Bom.
303, referred to.
The words " or otherwise " occurring in explanation (a) to section 6 of the Act could not be construed as ejusdem generis with the words immediately preceding them and must be held to cover all possible cases of vacancy due to any reason whatsoever.
Skinner & Co. vs Shaw & Co., (I893) , referred to.
An order of requisition passed under section 6 (4) (a) of the Act was not of the nature of an order passed in a judicial proceeding and the death of one of the parties could not make it wholly ineffective, the only consequence being that his name as one of 723 the parties to be served under section 13 Of the Act must be removed from the order.
