A bigger Hindu undivided family (HUF) had filed income tax returns for the assessment years 1946 47 to 1949 50.
When the assessment was being done the bigger (HUF) made a claim under section 25A of the Income Tax Act, 1922, that the said HUF was partitioned on 19.5.1945.
While this claim was pending, the appellant along with a smaller HUF (hereinafter referred to as the assessee) which had come into being on partition of the bigger HUF, filed voluntary returns on 18.11.1950 for the assessment years 1946 47 to 1949 50 under s.22(1) of the Act.
The bigger HUF 's claim partition, which was rejected by the Income Tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, was accepted by the Appellate Tribunal on 31.8.1954.
While disposing of the appeals of the bigger HUF against the assessment orders, the Tribunal gave a direction on 28.10.1954 that assessments be made on the bigger HUF after accepting partition.
After the claim of partition was accepted the Income tax Officer sent notices to the assessee for initiating proceedings against him under s.34(1) (b).
In response to the notices the assessee filed fresh returns on 12.4.1955.
Rejecting the contention of the assessee that the time for making assessment under s.34 had expired, the Income tax Officer completed assessments under section 23(3) read with section 34 on .
8.9.1955.
The assessee 's appeal was rejected by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal.
The assessee filed a writ petition in the High Court which was allowed and the assessment orders were quashed on 30.3.1960.
The High Court observed that as voluntary returns filed by the assessee were pending no proceeding could be taken under section 34.
Thereafter the Revenue attempted to assess the assessee on the basis of voluntary returns originally filed on 18.11.1950 by relying upon the order of the Tribunal dated 23.10.1954 in the bigger HUF 's case and invoking second proviso to section 34(3).
The assessee filed a writ petition and that was dismissed.
The Income tax Officer completed assessment under section 23(3) on 31.5.1962.
In appeal the Appellate Assistant Commis 101 sioner held that no valid assessment could be made on 31.5.1962 and this view was confirmed by the Appellate Tribunal.
A reference was made to the High Court on the question whether on the facts and circumstances of the case, valid assessment could be made on 31.5.1962 for the assessment years 1948 49 and 1949 50 on the basis of voluntary returns of income filed under section 22(1) of the Act.
The assessee contended that since a return exhausted itself after expiry of four years from the end of the assessment year to which it related, no assessment could be made on the basis of voluntary return, it could be done under section 34 only if 2nd proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34 applied.
By majority a full Bench of the High Court answered the question in the affirmative in favour of the revenue.
Hence these appeals.
The two questions which arose were: (1) whether the assessment could be made under section 23(3) on the basis of voluntary returns filed or action should have been taken under section 34 with the help of the second proviso to sub section
(3) of section 34; and (2) whether the Tribunal could give a finding or direction in respect of the assessee.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD : On Question No. (1) The High Court was right in taking the view that assessments could be made on the basis of voluntary returns already filed by the assessee.
Sub section
(3) of section 34 provides a period of limitation of four years for assessment under section 23 of the Act.
If the assessment proceedings commence by filing of voluntary returns, as indeed these do, on the expiry of the period of four years from the end of the year in which the income, profits or gains were first assessable, such proceedings are suspended or interrupted.
But neither the proceedings nor the returns become invalid.
Since the order was passed by the Tribunal giving direction, the bar of limitation provided by section 34(3) was lifted and the assessments could be made without any bar of limitation.
[106 G H, 107 A] Commissioner of Income tax Bombay City II vs Ranchhoddass Karsondas, ; Estate of the late A.M.K.M.
Karuppan Chettiar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Madras, ; and Commissioner of Income tax Madras vs M.K.K.R. Muthukaruppan Chettiar, , referred to On question No. (2) The High Court rightly answered the question in favour of the revenue on the view that the Tribunal was competent to give the direction in respect of the present assessee.
[108 E G] Second proviso to section 34(3) authorises directions to be given by the Tribunal in respect of the assessee or any person beyond four years as provided in section 34(3) of the Act.
As explained in Income tax Officer vs Murlidhar Bhagwandas, "any person" in respect of whom such direction could be given must be one who would be liable to be assessed for the whole or a part of the income that went into the assessment of the year under appeal or revision.
The court must turn 102 to section 31 of the Act to ascertain who is that person other than the appealing assessee who might be affected by the orders passed by the appellate authority.
Modification or setting aside of assessment made on a firm, joint Hindu family, association of persons for a particular year may affect the assessment for the said year on a partner or partners of the firm, member of members of such Hindu undivided family or the individual, as the case might be.
These instances are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
The expression "any person" in its widest amplitude might take in any person connected or not with the assessee, whose income for any year had escaped assessment; but this construction cannot be accepted, for the said expression was necessarily circumscribed by the scope of the subject matter of the appeal or revision, as the case might be.
So therefore the person must be one who would be liable to be assessed for the whole or any part of the income that went into assessment of the year under appeal or revision (Emphasis supplied).
Therefore, "any person" in sub section (3) of section 34 must be confined to person intimately connected in the aforesaid sense with the assessments of the years under appeal.
[701 C S, 108 A F] Income tax Officer, A Ward, Sitapur vs Murlidhar Bhagwan Das, ; Rajinder Nath vs Commissioner of Income tax, Delhi, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Central, Calcutta vs National Taj Traders, 121 I.T.R. 535; and Commissioner of Income tax, Andhra Pradesh vs Vadde Pullaiah & Co., , referred to.
The facts in the instant case show that income can belong either to the bigger Hindu undivided family or to the smaller Hindu undivided family, the present assessee alongwith another smaller H.U.F. and to no one else.
Therefore a finding that it belongs or it does not belong to the bigger Hindu undivided family which had disrupted on partition would determine the issue whether it could be taxed in the hands of the present assessee.
Judged in the light of the test laid down in Murlidhar Bhagwan Das case and as pointed out in Rajinder Nath 's case, it appears that the present assessee can be said to be a person who would be liable to be assessed for the whole or part of the income that went to the assessment of the bigger Hindu undivided family in years under appeal and is a person intimately connected with the assessments of the bigger Hindu undivided family.
The income in this case cannot be the income of both bigger Hindu undivided family and the present assessee, it must be either of these two.
Therefore, the directions given in the appeals filed by the bigger Hindu undivided family would be applicable to the present assessee.
[111 A D] Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat vs Shantilal Punjabhai, , distinguished.
Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh vs section Raghubir Singh Trust, referred to.
