The first respondent was elected to the State Legislative Assembly.
Voting in the Constituency was by the conventional method provided in the Conduct of Election Rules 1961.
the votes cast manually; and also by the mechanical process, viz., the use of 'electronic ' machines.
The appellant challenged the election of the first respondent.
The trial court upheld the validity of voting by machines and held that the first respondent was duly elected.
In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that voting by mechanical process was not permissible either under the Representation of the People Act 1951, or under the Conduct of Election Rules 1961.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The order of the Election Commission directing casting of ballots by machines in some of the polling stations, was without jurisdiction and could not have been resorted to.
[90G] 2.
When the Representation of the People Act 1951 and the Conduct of Election Rules 1961, prescribed a particular method of voting the Commission could not innovate a new method and contend that use of the mechanical process was not covered by the existing law and, therefore, did not come in conflict with the law in the field.
The Act and the Rules completely excluded the mechanical process which, if resorted to, would defeat in a large measure the mandatory requirements of the Rules.
[86G, 88F] 75 3.
(a) When there is no Parliamentary legislation or rule made under the said legislation, the Commission is free to pass any orders in respect of the Conduct of elections.
[86 H] (b) Where there is an Act and there are express Rules made thereunder, it is not open to the Commission is over ride the Act or the Rules and pass orders in direct disobedience to the mandate contained in the Act or the Rules.
The Powers of the Commission are meant to supplement rather than supplant the law (both statute and Rules) in the matter of superintendence, direction and Control as provided by Article 324.
[87A B] (c) Where the Act or the Rules are silent, the Commission has no doubt plenary powers under Article 324 to give any direction in respect of the conduct of election.
[87C] (d) Where a particular direction by the Commission is submitted to the government for approval, as required by the Rules, it is not open to the Commission to go ahead with implementation of it at its own sweet will even if the approval of the Government is not given.
[87D] 4.
It is a well settled rule of interpretation of statutes that words, phrases or sentences of a statute should ordinarily be understood in their natural, ordinary, popular and grammatical sense unless such a construction leads to absurdity.
[88G] 5.
Legislatures must be deemed to be aware of the modern tendencies in various democratic countries of the world where the mechanical system has been introduced and if despite the plain meaning of the word 'ballot ' they did not choose to extend the definition given as far back as 1950, it may be safely presumed that Parliament intended to use the word 'ballot ' in its popular rather than a technical sense.
[89G] 6.
The word 'ballot ' has been derived from the word 'ballot ' which existed at a time when there was no question of any system of voting by machine.
Even in 1951 when the Act was passed or the Rules were made, the system of voting by machine was not in vogue in this country.
In these circumstances the word 'ballot ' in its strict sense would not include voting by the use of voting machines.
[89F] Sadiq Ali & Anr.
vs Election Commission of India & Ors.
,[1972] 2 S.C.R. 318; Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr.
vs The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors., and N P: Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency & Ors., ; ; referred to.
