The respondent landlord filed a suit for eviction of the appellant tenant in a town in U.P.
On the ground that the tenant had created a sub tenancy of the premises in favour of a trading company.
The landlord filed a photo graph showing the son of the proprietor of the trading company standing in the shop.
Adopting the approach that if any person other than a tenant was found sitting in the shop, the tenant had to lead evidence to show that a sitting person was not a sub tenant, the small cause court Judge assumed that there was a sub tenancy; held against the tenant and ordered his eviction.
Allowing the revision petition filed by the tenant the Additional District Judge held that it was for the landlord to lead good and positive evidence to prove that the business in fact at the shop was being carried by the trading company and not by the tenant himself.
The Additional District Judge looped into the evidence and held against the landlord.
In an application under article 227 the High Court held that under section 25 of the U.P. Act No. 13 of 1972 read with sec.
12(1)(b) and section 12(2) of the aforesaid.
Act a tenant would be deemed to have sub let the accommodation if he had allowed it to be occupied by any person who was not a member of his family.
The High Court further held that the Additional District Judge exceeded his jurisdiction under section 25 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 in setting aside the findings of the trial court on a mere re appraisal of the evidence on record.
Hence this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: As long as control over the premises is kept by the tenant and the business run in the premises is of the tenant, sub letting flowing from the presence of a person other than the tenant in the shop cannot be assumed.
The U.P. Act No. 13 of 1972 does not require the Court to assume a sub tenancy merely from the fact of presence of an outsider.
[220G] 217 In the instant case the allegation that the premises had been sublet to a trading company had to be proved as a fact by the ' landlord and merely on the basis of the photograph showing the presence of the son of the proprietor of the trading company within the room, sub letting could not be presumed.
The approach of the trial Judge was totally vitiated.
[?20 D E] The revisional jurisdiction under section 25 of the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act is not as wide as the appellate jurisdiction under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure; yet in a case of this type this Court does not think fault could he found with the revisional court for pointing out the legal error committed by the trial court in its approach to this material aspect.
The legal position having been totally misconceived by the trial court and there being an assumption of the position which the landlord was required to prove by evidence, the revisional authority was entitled to point out the legal error and rectify the defect.
[221B D] The jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorai is a supervisory one and in exercising it, the court is not entitled to act as a court of appeal.
That necessarily means that the finding of fact arrived at by the inferior court or tribunal arc binding.
An error of law apparent on the face of the record could be corrected by a writ of certiorari but not an error or fact, however, grave it may appear to be.
[221F G] Syed Yakoob vs K.S. Radhakrishnan & Ors., ; referred to.
In the instant case the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering with the order of the Additional District Judge.
[221G]
