J, a displaced person, was found Prima facie entitled to allotment of a house and the Accommodation Officer moved his family into the house on May 10, 1952, but no letter of allotment was issued to him.
Later, when certain facts became known which in the opinion of the Union of India disentitled j to the allotment, he was informed that the house could not be allotted to him.
j was evicted from the house on September 27, 1952, without being given 15 days notice as required by section 3 of the Public Premises Eviction Act (XXVII of 1950).
The house was then allotted to S and he was given possession on October 3, 1952.
J filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court.
The High Court ordered the Union of India and also S to restore possession of the house to J. S appealed.
Held, that the High Court erred in issuing the writ of mandamus.
There was a serious dispute on questions of fact between the parties and also whether j had acquired any title to the property in dispute.
Proceedings by way of a Writ were not appropriate in a case where the decision of the Court would amount to a decree declaring a party 's title and ordering restoration of possession.
The proper remedy in such a case is by way of a title suit in a Civil Court.
The alternative remedy of obtaining relief by a 739 writ of mandamus or an order in the nature of mandamus could only be had if the facts were not in dispute and the title to the.
property in dispute was clear.
As the eviction of J was illegal on account of the failure to give him notice under section 3 Of the Public Premises Eviction Act a writ of mandamus might have issued to the Union if the property had still been in its possession.
But no such writ could issue to S as, normally, it does not issue to a private individual.
If it had been proved that the Union and S had colluded, and the transaction between them was merely colourable, entered into with a view to deprive J of his rights, jurisdiction to issue the writ might be said to exist in the Court.
The writ however could not issue to S who had, apparently, entered into bona fide possession of the house without knowledge that J had been illegally evicted therefrom.
R. vs Chestey Corporation, , applied.
