Prior to 1972, there were over 100 Insurance Companies Indian and A, foreign.
The conditions of service of the employees of these companies were governed by the respective contracts of service between the companies and the employees.
On 13th May 1971, the Government of India assumed management of these general insurance companies under the .
The nationalised general insurance business.
Four merger schemes were framed in 1973 by the Central Government in exercise of the powers contained in section 16(1) of the Act and four companies; oriental Fire and General Insurance Company, National Insurance Company New India Assurance Company and United India Insurance Company Ltd., were merged into and they alone were allowed to carry on the business of general insurance.
These companies started functioning from Ist January, 1973 and the process of merger was completed by Ist January, 1974 ' when the aforesaid four schemes came into force.
The Government of India by a notification dated 27th May, 1974, framed a 'scheme ' called the General Insurance (Rationalisation and Revision of Pay Scales and other Conditions of Service of Supervisory, Clerical and Subordinate Staff) Scheme, 1974 in exercise of the powers conferred by section 16(1)(g) of the Act.
This scheme provided for the rationalisation and revision of pay scales and other terms and conditions of service of employees working in supervisory, clerical and subordinate positions and governed the pay scales, dearness allowance, other allowances and other terms and conditions of the general insurance employees.
Paragraph 23 of the Scheme provided that the new 'scales of pay ' shall remain in force till December 31, 1976 and thereafter shall continue to be in force unless modified by the Central Government.
In 1976, the Board of Directors approved a policy for promotion.
On Ist June, 1976 another scheme by which amendments were made with regard to Provident Fund, was introduced.
On 30th July 1977, a Scheme amending provisions regarding sick leave was also introduced. ' F The employees submitted a memorandum objecting to the revision of pay scales and other conditions of service and wanted a reference to the Industrial Tribunal.
The class III and IV employees however did not accept the revision of Service Conditions, pay scales dearness allowance, etc.
and raised industrial dispute.
There were conciliation proceedings and there was failure to bring about amicable settlement of disputes.
In 1980, the Government introduced the General Insurance (Rationalisation and Revision of Pay Scales and other conditions of Service of Supervisory, Clerical and Subordinate Staff) Second Amendment Scheme, 1980.
This Scheme which was introduced by a notification dated September 30, 1980 made detailed provisions as to how the adjustment allowance is to be dealt With so far as Dearness Allowance, overtime Allowance, Contribution to Provident Fund and other retirement benefits were concerned.
Paragraph 7 which dealt with 'retirement ' stipulated that an employee who was in service of the Corporation before the 254 commencement of the Scheme of 1980 should retire from service when he attains the age of 60 years, but an employee, who joins the service of the Corporation after the commencement of the Scheme would retire on attaining the age of 58 years.
The Fourth Schedule to the Scheme indicated tho revised scales of pay.
The petitioners in their writ petitions to this Court contended that the terms and conditions of service enunciated in 1974 being a result of bilateral agreement could not be changed unilaterally to the detriment of the employees and that the notification deprived the rights of the employees to receive dearness allowance etc.
with the rise in the cost of living index.
It was further contended that the Scheme was violative of section 16(2) of the Act and ultra vires Articles 14,19(1)(g) and Article 31(2) of the Constitution, and that the Constitution 44th amendment deleting Articles 31 and 19 cannot save the Scheme, since the amendment came into force only 20th June, 1979, whereas the impugned notification affecting the rights of the employees to emoluments took effect from 1st January, 1979.
The respondents contested the writ petitions on the ground that section 16(6) authorised the Central Government by notification, to add, to amend or to vary any scheme framed under section 16 and consequently rationalisation or revision of pay scales was permissible by the 1980 scheme.
Moreover in comparison With other employees in governmental or public sector, the employees of the general insurance, companies were 'High wage islanders ' and it was consequently necessary to put a ceiling on their emoluments and other amenities in order to facilitate better functioning of the insurance companies as well as to subserve the object and purpose of the nationalisation policy.
Allowing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
(a) The impugned scheme of 1980 is bad as being beyond the scope of the authority of the Central Government, under the , and therefore quashed.
This, however, will not prevent the Government, if it is so advised, to frame any appropriate legislation or make any appropriate amendment giving power to the Central Government to frame any scheme as it considers fit and proper.
[290G; 291A B] 1.
(b) The scheme of 1980 so far as it is not related to the amalgamation or merger of insurance companies, is not warranted by sub section
(1) of section 16.
The scheme is therefore bad and beyond authority.
[278D] A.V. Nachane & Another vs Union of India & Another [1982] 2 S.C.R p. 246, Madan Mohan Pathak vs Union of India Corporation of India vs D.J. Bahadur & Ors.
[1981] 1 S.C.R. p. 1083.
referred to. 2.
The duty of the Court in interpreting or construing a provision is to read the section, and understand its meaning in the context interpretation of a provision or statute is not a mere exercise in semantics but an attempt to find out the meaning of the legislation from the words used, understand the context and 255 the purpose of the expressions used and then to construct the expressions sensibly.
[275C D] 3 (a) The scheme is an exercise or delegated authority.
The scope and ambit of such delegated authority must be so construed, if possible, as not to make it bad because of the vice of excessive delegation of legislative power.
In order to make the power valid, s.16 of the Act should be so construed in such manner that it does not suffer from the vice of delegation of excessive legislative authority.
[275E] 3.
(b) Unlimited right of delegation is not inherent in the legislative power.
[275 F] Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg.
(Wvg.) Co. Ltd. vs The Asst.
Commissioner of Sales Tax & Ors., [1974] 2 S.C.R. p. 879, referred to.
The growth of legislative power of the executive is a significant development of the 20th century.
The theory of laissez faire has been given a go by and large and comprehensive powers are being assumed by the State with a view to improve social and economic well being of the people.
Most of the modern socioeconomic legislations passed by the legislature lay down the guiding principles of the legislative policy.
The legislatures, because of limitation imposed upon them and the time factor, hardly can go into the matters in detail.
The practice of empowering the executive to make subordinate legislation within the prescribed sphere has evolved out or practical necessity and pragmatic needs of the modern welfare State.
[275G 276A] 5.
Regarding delegated legislation, the principle which has been well established is that the legislature must lay down the guidelines, the principles of policy for the authority to whom power to make subordinate legislation is entrusted.
The legitimacy of delegated legislation depend upon its being used as ancillary which the legislature considers to be necessary for the purpose of exercising i s legislative power effectively and completely.
The legislature must retain it its own hand the essential legislative function which consists in declaring the legislative policy and lay down the standard which is to be enacted into a rule of p law, and what can be delegated is the task of subordinate legislation which by its very nature is ancillary to the statute which delegates the power to make it effective provided the legislative policy is enunciated with sufficient clearness or a standard laid down The courts cannot and do not interfere on the discretion and that undoubtedly rests with the legislature itself in determining the extent of the delegated power in a particular case.
[276B D] 6.
The authority and scope for subordinate legislation can be read in either of the two ways; namely one which creates wider delegation and one which restricts that delegation.
[277E] In the instant case, the Act must be read in conjunction with the Memorandum in Clause No. 16 of the Bill which introduced the Act in question.
But above all, it must be read in conjunction with sub section 2 of section 16 of the Act which clearly indicated the object of framing the scheme under section 16(1) of the Act.
[277D] 256 7.
In view of the language of sub section
(2) of section 16 and the memorandum to the Bill, the one which restricts the delegation must be preferred to the other.
So read, the authority given under section 16 under the different clauses of sub section (I) must be to subserve the object as envisaged in sub section (2) of section 16 of the Act, and if it is so read then framing of a scheme for purposes mentioned in different clauses of sub section (1) of section 16 must be related to the amalgamation or merger of the insurance companies as envisaged both in the memorandum on delegated legislation as well as sub section (2) of section 16.
[277F G] 8.
Sometimes there have been rise in emoluments with the rise in the cost of indeed in certain public sector corporations.
The legislature however is free to recognise the degree of harm or evil and to make provisions for the same.
In making dissimilar provisions for one group of public sector undertakings does not per se make a law discriminatory as such.
Courts will not sit as super legislature and strike down a particular classification on the ground that any under inclusion namely that some others have been left untouched so long as there is no violation of constitutional restraints.
[285D E] 9.
Piece meal approach to a general problem permitted by under inclusive classifications, is sometimes justified when it is considered that legislatures deal with such problem, usually on an experimental basis.
It is impossible to tell how successful a particular approach might be, what dislocation might occur, and situation might develop and what new evil mights be generated in the attempt.
Administrative expedients must be forged and tested.
Legislators recognizing these factors might wish to proceed cautiously, and courts must allow to do so.
[286B C] Special Courts Bill [1978] 2 S.C.R. p. 476 at pages 540 541, State of Gujarat and Anr.
vs Shri Ambica Mills Limited Ahmedabad etc.
[1974] 3 S.C.R. p. 760 and R.K. Garg etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
, [1982] I S.C.R. p. 947, referred to.
In the instant case, as there was no industrial dispute pending, the ground that the petitioners have been chosen out of a vast body of workmen to be discriminated against and excluded from the operation of the Industrial Disputes Act, is no ground that there has been no violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
[286D] 10.
Differentiation is not always discriminatory.
If there is a rational nexus on the basis of which differentiation has been made with the object sought to be achieved by particular provision, then such differentiation is not discriminatory and does not violate the principles of Article 14 of the Constitution.
There is intelligible basis for differentiation.
Whether the same result or better result could have been achieved and better basis of differentiation evolved is within the domain of legislature and must be left to the wisdom of the legislature.
[288H 289B] 11.
Article 14 does not prevent the Legislature from introducing a reform i.e. by applying the legislation to some institutions or objects or areas only according to the exigency of the situation and further classification of selection can be sustained on historical reasons or reasons of administrative exigency or 257 piece meal method of introducing reforms.
The law need not apply to all the A persons in the sense of having a universal application to all persons.
A law can be sustained if it clears equally with the people of well defined class employees of Insurance Companies as such, and such a law is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it had not application to other persons.
[290E F] State of Karnataka & Anr.
vs Ranganatha Reddy, & Anr. etc.
[1978] I S.C.R. p. 641 at pages 672, 676 & 691, referred to.
In the instant case, for the purpose of rationalisation, the insurance companies wanted to curtail the emoluments of class Ill and class IV employees on a small scale.
It cannot therefore be said that there are no distinguishing factors and that fol choosing a particular group for experiment, the respondents should be found guilty of treating people differently while they are alike in all material respects [288G] 12.
The object of the is to run the business efficiently so that the funds available might be utilised for socially viable and core projects of national importance.
The Nationalised Banks and the Insurance Companies for the purposes of applicability or otherwise of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act cannot be treated as belonging to one class.
Historical reasons provide an intelligible differential distinguishing Nationalised Insurance Companies from the Nationalised Banks.
The financial resources, structures and functions of the Banks are different from those of the Insurance Companies.
[288A E] 13.
The general rule to be followed in case of conflict between two statutes is that the later abrogates the easier one.
A prior social law would yield to a later General law if either of these two conditions are satisfied: (i) The two ale inconsistent with each other and (ii) there is some express reference in the later to the earlier enactment.
[282D F] 14.
(i) The Legislature has the undoubted right to alter a law already promulgated through subsequent legislation, (ii) A special law may be altered, abrogated or repealed by a later general law by an express provision, (iii) A later general law will override a prior special law if the two are so repugnant to each other that they cannot co exist even though no express provision in that behalf is found in the general law, and (iv) It is only in the absence of a provision to the contrary and of a clear inconsistency that a special law will remain wholly unaffected by a later general law.
[282G H] Maxwell "Interpretation of Statutes Twelfth Edition pp.
196 198, referred to.
J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of U.P. & Ors.
[1961] 3 S.C.R,.
p. 185 and U.P. State Electricity Board & Ors.
vs Hari Shanker Jain and Ors.
[1979] 1 S.C R. p. 355, referred to.
258 15.
The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Ac; was put in the Ninth Schedule of the Constitution as Item 95 on loth August 1975.
If any of the rights of the petitioners had been affected by the scheme of 1980 then these rights would not enjoy immunity from being scrutinised simply because the Act under which the scheme was framed had been put in the Ninth Schedule.
In any event any right which accrued to the persons concerned prior to the placement of the Act in the Ninth Schedule cannot be retrospectively.
affected by the impugned provisions.
[284E G] Prag Ice & Oil Mills & Anr. etc.
vs Union of India, [1978] 3 S.C.R. p. 293, referred to In the instant case, empowering the Government to frame schemes for carrying out the purposes of the Act does not in any way affect or abridge the fundamental rights of the petitioners and would not attract Article 19(1)(g).
[284H;
