The respondents who were working in different capacities in the factory of India Security Press at Nasik, an establishment of the appellant, filed an application before the Central Government Labour Court, Bombay under section 33 C(2) of the claiming overtime wages at double the ordinary rate of wages under section 59 of the Factories Act read with section 70 of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948.
The Labour Court dismissed the contentions of the appellant and granted relief.
Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the Appeal ^ HELD: The contention that the respondents were not workers within the meaning of section 2(1) of the Factories Act and therefore not entitled to the benefit of section 59 of that Act read with section 70 of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act 1948 must fail on the plain language of section 70.
The main provision of section 70 which is relevant consists of two parts; the first part states that if there be a factory the Shops and Establishment Act will not apply and the second part states that to such a factory 'the provisions of the Factories Act shall, notwithstanding anything contained in that Act, apply to all persons employed in or in connection with the factory".
Clearly, the underlined portion (the non obstante clause and the phrase 'all persons employed ') has the effect of enlarging the scope of Factories Act by making it applicable to all persons employed in such factory irrespective of whether employed as workers or otherwise.
Therefore although the respondents have not been 'workers ' within the meaning of section 2(1) they will get the benefit of section 59.
[298 C F] B.P. Hira, Works Manager, Central Railway, Parel, Bombay, etc.
vs C.M. Pradhan etc ; referred to.
The contention that by reason of rule 100 made by the State Govern 293 ment under section 64 of the Factories Act the benefit under section 59 was not available to the respondents falling within the exempted category by reason of their holding posts of supervision, has no force.
[300F and 295E] It is well known that a non obstante clause is a legislative device which is usually employed to give over riding effect to certain provision over some contrary provision that may be found either in the same enactment or some other enactment, that is to say, to avoid the operation and effect of all contrary provisions.
Thus the non obstante clause in section 70, namely, "notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in that Act and as such it must refer to the exempting provisions which would be contrary to the general applicability of the Act.
Just as because of the non obstante clause the Act is applicable even to employees in the factory who might not be workers ' under section 2(1), the same non obstante clause will keep away the applicability of exemption provisions quarrel those working in the factory The Labour Court was therefore right in taking the view that because of the non obstante clause s 64 read with Rule 100 itself would not apply to the respondents and they would be entitled to claim overtime wages under section 59 of that Act read with section 70 of the Bombay Shops and Establishments Act, 1948.
[300 C G] The contention that the respondents were not workmen under the and as such their application was not maintainable, must be rejected.
The contention depends upon the appreciation of evidence led by the parties on the nature of duties and functions performed by the concerned respondents and it was on an appreciation of the entire material that the Labour Court recorded a finding that having regard to the nature of their duties and functions all respondents, other than those who were holding the posts of Senior Supervisors and supervisors, were industrial employees, i. e. workman under the and it is not possible for this Court to interfere with such a finding of fact recorded by the Labour Court.
Even otherwise after considering some of the important material on record the court is satisfied that the Labour.
Court 's finding is correct.
[301 C F]
