The appellant was working as a senior clerk in the office of the chief Commercial Superintendent.
Northern Railway, Varanasi on May 22, 1982, the senior Commercial officer wrote a letter to him calling upon him to offer his explanation in regard to twelve charges of gross indiscipline, mostly relating to the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent.
The appellant submitted his explanation to the charges by his reply dated June 9, 1982.
On the very next day, the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent served a second notice upon the appellant saying that the explanation offered by him was not convincing but that another chance was being given to him to offer his explanation regarding the specific charges which were conveyed to him earlier.
By this letter, the appellant was also called upon to submit his explanation within three days ' as to why deterrent disciplinary action should not be taken against him.
The appellant submitted his further explanation on June 14, 1982, but on the very next day, the Deputy Chief Commercial Superintendent passed an order dismissing him from service on the ground that he was not fit to be retained in service.
The appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court of Allahabad challenging the order of dismissal on various grounds.
The writ petition was dismissed and hence the appeal special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1: 1.
The order of dismissal passed against the appellant stands vitiated for the simple reason that the issue as to who, between the appellant and Respondent No. 3 (the dismissing authority) was speaking the truth was decided by Respondent No. 3.
The main thrust of the charges against the appellant related to his conduct qua Respondent 3.
Therefore, it was not open to the latter to sit in Judgment over the explanation offered by the appellant and decided that the explanation was untrue.
No person can be a judge in his own 303 cause and no witness can certify that his own testimony is true.
Any one who has a personal stake in an enquiry must keep himself aloof from the conduct of the inquiry.
[306 F H] 1: 2.
On the facts of the case, the illegality touching the proceedings which ended in the dismissal of the appellant is "so patent and loudly obtrusive that it leaves an indelible stamp of infirmity" on the decision of Respondent No. 3.
[307 B C] 2.
From the charges 2 to 7 and 11, it is obvious that if an enquiry were to be held into the charges framed against the appellant, the principal witness for the Department would have been Respondent No. 3 (the dismissing authority) himself as the main accuser and the target of appellant 's misconduct.
Surprisingly, the explanation dated June 9, 1982 of the appellant to the letter of accusation dated May 22,1982 was considered on its merits by Respondent himself.
Thereby, the accuser became the Judge.
[305 G H, 306 A] Not only that, the further explanation submitted by the appellant was considered by Respondent No. 3 himself.
The order of dismissal dated June 15, 1962 which was issued by Respondent No. 3 recites that he was fully satisfied that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry into the appellant 's conduct as provided by the Rules and that he had come to the conclusion that the appellant was not fit to be retained in service and had, therefore, to be dismissed, Evidently, Respondent 3 assessed the weight of his own accusations against the appellant and passed a judgment which is one of the easiest to pass, namely, that he himself was truthful person and the appellant a liar.
In doing this Respondent No. 3 violated a fundamental principle of natural justice.
[305 B C, 306 F] The State of U.P. vs Mohammad Nooh ; , referred to.
The contention that inspite of the above legal position, the appellant does not deserve the assistance of the court, since he was habitually guilty of acts subversive of discipline cannot be accepted.
In the first place, to hold the appellant guilty of habitual acts of indiscipline is to assume something which remains unproved, Secondly, the illegality from which the order of dismissal passed by Respondent No. 3 suffers is of a character so grave and fundamental that the alleged habitual misbehaviour on the part of the appellant cannot cure or condone it.
[307 C E] 4.
The aviod needless complications in working out the mutual rights and obligations of the parties, the court directed: (i) The appellant who is due to retire from service shall be treated as having retired from service with effect from April 1, 1984: (ii) He shall be paid arrears of salary due until March 31, 1984 on the basis of salary last drawn by him on June 15, 1982 without taking into account the increments which he might have earned subsequent to that date: 304 (iii) The Provident Fund and gratuity shall also be paid to the appellant as calculated in accordance with the rules, as if no order of dismissal was passed against him; and (iv) he may not and shall not rejoin his duties and he will be treated as on leave between 23rd March, 1984 and 31st March, 1984.
[307 F H, 308 A B]
