A group of persons residing in a village and professing the Sikh religion made an application to the State Government to declare the religious and charitable institution described in the application as a Sikh Gurdwara.
This application was published in the Officer Gazette and respondent No. 1 filed objections under section 8 of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925 contending that the institution was not a Sikh Gurdwara and that he was entitled to raise the said contention because he was the holder of the hereditary office of mahant of the institution.
The application was forwarded by the State Government under section 14 to the Sikh Gurdwara Tribunal which held that the respondent was the hereditary holder of the office of mahant of the institution and that the institution was a Sikh Gurdwara and was governed by the Act.
The respondent thereupon filed an appeal in the High Court which held that the institution was set up by a mahant for commemorating the memory of his Guru and that the land on which the institution was set up with the grant of Muafi had been donated by a Muslim ruler.
After considering of the entries in the land records, the High Court further held that institution was not only serving as a Gurdwara for the worship of Granth Saheb but was also used as a Dera or lodging house or Sadhus or Faqirs of the Udasi Sect and that there was a duality of faiths in the institution.
The High Court concluded that the institution was catering to the religious views and beliefs of both the sects amongst the local population and that the Tribunal was in error in declaring that the institution was a Sikh Gudrwara which would permit one of the communities to appropriate the institution to its exclusive use and to deprive the other community or sect from the dual use to which the institution has been put ever since it was founded or established.
The High Court, consequently allowed the appeal and set aside the declaration made by the Tribunal.
Dismissing the further appeals to this Court 373 ^ HELD: 1.
The appraisal of the evidence by the High Court is correct and unexceptional.
The evidence discloses that the institution in question was not shown to have been established for use by Sikhs for the purpose of public worship and therefore one of the material conditions for attracting section 16(2)(iii) of the Sikh Gurdwara Act, 1925 was not established.
It is immaterial that at the time of presentation of the petition it was along with the followers of Udasi Sect used for worship of Granth Sahib by the Sikhs.
[382E F] 2.
In order to bring a case under section 16(2)(iii) of the Act it must not only be established that the institution was established by Sikhs for the purpose of public worship but was used for such worship by Sikhs before and at the time of the presentation of the petition.
The use of the conjunctive 'and ' clearly imports that in order to attract Section 16(2)(iii) both the conditions must be cumulatively satisfied.
[380A B] Gurmukh Singh vs Risaldar Deva Singh & Ors., AIR 1937 Lahore 577, allowed.
Udasis form an independent sect : They do venerate Sikh Scriptures.
Therefore, in an institution of Udasis sect, one can visualise reading of Granth Sahib or veneration of Sikh scriptures.
That itself is not decisive of the character of the institution.
If the succession was from Guru to Chela and those Gurus were followers of Udasi faith and the institution was known as Dera of Udasi Bhekh and they followed some of the practices of Hindu traditional religion that would be completely destructive of the character of the institution as Sikh Gurdwara.
[381E F] Mahant Daram Dass etc.
vs The State of Punjab & Ors. ; Hem Singh & Ors.
vs Basant Das and Anr.
, AIR 1936 PC 93 at 100 and Pritam Dass Mahant vs Shiromani Gurdwara Prabhandak Committee, C.A. No. 1983 of 1970 dated 16.2.84 referred to.
In the instant case, there is no evidence to show that the institution was established for use by Sikhs for the purpose of public worship.
Though the institution may be established by anyone may be a Sikh or follower of any other faith, but it must be established for use by Sikhs for the purpose of public worship.
The original grantor was a Muslim ruler but there is nothing to show that when Gulab Das Faqir of Udasi Sect established the institution, he did it for use by Sikhs for the purpose of public worship.
Later on as the majority of the population of the village were followers of Sikh religion and as Udasis also venerate Granth Sahib, reading of Granth Sahib may have commenced and therefore, generally speaking people may describe, and revenue record may show it to be Gurdwara, but that would neither be decisive of the character of the institution nor sufficient to bring the institution within Section 16(2)(iii) of the Act.
[380D F]
