The appellants plaintiffs instituted a suit for declaration of title and delivery of possession of immovable properties.
The first respondent was the State Government.
Prior to the institution of the suit the plaintiffs, had issued notice to the 1st respondent under section 80 CPC, but without waiting for the statutory period of two months to expire, the plaintiffs instituted the suit.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State it was contended that the suit was not maintainable for want of proper notice under section 80 CPC.
The Trial court upheld the contention and dismissed the suit.
The order was confirmed by the first appellate court and the second appeal preferred by the appellants to the High Court was dismissed in limine.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
A suit against the Government or a public officer, to which the requirement of a prior notice under section 80 CPC is attracted, cannot be validly instituted until the expiration of the period of two months next after the notice in the writing has been delivered to the authorities concerned in the manner prescribed in the said section and if filed before the expiry of the said period, the suit has to be dismissed as not maintainable.
[314 A B] 2.
The effect of section 80 CPC prior to its amendment by Act 104 of 1976 is clearly to impose a bar against the institution of a suit against the Government or a public officer in respect of any act purported to be done by him in his official capacity until the expiration of two months after notice has been delivered.
There is clearly a public purpose underlying this mandatory provision.
310 3.
The examination of the scheme of the Section reveals that the section has been enacted as a measure of public policy with the object of ensuring that before a suit is instituted against the Government or a public officer, the Government or the officer concerned is afforded an opportunity to scrutinise the claim in respect of which the suit is proposed to be filed and if it be found to be a just claim, to take immediate action and thereby avoid unnecessary litigation and save public time and money by settling the claim without driving the person who issued the notice, to institute the suit involving considerable expenditure and delay.
[312 E] 4.
When the language used in the Statute is clear and unambiguous it is the plain duty of the Court to give effect to it and considerations of hardship will not be a legitimate ground for not faithfully implementing the mandate of the legislature.
[313 B] Bhagchand Dagadusa vs Secretary of State for India, 54 IA 338; Vellayan vs Madras Province; 74 Indian Appeals 223; and Sawai Singhai Nirmal Chand vs Union of India referred to.
Nani Amma Nannini Amma vs State of Kerala AIR 1963 Kerala 114, overruled.
