The appellant, an employee of the respondent, was charged for abusing some fellow worker or officer of the management within the premises of the factory of the respondent.
In domestic enquiry the Enquiry officer found the appellant guilty of the charge.
The management dismissed the appellant.
On a reference being made under section 10(i)(c) of the the Labour Court held on preliminary issue that the reference was bad in law because the appellant was not a workman under section 2(s) of the Act.
The Labour Court 's findings were challenged by the appellant in a writ petition which was dismissed by the High Court in limine On a special leave petition being filed by the appellant from which this appeal arises, this Court directed the Labour Court to try the other issues before it on the basis that the appellant was a workman.
The Labour Court held that the finding of the Inquiry officer was perverse; the punishment of dismissal was disproportionate to the gravity of the charge and the appellant was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages and continuity of service.
The management filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the findings of the Labour Court.
This writ petition was transferred to this Court.
Allowing the appeal and dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD: A perusal of the evidence shows that the substantial part of the work of the appellant consisted of looking after the security of the factory and its property by deputing the watchmen working under him to work at the factory gate or sending them to watch towers or around the factory or to accompany visitors to the factory and making entries in the visitors ' register as regards the visitors and in the concerned registers as regards material entering or, going out of the premises of the factory.
The appellant could never appoint or dismiss any workman or order any enquiry against any workman.
In these circumstances 170 it is held that the substantial duty of the appellant was only that of a Security Inspector at the gate of the factory premises and that it was neither managerial nor supervisory in nature in the sense in which those terms are understood in industrial law.
Therefore he clearly falls within the definition of workman under s.2(s) of the Act and the reference of the dispute under section 10(i)(c) of the Act is valid in law.
[177B C, E G] It is seen from the judgment of the Labour Court that though the appellant had produced before the Enquiry officer 5 sheets of papers with the signatures of about 100 workmen of the factory in support of the statement that the appellant had not abused anyone in the factory during the course of his service and the management had produced Exts.
M 6, a list of 90 persons before the Enquiry officer, he had not called any of those persons to ascertain the truth regarding the alleged abuse by the appellant.
It is also seen from the judgment of the Labour Court that the appellant was not given a list of the management 's witnesses before the commencement of the domestic enquiry.
In these circumstances, the conclusion of the Labour Court that the Enquiry officer had not acted properly in the proceedings and that he had not given full opportunity to the appellant as required by law does not call for any interference.
[178C E] The punishment awarded to the appellant is shockingly disproportionate regard being had to the charge framed against him.
No responsible employer would ever impose in like circumstances the punishment of dismissal to the employee, and victimization or unfair labour practice could well be inferred from the conduct of the management in awarding the extreme punishment of dismissal for a flimsy charge of abuse of some worker or officer of the management by the appellant within the premises of the factory.[178G H, 179A] Therefore termination of the appellant 's service is invalid and unsustainable in law.
[179A] Llyods Bank Ltd. vs Panna Lal Gupta & others and Construction and Engineering Company Ltd. vs Their Workmen , referred to.
