In 1837 the late Maharaja Harihar Rao Holkar made a grant of an inam of a garden to the priest of the Holkar family.
The grant of inam was on Putra Pautradi Vansh Parampara condition by way of parvarish i.e., maintenance, The three appellants in the appeal were the legal heirs and successors of the grandson of the original inamdar, and the 1st Respondent as the sole survivor of the eldest male line of the last holder, the inamdar and as also the karta of the joint Hindu family.
The appellants plaintiffs instituted a suit for partition and separate possession of their half share in the joint family property alleging that defendant No. 1 in his capacity as the karta of the joint Hindu family was in possession and management of the joint family property, including the inam lands.
The claim was contested by respondents defendants 1 and 2 who contended that the plaintiffs predecessor in interest had separated from the family by taking his share in the year 1917 18 and therefore the plaintiffs had no kind of right or title in the suit property and that the inam lands and the properties acquired from and out of the inam being impartible in nature, the succession to which was governed by the rule of lineal primogeniture, the properties exclusively belonged to defendant No. 1 and that the conferral of bhumiswami right on defendant No. 1 under section 158 (1)(b) of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 made the suit lands his separate and exclusive property and it was not part of the joint estate of the undivided family.
The Additional District Judge held that the inam lands together with the property acquired from the income of the inam were ancestral impartible estate since the same had devolved by survivorship by the rule of linea 485 primogeniture and therefore constituted joint family property and that the rule of impartibility and the special mode of succession by the rule of lineal primogeniture were nothing but incidents of the inam which stood extinguished by section 158(1)(b) of the Code.
The plaintiff 's claim for partition and separate possession to the extent of their half share in the plaint schedule properties and to mesne profits were decreed.
On appeal, the High Court reversed the judgment of the Additional District Judge with regard to the inam lands and the houses and other property acquired out of the inam holding.
The High Court held that the plaintiffs who were the junior members of the family had no kind of right or title to the inam lands except the right to maintenance and that defendant No. 1, the inamdar for the time being, became the bhumiswami of the suit lands under section 158(1)(b) of the Code which constituted his separate property.
The High Court however maintained the decree of the Additional District Judge with regard to partition and separation of the plaintiffs ' share of immovable property.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
section 158 (1)(b) of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 effected a complete extinction of the inam rights followed by simultaneous conferral of bhumiswami rights.
Every person, in respect of the land held by him in the Madhya Bharat region, as an inamdar, at the time of the coming into force of the Code, became a bhumiswami thereof, and acquired all the rights and became subject to all the liabilities of a bhumiswami under the Code.
[493B] 2.
The words "in respect of land held by him" appearing in section (158)(1) (b) refer to the status and character of the tenure holder in relation to the holding on the appointed day.
The accrual of the status of bhumiswami by such person was automatic and he acquired all the rights and became subject to all the liabilities conferred or imposed upon a bhumiswami by or under the Code.
[493C] 3.
On a combined reading of SS.
158(1) (b) and 164 the legal consequence that ensued was that the incident of the impartibility and the special mode of succession by the rule of primogeniture which were terms of the grant of inam lands under the Jagir.
Manual of the Holkar State stood extinguished.
After the conferment of bhumiswami rights, the incidents and character of the tenure became transformed the restrictions placed thereon disappeared, and such lands became capable of being held in joint ownership like any other coparcenary property.
[493E] 4.
The conferral of bhumiswami rights on the holder for the time being under section 158(1)(b) of the Code in respect of ancestral inam lands necessarily enures to the benefit of all the members of the joint family.
[493F] 5.
Impartibility is essentially a creature of custom.
Here it is a term of the grant.
The junior members of a family in the case of an ancient 486 impartible joint family estate take no right in the property by birth and therefore have no right of partition having regard to the very nature of the estate that it is imartible.
The only incidence for joint property which still attaches to the joint family property is the right of survivorship which, of course, is not inconsistent with the custom of impartibility.
[495D] In the instant case, the incident of impartibility attached to inam lands, no longer exists by reason of section 158(1)(b) of the Code as they have now become bhumiswami lands.
The right of junior members of the family for maintenance is governed by custom and not based upon any joint right or interest in the property as co owners.
[495E] 6.
To establish that a family governed by the Mitakshara in which there is an impartible estate has ceased to be joint, it is necessary to prove an intention, express or implied, on the part of the junior members of the family to renounce their succession to the estate.
[495H] 7.
The impartibility of the tenure governed by the Jagir Manual of the Holkar State and the rule of lineal primogeniture governed by the Jagir Manual, Chapter 11, rules 2 and 3 did not per se destroy its nature as joint family property or render it the separate property of the last holder so as to destroy the right of survivorship; the estate its character of joint family property and its devolution was governed by the devolution was governed by the rule of survivorship as modified by the rule of lineal primogeniture.
[495G] Shiba Prasad Singh vs Rani Prayag Kumari Debi & Ors., LR (1931 32) 59 IA 331 and Nagesk Bisto Desai vs Khando Tirmal Desai, ; , referred to.
