On January 8, 1980 the respondent State issued a notification under Sec. 4 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act of 1894 for acquisition of 60 adjoining plots of land of two small villages for construction of a market yard.
The notification also contained an order of the Government made under Sec.
17(4) of the Act directing that Sec.
5A would not apply to the said proceedings.
The notification was published in the Official Gazette dated January 9, 1980.
That notification was followed by another notification dated January 9, 1980 issued under Sec. 6 of the Act.
This notification contained an order made under Sec.
17 (1) of the Act authorising the Collector to take possession of the plots.
The notification was published in the official Gazette dated January 10, 1980.
The possession of the plots was taken in course of the acquisition proceedings.
In or about June 1982 notices were issued by the Collector to the interested persons for determining the compensation payable to them.
By filing a writ petition in the High Court the appellants questioned the validity of the acquisition proceedings in regard to certain plots on the grounds that: (1) they had no knowledge of the acquisition proceedings and were prejudiced by the order made under sec.
17 (4); (2) there was no urgency sufficient in law to sustain the order made under Sec.
17 (4); and (3) Sec.
17 (4) would not be applicable because on a part of a plot of land there was a house.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition.
Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: In a small place where these plots are situate, the acquisition of these lands would be the talk of the town in a shortwhile and it is difficult to believe that the appellants who are residents of that place would not have known till July 1982 that the impugned notification had 418 been published in 1980.
Any interference in this case filed after two and a half years with the acquisition proceedings is likely to cause serious public prejudice.
This appeal should, therefore, fail on the ground of delay alone.
[420G H] Appellant No. 1 claims to be the owner of plot No. 249.
On behalf of the respondents it is urged that appellant No. 1 is recorded only as a co tenure holder alongwith five others and they have not impeached the notifications.
With regard to the allegations about the existence of a house on this plot, it is seen that the said fact is denied.
The respondents rely upon some statements recorded by the revenue authorities suggesting that there was no house on this plot on the date of the notification.
This is a disputed question of fact.
Appellant No. 2 who claims to be the owner of plot No. 261 is stated to have purchased it on November 17, 1980 after the impugned notifications were published.
The title of appellant No. 3 to plot No. 133 is denied by R.K. Kannaujia, Secretary, Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti, Kheragarh.
In this State of affairs where there are disputed questions of facts it cannot be said that the appellants have made out any case for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution.
[421B D] There is no ground to held that the order made under section 17 (4) of the Act exempting the operation of section 5 A of the Act is bad in law even though there appears to be some administrative delay in commencing the construction of the Market Yard.
[421F G] State of Punjab vs Gurdial Singh & Ors., ; , referred to.
