The management of the Sugar Mill of the Appellant was taken over under Rule 125 of the Defence of India Rules 1962 and an Authorised Controller was appointed.
In the appeal by certificate to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the Appellant that long before passing of the order and even before sugar was declared to be an essential commodity, the appellant had completely stopped the running of the Mill with no intention to start it again, there was, therefore, no undertaking within the meaning of Rule 125A and the order passed under Rule 125A which was not attracted must be held to be bad and invalid.
On behalf of the Union of India, it was contended that Rule 125A confers jurisdiction and authority to pass an order even in respect of an undertaking closed and intended to be permanently shut down.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : The taking over of the management of the sugar mill of the appellant and the appointment of the authorised controller were perfectly valid and lawful and the act done by the authorised controller in the course of management is binding on the appellant.
[553A] 531 2.
Although Rule 125 confers very wide powers for general control of an undertaking, there is no provision in the said rule to take over the management of any undertaking.
Rule 125A by way of amendment was, therefore, inserted to confer further power of taking over the management of particular undertakings and of appointing authorised controllers for running such undertakings.
[541G, 542A] 3.
Rule 125A makes it clear that the rule was not intended to apply to each and every undertaking within the meaning of Rule 125.
Special provision is made in Rule 125A in respect of particular undertakings only.
Rule 125A describes and particularizes the undertakings to which this rule will be applicable.
[542B] 4.
The provision in Rule 125A that "in this rule unless the context otherwise requires, an 'undertaking ' means any undertaking (including an undertaking vested in or controlled or managed by, a local authority) which is engaged in ", is merely descriptive of the undertaking to which this rule is applicable.
The words "which is engaged in the production" merely describes the kind of undertaking by referring to the nature of the activity of the undertaking for bringing it within the purview of Rule 125A and they have no bearing on the question whether the activities are in the process of being carried on or have been stopped.
The expression any undertaking which is 'engaged in ' has been used to describe the nature of business of the undertaking and is merely descriptive of the undertaking to which this rule will apply.
[542C E]
