The Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner held an auction for granting the right to sell country Liquor for liquor vend.
The respondents offered the highest bid which was provisionally accepted and they were declared the highest bidder under Rule 36(2) of the Punjab Liquor Licence Rules 1956.
Subsequently, the Excise and Taxation Commissioner accepted the bid as required Rule 36(22) The respondents however failed to deposit the security amount as required under Rule 36(22A) and thereby contravened conditions No 15(1) of the conditions of auction and Rule 36(23).
The Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner therefore served the respondents with a notice to show cause why the licence for country liquor vend, should not be re auction under Rule 36(23A) and the deficiency in price and all expenses of such re auction recovered from them under Section 60 of the Punjab Excise Act, 1914.
The respondents represented that before the auction it was announced that no wine shop would be opened within a radius of three miles of the liquor vend but across the border the State Government of Punjab had sanctioned the establishment of 716 a liquor shop which was hardly 2 1/2 miles from the border and this would mean that there would be two country liquor shops one in the State of Haryana and the other in the State of Punjab and this was in breach of condition No. 13(iii) read with Rule 37(88) of the Rules.
The Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner rejected the representation and directed the re sale of the licence for retail vend of the country liquor shop under Rule 36(23).
The shop was re auctioned.
At the time of re auction there were 52 bidders and the shop was re sold at the highest bid of Rs. 6.65 lakhs.
The respondents were served with a notice of demand of Rs. 3.46 lakhs representing the loss on re sale.
In their writ petitions to the High Court the respondents assailed the notice of demand.
Following the decision in Kanhiya Lal Bhatia & Co. vs State of Haryana & Ors.
the High Court held that the State had no authority to demand the amounts for failure of which the vends were put to re auction on the ground that the licence fee levied was in the nature of excise duty.
In the Appeals to this Court, on the question whether the State Government was entitled to realise the difference which the respondents had agreed to pay under the terms of auction of a liquor vend and the amount realized on reauction of the vend, as also the defaulted instalments of the licence fee payable in respect of a liquor vend: Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) There is a distinction between contracts which are executed in exercise of the executive powers and contracts which are statutory in nature.
Under Art.299 (1), three conditions have to be satisfied before a binding contract by the Union or the State in exercise of the executive power comes into existence: (1) The contract must be expressed to be made by the President or the Governor, as the case may be.
(2) It must be executed in writing.
And (3) the execution thereof should be by such person and in such manner as the President or the Governor may direct or authorize.
There can be doubt that a contract which has to be executed in accordance with article 299(1) is nullified and becomes void if the contract is not executed in conformity with the provisions of article 299(1) and there is no question of estoppel or ratification in such case.
Nor can there by any implied contract between the Government and another person.
[726C E] Smt.
Nanhibai vs The Excise Commissioner, M.P. & Ors., AIR (1963) MP 352, referred to.
Ram Ratan Gupta vs State of M.P., AIR (1974) MP 101.
Ajodhya Prasad Shaw & Anr.
vs State of Orissa & Ors., , M/S Shree Krishna Gyanoday Sugar Ltd. & Anr.
vs State of Bihar & Anr., , approved.
(ii) article 299(1) applies to a contract made in exercise of the executive power of the Union or the State.
but not to a contract made in exercise of statutory power.
article 299(1) has no application to a case where a particular statutory authority as distinguished from the Union or the States enters into a contract which is statutory in nature.
Such a contract.
even though it is for 717 securing the interests of the Union or the States.
is not contract which has been entered into by or on behalf of the Union or the State in exercise of its executive powers.
[726F G] K.P. Chowdhary vs State of M.P. ; , Mulamchand vs state of M.P. ; , State of M.P. vs Rattan Lal, , State of M.P., vs Firm Gobardhan Dass Kailash Nath, AIR , referred to.
(iii) In an excise contract, the Collector acting as Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner conducting the auction under Rule 36(22) and the Excise Commissioner exercising the functions of the Financial Commissioner accepting the bid under Rule 36(22A) although they act for and on behalf of the State Government for raising public revenue, have the requisite authority to do so under the Act and the rules framed thereunder and therefore such a contract which comes into being acceptance of the bid, is a statutory contract falling outside the purview of Article 299(1) of the Constitution.
In such a contract the requirements of Article 299(1) cannot be invoked.
[727B E] A. Damodaran & Anr.
vs State of Kerala & Ors.
; , referred to, In the instant case, there was unconditional acceptance of the highest bid of the respondents by the Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner at the time of the auction on March 11, 1969, and also by the Excise & Taxation Commissioner on March 21, 1969 as required under Rule 36(22A).
The respondents could not unilaterally by their letter dated April 12, 1969 rescind the contract on the pretext that the State Government of Punjab had opened a new liquor shop across the State border.
Even though this may have been in breach of the inter state agreement between the State Governments of Punjab and Haryana, the opening of such a liquor vend by the State Government of Punjab could not justify the respondents in not making the security deposit.
This would not amount to a breach of the conditions on the part of the State Government of Haryana or furnish a ground absolving the respondents of their liability to pay the shortfall.
[730E G ; 731A B] 2.
Persons who offer their bids at an auction to vend country liquor with full knowledge of the terms and conditions attaching thereto, cannot be permitted to wriggle out of the contractual obligations arising out of the acceptance of their bids by a petition under Article 226 of Constitution.
[731G] Har Shanker & Ors.
vs The Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner & Ors. , State of Haryana & Ors vs Jage Ram & Ors. ; ,.
State of Punjab vs M/s Dial Chand Gian Chand & Co. referred to 3.
(i) In a commercial contract for the performance of which a definite time has been fixed and the contract specifies the mode of payment.
i.e. specifies the dates on which the instalments of the licence fee are to be paid.
time is of the essence of the contract.
[732H] 718 (ii) Rule 36(23)(1) of the Rules specifically makes time of the essence.
It therefore follows that payment of the instalments on the due dates was a condition pre requisite to the performance of the contract.
[733A] In the instant case, the failure of the respondents to make payments relieved the State Government of their obligations.
The Excise & Taxation Commissioner would have been justified if he had cancelled the licence under Rule 36(23) and put the liquor vend to reauction for the remaining period of the financial year.
Instead of taking this drastic step of cancellation of the contract, the Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner served the respondents with the impugned notice of demand for payment of the first fortnightly instalment.
The respondents were bound to pay the defaulted instalment on the due date.
[733B C] 4.
The decision of the High Court in Kanhiyalal Bhatia Court in State of Haryana vs Jage Ram & Ors,
