The appellant was a senior.
advocate.
He was required to appear before the Special Judge to make his submission on the question of sentence to be imposed upon his client who was convicted for an offence under s.5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
As he appeared in a shirt and trouser outfit and not in Court attire, the Judge asked him to appear in the prescribed formal attire for being heard in his professional capacity.
The appellant took umbrage and left the Court.
Some other advocate appeared in the matter and the accused having being found guilty of the charge of corruption the Judge imposed a sentence of four years R.I.
The appellant made a written application to the Judge couched in scurrilous language making the imputation that the Judge was a 'corrupt Judge ' and added that he was 'contaminating the seat of justice '; and forwarded copies of the application, without occasion or need to the Administrative Judge, Chief Secretary and other authorities.
The High Court initiated contempt proceedings, found the appellant guilty of having committed criminal contempt under section 2(c)(1) of the and after affording full opportunity of hearing, imposed a sentence of simple imprisonment for one week and a fine of Rs. 500.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Considerations regarding maintenance of the independence of the judiciary and the morale of the Judges demand that the appellant should not escape with impunity on the mere tendering of an apology which in any case.
does not wipe out the mischief.
If such a apology were to be accepted, as a rule, and not as an exception, it would virtually be tantamount to issuing a 'licence ' to scandalize courts and commit contempt of court with impunity.
The High Court was justified in imposing a substantive sentence and the said sentence cannot be said to be excessive or out of proportion.[838E; 837E, 838F] 834 No Judge can take a decision which does not displease one side or the other.
By the very nature of his work he has to decide matters against one or other of the parties.
If the fact that he renders a decision which is resented to by a litigant or his lawyer were to expose him to such a risk, it will sound the death knell of the institution.
The day must be dreaded when a Judge cannot work with independence by reason of the fear that a disgruntled member of the Bar can publicly humiliate him and heap disagree on him with impunity, if any of his orders, or the decision rendered by him displeases any of the Advocates appearing in the matter.
A line has therefore to be drawn some where, some day, by some one.
That is why the Court is impelled to act (rather than merely sermonise) much as the Court dislikes imposing punishment whilst exercising the contempt jurisdiction, which no doubt has to be exercised very sparingly and 'with circumspection.
[837H; 838A B] 2.
An attitude of unmerited leniency cannot be adopted at the cost of principle and at the expense of the Judge who has been scandalized.
To pursue a populist line of showing indulgence is not very difficult in fact it is more difficult to resist the temptation to do so rather than to adhere to the mail studded path of duty.
Institutional perspective demands that considerations of populism are not allowed to obstruct the path of duty.
[338C] In the instant case, the appellant sought to justify his conduct before the High Court on the ground of the treatment alleged to have been meted out to him by the Special Judge.
No remorse was felt.
No sorrow was expressed.
No apology was offered: He expressed his sorrow only before this Court, saying that he had lost his mental balance, and was granted an opportunity to tender an apology.
He appeared before the Special Judge and tendered a written apology indicating that he was doing so: "as directed by the Hon 'ble Supreme Court.
" This circumstance shows it was a 'paper ' apology, and that the expression of sorrow came from his pen, not from his heart.
It is one thing to "say" sorry it is another to "feel" sorry.
This Court cannot subscribe to the 'slap say sorry and forget ' school of thought in administration of contempt jurisdiction.
[886H; 837A C]
