Regulation 37 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board Contributory Provident Fund Regulations framed by the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board under the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 provides that the Electricity Board shall credit to a member 's provident fund account a special contribution calculated in the specified manner, in addition to the contribution credited under Regulation 11, if the Board is satisfied that the service of the member has been good efficient and faithful and the member has not been dismissed from service or the member has not been removed from service in which case the sanction of the Board had to be obtained.
The which was also applicable to the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board provided for the payment of gratuity to employees who would retire after rendering service for a specified number of years.
The petitioner 's husband retired in 1976 after serving the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board for about 34 years and died three months thereafter.
The petitioner was paid her husband 's subscription to the Contributory Provident Fund and interest and the Electricity Board 's contribution and interest and also the gratuity under the payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
The Electricity Board did not pay the Special Contribution to be made by it to the contributory Provident Fund under Regulation 37 on the ground that the special contribution being nothing other than the payment of gratuity, they could not be asked to pay gratuity twice over, once under and again under Regulation 37.
The petitioner having got no relief from anywhere wrote a letter to a Judge of the Supreme Court which was treated as a writ petition.
Allowing the petition, 799 ^ HELD: The Electricity Board cannot avoid payment of the special Contribution to Provident Fund under their own Provident Fund Regulations on the pretext that it is akin to or the same as Gratuity payable under the .
In the first place, the Board, in their Regulations, have themselves labelled the Special Contribution under Regulation 37 as a Special contribution to Provident Fund and not as Gratuity.
It is not as if they were unaware of the word 'Gratuity ' and that it meant since it is found that there is a reference in Regulation 5 to a Gratuity Scheme of the Tamil Nadu Government which had been adopted by the Board.
The Special Contribution under Regulation 37 is part of a well thought out Provident Fund Scheme designed to benefit 'good, efficient and faithful ' employees (borrowing the words from the Regulation itself) by making annual contributions in addition to the monthly contributions under Regulation 11.
This is what appears from Regulation 37 itself.
There is no justification for first dubbing it as a gratuity on the ground that it has some of the known characteristics of gratuity and then proceeding to deny the employees the befit of it on the ground that the Board are paying gratuity under the .
If the Special Contribution has some common features with gratuity, it has also distinctive features which distinguish it from gratuity payable under the .
[803B F] In view of the finding that Special Contribution under Regulation 37 is not the same as gratuity under , the argument that the provision for Special Contribution under Regulation 37 was inconsistent with the provisions of the and therefore the latter should prevail to the exclusion of the former must fail.
[804H; 805A]
