In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 36 of the Maharashtra Secondary and Higher Secondary Boards Act, 1965, the State Board has framed the Maharashtra Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Boards ' Regulations 1977.
These regulations were sanctioned by the State Government under sub section 3 of section 36 on 11th July, 1977 and came into force on 15th June, 1977.
These regulations were applied to the Secondary School Certificate examination and Higher Secondary Certificate examination held in October, 1977 and thereafter Regulation 104 refers to verification of marks obtained by a candidate in a subject.
Clause (1) thereof restricts verification to checking whether all the answers have been examined and that there has been no mistake in the totalling of marks for each question in that subject and transferring marks correctly on the first cover page of the answer book and whether the supplements attached to the answer book mentioned by the candidate are in tact.
Clause (1) also speaks of revaluation and prohibits revaluation of the answer books or supplements.
Clause (3) of the said regulation also speaks of right to claim revaluation by an examinee and is to the effect: "no candidate shall claim, or be entitled to revaluation of his answer or disclosure or inspection of the answer books or other documents as these are treated by the Divisional Board as most confidential.
A number of unsuccessful and disappointed candidates who had 30 appeared for the Higher Secondary Certificate and Secondary School Certificate public examinations conducted by the Divisional Boards functioning under the supervision and control of the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education filed a batch of 39 Writ Petitions in the High Court of Bombay challenging the validity of Clauses (1) and (3) of regulation 104 of the Maharashtra Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Boards Regulations 1977 and seeking the issuance of writs directing the Board to allow them disclosure and inspection of their answer books in the public examination, the results whereof had already been published and to conduct a revaluation of such of the answer papers as the petitioners may demand after the inspection.
The writ petitioners had based their challenges against the validity of clauses (1) and (3) of Regulation 104 on three main grounds: (1) The Impugned clauses were violative of the principles of natural justice; (2) Both clauses (1) and (3) were ultra vires and void on the ground of their being in excess of the regulation making, powers conferred on the Board by Section 36 of the Act; and (3) The impugned provisions contained in clauses (1) and (3) were highly unreasonable and since the regulations framed by the Board are in the nature of bye laws.
they are liable to be struck down on the ground of unreasonableness The High Court divided the Writ Petitions into two groups; the first group consisting of cases where the right of inspection alone was claimed and second group comprising of cases where the petitioners had claimed also a further right to demand a revaluation of the answer papers.
The High Court allowed the petitions by two separate judgments one in respect of the first group holding that clause (3) of regulation 104 which lays down that no candidate shall be entitled to disclosure or inspection of the answer books or other documents as these are to be treated as most confidential is ultra vires on the ground of its being in excess of the regulation making power of the Board and by another judgment in the second group holding that the provisions contained in clause (1) of regulation 104 that no revaluation of the answer books or supplements shall be done is ultra vires the regulation making power conferred by section 36 and is also illegal and void on the ground of its being manifestly unreasonable.
Aggrieved by these judgments rendered in the two groups of cases the appellant Board preferred these appeals after obtaining Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeals, the Court ^ HELD: 1:1.
Regulation 104(3) of the Maharashtra Secondary and 31 Higher Secondary Board Regulations 1977 is valid.
The process of evaluation of answer papers or subsequent verification of marks under clause (3) of regulation 104 does not attract the principles of natural justice since no decision making process which brings about adverse civil consequences to the examinees is involved.
Non disclosure or disallowance of the right of inspection of the answer books as well as denial of the right to ask for a revaluation to examinees who are dissatisfied with the results do not visit them with adverse civil consequences.
There is no substance in the contention that every adverse verification involves a condemnation of the examination behind their back and hence.
constitutes a clear violation of principles of natural justice.[62E, 41D E, F G] 1:2.
The principles of natural justice cannot be extended beyond reasonable and rational limits and cannot be carried into such absurd lengths as to make it necessary that candidates who have taken a public examination should be allowed to participate in the process of evaluation of their performances or to verify the correctness of the evaluation made by the examiners by themselves conducting an inspection of the answer books and determining whether there has been a proper and fair valuation of the answers by the examiners.
[41H; 42A] Union of India vs M.L. Kapur, ; ; referred to.
The question whether a particular piece of delegated legislation whether a rule or regulation or other type of statutory instrument is in excess of the power of subordinate legislation conferred on the delegate has to be determined with reference only to the specific provisions contained in the relevant statute conferring the power to make the rule, regulation etc.
and also the object and purpose of the Act as can be gathered from the various provisions of the enactment.
[43 A B] 2:2.
The Court cannot substitute its own opinion for that of the legislature or its delegate as to what principle or policy would best serve the object and purposes of the Act and it cannot sit in judgment over the wisdom and effectiveness or otherwise of the policy laid down by the regulation making body and declare a regulation to be ultra vires merely on the ground that, in the view of the Court the impugned provisions will not help to serve the object and purpose of the Act.
So long as the body entrusted with the task of framing the rules or regulations acts within the scope of the authority conferred on it, in the sense that the rules or regulations made by it have a rational nexus with the object and purpose of the statute, the Court should not concern itself with the wisdom or efficatiousness of such rules or regulations.
It is exclusively within the province of the legislature and its delegate to determine as a matter of policy, how the provisions of the statute can best be implemented and what measures, 32 substantive as well as procedural would have to be incorporated in the rules or regulations for the efficacious achievement of the objects and purposes of the Act.
It is not for the Court to examine the merits or demerits of such a policy because its scrutiny has to be limited to the question as to whether the impugned regulations fall within the scope of the regulation making power conferred on the delegate by the statute.
[43 C F] 3:1.
The view taken by the High Court that clause (3) of the regulation 104 is ultra vires on the ground of its being in excess of the regulation making power conferred on the Board is not correct.
[45 B] 3.2.
Any drawbacks in the policy incorporated in a rule or regulation will not render it ultra vires and the Court cannot strike it down on the ground, that, in its opinion, it is not a wise or prudent, but is even a foolish one, and that it will not really serve to effectuate the purposes of the Act.
The legislature and its delegates are the sole repositories of the power to decide what policy should be pursued in relation to matters covered by the Act and there is no scope for interference by the Court unless the particular provision impugned before it can be said to suffer from any legal infirmity, in the sense of its being wholly beyond the scope of the regulation making power or its being inconsistent with any of the provisions of the parent enactment or in violation of any of the limitations imposed by the Constitution.
None of these vitiating factors are shown to exist in the present case.
[46E F] 3:3.
The provisions of sections 19 and 36 of the Act make it clear that a duty is cast on the State Board to formulate its policy as to how the examinations are to be conducted, how the valuation of the performances of the candidates is to be made and by what procedure there results are to be finalised, compiled and released it is perfectly within the competence of the Board, rather, it was its plain duty, to apply its mind and decide as a matter of policy relating to the conduct of the examination as to whether disclosure and inspection of the answer books should be allowed to the candidates, whether and to what extent verification of the result should be permitted after the results have been announced and whether any right to claim revaluation of the answer book should be recognised or provided for.
All these are undoubtedly matters which have an intimate nexus with the objects and purposes of the enactment and are, therefore, within the ambit of the general power to make regulations conferred by sub section 1 of section 36, and also within the scope of clauses (c), (f) and (g) of sub section 2 of the said section.
[44F H, 45 A B] 4:1.
Clause (3) or Regulation 104 is not in the nature of a bye law and it is not an unreasonable provision.
[46 H] 33 4:2.
While the power to make regulations for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of the Act, is conferred on the Board by section 36, section 38 confers a distinct power of making bye laws.
The legislature, while enacting sections 36 and 38 must be assumed to have been fully aware of the niceties of the legal position governing the distinction between rules/regulations properly so called and bye laws.
When the statute contains a clear indication that the distinct regulation making power conferred under section 36 was not intended as a power merely to frame byelaws, it is not open to the Court to ignore the same and treat the regulations made under section 36 as mere bye laws in order to bring them within the scope of justifiability by applying the test of reasonableness.
[47 E G] 4.3.
Regulations made by the Board under section 36 are in the nature of statutory rules and they have the full rigour and force of sub ordinate legislation made by a delegate duly empowered in that behalf by the legislature.
[49 D E] Sophy Kelly vs The State, 69 Bombay, L.R. 186 overruled.
The provisions contained in a statutory enactment or in rules/regulations framed thereunder have to be so construed as to be in harmony with each other and where under a specific section or rule a particular subject has received special treatment, such special provision will exclude the applicability of any general provision which might otherwise cover the said topic.
[52 B C] 5.2.
Regulation 102(2), if properly construed in the setting in which it occurs only confers a suo motu power on the Divisional Board to amend the result of the examination in respect of any candidate or candidates on its being found that such result has been affected by error, malpractice, fraud, improper conduct, etc.
The error referred to in the said provision has the context to be understood as being limited to an error rising in consequence of malpractice, fraud, improper conduct or other similar matter of whatsoever nature.
Clauses (1) and (3) of regulation 104 must be read together and not in isolation.
Clause (3) of regulation 104 contains is fact a mandate to the Divisional Boards to treat the answer books and documents as confidential and lays down that no candidate shall be entitled to claim disclosure or inspection of the said confidential books and documents.
Therefore, the High Court ought not to have invoked the doctrine of implied power and obligation, in the instant case, for the purpose of holding that because the right of verification has been conferred in clause (1) of regulation 104, there is an implied power in the examinees to demand disclosure and inspection and a corresponding implied obligation on the part of the Board to cause such a demand.
[52 C D, H; 53 A; C D] 34 5:3.
Unless it can be said that a bye law is manifestly unjust, capricious, inequitable or partial in i s operation, even a bye law cannot be struck down by a Court on the ground of unreasonableness merely because the Court thinks that it goes further than is necessary or that it does not incorporate certain provisions which, in the opinion of the Court, would have been fair and wholesome.
The responsible representative body entrusted with the power to make bye laws must ordinarily be presumed to know what is necessary, reasonable, just and fair.
The Court should be extremely reluctant to substitute its opinions and views as what is wise, prudent and proper in relation to academic matters in preference to those formulated by professional men possessing technical expertise and rich experience of actual day to day working of educational institutions and the departments controlling them.
The Court cannot make a pedantic and purely idealistic approach to the problems of this nature, isolated from the actual realities and grass root problems involved in the working of the system and unmindful of the consequences which would emanate, if a purely idealistic view as opposed to a pragmatic one were to be propounded The Court should also, as far as possible, avoid any decision or interpretation of a statutory provision, rule or bye law which would bring about the result of rendering the system unworkable in practice.
[53 F H; 55 A] Trustees of the Port of Madras vs Aminchand Pyarelal and ors. ; referred to.
Kruse vs Johnson [1898] 2 Q.B. and Slattery vs Naylor [1888] 3 A.C. 446 quoted with approval.
What constitutes fair play depends upon the facts and circumstances relating to each particular given situation.
If it is found that every possible precaution has been taken and all necessary safeguards provided to ensure that the answer books inclusive of supplements are kept in safe custody so as to eliminate the danger of their being tampered with and that the evaluation is done by the examiners by applying uniform standards with checks and cross checks at different stages and that measures for detection of malpractice, etc. have also been effectively adopted, in such cases, it will not be correct on the part of the Courts to strike down the provisions prohibiting revaluation on the ground that it violates the rules of fair play.
Further, the candidates have taken the examination with full awareness of the provisions contained in the regulations and in the declarations made by them in the form of application for admission to the examination they have solemnly stated that they fully agree to abide by the regulations issued by the Board.
[59 A C; 60 F G] 6:2.
That the University of Bombay and some other Universities have 35 made provisions permitting candidates to demand revaluation, has little relevance for the purpose of deciding about the legal validity of the impugned regulations framed by the Board.
In the public interest, the results of public examinations published should have some finality attached to them.
If inspection, verification, in the presence of the candidates and revaluation are to be allowed as of right it may lead to gross delays and indefinite uncertainly particularly in regard to the relative ranking etc of the candidates, besides leading to utter confusion on account of the enormity of the labour and time involved in the process.
[60 H; 61 A D]
