Section 3 (1) of the established a fund known as the Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund.
Sub sec.
(2) of section 3 provided that there shall be credited to the Fund amounts representing all excess realisations made by the manufacturers.
Section 6 (1) provided that where any amount of excess realisation was credited to the fund, the buyer of levy sugar from whom such excess realisation as made by the manufacturers shall be entitled to the refund of such excess realisation from the Fund.
There was a proviso to section 6 (1) which inter alia precluded buyers of levy sugar to claim refund of excess realisation in certain cases.
The appellants, who carried on the business of manufacture of syrups, squashes, jams and jellies, preservation of vegetables and other food products and from whom excess realisation was made and credited to the Fund, applied for refund of such realisation.
The Central Government rejected the appellants ' application for refund on the ground that they had not been able to establish fully and clearly that the incidence of higher sugar price was not passed on by them to the consumers of the end products.
The appellants preferred a writ petition which was dismissed by the High Court on the same ground.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The proviso on its plain terms applies only where the party claiming refund of the amount of excess realisation is a wholesale or a retail dealer who has passed on the incidence of the excess over the controlled price of levy sugar to the retail dealer or to the consumer, as the case may be.
The proviso obviously cannot apply to a case where a claim for refund has been made, by a consumer of sugar from whom excess realisation has been made by the manufacturer of sugar.
[106C D] In the instant case the appellants were admittedly consumers of sugar 208 and not dealers in sugar and since they were not dealers in sugar, there could be no question of any incidence of excess being passed on by them to the retail dealer or to the consumer.
[106D] The proviso to section 6 (1) contemplates a case where a dealer whether wholesale or retail sells sugar to a retail dealer or consumer as the case may be and not where a person sells a manufactured product containing sugar as one of its ingredients.
[106G] In the instant case the appellants sold manufactured product containing sugar as one of its ingredient.
Therefore, the proviso to section 6 (1) was not attracted and the appellants were entitled to claim refund of the excess realisation from the Fund.
[106H]
