Selection of text books and books for reading to be kept in school and college libraries is a matter of vital importance to the imparting of proper education.
Such selection must depend upon the ability and fitness for the purpose of those who are charged with that responsibility.
In the State of Orissa, there was no statutory rule or regulation prescribing the procedure for selection of books for general reading to be kept in school and college libraries, except the State Government 's periodical administrative instructions in the form of resolutions constituting committees namely, an Assessment Sub Committee, a Distribution Sub Committee and a Purchase Committee to which Government officials as well as non officials were appointed as members.
The procedure followed was that each year the Member Secretary of the Purchase Committee would call upon publishers and authors by advertisements given in local newspapers to submit books for consideration.
The Assessment Sub Committee could than consider the books so submitted and thereafter recommend a list of books which, according to it, were suitable for general reading by school and college students.
The Purchase Committee would consider the recommendations made by the Assessment Sub Committee prepares a final list and submit it for approval to the State Government which could reject any book out of the list so submitted without giving any reason.
The decision of the State 323 Government regarding the assessment, selection purchase and distribution of books was made final.
The selection of the books for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 was made in this fashion.
Admittedly, some of the members of the Assessment Sub Committee were themselves authors of books and some of the books written by them were selected and purchased.
The Purchase Committee restricted the list for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 to 466 books out of 1,718 books submitted for selection, but as further funds became available the Government decided to select more books and accordingly a committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Director of Public Instruction (Schools), Orissa, selected a supplementary list of 105 books out of the said 1,718 books which had been submitted for selection.
Before further steps could be taken, in the unprecedented fiords and cyclones of August/September 1982, number of schools and colleges suffered in the calamity and the libraries of many schools and colleges were washed away.
The Central Government thereupon, as part of its relief programme for the State, gave grants to the State during February and March, 1983 aggregating to Rs. 45 lakhs for the purchase of books for the libraries of non governmental schools and colleges and to be utilised before June 1983.
Due to Paucity of time and delay in the normal process of selection of books, the State Government took a decision or April 5, 1983 to utilise the grant made by the Central Government by purchasing books out of the books selected for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 and the said supplementary list of 105 books.
In the meeting convened on April 13, 1983, to consider the selection of books to be purchased, all the 466 books selected for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 together with the 105 supplementary list of books were approved.
Thereupon, the appellants who were publishers filed a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution against the State of Orissa and the Director of Public Instruction, Orissa to quash the list of books selected for the years 1980, 1981 and 1982 and the State Government 's said decision with respect to purchasing books out of the cyclone and flood relief grant made by the Central Government, inter alia on the ground of bias on the part of some of the members of the Assessment Sub Committee whose books were submitted for selection.
This Writ Petition was heard along with a similar Writ Petition filed by the Orissa Publishers and Book Sellers Association.
The High Court by a common judgment delivered on August 10, 1983 dismissed both these Writ Petitions.
Hence the appeals by Special Leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court 324 ^ HELD : 1.
The law with respect to locus standi has considerably advanced both in this country and in England and in the case of public interest litigation it is not necessary that a petitioner should himself have a personal interest in the matter.
Merely by submitting books for selection, of which some might have been selected, a person cannot be said to have waived the objection which he may have to the constitution of the committee which selects the books.
Similarly, merely because a person does not submit any book for selection, it cannot, be said that he is not a person aggrieved.
[331 E; D] 2.
In the absence of any statutory rule or regulation with respect to selection of books and the selection being made each year as an administrative measure it was open to the State Government to change both the constitution of the committee and sub committees as also the procedure for selecting books to be purchased.
Since the procedure normally adopted by the State Government would have taken more time than what the time bound grant of the Central Government would have permitted, the State Government was justified in convening the meeting on April 13, 1983 and selecting the books to be purchased from the Central Government grant.
[331 G H] 3:1.
Nemo judex in causa sua, that is, no man shall be a judge in his own cause, is a principle firmly established in law.
Justice should not only be done but should manifestly be seen to be done.
It is on this principle that the proceedings in courts of law are open to the public except in those cases where for special reason the law requires or authorizes a hearing in camera.
Justice can never be seen to be done if a man acts as a judge in his own cause or is himself interested in its outcome.
The principle applies not only to judicial proceedings but also to quasi judicial and administrative proceedings.
[332 G H] A. K. Kraipak and others vs Union of India and others, , followed.
A person who has written a book which is submitted for selection either by himself or by his publishers, is interested in the matter of selection and therefore an author member should not be a member of any such committee or sub committee for several considerations namely : (a) Authors stand to benefit financially in several ways by getting either royalty from the publishers or by direct sales; (b) Though an author member may be only one of the members of the Assessment Sub Committees and that the ultimate decision of selection may rest with the State Government which may reject any book out of the list of the approved books, normally the State would be guided by the list of books approved by the Assessment Committee ; (c) The author member can certainly influence the minds of the other members against selecting books by other authors in preference 325 to his own ; (d) Books by some of the other members may also have been submitted for selection and there can be between them a quid pro quo or, in other words you see that my book is selected and in return I will do the same for you.
In either case, when a book of an author member comes up for consideration, the other members would feel themselves embrassed in frankly discussing its merits ; (e) Such author member may also be a person holding a high official position whom the other members may not want to displease ; and (f) Though it may be that the other members may not be influenced by the fact that the book which they are considering for approval was written by one of their members, whether they were so influenced or not would, however, be a matter impossible to determine.
It is not, therefore, the actual bias in favour of the author member that is material but the possibility of such bias.
[333 F H; 334A G] 4 : 1.
The doctrine of necessity is, however, an exception to the doctrine of bias, that no man shall be a judge in his own cause.
An adjudicator, who is subject to disqualification on the ground of bias or interest in the matter which he has to decide, may be required to adjudicate if there is no other person who is competent or authorized to adjudicate or if a quorum cannot be formed without him or if no other competent tribunal can be constituted.
In such cases, the principal of natural justice would have to give way to necessity for otherwise there would be no means of deciding the matter and the machinery of justice or administration would break down.
[334 H; 335 A B] The Judges vs Attorney General for Saskatchewan, 53 The Times Law Reports 464 (1937) quoted with approval.
In the instant case, the High Court wrongly applied the doctrine of necessity to the author member of the Assessment Sub Committee.
Though the members of this Sub Committee were appointed by a Government resolution and some of them were appointed by virtue of the official position they were holding, such as, the Secretary, Education Department of the Government of Orissa, and the Director, Higher Education, etc.
, there was, nothing to prevent those whose books were submitted for selection from pointing out this fact to the State Government so that it could amend its resolution by appointing a substitute or substitutes, as the case may be.
There was equally nothing to prevent such non official author members from resigning from the committee on the ground of their interest in the matter.
[335 C E] 5:1.
The High Court, however, was justified in refusing to grant any relief in respect of the books selected for the year 1980, 1981 and 326 1982 inasmuch as the books selected for those years had already been purchased.
Since a similar fait accompli stared at the Supreme Court not only in respect of the books selected and purchased for those years, but also with respect to the books selected to be purchased from the Central Government grant, in the instant fase, the Court could lay down only certain guide lines to be followed in future in selecting not only books for libraries in educational institutions but also in prescribing text books and in constituting committees for these purposes.
The Supreme Court accordingly laid down such guidelines.
[335 F H] 5:2.
However, the guide lines laid down by a court can only ensure the selection of worthwhile books.
This must necessarily depend upon the social consciousness and moral fibre of the members of the committee.
Further, no judgment of a court can eliminate the evil of behind the scene influence.
Here, one must perforce trust the sense of responsibility of the members of the committee in the discharge of the important duty with which they are entrusted.
[338 B C] 6:1.
Clause 8 of the Government resolution dated November 24, 1983, issued after the grant of Special Leave Petition to Appeal does not satisfy the principle of natural justice and fair play.
Since several books would come up for consideration before the committee, one or more of them by one of the member and the other or others by some of the other members, mere non participation in the discussion by the member concerned or even his withdrawing from the deliberations of the committee while his or her book or books are being considered is not sufficient because the evil of quid pro quo cannot be eliminated by such a resolution.
Members deliberating would bear in mind that the turn for selecting their books would also come and the concerned member who had not participated or had withdrawn would not then be favourably inclined to select their books.
[336 B; E G] 6:2.
Many a person falls a victim to the disease called cacoethes scribendi.
It would, therefore, be unfair to prohibit publishers from submitting books for selection merely because they had at one time published a book written by any one of the members of the committee or sub committee concerned with the selection of books.
The number of publishers is large but good publishers are few and such publishers will, therefore, be publishing the majority of books.
To lay down such a guide line would be to eliminate a large number of books which may be worthy of selection.
[337 A C]
