The appellant Institution was started as a Teachers Training College under a Society which was established as far back as 1972, though the college itself was established and started in July 1977.
On 22.9.1977 the institution made an application to the Government for grant of affiliation or recognition of the same in response to which a most extraordinary order was passed by the Government directing the University for refusing affiliation on the strange ground that all proposals for affiliation by the non Government Teachers Training Colleges be rejected and that no student be allowed to appear as a private candidate.
How ever, since the above decision was not applicable to minority institutions which was reiterated by a latter ordinance called Bihar non Government Teachers Training College ordinance on June 5, 1978, it was incumbent on the institution to prove that it was a minority institution before it could be granted affiliation, on 24.2.1978 the appellants filed an application before the Ranchi University for grant of affiliation on June 15, 1978, the Government wrote to the Ranchi University for inspection of the appellants college.
On 6.2.1980.
Joint Secretary to the Government of Bihar sent letter to the Ranchi University and the Deputy Commissioner, Ranchi for inspection of the appellants ' college.
Although the institution applied for affiliation in 1978 and claimed to be a minority institution which was never disputed at any point of time the Government took three years to take a decision about affiliation of the appellants ' college.
On 5.3.1980, the University Authorities inspected the appellants ' college and recommended its affiliation which was followed by a report by the District Development officer, Ranchi on 30.6.1980 recommending affiliation.
But, despite these facts no final decision was taken by the Government as a result of which the appellants had to move the High Court for directing the Government to grant affiliation.
On the High Court 's direction to the Government to decide recognition and affiliation 411 the appellants ' college within a specified time, on 3.11.1980, the Government granted recognition and approval for affiliation for three sessions only, i.e. 1977 78, 1978 79 and 1979 80.
On 10.11.1980, the University wrote to the Government recommending further grant of affiliation to the appellants ' college.
On 22.11.1980 the appellants applied for grant of permanent affiliation.
But, somehow or the other, on 27.11.1980 for undisclosed reasons, the Government passed a strange order cancelling the recognition and approval for affiliation granted to the appellants ' college vide its letter dated 3.11.1980.
This order was challenged before the High Court which quashed the same on 18.5.1981.
Thereafter, on 17.8.1981 the State of Bihar filled a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court which was dismissed on 30.11.1981.
However.
on 7.9.1981.
three minority colleges, alongwith the appellants ' college, were granted recognition and affiliation by the Government by virtue of the High Court 's orders.
The appellants again wrote to the High Court to direct the State Government to dispose of the application of the appellants for permanent recognition filed by them on 22.11.1980.
On 16.9.1982.
the Education Commissioner, Bihar again made a recommendation This recommendation was made after inspection by the Educational Commissioner In the presence of the local authorities as also the University authorities and after coming to a conclusion that the institution was a minority institution.
Despite this, since no action was taken by the Government the appellants were compelled to file another Writ Petition in the High Court on 3.5.1983 with a prayer to allow the students of the appellants ' college to appear at the University Examination, but the Writ Petition was dismissed by the High Court in limine.
Hence, the appeal by Special Leave of this Court Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: (Per majority) Per Fazal Ali.
J 1.1.
Although Article 30 of the Constitution is not included in Part III of the Indian Constitution which guarantees certain fundamental rights, yet the Supreme Court starting from the Kerala Education Bill s case, which is the locus classicus on the point in issue, right up to the case of The Ahmedabad St. Xaviers College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat and Anr.
and ending with All Saints High School, Hydrabad & Ors.
vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors. has clearly recognised that running of minority institutions is also as fundamental and important as the rights conferred on the other citizens of the country, with the only difference that the rights contained in Article 30 have as independent sphere of their own The freedoms guaranteed by Article 30 are also elevated to the status of a full fledged fundamental right within the field in which they operate.
In other words, any State action which in any way destroys, curbs or interferes with such rights would be violative of Article 30.
[414 G H; 415 A B] 1.2.
Technically speaking, the right of affiliation or aid from the Government is not a fundamental right so as to violate Article 30, but the refusal to give aid or affiliation by the statutory authorities without just and sufficient grounds amounts to violation of the fundamental freedoms enshrined in Articles 30 of the Constitution.
If the Government withholds giving aid or a University 412 refuses to grant affiliation, the direct consequence would be to destroy the very existence of the institution itself because there may be a number of minority institutions which may not exist without the Government aid and a large number of students admitted to these institutions, in the absence of affiliation, will be deprived of acquiring higher academic status which will not only be a loss to the institution but a loss to the nation itself.
It is for this purpose that Article 30 was inserted in the Constitution.
[415 G H; 416 A] Kerala Education Bill 's Case [1959] SCR 995; The Ahmedabad St Xaviers College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
; ; and All Saints High School.
Hyderabad & Ors.
vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.
referred to.
On a careful and detailed review of these cases the following position emerges: (1) that while article 30 undoubtedly seeks to preserve the religious freedom, autonomy and its individuality; there is no fundamental right under which an institution can claim either aid or affiliation as a matter of right.
It is permissible for the State of the University, as the case may be, to lay down reasonable conditions to maintain the excellence of standard of education but in the garb of doing so, refusal to grant affiliation cannot be made a ruse or pretext for destroying the individuality and personality of the said institution.
If this is done, then apart from being wholly arbitrary and unreasonable it would amount to a clear infraction of the provisions of article 30 because what cannot be done directly is done indirectly.
[420 C E] (2) While the State or a University has got an absolute right to insist on certain courses of study to be followed by institutions before they could be considered for affiliation but these conditions should not in any way take away the freedom of management or administration of the institution so as to reduce it to a satellite of the University or the State.
This is impermissible because such a course of action directly violate article 30 of the Constitution.
[420 F G] (3) While imposing conditions before granting affiliation, as indicated above, the State or the University cannot kill or annihilate the individuality or personality of the institution in question by insisting on following a particular kind of syllabus or a course of study which may be directly opposed to the aims, objects and ideals sought to be achieved by the institutions.
[420 H] (4) There is a very thin line of distinction between withholding of affiliation for a particular purpose on extraneous grounds so as to subject the institution to rigorous orders, edicts or resolutions which may run counter to the dominant purpose for which the institution has been founded, and insisting on genuine and reasonable conditions to be imposed in the larger interest of education.
[421 A B] While affiliation itself may not be a fundamental right but refusal of affiliation on terms and conditions or situations which practically denies the progress and autonomy of the institution is impermissible as being violative of article 30 of the Constitution.
[421 C] 413 2:1.
In the instant case, the State has refused to grant affiliation on purely illusory grounds which do not exist and failed to consider the recommendation of the Education Commissioner which was made after full inspection for grant of affiliation.
In other words, the affiliation was refused without giving any sufficient reasons and such a refusal contravenes the provisions of article 30 of the Constitution.
[426 G] 2:2.
The belated attempt through a subsequent affidavit filed by the State Government to show that there were certain defects in the Institution, in view of the non production of the most important and decisive material, is nothing but an after thought.
The State Government 's assurance to grant affiliation to the appellants college on fulfilling certain conditions is nothing but a pretext or a smoke screen to cloud the real issue.
The Government did not mean business by producing a report on which exhibit J was based, which has been deliberately suppressed despite the Court 's order to produce the same.
Therefore, an adverse inference has to be drawn against the State Government to the effect that if the materials on which the report was based had been produced it would have exploded the case of the Government and disclosed the real state of affairs namely that the appellants institute does fulfil all the conditions imposed by the State.
[425 G H; 426 A] 3.
Normally the Supreme Court does not grant cost in case of refusal of affiliation to institutions but having regard to the manner in which the State Government has behaved and exhibited its reluctance to perform a constitutional duty and has also tried to disobey the Court 's order for production of certain documents the instant case is a fit case for imposing a heavy cost on the State, apart from the directions to the State for granting affiliation to the appellant 's college and to allow its students of the 1980 81, 1981 82 and 1982 83 sessions to sit in the examination.
[426 F G] Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (Concurring) In the background of the facts and circumstances of this case, the Government action is not granting affiliation to the appellants college is action based without reason and is an act of arbitrariness.
[428 F] (Per contra) 1.
Article 30 of the Constitution was engrafted for the high and noble purpose of safeguarding and protecting the rights of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions.
In this case, in not granting affiliation to the appellants ' college there was no discrimination against any educational institution on the ground that it was under the management of any minority whether based on religion or language.
It was inaction or an act of arbitrariness on the part of the authorities.
From such unreasonable and arbitrary actions or inactions institutions, educational or otherwise, belonging both to the majority or minority communities often suffer and in appropriate cases, Court should grant relief without aid or recourse to the articles of the Constitution protecting the freedom and rights of the minorities.
In this case there is no evidence or even any serious allegation that affiliation was being denied to the appellants institution on the ground that it was a minority institution.
[428 G H; 429 A B] 414
