While determining the annual value of the property which was liable to income tax for the assessment year 1966 67 under the head "Income from house property" under section 22 of the Income tax Act, 1961, the respondent assessee claimed that the total liability for municipal taxes levied by the corporation, whether actually paid or not and whether the extent of liability questioned or not, was deductible under the priviso to section 23 (1) of the Act.
The department rejected the claim.
The Income tax Appellate Tribunal allowed the claim.
On a reference being made the High Court held in favour of the assessee.
Therefore the department filed this petition for special leave to appeal.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: The only point is whether the expression 'borne by the owner ' which appeared in the proviso to section 23 (1) as it stood in the year 1966 67 would refer to the amount of tax which the owner was liable to pay or amount of tax which he had actually paid in discharge of the liability.
It is true that the expression 'borne ' may refer to either the liability which a person is liable to discharge or the actual sum paid by him in discharge of that liability.
But we agree with the High Court that in the present context it should be construed as referring to the former namely, the amount of tax which the owner is liable to discharge as stated in the proviso to section 23 (1) of the Act and not the latter one.
The reason for taking this view flows from the scheme of the Act itself.
[616D F] Bhagwan Dass Jain vs Union of India, [1981] 2 S.C.R. 808; referred to.
In the instant case it is not, therefore.
necessary that the assessee should have actually paid the amount of tax in question before such deduction is claimed.
The position is not also different even where the assessee has dis 614 puted the correctness of the levy before the local authorities concerned.
A mere expectation of success in the proceedings in which the assessee has disputed such levy does not disentitle him to the statutory deduction on the basis of the levy which is in force.
[617B C]
