In a second appeal filed by the appellant tenant against an eviction order, the High Court remanded the matter to the trial court and called for a finding on the question of partial eviction.
The trial court while recording its finding was of the view that the question of partial eviction should be considered in the light of the requirement of the landlord respondent as deposed to by him.
The High Court accepted the finding of the trial court without scrutinising it and dismissed the appeal accordingly.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal.
^ HEID: (1) The High Court should have scrutinised the finding of the trial court with special reference to the question of partial eviction even on facts as the finding of the trial court standing on its own (not confirmed by appellate court) is not conclusive on facts even in a second appeal.
This is so because the High Court had called for a finding of facts from the trial court bypassing the appellate court and thus deprived the right of appeal to the District Judge (last court on facts) which might not have agreed with the trial court.
[640 A B] (2) The High Court as well as the trial court failed to take into account the Proviso to section 12 (1) (c) of the Bihar Buildings (Lease, Rent & Eviction) Control Act 1977, which provides, inter alia, that where the court thinks that the reasonable requirement of such occupation may be substantially satisfied by evicting the tenant from a part only of the building and allowing the tenant to continue occupation of the rest and the tenant agrees to such occupation, the Court shall pass a decree accordingly.
Therefore, the court has, to determine; 639 (i) the extent of the premises which the landlord "reasonably" requires.
Determine it objectively and not on the basis of his ipse dixit or his mere desire to occupy as much as he wants; and (ii) whether such requirement as the court considers reasonable, will be 'substantially ' satisfied (not fully satisfied) by ordering partial eviction.
[639 G H] The Court remanded the case to the High Court to decide the question afresh after considering the evidence on record in the light of the aforesaid observations.
[640 F]
