The appellant preferred an appeal to the Appellate Authority under the Kerela Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1960 (For short.
the Act) against his dismissal from service by respondent No. 1, a firm of Lawyers.
Respondent No. 1 raised a preliminary objection that the appeal was not maintainable since Respondent No. I firm was not a commercial establishment under the Act.
The Appellate Authority upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed the appeal.
His writ Petition and Letters Patent Appeal in the High Court against the judgment of the Appellate Authority were also dismissed.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: (I) The question whether respondent No. I firm is a commercial establishment must naturally depend upon the definition of that expression and the definition of cognate expressions which are contained in the Act.
The definition of "commercial establishment" contained in sec.2(4) of the Act may be simplified by restating it in separate clauses as follows: (I) Commercial, Establishment means five different kinds of establishments; commercial, industrial, trading, banking or insurance; (2) Commercial Establishment means an establishment or administrative service in which the persons employed are mainly engaged in office work; (3) Commercial Establishment means a hotel, restaurant, boarding or eating house, a cafe or any other refreshment house; (4) Commercial Establishment means a theater or any other place of public amusement or entertainment; and (5) Commercial Establishment includes such other establishment as the Government may, by notification in the Gazette.
declare to be a commercial establishment for the purposes of the Act.
Commercial Establishment does not include a factory to which any of the provisions of the apply Section 2(8) defines 'establishment ' to mean a shop or a commercial establishment.
The definition of shop contained in sec.
2(15) shows that in order that an establishment can be regarded as a shop it is necessary that some trade or business must be carried on there or some service must be rendered to 'customers '.
The expression 'shop also includes offices, warehouses.
store rooms or godowns which are used in connection with the trade or business.
[30H; 603H, 605A, D G].
602 (2) A lawyer 's office or the office of a firm of lawyers cannot obviously fall under clauses (3) and (4) of section 2(4).
Nor has the Government issued any notification as contemplated by section 2(4).
The question thus narrows itself into whether a lawyer 's office falls under either of the first two clauses.
Since by the definition contained in the first clause of section 2(4), a 'commercial establishment means an establishment, a place of work cannot be regarded as a commercial establishment unless the activity is conducted in a 'shop ' or in a commercial establishment, which is really tautological.
Whatever may be the popular conception regarding the role of today 's lawyers and the alleged narrowing of the gap between a profession on one hand and a trade or business on the other, it is trite that, traditionally, lawyers do not carry on a trade or business nor do they render services to customers '.
The context as well as the phraseology of the definition in section 2(15) is inapposite in the case of a lawyer 's office or the office of a firm of lawyers.
Therefore, the office of a lawyer or of a firm of lawyers is not a shop within the meaning of sec.
2(15) of the Act.
[605C, F G] (3) The argument, that a lawyer 's office is a commercial establishment because, persons who are employed in that office are mainly engaged in office work, cannot be sustained.
This argument overlooks that (i) under the second clause of the definition in section 2(4), commercial establishment ' means "an establishment or administrative service in which the persons employed are mainly engaged in office work" and thus the same question arises again as to whether a lawyer 's office is an " establishment ' within the meaning of the Act; and (ii) that a lawyer 's office is not an administrative service ' and it will be doing violence to the language of the second clause of sec.
2(4) to hold that a lawyer 's office is an 'administrative service '.
The proposition is well established that words which occur in the same context must take their colour from each other.
It is unrealistic to dissect the definition clause in section 2(4) and to catch a word here or there in order to bring a lawyer 's office within the four corners of the definition of commercial establishment '.
The various clauses of that definition would show that establishments, far apart from professional offices were within the contemplation of the legislature.[606BtoD] (4) Chapters 1 A, II.
III, IV, V and VI as also sections 6,8, 10 and other cognate provisions of the Act also strengthen the conclusion that a lawyer 's office cannot possibly be comprehended within the meaning of the expression 'Commercial establishment ' as defined in section 2(4) of the Act.
[607A B] Bangalore Water Supply and Sewage Board vs A. Rajappa.[1978] 3 SCR 297 and Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry distinguished.
