The Provident Fund Inspector filed complaints against the appellants Directors and Factory Manager and respondent No.2 Company charging them with non payment of employers contribution under the Employees ' Provident Fund and Family Pension Fund Act, 19 of 1952, alleging that the accused did not pay the employers contribution to the Fund from February 1970 to June 1971.
At the commencement of the trial, the accused filed applications contending that since the limitation prescribed by section 468 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 had expired before the filing of the complaints, the Court had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the complaints.
These applications were rejected by the Judicial Magistrate on the ground that the offences of which the accused were charged are 'continuing offences ' and therefore, no question of limitation could arise.
This order was upheld by the High Court in the revision applications filed by the appellants.
In the appeals to this Court filed by the Directors of the Company it was contended that the offence of non payment of the employers contribution can be committed once and for all on the expiry of fifteen days after the close of every month and, therefore, prosecution for that offence must be launched within the period of limitation provided in section 468 of the Code.
627 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD 1.
The offence of which the appellants are charged, namely non payment of the employer 's contribution to the Provident Fund before the due date, is a 'continuing offence ' and, therefore, the period of limitation prescribed by section 468 of the Code cannot have any application.
The offence which is alleged against the appellants will be governed by section 472 of the Code, according to which, a fresh period of limitation begins to run at every moment of the time during which the offence continues.
[636 D E] 2.
The concept of 'continuing offence ' does not wipe out the original guilt.
It keeps the contravention alive, day by day.
[636 D] S.V. Lachwani vs Kanchanlal C. Parikh and others, , over ruled.
Courts when confronted with provisions which lay down a rule of limitation governing prosecutions, in cases of this nature will give due weight and consideration to the provisions contained in section 473 of the Code.
That section is in the nature of an overriding provision according to which, notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of Chapter XXXVI of the Code, any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the period of limitation if, inter alia, it is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interest of justice.
[636 F G] 4.
The expression 'continuing offence ' is not defined in the Code but that is because expressions which do not have a fixed connotation or static import are difficult to define.
The question whether a particular offence is a 'continuing offence ' must necessarily depend upon the language of the statute which creates that offence, the nature of the offence and, above all, the purpose which is intended to be achieved by constituting the particular act as an offence.
[632 E, 635E] State of Bihar vs Deokaran Nanshi, [1973]1 SCR 1004, explained.
The offence of which the appellants is charged is the failure to pay the employers contribution before the due date.
Considering the object and purpose of this provision, which is to ensure the welfare of workers, it is impossible to hold that the offence is not of a continuing nature.
The appellants were unquestionably liable to pay their contribution to the Provident Fund before the due date and it was within their power to pay as soon after the due date had expired as they willed.
The late payment could not have absolved them of their original guilt but it would have snapped the recurrence.
Each day that they failed to comply with the obligation to pay their contribution to the Fund, they committed a fresh offence.[635 F G] 628 6.
To hold that the employer who has not paid his contribution or the contribution of the employees to the Provident Fund can successfully evade the penal consequences of his act by pleading the law of limitation, would be putting an incredible premium on lack of concern for the welfare of workers.
Such offences must be regarded as continuing offences to which the law of limitation cannot apply.
[635 G 636 A]
