Respondents, predecessor Behara Venkataramanayya Patro executed two deeds dated 30 8 1939 and 25 8 1942 in favour of one Sambangi Thavitinaidue, who was then a sitting tenant of the property.
In 1951 the mortgagor filed a suit for redemption of the mortgages and obtained a preliminary decree on 31 12 1952.
Subsequently, the mortgagor died and the present respondents were brought on record as his legal representatives.
On 21 10 1963 the respondent filed an application for passing a final decree by way of ascertainment of the amount due and for delivery of possession upon deposit of entire dues so ascertained.
The application was resisted by the appellants on several grounds.
According to them, on redemption, relationship of landlord and tenant would revive which needed to be protected and the delivery should be of symbolical possession only.
The learned trial judge allowed the application but on an appeal preferred, the Additional District Judge Srikakulam took a contrary view relying upon Varada Bangar Raju 's case AIR (1965) A.P. 86 The respondents, therefore, preferred a second appeal and the learned Single Judge of the A.P. High Court relying upon a subsequent decision in P. Satyanarayana 's case ILR set aside the decision of the first Appellate Court.
Letters Patent Appeal preferred by the tenant mortgagees to the Division Bench of the High Court failed and hence this appeal by Special Leave to this Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD:1: 1 There can be no merger of a lease and a mortgage, even where the two transactions are in respect of the same property.
[655C] 1:2 It is well settled that for a merger to arise, it is necessary that lesser estate and a higher estate should merge in one person at one and the same time and in the same right and no interest in the property should remain 652 outstanding.
In the case of a lease, the estate that is outstanding in the lessor is the reversion, in the case of a mortgage, the estate that is outstanding is the equity of redemption of the mortgagor.
Accordingly, there cannot be a merger of a lease and a mortgage in respect of the same property since neither of them is a higher or lesser estate than the other.
Even, if the rights of the lessee and the rights of the mortgagee in respect of a property were to be united in one person the reversion in regard to the lease and the equity of redemption in regard to the mortgage, would be outstanding in the owner of the property and accordingly, there would not be a complete fusion of all the rights of ownership in one person.
[655D F] Shah Mathurdas Maganial & Co, vs Naogappa Shankarappa & ors A.I.R followed.
Narayana Dogra Shetty vs Ramchandra Shivram Hingne , approved.
Whether upon redemption of usufructuary mortgage a tenant mortgagee could be directed to deliver actual or physical possession of the mortgaged property to the lessor mortgagor and whether the original relationship of landlord and tenant would revive upon redemption of usufructuary mortgage by a tenant mortgagee in possession of the mortgaged property by delivering possession to the lessor mortgagor, will depend upon whether there was an implied surrender of the lessee 's right when the usufructuary mortgage was executed which in turn depends upon what was the intention of the parties at the time of the execution of the mortgage deed in favour of the sitting tenant to be gathered from the terms of and conditions of the mortgage transaction in light of the surrounding circumstance of the case.
[656C D 655G H; 656A] 2:2 In the instant case, the only effect of the execution of usufractutary mortgage deeds was that the lessee 's right were kept in abeyance and they revive upon redemption of the mortgage.
[658E] The mortgage deed does not mention whether on redemption physical possession is, to be delivered or symbolical possession is to be delivered to the mortgagor.
[657H] During the currency of the mortgage the liability to pay rent to the lessor mortgagor (albeit to be discharged by adjustment) is kept alive.
If any thing such a term clearly runs counter to any implied surrender of the lessee 's right.
There is no term fixed for redemption of mortgage property which mean that it was open to the mortgagor to redeem the mortgagor at any time that is to say even within a very short time and if that be so a sitting tenant cultivating the lands under a lease, who has obliged his lessor by advancing monies to him to tide over his financial difficulties would not give up his right as a lessee no sooner redemption takes place, coupled with a fact that the mortgage deed keeps alive the lessee 's liability to pay rent during the currency of the mortgage clearly suggests that no implied surrender was intended by the parties.
