One Mahendra Kumar Saxena moved three applications in the High Court one under O.XXII Rule 3, C.P.C. for substitution of heirs and legal representatives of the deceased appellant, the other under O.XXII rule 9, C.P.C. for setting aside abatement of the appeal if it has abated for failure to seek substitution within the prescribed period of limitation and the third one for condonation of delay section 5 of the .
The High Court transmitted these applications to the trial court for enquiry and report regarding the date of death of the deceased appellant and knowledge about the pendency of the appeal of the heirs and legal representatives in order to ascertain whether the applicant had made out sufficient cause for condoning the delay.
The trial court submitted its report which in terms included a finding that Mahendra Kumar Saxena had knowledge about the pendency of the second appeal before moving the aforementioned applications.
The High Court held that the conclusion reached by the trial court is such that it would not like to take a different view of the matter and therefore rejected the various applications and disposed of the appeal as having abated.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal and remitting the matter to the High Court for early disposal.
^ HELD : (1) The approach of the High Court that it was not pursuaded to take a view different from the one taken by the trial court is not permissible.
It is the High Court which had to satisfy itself that the petitioner made out sufficient cause which prevented him from moving the application for substitution in time and not the trial court.
The High Court may call for a report of the trial court but then cannot adopt the approach of a court exercising revisional jurisdiction.
It must examine the material collected by the trial court and come to its own conclusion.
[662 C D,] 660 Bhagwan Swaroop vs Mool Chand and Hans Raj vs Sunder Lal Aggarwal (1982) 1 sec.
476 followed.
(2) Once an appeal is pending in the High Court, the heirs are not expected to keep a constant watch on the continued existence of parties to the appeal before the High Court which has a seat far away from where parties in rural areas may be residing.
In the instant case, it is a moot point whether the father acquainted his son/sons about his litigation for seeking relief in respect of his service.
If this is the nature of litigation, this Court is not inclined to draw the inference drawn by the trial court that son/sons knew about the pendency of second appeal.
Therefore, sufficient cause was made for condoning the delay.
[622 D E, 622 F]
