The appellants and G were convicted of the offence of murder by the Sessions Court on the basis of the evidence of the approver, which it considered reliable, and the confession made by the first appellant which it found to be voluntary and true.
The High Court held that the evidence of the approver as against G was very discrepant and.
unreliable and set aside his conviction but, nevertheless, confirmed the conviction of the appellants.
The appellants appealed to the Supreme Court.
It was found (1) that the statement originally made by the approver as against the second appellant was wholly inconsistent and irreconcilable with the evidence given by him in Court and that the High Court did not consider the question as to whether the approver was a reliable witness at all, (2) that the Magistrate who recorded the confession did not fully comply with the procedure to be adopted to ensure that it was voluntary, (3) that the prosecution story as deposed to by the approver was inconsistent with the material statement in the confession, and (4) that the High Court while deciding whether the confession was voluntary assumed that it was true.
Held, that the conviction of the appellants must be set aside.
The appreciation of an approver 's evidence has to satisfy a double test.
It must show that be is a reliable witness and that his evidence receives sufficient corroboration.
The act of recording confessions under section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is a solemn one and in discharging his duties under the said section the Magistrate must take care to see that the requirements of sub section
(3) Of section 164 are fully satisfied.
When an accused person is produced before the Magistrate by the investigating officer, it is of the utmost importance that the mind of the accused person should be completely freed from any possible influence of the police and he must be sent to jail custody and given adequate time to consider whether he should make a confession at all.
Ordinarily, he should be given at least 24 hours to decide.
Even if a confession is voluntary, it must also be established that it is true and, for that purpose, it is necessary to examine it 123 954 and compare it with the rest of the prosecution evidence and the probabilities of the case.
