The respondent a monthly rated employee of the appellant a public limited company, ceased to be an employee on attaining the age of superannuation after completing 35 years of service.
Since he was entitled to payment of Gratuity under the , the appellant calculated the amount of gratuity payable under sub s.(2) of s.4 on the basis that 'fifteen days ' wages" meant half of the monthly wages last drawn i.e., for 13 working days.
there being 26 working days in a month, The respondent being dissatisfied with this payment, made a claim under sub s(1) of s.7, before the Controlling Authority, for payment of an additional sum of gratuity on the ground that the daily wages should be ascertained on the basis of what he actually got for 26 days and the amount of "fifteen days ' wages" should be calculated accordingly, not by just taking half of his wages for a month of 30 days or fixing his daily wages by dividing his monthly wages by 30.
The Controlling Authority held; that for the purpose of calculating "fifteen days ' wages" it was necessary to ascertain one day 's wage and since a 665 month consists of 26 working days, the amount of gratuity should be calculated by dividing the monthly wages last drawn by 26 and multiplying by 'fifteen '; and not by just taking half of the monthly wages or by dividing such monthly wages by 30.
On appeal, the Appellate Authority, held that there was an error in the mode of computation of the amount of gratuity that was payable, and held that the gratuity payable would have to be calculated at half of the monthly rate of wages, i.e. wages earned in a consecutive period of 15 days and the daily wages had to be multiplied by "thirteen" and not by "fifteen" for every completed year of service or part thereof not exceeding six months.
The amount of gratuity payable was accordingly reduced.
The High Court under Article 226, held following the decision of this Court in Shri Digvijay Woollen Mills Ltd. etc.
vs Mahendra Prataprai Buch etc. ; that in order to determine "fifteen days ' wages" of a monthly rated employee under sub s.(2) of s.4 of the Act, it was necessary to determine one day 's wages last drawn by him, and them multiply the same "fifteen ' times.
and the resultant sum has to be multiplied by twenty to arrive at the maximum amount of gratuity payable under sub s.(3) of s.4 of the Act.
The orders of the Controlling Authority were restored.
In the Appeals and Special Leave Petitions it was contended on behalf of the Management: that the words "fifteen days ' wages" occurring in sub s.(2) of s.4 of the Act are clear and unambiguous and must mean half a month 's wages and therefore there was no scope for an artificial calculation being made by dividing the wages for a month by the number of working days.
Dismissing the Appeals and Special Leave Petitions, ^ HELD: 1.(i) The was enacted to introduce a scheme for payment of gratuity for certain industrial and commercial establishments as a measure of social security.
The significance of this legislation lies in the acceptance of the principle of gratuity as a compulsory statutory retiral benefit.
[672G; 673B] (ii) In construing a social welfare legislation, the Court should adopt a beneficent rule of construction and if a section is capable of two constructions, that construction should be preferred which fulfils the policy of the Act, and is more beneficial to the persons in whose interest the Act has been passed.
When the language is plain and unambiguous.
the Court must give effect to it whatever may be the consequence.
The argument of inconvenience and hardship is only admissible in construction where the meaning of the statue is obscure and there are two methods of construction.
In an anxiety to advance the beneficent purpose of the legislation, the Court must not yield to the temptation of seeking ambiguity when there is none.
[675B D] 2.(1) The intention of the Legislature in enacting sub s.(2) of s.4 of the Act was not only to achieve uniformity and reasonable degree of certainty, but 666 also to create and bring into force a self contained, all embracing, complete and comprehensive code relating to gratuity as a compulsory, retiral benefit.
The quantum of gratuity payable under sub s(2) of s.4 of the Act has to be "fifteen days ' wages" based on rate of wages last drawn by the employee concerned for every completed year of service or more in excess of six months 'subject to the maximum of 20 months ' wages as provided by sub section
[676G H; 677A] Shri Digvijay Woollen Mills Ltd. etc.
vs Mahendra Prataprai Buch etc.
; , , referred to.
Associated Cement Co. Ltd. Kistna Cement Works, Kistna Guntur Distt.
vs The Appellate Authority under (Regional Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Guntur) & Ors.
and Swamy & Ors.
vs Controlling Authority under & Ors.
, [1978] 52 IFJ 138 over ruled.
(ii) The word 'rate ' appears twice in sub s.(2) of s.4 and it necessarily involves the concept of actual working days.
Although a month is understood to consist of 30 days, gratuity payable under the Act treats the monthly wages as wages for 26 working days.
[675A] (iii) Sub ss.(2) and (3) of the Act are designed to achieve two separate and distinct objects and they operate at two different stages.
While sub section
(2) provides for the mode of calculation of the amount of gratuity, sub s:(3) seeks to impose a ceiling on the amount of gratuity payable at 20 months wages.
It is meant to provide in incentive to employees to serve for the period of 30 years or more.
Sub s.(2) of s.4 of the Act which uses the words "fifteen days ' wages" and not half a months wages, cannot be called in aid for construction of the words "20 month ' wages ', appearing in sub s.(3) of s.4 of the Act.
[677F G] 3.
The definition of 'appropriate government ' in s.2(a)(1) in relation to an establishment makes a distinction between establishments and factories.
In relation to an establishment belonging to, or under the control of, the Central Government and of a factory belonging to, or under the control of, the Central Government, the appropriate government is the Central Government.
But the Central Government is the appropriate government only in relation to an establishment having branches in more than one State.
There is no like provision made in relation to such an establishment having factories in different States.
[678F G] 4.
Whenever doubt or difficulty is expressed by the High Courts in the application of provisions of social security measures, namely, retiral benefits, gratuity, provident fund etc., the Government must always introduce legislation to cure the defect rather than wait judicial interpretation by the highest Court.
[680H] Lalappa Lingappa and Ors.
vs Laxmi Vishnu Textile Mills., Ltd. referred to.
667 5.
The Government may consider the desirability of setting up a National Labour Commission which may be entrusted not only with the task of making periodical review of social welfare legislations from time to time but also to suggest radical reform of the laws relating to industrial relations which must be brought in tune with the changing needs of the society.
[681A B]
