The respondent, State of Rajasthan through its District Rehabilitation Officer, Barmer filed a suit in the court of the District Judge, Balotra against the appellant, Union of India, and the Railway Administration claiming damages for the loss suffered by it on account of the damage caused to the goods transported by rail through the Railway Administration.
The appellant contended that the suit was not maintainable in the District Court in view of Article 131 of the Constitution which, according to it conferred exclusive jurisdiction on the Supreme Court to decide all disputes arising between a State and the Union.
The District Judge held that he had jurisdiction to try the suit.
A Revision Petition filed against the order of the District Judge was dismissed by the High Court.
Hence this petition for special leave to appeal.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: The suit was entertainable by the District Court.
On a careful consideration of the whole matter in the light of the decisions of this Court, it is felt that Article 131 of the Constitution is attracted only when a dispute arises between or amongst the States and the Union in the context of the constitutional relationship that exists between them and the powers, rights, duties.
immunities, liabilities, disabilities etc.
flowing therefrom.
Any dispute 701 which may arise between a State in the capacity of an employer in a factory, a manufacturer of goods subject to exercise duty, a holder of a permit to run a stage carriage, a trader or businessman carrying on business not incidental to the ordinary functions of Government, a consumer of railway services etc.
like any other private party on the one hand and the Union of India on the other cannot be construed as a dispute arising between the State and the Union in discharge of their respective executive powers attracting Article 131 of the Constitution.
It could never have been the intention of the framers of the Constitution that any ordinary dispute of this nature would have to be decided exclusively by the Supreme Court.
[708G H; 709A B] State of Bihar vs Union of India & Anr., ; , Union of India vs State of Mysore, [1977] S.C.R. 842.
State of Mysore vs Union of India & Ors.
A.I.R. at pages 239 240, State of Rajasthan & Ors., etc.
vs Union of India etc.
; , , State of Karnataka vs Union of India & Anr., ; at page 92 and The Framing of India 's Constitution A Study by Shri B. Shiva Rao at page 483, referred to.
In the instant case, the State Government has made a claim like any other consignee of goods despatched through the railway for compensation and its success or failure in the suit depends on proof of facts which have to be established in the same way in which a private person would have to establish.
This is not even a case where a formal contract is entered into between the Union of India and the State of Rajasthan is accordance with the requirements of Article 299 of the Constitution.
It is just a commercial contract under which an officer of the State of Rajasthan was entitled to claim delivery of the goods consigned as any ordinary consignee.
The claim involved in this case is one based on section 80 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890.
Section 80 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 indicates that the claim made under it is essentially against the Railway Administration concerned.
The Union of India is impleaded as a party to suits instituted thereunder being the owner of the Indian Railways by virtue of Article 300 of the Constitution.
The statute, however, treats the dispute as one between the Railway Administration concerned and the person instituting the suit.
Neither of the parties to these proceedings is questioning the applicability of the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 to these proceedings.
It is, therefore, difficult to hold that in these proceedings there is any question which falls within the scope of Article 131 of the Constitution.
[709H; 710A B; D; H; 711A B]
