Section 2(k) of the (the Act, for short) defines an 'industrial dispute ' to mean any dispute or difference between employers and employers, or between employers and workmen or between workmen and workmen, which is connected with the employment or non employment or the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, of any person.
Section 7 A of the Act provides that the appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette constitute one or more Industrial Tribunal for the adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any matter whether specified in the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule.
Entry at plecitum 7 in the Third Schedule reads 'Classification by grades '.
Sec, 4 of the (1946 Act, for short) also requires the employer in an industrial establishment to make provision in the standing orders for every matter set out in the Schedule which is applicable to the industrial establishment.
The Schedule provides, amongst others, for making provision in the standing orders for classification of workmen for example, whether permanent, temporary apprentices, probationers or badlis.
The Government of Maharashtra referred to the Industrial Tribunal a dispute between appellants workmen and the respondent employer as to whether "All the employees who are acting continuously in higher grades for more than three months should be confirmed in the respective grades immediately and all the benefits should be given to the concerned employees with retrospective effect had they been confirmed immediately after three months of their continuous acting.
" The respondent raised a preliminary objection that the dispute was not an industrial dispute within the meaning of the expression in the Act, because if the demand as raised is conceded, it would tantamount to allowing the workmen to decide the work force required in various grades which is a managerial function.
The Industrial Tribunal up 642 held the preliminary objection and rejected the Reference as incompetent holding that the demand shorn of verbiage is one for promotion which is the managerial function and therefore cannot be the subject matter of industrial adjudication.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal and remitting the matter to the Tribunal for disposing of the Reference on merits, ^ HELD: (1) It is well settled that certified Standing Orders under the 1946 Act which have a statutory flavour prescribe the conditions of service and they shall be deemed to be incorporated in the contract of employment of each workman with his employer.
Since there is a statutory obligation on the employer in an 'industrial establishment ' to classifi workmen under the 1946 Act, the classification would be permanent, temporary, apprentices, probationers and all other known categories, such as, acting, officiatingetc.
In respect of the classification, a dispute can conceivably arise between the employer and the workmen because failure of the employer to carry out the statutory obligation would enable the workman to question his action which will bring into existence a dispute.
It would become an industrial dispute because it would be connected with the condition of employment.
It becomes a condition of employment because necessary conditions of service have been statutorily prescribed one such being classification of workmen.
Therefore, without anything more where the demand of the workmen was to confirm employees employed in an acting capacity in a grade, it would unquestionably be an industrial dispute.
[646C G] Sudhir Chandra Sarkar vs Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd., , referred to.
(2) Even if one does not reach the conclusion that the dispute raised in question would be an industrial dispute by reference to the Standing Orders certified under the 1946 Act, a mere reference to Entry 7 of the Third Schedule read with Sec.
7 A would clinch the issue.
Entry at plecitum 7 in the Third Schedule reads "Classification by grades".
If there is any dispute in respect of classification by grades, it will necessarily be an industrial dispute.
This would flow indisputably from the language of section 7 A which provides for setting up of Industrial Tribunal for adjudication of industrial dispute relating to any matter specified, amongst others, in the Third Schedule.
In the instant case, the demand of the workmen was for classification of the workmen officiating in the higher grades either as permanent or temporary and they should not be continued indefinitely as temporary by making them permanent on rendering of continuous service in the higher grade for a period of three months.
The demand involves both the classification of employees and classification by grade.
Therefore, the Industrial Tribunal overlooked this obvious fact situation by mis interpreting the demand and reached a wholly untenable conclusion that the demand was for promotion which appeared to the Tribunal to be a managerial function and beyond the reach of adjudication.
[647 C E] (3) Even on the footing of the law as it stands at present in this country that promotion is a management function, the industrial dispute referred 643 to the Tribunal was not one for claiming promotion.
The Tribunal committed a grave error in so misinterpreting the dispute referred to it.
The Tribunal overlooked the fact that the demand was in respect of workmen already promoted i.e. in respect of whom managerial function of selecting personnel for promotion had been already performed.
The demand was in respect of already promoted workmen, may be in an officiating capacity, for their classification from acting or temporary to confirmed, that is, permanent, in the higher grade to which they were promoted, after a reasonable period of service which according to the Union must be three months of service.
By no canon of construction this demand could be said to be one for promotion.
[550 B D] Management of Brooke Bond India (P) Ltd. vs Workmen ; and The Hindustan Lever Ltd. vs The Workmen ; held inapplicable.
In the decisions of this Court in Management of Brooke Bond India (P) Ltd. vs Workmen ; and The Hindustan Lever Ltd. vs The Workmen it is assumed without controversy that promotion is a managerial function.
But in view of the decision of this court in All India S.M. and A.S.M. 's Association vs General Manager, Central Railway ; , it is time to reconsider this archaic view of the laissez faire days that promotion is a management function.
The expression "terms and conditions of employment" would ordinarily include not only the contractual terms and conditions but those terms which are understood and applied by the parties in practice or habitually or by common consent without ever being incorporated in the contract.
[649 E G] British Broadcasting Corporation vs Hearn & Others, and R. Industrial Disputes Tribunal & Anr.
vs Ex parte Queen Mary College University of London, , referred to.
