The appellant Union served a notice of demand for the grant of bonus for the period 1964 65 to 1967 68.
The matter was taken into conciliation.
The Conciliation Officer recorded a failure, issued a certificate under Section 73A of the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946 certifying that the dispute was not capable of being settled by conciliation.
The Union thereupon made four independent references to the Industrial Court, for the grant of bonus for each of the four accounting years 1964 65 to 1967 68.
The Union further alleged that it could not make a specific demand for bonus calculated at a certain percentage of the salary as it had not got the requisite information about the financial position and the balance sheet of the Employer, and that the Industrial Court should compute the bonus which becomes payable under the Bonus Act, and award the same to the workmen.
The employer resisted the references contending that once a notified order was issued under Section 18A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 appointing an authorised controller in respect of an industrial undertaking, it was run by the authorised controller under the authority of a Department of the Central Government and therefore, in view 752 of the provisions contained in Section 32(IV) of the Bonus Act its employees were excluded from the application of the Bonus Act and the references must consequently be rejected.
The Industrial Court upheld the aforesaid contention on behalf of the employer that having regard to the provisions contained in Section 32(IV) of the Bonus Act read with Section 18A of the IDR Act, the workmen employed by the employer were excluded from the operation of the Bonus Act as it was not applicable to the employer.
The Industrial Court however rejected the alternative contention that even if the workmen employed by the employer were not entitled to bonus under the Bonus Act, they were yet entitled to claim bonus apart from the Bonus Act as a norm of industrial relations by observing that as the demand was made for bonus under the Bonus Act, and the alternative demand was not made before the Conciliation Officer, the scope of the references could not be enlarged to cover the same.
In the appeals to this Court on the questions: (1) On the appointment of the authorised controller under Section 18A of the IDR Act by the Central Government in respect of an industrial undertaking whether the undertaking acquires the status of an establishment engaged in an industry carried on under the authority of the Department of the Central Government, and (2) Whether the employees employed in such an industrial undertaking were excluded from the operation of the Bonus Act.
Allowing the Appeals, ^ HELD: 1(a) If on the issue of a notified order appointing an authorised controller under Sec.
18A Industries (Development and Regulation) Act 1951, the management of the industrial undertaking undergoes a change, yet it does not become an establishment engaged in an industry carried on by the department of the Central Government, and therefore its employees would not be excluded from the operation of the as provided in Sec.
32(IV).
[768 E G] Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs The State of Bihar & Ors., and M/s. Swadeshi Cotton Mills Thozhilalar Shemalana Padukappu Union vs M/s. National Textile Corporation Ltd. & Ors. , referred to.
Carlsbad Mineral Water Mfg. Co. vs P. K. Sarkar, ; Workmen, Karnataka P.F. Employees Union vs Additional Industrial Tribunal & Anr., [1983] II L.L.J. 108; The Management of Bihar Khadi Gramodyog Sangh, Muzaffarpur vs The State of Bihar & Ors.
, ; Abdul Rehman Abdul Gafur & Anr.
vs Paul (Mrs. E.) & Ors., ; Bharat Glass Works (Pvt.) Ltd. vs State of West Bengal & Ors; and Indian Naval Canteen Control Board vs Industrial Tribunal, Ernakulam & Anr., [1965] II L.L,J. 366, approved.
D.P. Kelkar, Amalner vs Ambadas Keshav Bajaj & Ors., A.I.R. 1971 Bom.
124, over ruled.
753 1.
(b) The Industrial Tribunal was clearly in error in rejecting the references holding that the workmen of the respondent were excluded from the operation of the Bonus Act.
[769 H] 1.(c) The Award of the Industrial Tribunal rejecting the references is quashed and set aside and the matter remitted to the Industrial Tribunal for disposal on merits.
[769 H] 2.(a) The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 was enacted to confer power on the Central Government to provide for development and regulations of scheduled industries.
With a view to regulating the industrial expansion of the country and to lay the infrastructure for the same, the Central Government armed itself with the powers to order investigation into the affairs of an industrial undertaking as also, if necessary of a scheduled industry as a whole.
The investigation may be caused to be made where there has been or likely to be a substantial fall in the volume of production or marked deterioration in the quality of an article or an unwarranted rise in the price or for conserving any resources of national importance.
On receipt of the report of investigation, the Central Government could give necessary directions.
These directions are statutory in character.
[761 E G] 2.
(b) The Act provides not for taking over of the industrial undertaking.
It provides for control of management by giving directions or for change of management.
Where the industrial undertaking is owned by a company governed by the Companies Act in force at the relevant time, the management would generally vest in the Board of Directors, and/or the Managing Director, as the case may be.
Where it is a firm or a proprietary concern the partners or proprietors as the case may be, would be in the saddle of management.
[761 H; 762 A B] 2.(c) On the issue of a notified order appointing an authorised controller, the person in charge of management including persons holding office as Managers or Directors of the industrial undertaking immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be deemed to have vacated their office as such.
The contract of management between the industrial undertaking and any managing agent or any director thereof holding office immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be deemed to have been terminated.
Subject to the limitation specified in Sec.
18E, the Companies Act in force at the relevant time will continue to apply to such undertaking in the same manner as it applied thereto before the issuance of the notified order under Sec.
18A. [762 B E] 2.
(d) The significant consequence that ensues on the issue of a notified order appointing an authorised controller is to divert the management from the present managers and to vest it in the authorised controller.
This change of management does not tantamount to either acquisition of the industrial undertaking or a take over of its ownership.
The industrial undertaking continues to be governed by the Companies Act or the Partnership Act or the relevant provisions of law applicable to a proprietary concern.
The only change is the removal of managers and appointment of another manager and 754 to safeguard his position restriction on the rights of shareholders or partners or original proprietor.
This is the net effect of the appointment of an authorised controller by a notified order.
[762 F H; 763 A B] 3.
The expression 'under the authority of and department of the Central Government ' would in ordinary parlance mean that the department is directly responsible for the management of the industrial undertaking.
This responsibility may cover amongst others, financial responsibility as well.
Power to regulate management or control the management is entirely distinguishable from the power to run the industry under the authority of the Central Government.
[763 C D] 4.
The substitution of the management ordered under Sec.
18 A does not tantamount to the industrial undertaking being taken over by the department of the Central Government.
Nor could it be said to be run under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
As the authorised controller enjoys all the powers of directors conferred by the relevant provisions of the Companies Act, be can exercise that power subject of course to any restriction or limitation on his power specified in the notified order or under the general supervision of the Central Government.
But this power is subject to the in built limitation that it can be exercised for regulating the management of the industrial undertaking.
Neither its identity nor its ownership is affected in any manner.
The change in personnel of management of the industrial undertaking for a specified period can never make the industrial undertaking one engaged in an industry carried on under the authority of the Central Government.
[763 E G] 5.
Under Sec.
16 of the IDR Act, the Central Government enjoys wide powers to issue directions to the industrial undertaking as may be appropriate in the circumstances for all or any of the purposes set out in the various sub clauses of Sec.
16(1).
This power to give directions without appointing an authorised controller or to appoint an authorised controller giving him specified directions is of a regulatory nature to be exercised with a view to regulating the managerial functions of an industrial undertaking so as to achieve certain objects or to rectify the mis management in larger national interest without in any manner affecting the identity, the status or the ownership of the industrial undertaking.
The appointment of the authorised controller would not make the industrial undertaking one run under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
While exercising power of giving directions under Sec.
16 the existing management is subjected to regulatory control, failing which the management has to be replaced to carry out the directions.
In either case the industrial undertaking retains its identity, personality and status unchanged.
[763 H; 764 B E] 6.
The underlying purpose of Sec.
32(IV) of the Bonus Act is not to exclude the employees of some stray establishment from the operation of the Act but to exclude all employees of all establishments in any industry which is carried on under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
[764 H] 7.
The expression 'carried on by or under the authority of any department of the Central Government ' qualifies the expression industry and not 755 the expression 'establishment ' as used in sub sec.
(iv) of Sec. 32 of the Bonus Act.
[765 A] 8.
The intention of the framers of the Bonus Act was to exclude employees employed in an establishment engaged in any industry which is carried on by or under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
It cannot be said that textile industry is being carried on under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
There may be employees in an industrial undertaking engaged in textile industry which may have been established under the authority of the department of the Central Government.
Ordinarily the Central Government would not like to treat an industrial establishment set up by it in an industry in which there are other private sector establishments to differentiate and discriminate between employees of establishments engaged in the same industry.[765 C E] 9.
The exception that is being carved out by Sec.
32(IV) is in respect of employees of an industrial undertaking engaged in an industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of the Central Government as a whole and not individual establishments.
[765 E] 10.
The expression 'wages ', salaries and other dues of the employees ' occurring in sub cl.
(c) of sub sec.
(2) of Sec. 5 of the Sick Textile Undertaking (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 would without doubts include statutory bonus payable under the Bonus Act.
[770 E] In the instant case, the liability arose for the period after the management of the undertaking had been taken over by the Central Government by appointing an authorised controller under Sec.
18A of the IDR Act.
Therefore, the liability to pay the bonus if awarded would be of the National Textile Corporation.
[770 E]
