The appellant, a directly recruited Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Police Department of the Respondent State was considered in 1976 for appointment as a member of the India Police Service under the provisions of the Indian Police Service (Recruitment) Rules, 1954 read with the Indian Police Service (Appointment by promotion) Regulations, 1955.
The Selection Committee did not include the appellant in the select list because of an adverse entry in his confidential roll of 1973 74.
The appellant was communicated the said adverse entry only in 1977 which was later on expunged by the State Government in December 1980.
There were also adverse entries in the confidential roll of the appellant for the year 1974 75 which were communicated to him in 1976 and which were also later on expunged by the State Government in February, 1978 and October 1980.
The Selection Committee met again in March 1981, but this time also did not include the appellant in the select list while some of his juniors were included.
The appellant questioned the validity of the decision of the Selection Committee in a writ petition before the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition at the stage of admission.
Hence this appeal.
In this appeal the appellant urged that the Selection Committee was wrong in relying upon the adverse entries which had been made in his confidential rolls which had not been either communicated to him or against which he had made representation which had remained undisposed of and which had been subsequently expunged.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The principle is well settled that in accordance with the rules of natural justice, an adverse report in a confidential roll cannot be acted upon to deny promotional opportunities unless it is communicated to the person concerned so that he has an opportunity to improve his work and conduct or to explain the circumstances leading to the report.
Such an opportunity is not an empty formality, its object, partially, being to enable the superior authorities to decide on a consideration of the explanation offered by the person concerned, whether the adverse report is justified.
[302 F] Gurdial Singh Fijji vs State of Punjab & Ors., ; referred to.
In the instant case, the case of the appellant for promotion to the Indian 300 Police Service Cadre had not been considered by the committee in a just and fair way and his case has been disposed of contrary to the principles laid down in the Gurdial Singh Fijji 's case.
The decisions of the Selection Committee recorded at its meetings in which the case of the appellant was considered are vitiated by reason of reliance being placed on the adverse remarks which were later on expunged.
The High Court committed an error in dismissing the petition of the appellant.
The appellant has made out a case for reconsideration of the question of his promotion to the Indian Police Service Cadre of the State of Bihar as on December 22, 1976.
The Selection Committee has now to reconsider the case of the appellant accordingly.
[104 E G] R.L. Butail vs Union of India & Ors., [1971] 2 S.C.R. 55.
distinguished.
In order to avoid a contingency, as arose in this case, the Government may consider the introduction of a system in which the officer who has to make entries in the confidential roll may be required to record his remarks in the presence of the Officer against whom remarks are proposed to be made after giving him an opportunity to explain any circumstance that may appear to be against him with the right to make representation to higher authorities against any adverse remarks.
Another system which may be introduced is to ask the officer who records the confidential remarks to serve a copy of such remarks on the officer concerned before the confidential roll is submitted to the higher authorities so that his representation against the remarks may also reach the higher authority shortly after the confidential roll is received.
This would curtail the delay in taking action on the representation.
[105 E G]
