Section 3 (2) of the (for short, the Act) empowers the Central Government and the State Governments, if satisfied With respect to any person, with a view to preventing him, "inter alia from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order", it is necessary to do so to make an order directing such person to be detained.
Section 5 A of the Act by virtue of section 2 of the National Security (Second Amendment) Act provides.
(i) that where a person has been detained under section 3 of the Act on two or more grounds, such order of detention shall be deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds and that such an order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one or some of he grounds are vague, non existent, non relevant, not connected or invalid for any reasons whatsoever and the Government or officer making the order of detention shall be deemed to have made the order of detention under the said section after being satisfied as provided in that section with reference to the remaining ground or grounds.
The District Magistrate, Agra passed an order of detention of Ajay Dixit, the detenu, under section 3 (2) of the Act on 29th February 1984 stating that he was satisfied that the detenu was likely to act in a manner prejudicial to maintenance of public order and that it was necessary to detain him with the object of preventing him from acting prejudicially to the maintenance of public order.
The grounds of detention were (i) that on 10.4.81 the detenu alongwith his companions surrounded Shri Kanhaiya Lal Sharma with the intention of killing him but the latter escaped slightly; (ii) that on 27.9.82 he fired at the police party from his house where the policy had gone to arrest goondas collected by him; (iii) That on his arrest on 27.9.1982 a country made 844 Tamancha and two live cartridges without licence were recovered from him; (iv) That on 15.1.83 he shot dead Shri Naresh Paliwal; (v) That on 31.10.1983, he forcibly compelled Mrs. Sanjeev Kumar Paliwal at the point of a revolver to take a nude snap of immoral act being committed by Umesh with Sanjeev Kumar Gupta; and (vi) That on 26.2.1984, he attempted to murder Shri Jai Kumar Jain.
The grounds of detention also stated the fact that criminal cases were pending trial in the court in respect of the above criminal acts committed by the detenu.
The petitioner father of the detenu, moved this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for a writ of habeas corpus directing the release of the detenu from detention.
He contended, inter alia, that the grounds mentioned in the order wore illusory, insufficient and not bona fide and in any case irrelevant for the detention of the detenu for the maintenance of public order.
Allowing the writ petition, ^ HELD: (1) The satisfaction of the detaining authority cannot be subjected to objective tests and courts are not to exercise appellate powers over such authorities and an order proper on its face, passed by a competent authority in good faith, would be a complete answer to a petition for a writ of habeas corpus.
But when a challenge is made to a detention on the grounds that the stale and irrelevant grounds were the basis for detention, then the detenu is entitled to be released and to that extent the order is subject to judicial review not on the ground of sufficiency of the grounds nor the truth of the grounds but only about the relevancy of the grounds which would come under judicial scrutiny.
It is, therefore, necessary in each case to examine the facts to determine not the sufficiency of the grounds nor the truth of the grounds, but nature of the grounds alleged and see whether these are relevant or not for considering whether the detention of the detenu is necessary for maintenance of public order.
[850F; 853A B; 854G H] (2) It is important to bear in mind the difference between the law and order situation & maintenance of public order.
The contravention 'of law ' always affects 'order, but before it could be said to affect 'public order ' it must affect the community or the public at large.
The question whether a man has only committed a broach of law and order or has acted in a manner likely to cause a disturbance of the public order, is a question of degree and the extent of the reach of the act upon society.
The test is: Does it lead to a disturbance of the even tempo and current of life of the community so as to amount to a disturbance of the public order.
Or, does is affect merely an individual without affecting the tranquillity of society.
It may be remembered that qualitatively, the acts which affect 'law and order ' are not different from the acts which affect 'public order '.
Indeed a state of peace or orderly tranquillity which prevails as a result of the observance or enforcement of internal laws and regulations by the Government is a feature common to the concepts of 'law and order.
and 'public order ' Every kind of disorder or contravention of law affects that orderly tranquillity.
The distinction between the areas of 'law and order ' and 'public order ' "is one of degree and extent of the reach of the act in question on society".
It is the potentiality of the act to disturb the even tempo of the life of the community which makes it prejudicial to the maintenance of public order.
If the contravention in its effect is confined only to a few individuals directly involved as 845 distinguished from a wide spectrum of the public, it would raise a problem of law and order only.
These concentric concepts of 'law and order ' and 'public order ' may have a common 'epicentre ', but it is the length, magnitude and intensity of the terror wave unleashed by a particular eruption of disorder that helps distinguish it as an act affecting 'public order ' from that concerning law and order.
[851A B; D E; G H; 852A D] (3) In the instant case, apart from the fact that the first ground was old and stale, it is irrelevant in as much as the detenu has been acquitted of the charge before the detention order was passed.
The other grounds mentioned in the detention order no doubt are also unfortunate and the conduct alleged of the detenu is reprehensible.
Such conducts, if true, are not of such nature which could possibly endanger 'public order '.
The grounds mentioned therein are not of such magnitude as to amount to apprehend disturbance of public order, nor was there any evidence that for any conduct of the detenu public order was endangered, or there could be reasonable apprehension about it.
In view of the nature of the allegations mentioned in the grounds, this Court is satisfied that these are not of such a nature as to lead to any apprehension that the even tempo of the community would be endangered.
Therefore, the detention of the detenu under the provisions of section 3 (2) of the Act was not justified.
[853C D; 855A] Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & Ors Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal , Ram Ranjan Chatterjee vs State of West Bengal ; at 146 Jaya Mala vs Home Secretary Govt.
of J & K. , Alijan Mian V. District Magistrate, Dhanbad and Others [1983] 4 S.C.C. p 301.
at 308 and Kamlakar Prasad Chaturvedi vs State of M.P. and An other.
[1983] 4 S.C.C. 433. followed.
