The appellant was working as a salesman at a show room of a company.
The company charge sheeted the appellant inter alia on the ground of misconduct.
The misconduct imputed to the appellant was that he was negligent in keeping his cheque book in relation to his own private account in such a manner that it enable the Manager cum Cashier of the show room of the company in which the appellant was a salesman at the relevant time to misuse the cheque forms and thereby defraud the company.
An Inquiry Officer was appointed to enquire into the charges.
The company examined some with cases and adduced evidence.
The Inquiry Officer found the appellant guilty of all the charges.
On the basis of the findings of the Inquiry Officer the company dismissed the appellant from service.
The appellant raised an industrial dispute and the same was, by agreement, referred by the appropriate Government to an arbitrator as provided under Sec.
10(A)(1) of the .
The company submitted that the arbitrator cannot sit in appeal over the findings of the inquiry.
In his award, the arbitrator held that the findings of the Inquiry Officer were based on no legal evidence and were, therefore, perverse and the enquiry was therefore vitiated.
Before a formal final order could be made by the arbitrator, he was elevated as a Judge of the Delhi High Court.
That led to a second reference.
The second arbitrator found the appellant guilty of all the charges and held that The dismissal of the appellant was not wrongful.
The appellant filed a writ petition under article 226 in the High Court question 867 ing the correctness, validity and the legality of the award of the second arbitrator.
A Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the matter in limine observing that the matter depends upon assessment of evidence and the Court cannot reappraise the same under article 226 of the Constitution.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The charge levelled against the appellant is a composite charge and has two limbs.
The first limb of the charge refers to negligence in handling his private cheque book so that in conspiracy with the Manager cheque forms contained in the cheque book issued to the appellant for operating his private account were used by the Manager to defraud the company.
When a cheque book is issued to a holder of an account by the bank, there is no law which requires him to keep his cheque book in safe custody.
He may keep his cheque book anywhere be likes and even if it is not in safe custody he does so at his own peril.
Some one so minded to forge cheque and to withdraw money from some one 's account may use anybody 's cheque book.
In such a situation, the owner of the cheque book unless he has participated in the conspiracy in any manner for facilitating withdrawal of the amount cannot be attributed any misconduct for keeping his cheque book unattended or not in safe custody.
Therefore first limb of The charge can be rejected as per se untenable without anything more.
The second limb of the charge that since the appellant left his cheque book unattended the appellant was negligent and guilty of wilful disobedience in performance of his duties as a salesman, has no force.
Keeping one 's own cheque book unattended is no part of performance of duties of the employees and there was no order by the employer how appellant should handle his private cheque book.
Therefore, the charge apart from being frivolous is ludicrous and could not have been even framed.
Even if the allegation in the charge is left unquestioned it does rot constitute misconduct.
The employer could not have framed such charges without any evidence in support of them yet and the second arbitrator holds them proved.
Therefore the second arbitrator accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer which were per se perverse.
Not only the second arbitrator did not apply his mind to the submission of the appellant that the findings were perverse but he merely recorded his ipse dixit without in any manner analysing or examining or applying his mind to the evidence only to find out whether there was any evidence to substantiate the charge and whether any reasonable man would arrive at the conclusion which the Inquiry Officer had reached.
The award of the second arbitrator, apart from the fact that it is based on no Legal evidence suffers from the additional infirmity of total non application of mind.
Any finding of misconduct based on total absence of evidence must fall.
[875 B C; D E; G H; 878 H; 879 A B] The contention that once the second arbitrator came to the conclusion that the appellant was given full opportunity to participate in the domestic enquiry neither High Court under article 226 nor this Court under article 136 can sit in appeal over the findings of the Inquiry Officer and reappraise the evidence, has no force.
In exercise of the jurisdiction conferred by Sec.
11 A of the both arbitrator and this Court can reappraise the evidence led in the domestic enquiry and satisfy itself whether 868 the evidence led by the employer established misconduct against the workman.
It is too late in the day to contend that the arbitrator has only the power to decide whether the conclusions reached by the Inquiry Officer were plausible one deducible from the evidence led in enquiry and not to re appreciate the evidence itself and to reach the conclusion whether the misconduct alleged against the workman has been established or not.
[879 C E] Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company of India (P) Ltd. vs Management and Others, ; , referred to.
It is well settled that where the findings of misconduct are based on no legal evidence and the conclusion is one to which no reasonable man would come, the arbitrator appointed under Sec.
10 A or this Court in appeal under article 136 can reject such findings as perverse.
Holding that the findings are perverse does not constitute reappraisal of evidence, though this Court would have been perfectly justified in exercise of powers conferred by Sec.
11A to do so.
[880 A B] Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. vs Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha, ; , referred to.
It is equally well settled that where a quasi judicial tribunal or arbitrator records findings based on no legal evidence and the findings are either his ipse dixit or based on conjectures and surmises, the enquiry suffers from the additional infirmity of non application of mind and stands vitiated.
The industrial tribunal or the arbitrator or a quasi judicial authority can reject not only such findings but also the conclusion based on no legal evidence or if it is merely based on surmises and conjectures unrelated to evidence on the ground that they disclose total non application of mind.
[880 C D] In the instant case, viewed from either angle, the conclusion of the Inquiry Officer as well as of the second arbitrator are wholly perverse and hence unsustainable.
The High Court was clearly in error in declining to examine the contention that the findings were perverse on the short, specious and wholly untenable ground that the matter depends on appraisal of evidence [880 F] Between appraisal of evidence and total lack of evidence there is an appreciable difference which could never be lost sight of and the High Court ought not to have short circuited the writ petition.
[880 F] If there is absolutely no evidence in support of the only allegation of misconduct namely negligence in not keeping one 's private cheque book in safe custody, the conclusion is not only not a plausible one but it in wholly perverse and this Court is in complete agreement with the findings recorded by the first arbitrator that the findings of Inquiry Officer were perverse and the enquiry was wholly vitiated.
[880 G] 869 Where the order of dismissal is sought to be sustained on a finding in the domestic enquiry which is shown to be perverse and the enquiry is vitiated as suffering from non application of mind the only course open to court is to set it aside and consequently relief of reinstatement must be granted.
[880 G] The submission of the company that since the appellant was gainfully employed during the period of his dismissal, he should not be awarded back wages must fail.
The only evidence was that during his forced absence from employment since the date of termination of his service, the appellant and the members of his family were staying with his father in law and during this period the appellant was helping his father in law who had a coal depot.
On this evidence it cannot be said that the appellant was gainfully employed so as to reject the claim for back wages.
If this is gainfully employment as contended by the company, the employer can contend that the dismissed employee in order to keep his body and soul together had taken to begging and that would as well be the gainful employment.
Therefore, the appellant would be entitled to full back wages and all consequential benefits.
[881 C E]
