The appellant was employed in the service of the former Indian State of Hyderabad prior to the coming into force of the Constitution of India.
On the coming into force of the Constitution of India, the said State became a part of the territory of India as a Part State and the Appellant continued in the service of that State, till he retired from service on January 21, 1956.
The appellant claimed that he was entitled to be paid the salary of a High Court Judge from October 1, 1947 and also claimed that he was entitled to receive a pension of Rs. 1,000 a month in the Government of India currency being the maximum pension admissible under the rules.
Both the aforesaid claims were negatived by the Government.
The Appellant thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court against the Respondent State of Andhra Pradesh, which was the principal successor State to the erstwhile State, which was contested under Regulation 6 of the Hyderabad Civil Service Regulations which were applicable in the case of the Appellant and that claim to pension was to be regulated by the rules in force at the time when the Government servant retired from the service of the Government.
Under clause (b) of Regulation 313, the maximum pension ordinarily admissible for superior service to which the Appellant belonged was to be Osmania Sikka Rs. 1,000 a month.
The Hyderabad Civil Service Regulations were replaced with effect from October 1, 1954 by the Hyderabad Civil Services Rules and under clause (b) of Rule 299 (which later became clause (b) of sub rule (1) of Rule 299) the maximum pension ordinarily admissible for superior service was to be Rs. 1,000 a month, 931 During the pendency of the writ petition, the Government by a Notification dated February 3,1971 amended clause (b) of sub rule (1) of Rule 299, with retrospective effect from October 1, 1954.
The expression 'Rs. 1,000 a month in the said clause (b) was substituted by the expression 'Rs 857.15 a month".
This amendment was made in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 read with Article 313 of the Constitution of India.
The Single Judge who heard the Appellant 's writ petition rejected the claim made by the Appellant with respect to salary on the ground that the said claim had been negatived by the Government as far back as 1955 and merely by making representations to the Government he could not keep the said claim alive.
He however held that in view of the judgment of this Court in Deokinandan Prasad vs State of Bihar and Others [1971] Supp.
S.C.R 634 the right to receive pension was property and was a fundamental right and that it had accrued to the Appellant on the date when he retired and could not be affected by a rule made subsequently under the proviso to Article 309, and allowed the writ petition to the extent that the Appellant was entitled to get his future pension at the rate of Rs. 1,000 a month in the Government of India currency from the date of filing of the said writ petition and arrears of pension at the same rate for a period of three years prior to the filing of the said writ petition.
The Respondent State filed a Letters Patent Appeal, and the Division Bench held that this Court in Deokinandan Prasad 's case did not hold that a pensioner was entitled to any pension that he demanded but all that was done in the said case was to direct the State to consider properly the claim of the pensioner for payment of pension according to law, and relying upon its earlier decisions in State of Andhra Pradesh vs Ahmed Hussain Khan and State of Andhra Pradesh vs section Gopalan upholding the validity of the amendment made in clause (b) of Rule 299 (1) by the Notification dated February 3, 1971, allowed the appeal and dismissed the writ petition of the appellant.
Allowing the Appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: The relevance placed by the Division Bench upon its earlier decision in the two writ appeals (Ahmed Hussain Khan and section Gopalan) was misconceived.
The two appeals arose out of separate writ petitions filed by two Government servants who had joined the service of the former Indian State of Hyderabad and retired after the States Reorganization Act, 1956 had come into force.
This Court allowed the two Appeals and reversed the said judgment of the Division Bench, held that the letter dated April 28, 1973 from the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, Cabinet Secretariat did not amount to a previous approval granted by the Central Government to the amendment made by the Notification dated February 3, 1971 to clause (b) of Rule 299 (1) and that, the Notification was invalid and inoperative so far as it concerned persons referred to in sub sections (1) and (2) of Section 115 of the States Reorganization Act, 1956.
[936D G] In the instant case, the Appellant had retired prior to the appointed day, November 1, 1956.
He therefore did not fall under either sub section (1) or 932 sub section (2) of section 115 and the proviso to sub section (7) of that section had no application to him.
The amendment to the Rules, so far as he was concerned, did not, therefore, require any previous approval of the Central Government even though thereby the conditions of the service were being varied to his disadvantage.
[937F G] 2.
Pension being a fundamental right, it could only be taken away or curtailed in the manner provided in the Constitution, [938E] In the instant case, the fundamental right to receive pension according to the rules in force accrued to the Appellant when he retired from service.
By making a retrospective amendment to the said Rule 299 (1) (b) more than fifteen years after that right had accrued to him, what was done was to take away the Appellant 's right to receive pension according to the rules in force at the date of his retirement or in any event to curtail and abridge that right.
To that extent, the said amendment was void.
[938H; 939A] 3.
The Appellant was entitled to succeed in view of the judgment of this Court in Deokinandan Prasad 's case.
The Division Bench of the High Court has misunderstood the ratio of that decision.
It was held in that case that pension is not a bounty payable at the sweet will and pleasure of the Government but is a right vesting in a Government servant and was property under clause (1) of Article 31 of the Constitution and the State had no power to with hold the same by a mere executive order.
It was also held that this right was also property under sub clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 of the Constitution and was not saved by clause (5) of that Article, and that this right of the Government servant to receive pension could not be curtailed or taken away, by the State by an executive order.
[937H; 938A D] 4.
The fact that sub clause (f) of clause (1) of Article 19 and Article 31 have been omitted from the Constitution by the Constitution (Forty fourth Amendment Act,) 1978 with effect from June 20, 1979 was immaterial because on the date when the said Notification was issued, these provisions were part of the Constitution.
[939B C] 5, The Supreme Court reversed and set aside the Judgment of the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court and restored the order passed by the Single Judge of that High Court.
The Supreme Court directed the State of Andhra Pradesh to pay to the Appellant the amounts due to him according to the Judgment of the Single Judge of the High Court within one month and pay to him pension in future at the rate of Rs. 1000 per month in the Government of India currency.
[939D E]
