The appellant was a member of the armed forces of the Union from August, 1942 until August 17, 1970 when he retired from the Army.
In 1964, he inherited a flat from his brother.
The respondent was already the tenant of the flat.
Soon after retirement, he filed a suit against the respondent for ejectment on the grounds of default, sub letting and bona fide personal requirement.
While the suit was pending, the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rents Control Act, 1947 was amended in 1975 by the introduction of section 13 A 1.
The appellant, therefore filed a fresh suit for eviction under section 13 A 1, and produced the required certificate.
The Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority concurrently found that the appellant bona fide required the flat for his own occupation and decreed the suit.
The respondent tenant moved the High Court under Article 227, and the High Court while not interfering with the concurrent finding of the subordinate tribunals that the appellant bona fide required the premises for 751 his own occupation, set aside the decree for eviction on the ground that section 13 A 1 did not enable a member or a retired member of the armed forces to seek the remedy provided by section 13 A 1, if the premises were already in the occupation of the tenant when he became the landlord while being a member of the armed forces.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The Bombay Rent Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 is a welfare legislation designed to protect tenants from harassment and unreasonable eviction by Landlords.
It should, therefore be interpreted in a broad and liberal spirit so as to further and not to constrain the object of the Act.
The exclusionary provisions in the Act should be construed strictly so as to give a wide amplitude to the principal object of the legislation and to prevent its evasion on deceptive grounds.
But this does not mean that the intention of the legislature, expressed with sufficient vocabulary clarity or gathered by reference to permissible sources, may be by passed to accommodate individual versions of what may appear reasonable.
[755B D] (ii) Where the words of a statute are clear and unambiguous, there can arise no question of construction.
Such words ordinarily speak for themselves.
[755D] (iii) A court should give effect to plain words, not because there is any charm or magic in the plainness of such words but because plain words may be expected to convey plainly the intention of the Legislature.
[755E] 2.
Section 13 A 1 of the Act was introduced in 1975, relaxing the rigour of section 13 in favour of a landlord who is or was a member of the armed forces.
The provision provides that if the landlord produces a certificate in the manner prescribed it shall be taken as established, without further proof that he was then a member of the armed forces of the Union or that be was such member and now a retired ex serviceman and that he did not possess any other suitable residence in the local area where he or any member of his family can reside.
All that he had to further prove was that he bona fide required the premises for occupation by himself or any member of his family.
The certificate is conclusive proof that he did not possess any suitable residence in the local area, and not that he bona fide required the premises for occupation by himself or any member of his family.
As soon as he established that he bona fide required the premises for occupation he was entitled to recover possession, and did not have to further prove that greater hardship could be caused to him than to the tenant if a decree for possession is not granted.
[756D G] 3.
It is impossible on the plain language of section 13 A 1 of the Act to read down the provision as enabling a member or a retired member of the armed forces to recover possession of the premises only if he had himself originally let out the premises when he was the member of the armed forces and not if the tenancy had commenced before he became the landlord of the premises either by inheritance, partition, or any other 752 mode of transfer of property.
To place such an interpretation would be to virtually rewrite the provision.
[757E F] 4.
The words 'regain possession ' in the Statement of objects and Reasons, merely mean obtain possession, and do not indicate that the member of the Armed Forces must have let the tenant into possession.
[758G] Mrs Winifred Ross and Anr.
vs Mrs. Ivy Fonseca and Ors., [1983] (2) S.C SCALE 900 referred to.
