The Appellant was a tenant of the Respondent.
The Respondent was in Central Government service and was allotted Government residential accommodation.
By a general order, the Government directed that all Government servants who had their own dwelling houses at the place of posting should vacate the Government accommodation allotted to them or in default to pay market rent in respect thereof.
The Respondent therefore vacated tho Government accommodation allotted to him and resided in another premise belonging to him which was adjoining the premises let out to the Appellant.
The Respondent later filed an application under section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 on the ground specified in section 14A(1) thereof for possession of the premises occupied by the Appellant which was contested.
The Rent Controller after considering the accommodation in the respective occupation of the parties held that it could not be said that the premises occupied by the Respondent constituted reasonably suitable residential accommodation.
He further held, that section 14A(1) of the Act did not contain a condition that the Government servant who made an application under section 14A(1) should not be in possession of reasonably suitable alternative accommodation as was the case under clause (e) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 14, and that even if such a factor were to be taken into consideration it could not be said that the Respondent was in occupation of reasonably suitable alternative accommodation.
The Rent Controller therefore passed an order of eviction against the Appellant and directed it not to be executed for a period of two months.
This order was confirmed by the High Court in the revision petition filed by the Appellant under section 25B(8).
In tho Appeal to this Court tho maintainability of the eviction petition was impugned on behalf of the Appellant on two ground : (1) the Respon 1026 dent was not in occupation of the government accommodation allotted to him on the date when be filed his application, and (2) on the date when he filed his application, the Respondent was already residing in premises belonging to him.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: A. (1) It is not necessary that a person in occupation of residential premises allotted to him by the Central Government or a local authority who is required by or in pursuance of a general or special order made by that Government or authority to vacate such accommodation or, in default, to incur certain obligations, such as payment of market rent, on the ground that he owns in the Union Territory of Delhi a residential accommodation either in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child should be in occupation of the accommodation allotted to him on the date when he files an eviction application under section 14A(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 to recover possession of the residential premises which he so owns and which has been let by him.
[1038 G H, 1039 A] (2) If such person has, however, other premises which he owns either in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child which are available to him for his residential accommodation or into which he has already moved, he cannot maintain an application under section 14A(1) of the Act.
[1039 B] (3) Even if the other premises owned by him their in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child are reasonably suitable for his accommodation he cannot maintain an application under section 14A(1) but must file an application on the ground specified in clause (e) of the proviso to sub section (1) of section 14 of the Act.
[1039 C] B. (1) Though the Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying a legislative Bill cannot be used to determine the true meaning and effect of the substantive provisions of a statute, it is permissible to refer to the Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying a Bill for the purpose of understanding the background, the antecedent state of affairs, the surrounding circumstances in relation to the statute, and the evil which the statute sought to remedy.
[1033 H; 1034 A] (2) The object underlying section 14A introduced by the Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act 1976 is that a person who is compelled to vacate residential accommodation allotted to him on the ground that he owns other residential premises in the Union Territory of Delhi either in his own name or in the name of his wife or dependent child should not be left without a roof over his head or should not be made to incur heavy financial obligation by continuing to reside in the accommodation allotted to him by paying market rent in respect thereof to the Central Government or the local authority, as the case may be.
[1035 C D] In the instant case, the Rent Controller was in error in considering the respective needs of the parties and the suitability of accommodation 1027 occupied by the Respondent.
The order of the High Court dismissing the revision petition is reversed and the eviction suit filed by respondent in the Court of the Rent Controller is dismissed.
