The prosecution alleged that PW 2 had given a First Information Report of two offences but appropriate investigation was not being done and charge sheet was not being furnished to the Court.
When PW. 2 contacted the Appellant the Head Constable of the Police Station he demanded money.
2 thereupon informed the Anti Corruption Department about the demand and the Deputy Superintendent of Police agreed to lay a trap.
Details were fixed and the trap was laid.
An amount of Rs. 50 was passed on as the bribe.
Five currency notes each of Rs. 10 denomination with marked initials were made over to PW. 2 to be given as bribe to the accused.
The prosecution further alleged that the accused came pursuant to the request and the money was passed on and the payment of bribe was duly detected.
The Special Judge accepted the prosecution case, convicted the Appellant under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code as also section 5(1)(d) and section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and imposed a consolidated sentence of two years ' rigorous imprisonment.
The conviction and sentence were upheld in appeal by the High Court.
Allowing the Appeal, to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The restriction on appreciation of evidence in an appeal by special leave is a self imposed one and is not a jurisdictional bar.
Whileordnai 1137 rily this Court would refrain from re examining the evidence in a case where serious injustice would be done if the evidence is not looked into it would not be proper for the Court to shun attention by following the self imposed restriction.
[1140C] Ram Prakash Arora vs State of Punjab, [1972] Crl.
L. J. 1293 and State of Bihar vs Basawan Singh ; ; referred to.
In the instant case, certain important features have been overlooked both by the trial Court as also by the High Court.
The two panch witnesses have not only turned hostile, but have disclosed facts which support the defence version of the incident.
PW. 2, the decoy witness has stated facts which probabilise the defence stand.
Even the literate Constable PW. 7 who has not been declared hostile has supported the defence version.
The Place and the manner in which the bribe is said to have been offered and received make the prosecution story totally opposed to ordinary human conduct.
[1139 H; 1140 A B] 2.
Sufficient material has been brought out to merit interference.
The evidence of the panchas is not available to support the prosecution case.
There is discrepancy in many material aspects.
The prosecution story is opposed to ordinary human conduct.
The discrepancies go to the root of the matter and if properly noticed would lead any court to discard the prosecution version.
Without powder treatment, for the absence of which no explanation has been advanced the prosecution story becomes liable to be rejected.
An overall assessment of the matter indicates that the story advanced by the prosecution is not true and the defence version seems to be more probable.
The conviction of the appellant is therefore set aside and he is acquitted.
He is discharged from his bail bond.
[1145 C E] Prakash Chand vs State (Delhi Administration), ; and Kishan Chand Mangal vs State of Rajasthan ; ; referred to.
The accused was, according to the prosecution evidence, in full uniform.
He had been called up to the bus stand which is a public place.
There is evidence to show that there were many people moving around and the area was crowded.
There is also evidence that the place where PW. 2 met the accused with the money was close to a hotel where people were standing.
In such a surrounding a police man in uniform would ordinarily not accept a bribe.
The police station was not far away and if the accused wanted actually to receive the bribe he would try to choose a better environment for it than the one where the bribe is said to have been given.
Human compunction would not permit a man in the position of the accused to behave in the manner prosecution has pictured him to have.
There is also evidence that the money had not really been received by the accused and PW I raised shouts that the bribe had been accepted before the amount was paid.
PW. 3 has also stated that he did not see anybody giving or taking illegal gratification.
[1143 B D] 4.
There is no material at all on the record to explain why the powder treatment process was not followed even though the detection is alleged to have been handled by experienced people of the Anti Corruption Department.
It is difficult to accept the position that PW. 6 was not aware of the powder treat 1138 ment.
It has been in vogue for well over three decades.
If such powder treat ment had been made the passing of the bribe would indeed not have been difficult to be proved.
[1145 A B] Raghbir Singh vs State of Punjab , referred to.
