Ram Sharan Yadav, the appellant and a candidate sponsored by the Communist Party of India, was declared elected on 16.6.1977, to the Bihar Legislative Assembly from 241 Goh Assembly constituency, after polling 28,783 votes as against 16,458 votes polled by respondent No. 1 Thakur Muneshwar Nath Singh.
An election petition was filed by the respondent No.1 in the High Court for setting aside the election of the appellant on the ground that he had indulged in corrupt practices as envisaged in sec.
123(2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
It was alleged that the appellant through his agents, supporters and other people, duly instructed by him made an attempt to set at naught the electoral process by putting the voters in serious fear as they were threatened, assaulted and even firing was resorted to.
The High Court found that the said acts which undoubtedly amount to undue influence had been committed not only at the instance but in the presence of the appellant and therefore allowed the petition and set aside the election of the people.
Hence the appeal by Special Leave of the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1 :1.
A charge of corrupt practice has to be proved by convincing evidence and not merely by preponderance of probabilities.
As the charge of corrupt practice is in the nature of a criminal charge it is for the party who sets up the plea of undue influence to prove it to the hilt beyond reasonable doubt and the manner of proof should be the same as for an offence in a criminal case.
This is more so because once it is proved to the satisfaction of a Court that a candidate has been guilty of undue influence them he is likely to be disqualified for a period of 6 years or such other period as the authority concerned under section 8A of the Act may think fit.
Therefore, as the charge, if proved, entails a very heavy penalty in the form of disqualification the Supreme Court has held that a very cautious approach must be made in order to prove the charge of undue influence levelled by the defeated candidate.
[1092C E] 1: 2.
Another well settled principle is that before the allegation 1090 of undue influence can be proved, it must be shown that undue influence proceeds either from the candidate himself or through his agent or by any other person either with his consent or with the consent of his election agent so as to prevent or cloud the very exercise of any electoral right.
[1092F] 1: 3.
Where allegations of fraud or undue influence are made while insisting on standard of strict proof, the Court should not extend or stretch the doctrine to such an extent to make it well nigh impossible to prove an allegation of corrupt practice.
Such an approach would defeat and frustrate the very laudable and sacrosanct object of the Act in maintaining purity of the electoral process.
[1093F] 1: 4.
By and large, the Court in such cases while appreciating or analyzing the evidence must be guided by the following considerations:[1093G] (1) the nature, character, respectability and credibility of the evidence; [1093H] (2) the surrounding circumstances and the improbabilities appearing in the case; [1093H] (3) the slowness of the appellate court to disturb a finding of fact arrived at by the trial court who had the initial advantage of observing the behavior, character and demeanor of the witnesses appearing before it, and [1094A] (4) the totality of the effect of the entire evidence which leaves a lasting impression regarding the corrupt practices alleged.
[1094] 1:5.
There is no ritualistic formula nor a cut and dried test to lay down as to how a charge of undue influence can be proved but if all the circumstances taken together lead to the irresistible inference that the voters were pressurized, threatened or assaulted at the instance of either the candidate or his supporters or agents with his consent or with his agents consent that should be sufficient to vitiate the election of the returned candidate.
The state of evidence in the present case, is both complete and conclusive.
All the witnesses who appeared to prove the allegation of undue influence have in one voice categorically stated that voters were threatened, assaulted and even a bomb was hurled so that they may not cast their votes.
The witnesses have also said that all this was done in the presence of the appellant.
[1093D E; 1094C D] 1:6.
The plea of alibi, to the effect that the appellant did not go to the polling booth cannot be accepted inasmuch as (a) such a plea was not taken in the written statement and (b) such a self imposed restriction not to leave the village and find out what was happening in his constituency is both unnatural and improbable.
A close scrutiny of the evidence makes it clear that the appellant was undoubtedly present at the Bhurkunda Polling booth at the time when the voters were going to cast their votes and his agents or supporters indulged in acts of assault, hurling of bombs 1091 etc.
in his presence and he did not stop them from doing so from which a conclusive inference can be drawn that the acts of assault, arosen, etc. were committed with the positive knowledge and consent of the party himself or his agents.
Clearly it is not a case where two views were possible so that the appellant could be given the benefit of doubt.
[1096A B, 1097A B, 1098B] Daulat Ram Chauhan vs Anand Sharma , (p. 73 para 18); Manmohan Kalia vs Yash and Ors. ; (p. 502 para 7); A. Younus Kunju vs R. section Unni ond Ors.[1984] 3 S.C C. 346 (p. 349); and Samant N. Balakrishna etc.
vs George Fernandez and Ors. ; (pp.
618 619); followed.
Normally, the Supreme Court in appeal does not interfere on a finding of this type unless there are prima facie good grounds to show that the High Court has gravely erred, resulting in serious prejudice to the returned candidate.
[1092H; 1093A]
