A single Judge of the Calcutta High Court, on an oral application made in his chamber on behalf of a person professing to be respondent No. 1, and on giving an oral undertaking to make a written application within 4 days, issued an interim order directing maintenance of status quo in regard to an auction of a liquor shop held in favour of the appellant.
The said order did not make any attempt to indicate even briefly the facts, the question of law, if any, raised before the Judge and the reasons which prompted him to make such an interim order.
On receiving the information about the said order, the appellant contacted the High Court and got the information that the subsequent writ petition filed by respondent No. I under Article 226 would be taken up for orders at 2.
30 p.m.
On 3. 4. 1984.
While the representatives of the appellant and their advocate were wailing in the court, they came to know that the matter had been mentioned in the chamber of the learned Judge who had earlier granted stay and that the order of statues quo had been extended until further orders.
The appellant told the learned Single Judge that they were waiting in the Court and .
were not informed that the matter was going to be mentioned in his chamber and in view of this they requested the learned Judge to reconsider his order.
But, the Judge declined to do so.
There upon the appellant filed a Writ Appeal.
The Writ Petition filed by respondent No. I along with the Writ Appeal of the appellant were heard together by a Division Bench which set aside the auction and directed that a fresh auction be held on 19th April 1984.
Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
Disposing of the appeal, ^ HELD: There is hardly any justification for the entertainment of an oral application and the issuance of an interim order with no record whatever of what was submitted to the court of the reasons for the order made by the court.
To permit a procedure by which oral applications may be made and internal orders obtained without any petition in writing, without any affidavit having been sworn to as prima facie proof of allegations and without any record before kept before the court may lead to very serious abuse of the process of the court.
Therefore, this Court expresses its disapprobation and forbids the 25 practice of entertaining oral applications by any court in matters of consequence A without any record before it.
[29E G] (2) This Court does not mean to suggest that oral application may never be made.
Often during the course of the hearing of a case it becomes necessary to make applications of a formal nature and such application are permitted by the Presiding Judge.
But in all such cases the court is already seized of the principal matter or dispute and there is a record pertaining to it before the 13 court.
Again, this Court does not mean to suggest that other urgent oral applications may never be made.
If urgent interim orders are imperative, at least skeletal applications setting out the bare facts and the questions invoked should be insisted upon.
A detailed application could be permitted to be filed later.
If the matter is so urgent as not even to brook any insistence upon a written application, the judge should at least take The trouble and the care to record in his order the facts mentioned to him and the submissions made to him.
It is essential that there be a contemporaneous record.
Otherwise the court ceases to be a court of record.
[29G H; 30A B] (3) A sitting in chambers could be held when both sides are represented and the sittings are held openly so that members of the public, if they desire to attend, may have access even in the chamber.
To grant interim orders on oral applications in chambers when the judge is otherwise sitting in open court for other matters would seriously reflect on the fairness of the procedure adopted by the courts and may have the unpleasant effect of undermining public confidence in courts.
A public hearing is one of the great attributes of a court, and courts of this country are therefore required to administer justice in public.
Otherwise, there is a risk that justice may even be undone.
It is not 'as a matter of policy but as a matter of law ' that The hearing of a cause be public except in the limited class of cases.
That rule was violated by the learned Single Judge in this case.
[3lE;H; 32A.B] Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar & ors.
vs State of Maharashtra PC 246 referred to.
