Respondent No. 1 was employed in the Agartala Municipality and held the post of an Assistant Accountant.
The Commissioners of this Municipality were superseded by an order of the State Government under Section 553 of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932 as extended to the State of Tripura in 1975.
Respondent No, 1 who was under suspension at the time of supersession was dismissed from service in the disciplinary proceedings against him by the Administrator of the Municipality on 20th December, 1975.
The State Government confirmed the order of dismissal.
Respondent No. 1 was however reinstated to the post of Accountant in charge on 6th May, 1978 with immediate effect by the Administrator.
Respondent No. I contested the mid term Lok Sabha election held in 1980 from the West Tripura Parliamentary Constituency, and was declared elected on 8th January, 1980.
The appellant who was a voter filed an Election Petition in the High Court contending that respondent No. 1 was disqualified for being elected as a member of the House of People as he held an office of profit under the Government of Tripura within the meaning of Article 102(1)(a) of the Constitution.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that Respondent No. 1 held an office of profit under the Government of Tripura.
51 In the appeal to this Court on the question: whether respondent No. 1 A held an office of profit under sub clause (a) of Clause (1) of Article 102 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the Appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
Whether in a particular case a person holds an office of profit under the government or not must depend upon the facts and circumstances of the relevant provisions.
To make in all cases employees of local authorities subject to the control of Government, holders of office of profit under the Government would be to obliterate the specific differentiation made under Article 58(2) of the Constitution and to extend disqualification under Article 102 (1)(a) to an extent not warranted by the language of the Article.
162 E F] In the instant case, having regard to the provisions of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932 as extended to Tripura, the Government does not control officers like respondent No. I and he continues to be an employee of the Municipality though his appointment is subject to the confirmation by the Government.
He does not cease to be an employee of the Municipality.
Local authority as such or any other authority does not cease to become independent entity separate from Government.
[62 D C] 2.
Respondent No. I was not at the relevant time a holder of office of profit under the Government.
Some amount of control is recognised even in a local authority which is taken account of under Article 58.
The High Court rightly held that respondent No. 1 did not hold office of profit under the Government of Tripura on the date of filing of the nomination on an analysis of relevant provisions of the Act.
[62 G H] 3.
The object of enacting provisions like Article 102(1)(a) and Article 191(1)(a) is that a person who is elected to a Legislature or Parliament should be free to carry on his duties fearlessly without being subjected to any kind of government pressure.
The term "office of profit under the Government" used in clause (a) is an expression of wider import than a post held under the Government which is dealt with in Part XIV of the Constitution.
The measure of control by the Government over a local authority should be judged in order to eliminate the possibility of a conflict between duty and interest and to maintain the purity of the elected bodies.
[61 G H] 4.
It will be clear from reference to Item S in List II of VII Schedule of the Constitution that Municipality are separately mentioned in contra distinction of the State government.
Therefore, a local authority as such is separate and distinct.
This becomes further clear from Article 58(2) of the Constitution.
[57 D] 5.
A person who is holding an office of profit either under the Government of India or the Government of the State or any other local or other authority subject to the control the said Governments is disqualified from becoming a President but if a person holds an office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State, he only is disqualified from going a member of Parliament.
A holder of the office of profit under any 52 authority or local authority subject to the control of the State or Central Government is as such not disqualified from becoming a Member of Parliament.
[58 C D] D. R. Gurushantappa vs Abdul Khuddus Anwar & Ors. , Gurugobinda Basu vs Sankari Prasad Ghosal & ors.
; Maulana Abdul Shakur vs Rikhab Chand [1958] S.C.R. 387, Surya Kant Roy vs Immamul Hai Khan [19751 3 S.C.R., 909, and Madhuker G.E. Pankakar vs Jaswant Chobildas Rajni & Ors.
[1975]3 S.C.R. p. 832 at page 851, referred to.
Biharilal Dobray vs Roshan Lal Dodray [1984]1 S.C.C. 551, explained.
