The appellant trade union filed two complaints against the employees.
The complaints were that the employers were guilty of imposing and continuing a lock out and had thus committed unfair labour practice.
The employers contended that they had finally and irrevocably closed the industrial under taking and were not guilty of any unfair labour practice.
The Industrial Cc.
Court dismissed the complaints.
The union 's appeals were dismissed by the High Court.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
Disposing of the appeals, ^ HELD .
Lock out has been defined in Sec.
2(L) of the to mean the closing of a place of business, or the suspension of work or the refusal by an employer to continue to employ any number of persons employed by him.
In lock out the employer refuses to continue to employ the workmen employed by him even though the business activity was not closed down nor intended to be closed down.
The essence of lock out is the refusal of the employer to continue to employ workmen.
There is no intention to close the industrial activity.
Even if the suspension of work is ordered it would constitute lock out.
On the other hand closure implies closing of industrial activity as a consequence of which workmen are rendered jobless.[67 G H; 68 Al The true test to find out whether the employer has imposed a lock out or has closed the industrial establishment, is that when it is claimed that the employer has resorted to closure of industrial activity, the Industrial Court in order to determine whether the employer is guilty of unfair labour practice must ascertain on evidence produced before it whether the closure was a device or pretence to terminate services of workmen or whether it is bonafide and for reasons beyond the control of the employer.
The duration of the closure may be a significant fact to determine the intention and bonafides of the employer at the time of the closure but is not decisive of the matter.
When it is claimed that the employer is not guilty of imposing a lock out but has closed the industrial activity, the Industrial Court before which the action of the employer 65 is questioned must keeping in view all the relevant circumstances at the time of A closure decide and determine whether the closure was a bonafide one or was a device or a pretence to determine the services of the workmen.
Answer to this question would permit the Industrial Court to come to the conclusion one way or the other.
[68 F H; 69A]
