An Ambassador car No. MHX 3771 was purchased by M/s. Karamchand Thapar & Bros. (Coal Sales) Ltd, Delhi in the year 1966 and was transferred to respondent No. I United Collieries Ltd., the owners in relation to the North Chirimiri Collieries, and it was, therefore, the owner of the said vehicle.
On and from the appointed day i.e. May 1, 1973, the right, title and interest of the owners in relation to the coal mines specified in the schedule stood transferred to and became vested in the Central Government free from all encumbrances, under sub section (1) of section 3 of the .
Immediately after the nationalisation of the coal mines, the Deputy Custodian General, Coal Mines Authority Limited, Nagpur addressed a letter dated May 9, 1973 to the Technical Advisor to the North Chirimiri Collieries using the said staff car to hand over if to the custodian.
Since the car was not handed over on the plea that it was not used by the Technical Advisor exclusively for the North Chirimiri Collieries but used by him for looking after the multifarious activities of the Thapar Group of industries which was a composite concern With the businesses other than coal mining, and therefore although the car belonged to respondent No. 1, the owners of the North Chirimiri Collieries, it was not a staff car 'belonging to the mine '.
The Managing Director, Western Division, Coal Mines '.
Authority by an order dated August 9, 1983 directed the respondents to hand over possession of the car failing which they would be liable to prosecution under the Act.
Thereupon, respondent No. 1 and the Technical Advisor assailed his order by a petition under article 226 of the Constitution before the Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court.
The High Court purporting to rely on the decision of this Court in New Satgram Engineering Works & Anr.
vs Union of India ; held that the question as to whether the staff car should be treated as belonging to the owner of a mine as part of the 210 mine itself raised disputed questions of fact relating to its user which would A have to be determined on the basis of evidence.
lt accordingly discharged the rule and left the parties to have their rights adjudicated in a civil suit.
Feeding aggrieved.
Union of India preferred the appeal by special leave as the question involved affected a large number of cases.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: Parliament by an enlarged definition of 'mine ' in section 2(h) of the Act has indicated the nature of the properties that vest and the question whether a particular asset is taken within the sweep of section 2(h) depends on whether it answers the description given therein.
The staff car in question was undoubtedly a fixed asset of the North Chirimiri Collieries Ltd., the owners in relation to the said mine, being the staff car of the Technical Advisor, was a fixed asset ' belonging to the mine. 'Fixed assets ' in general comprise house assets Which are held for the purpose of conducting a business, in contradistinction to those assets which proprietor they include real estate, building, machinery etc.
The staff car, therefore, fell within the definition of 'mine ' as contained in section 2(h)(xii) and vested in the Central Government under subsection (1) of section 3 of the .
Merely because the Technical Advisor was putting the staff car to his personal use or for multifarious activities of the Thapar Group of Industries would not alter the true legal position since the subsequent user for a different purpose was not really germane.
[214D G] There is a difference in the language used in section 2(h)(xi) and (xii) Sub clause (xi) uses the words if solely used ' in relation to lands and buildings for the location of the management, sale or liaison offices, or for the residence of officers and staff, of the mine, while sub clause (xii) uses the words belonging to the owner of mine, wherever situated '.
The difference in language between the two expressions 'if solely used ' and 'belonging to the owner of a mine ' is obvious.
The observations of this Court in New Satgram Engineering Works case that "where there is a dispute as to whether a particular property vest in the Central Government or not under sub s.(i) or section 3 of the Act, the dispute undoubtedly is a civil dispute and must therefore be resolved by a suit" where made in the context of section 2(h)(xi) of the Act.
In that case it was observed that was therefore possible to contend that lands and buildings appurtenant to a coal mine, if not exclusively used for the purpose of the colliery business, would not come within the definition of mine ' in section 2(h) i.e it would depend upon the nature of user, and that the crucial date is the date of vesting.
The present case is clearly covered by section 2(h)(xii) and not by section 2(h)(xi).
[213G H; 214A B ; 213A B] New Satgram Works & Anr.
vs Union of India ; distinguished
