The Maharashtra.
Vacant Lands (Prohibition of Unauthorised occupation and Summary Eviction) Act, LXVI of 1975 passed by the State of Maharashtra was amended twice first by Act No XXXVII of 1976 and later by Act No. VlI of 1977.
Section 2 (f) as amended retrospectively by the First Amendment Act divides "Vacant land" into four categories: (1) lands which are in fact vacant, that is to say, not built upon; (V lands on which structures have been or are being constructed otherwise than in accordance with any law regulating the construction of such structures and which the Competent Authority may specify and declare to be vacant lands by announcing by beat of drum or other suitable means; (3) lands specified in the Schedule to the Act, and (4) lands included in the Schedule by the State Government by an order amending the Schedule.
Section 3 provides that no person shall occupy or enact any shelter enclosure or other structure on such land for the purposes of residence or otherwise without the express permission of the Municipal Corporation and also prohibits any person to collect from the occupier of such vacant land any amount by way 130 of rent or compensation in relation to the unauthorised occupation of such vacant land while it empowers the government to collect or receive from the occupier of such vacant land such reasonable amount by way of penal charges as may be determined till such time as the structure erected in contravention of the provisions of s.3 is removed from the land.
Section 4 empowers the government to evict a person occupying any vacant land in an urban area in contravention of the provisions of section 3.
Section 4A deals with permission for renovation of structures on vacant lands as a temporary measure in certain circumstances.
Section 4B lays down mode of recovery of dues of financial institutions which render assistance for renovation of structures.
The respondents were owners of some plots of land in Bombay.
The plots were assessed to non agricultural assessment and to Property tax by the Bombay Municipal Corporation The respondents had constructed buildings of a Permanent nature on the plots and the same had been provided with essential civic amenities like water and electricity.
The appellants State Government & Municipal Corporation of Bombay called upon the respondents to demolish the buildings since they were constructed without the requisite permission of the Bombay Municipal Corporation.
The respondent 's request to regularize, the unauthorised construction was also rejected because the Government was considering a proposal for acquisition of the said land for the purpose of an industrial estate.
The respondents then approached the Special Land Acquisition officer requesting that the land be released from acquisition.
The Land Acquisition officer informed the respondents that the said plots of land had been released from acquisition by a notification dated September 14, 1964.
But, later on, the said plots of land were declared by the Competent Authority as "vacant land" in exercise of the powers conferred upon it by Section 2 (f) (b) of the Maharashtra Vacant Lands (Prohibition of Unauthorised occupation and Summary Eviction) Act LXVI of 1975.
The respondents challenged before the High Court the constitutional validity of the Act and the legality of orders passed thereunder The High Court declared the Act as violative of the provisions of the Constitution and allowed their writ petitions In the appeals to this Court, the appellants contended that the infirmity, if any, from which the Act suffered in its inception has been cured by the passing of the Maharashtra Vacant Lands (Prohibition of Unauthorised occupation and Summary Eviction) (Service of Notice) Rules, 1979 in as much as the affected person is given a notice before passing an order under section 2 (f) (b) or under section 4(1) of the Act and that the Competent Authority is further required to consider any objections submitted to it by the affected person.
On behalf of the respondents it was argued (1) that at the Act violates the fundamental rights conferred upon them by article 14.
19(1)(f) and 51 of the Constitution; (11) that the State Legislature lacked the Legislative competence to pass the Act and (III) that the Act delegated excessive and uncanalised powers to the Executive to pass orders.
131 Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.1 It is evident that the expression 'land ' in Section 2 (f) of the Act means plots of land with defined boundaries which are generally recognized for revenue and survey purposes.
Section 2 (f) (b) requires two conditions to be satisfied in order that a land can be described as a vacant land; Firstly, there has to be an unauthorised structure on the land and secondly, the Competent Authority has, by an order in writing, to specify and declare that land to be a vacant land [143 D.E] 1.2 Section 2 (f) (b) suffers from the vice in that, it treats all persons alike irrespective of how they are situated in the matter of their involvement in the construction of unauthorised structures and their interest therein.
Classification requires division into classes which are marked by common characteristics.
Such division has to be founded upon a rational basis and it must be directing at subserving the purposes of the statue.
Section 2 (f) (b) and the other cognate provisions of the Act make no distinction at all between owners of the lands who have themselves constructed unauthorised structures and those others on whose lands unauthorised structures have been constructed by trespassers The latter class of owners who are silent spectators to the forcible and lawless deprivation of their title to their property have been put by the Act on par with trespassers who, taking law into their own hands, defy not merely private owners but public authorities.
[146 G H; 1 47 A] 1.3.
Section 2(f) (b), also, suffers from the infirmity of according equal treatment to unequals.
Take a simple example: A plot of land may be vacant in the true sense of the term, that is to say, wholly unbuilt upon.
Another, plot of land may have a small structure built upon it in accordance with the Municipal rules and regulations.
The first plot of land attracts drastic provisions of the Act merely by reason of the fact that nothing has been built upon it at all, while the second plot of land is entirely outside the scope of the Act for the reason that some tiny structure is standing thereon.
Such a classification betrays lack of rationale [147 B C] 2.1.
The Act confers upon the Competent Authority the discretion to declare a land as a vacant land without laying down any guidelines to control that discretion.
Competent Authority has the freedom to pick and choose lands on which there are unauthorised structures and declare some of them as vacant lands and leave other lands similarly situated untouched.
[143 E] 2.2.
The Act does not also provide for any safeguard against the arbitrary exercise of the discretion conferred upon the Competent Authority to declare a land as a vacant land.
It does not contain any provision whatsoever which is directed at ensuring the public health and sanitation or the peaceful life of the inhabitants of the concerned locality Indeed, nothing is farther removed from the true purpose and object of the Act than these considerations.
The last item in the Schedule to the A.t includes all public roads and highways in Greater Bombay.
These, surely, cannot be regarded as constituting a grave danger to public health, sanitation or peaceful life of the citizens.
It is clear from the Statement of objects and Reasons that 132 the evil which was sought to be remedied by the ordinance, which was later replaced by the Act, was not danger to public health or sanitation or to the peaceful life of the inhabitants of the Metropolis of Bombay, but, the danger posed by the construction of unauthorised structures, is the evil which the Act seeks to remedy.
[144 H; 143 H; 144 A B; G] 2.3.
The Act does not prescribe any procedure which the Competent Authority is required to adopt before declaring a land as vacant land.
There is no provision in the Act requiring the Competent Authority to observe even the rudimentary norms of natural justice before making the statutory declaration.
The Authority is not obliged to give notice to anyone and it need not hear any person who is likely to be affected by the declaration.
The State Government too, is under no obligation to follow any set procedure prior to amending the Schedule so as to include new lands therein.
The power conferred by Sections 3(1) and 4(1) of the Act is similarly uncontrolled and arbitrary.
[145 B Dl 2.4.
In the instant case, massive encroachments on private properties have led to the virtual deprivation of the title of rightful owners of those properties The Act penalises such owners for no fault of theirs and, that too, without giving them an opportunity to be heared.
The fact that the power to make the requisite declaration under the Act is vested in officers of the higher echelons makes no difference to this position and is not a palliative to the prejudice which is inherent in the situation.
[145 F G] 3.1.
It is impossible to understand the scheme of the Schedule to the Act or to discover any rational basis behind it ii difficult to understand as to why certain lands which are under acquisition for the purposes of the Maharashtra Housing Board and Bombay municipal Corporation have been included in the Schedule and other lands similarly situated have not been so included Some of the entries in the Schedule show that unauthorised structures could not have been possibly constructed on the lands mentioned therein By and large, the Schedule is divorced from the true object of the Act .
[147 E F] 3.2.
No criterion or standard is laid down in order to enable the State Government to determine objectively as to which lands can be added to the Schedule.
The power to add to the Schedule is in the nature or a legislative power which, in the very nature of things cannot stipulate for service of notice to the persons affected by the amendment.
This power of amendment of the Schedule is not even conditioned by the fact that the lands added to the Schedule must have unauthorised structures standing thereon.
The State a Government is free to pick and choose any land and put it in the Schedule This kind of conferment of uncanalised discretion is strawn all over the Act.
[147 G H; 148 A] 3.3.
It is therefore clear that each part of the definition of 'vacant land ' in section 2(f) of the Act is violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 19 (1) (f) of the Constitution.
The Act had to satisfy the requirements of article 19 (1) (f) so long as it was a part of the Constitution.
[148 B C] 133 (4) It may be noted that until the Competent Authority passes an A order under section 4(l) calling upon an occupier to vacate a land, even a trespasser or an unauthorised occupier can continue to be in possession of the eland.
lf he is granted permission to occupy the land under section 3(1), he cannot be evicted at all, for the simple reason that the order of eviction under section 4(1) can be passed only if a person is in occupation of a land contrary to the provisions of section 3.
Even the eviction of a trespasser from the land can afford no solace to its rightful owner because, the Act doesn 't contain any provision whereby the land can be returned to him after it is freed from unauthorised occupational If the owner himself has erected an unauthorised structure, the Act does not provide as to what is to happen to the land after he is evicted therefrom [148 D F] (5) The Statement of objects and Reasons of the First Amendment Act shows that the provision for levying penalty was introduced into the Act in order that occupants of lands on which there were unauthorised structures and, who are allowed to continue in possession of the structures do not continue to occupy those lands without payment of any amount at all to public authorities.
It appears that even after forfeiting the structures consequent upon the passions of ;U1 order under section 4(l), the State government has been recovering compensation from unauthorised occupants.
It seems quite incongruous that while the true owner is prevented from taking legal proceeding to recover any rent or compensation from persons who had trespassed upon his land, the State Government can recover penal charges from the trespassers.
Moreover, the Statement of objects and Reasons of the Second Amendment Act shows that the Government had carried out substantial environmental improvements on vacant lands and had sponsored a scheme for building semi permanent houses thereon.
They intended to give to the occupants of such structures security of tenure subject only to the condition of regular repayment by them of the loans given by the financial institutions.
The true owners of lands are totally ignored in this scheme of things, even if they are victims and not the authors of unauthorised constructions.
[14811; 149A B; F G] (6) The unconstitutionality of the Act cannot be cured by the framing of the Rules made three and a half years after the Act was passed.
Besides, the Rules only provide for a notice to be given and objections to be considered before the passing of an order under sections 2 (f) (b) and 4(l).
They do not make a similar provision before permission is granted or refused under section 3(1) of the Act.
But, even, the Rules do not lay down any guidelines for the exercise of the discretition which is conferred upon the Competent Authority by section 2(f) (b) or section 4(1) of the Act.
[146E F] (7) The Act does not violate the provisions of article 31(1) of the Constitution as it then stood.
It does not provide for transfer of ownership of vacant lands to the State or to a corporation owned or controlled by the State; nor does it vest in the State the right of the owner or occupier of vacant lands to recover rent or compensation for use and occupation of such lands.
[150A B] (8) The Act does not amount to a measure of requisition and is not 134 bad for the reason that it provides for requisition without payment of compensation.
It is straining the language of the Act to hold that it provides, directly or indirectly, requisition of private property the Act does not transfer the right to possession of vacant lands to the State, its agents or its instrumentalities.
Therefore the Act does not offend against the provisions of Article 31(2) of the Constitution as it then stood Since that Article is not attracted, no question can arise of the invalidity of the Act on the ground mentioned in Article 31(5), namely that the Act had not received the assent of the President.
[150C D] (9) In so far as the question of legislative competence is concerned, the High Court was right in holding that the State Legislature had the competence to pass the Act under Entries 18, 64 and 65 of List 11 [150C D]
