The expression "systematic" has been deleted from sub section (3) of section 123 of the Representation of the People Act 1951 by the Amending Act by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent or by any other person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, community or language etc.
would be a corrupt practice.
160 The appellant challenged the election of respondent No. 3 to the Punjab Legislative Assembly on the allegations of corrupt practice.
It was contended that section 123(3) of the Representation of the People Act had been violated for three reasons, namely, (a) Sponsorship of respondent No. 3 and distribution of election ticket to him for the Assembly elections by the Akal Takht, "the supreme religious authority of the Sikhs", (b) Issue of Hukumnama (Ex.p 4) by the Jathedar of the Akal Takht in the matter of Assembly elections having regard to the circumstances in which it was issued, indicated that the approval of the Akal Takhat was obtained in order to give his decision a colour of religious authority and (c) Appeal to the voters at election meetings by referring to the Hukamnama, to the writings in the Akali Times and exhorting them to vote for respondent No. 3 by applying to the religious sentiments and warning them of the consequences of not doing so.
It was further alleged that an ex Chief Minister of the State as well as the respondent No. 3 himself had represented to the voters at different election meetings that respondent No. 3 had been sponsored by the Akal Takht.
Respondent No.3 denied the aforesaid allegations and contended that the alleged Hukamnamas were not Hukamnamas of Akal Takht.
The High Court held that Akal Takht was a symbol of political and religious powers and the documents alleged to be the Hukumnamas of Akal Takhat, but contained decision of the leaders of the Akali Party written on the letter head of the Akal Takhat and announced by a Jathedar, and the appellant had not succeeded in proving the charges of corrupt practice.
The election petition was accordingly dismissed.
The contentions raised in the High Court were reiterated by the appellant before this Court.
In addition, it was contended (i) The documents shown at the meetings were Hukumnamas and having regard to the background it cannot be said that it did not have the effect of Hukumnama on the community at large of inducing them to believe 158 ignoring the claim of the candidate nominated by Shri Akal Takht and represented to be supported by Hukamnama would be an act of sacrilege on the part of a good Sikh; and (ii) Respondent No. 3 being a Sikh and a member of the Akali Dal and having known of the conditions precedent which were required to be fulfilled before a proper Hukumnama could be issued had not chosen to raise these contentions in his written statement.
It was also urged that the concept of secular democracy is the basis of the Indian Constitution and that the paramount and basic purpose under lying section 123 (3) of the Act is the concept of secular democracy.
Section 123 (3) was enacted to eliminate from the electoral process, appeals to divisive factors such as religion, caste, etc.
which give vent to irrational passions.
It is essential that powerful emotions generated by religion should not be permitted to be exhibited during election and that decision and choice of the people are not coloured in any way.
Condemnation of electoral campaigns on lines of religion.
caste, etc. is necessarily implicit in the language of section 123 (3) of the Act.
Consequently the section must be so construed as to suppress the mischief and advance the remedy.
161 Respondent No. 3 contested the appeal, and it was urged: (i) in order to constitute a Hukumnama proper there were certain conditions precedent, A which were required to be fulfilled, namely, there should be a meeting of Sarbat Khalsa, that is, a meeting of all the Sikhs and secondly anunanimous decision must be arrived at which should be followed by the approval of Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee and the decision should be announced from Shri A kal Takht and that in the instant case no such Hukamnama held been issued; (ii) the constituency was a mixed constituency equally B divided into Hindu votes and Sikh votes and an appeal in the name of the Sikh religion in such a situation was unlikely; and (iii) the Akali Party was in alliance with CPI (M) and it was most improbable that when one of the allied parties was a Marxist Party, a candidate of Akali Dal would appeal in the name of religion.
Allowing the appeal, C ^ HELD :1.
Respondent No. 3 was guilty of corrupt practice under section 123 (3) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
[189D] 2.
As a result of amendment of sub section (3) of section 123 of the Act even a single appeal by a candidate or his agent or by any other person with the consent of the candidate or his election agent to vote or refrain from voting for any person on the ground of his religion, race, caste, community or language would be corrupt practice.
[1656] 3.
Section 123 (2), (3) and (3A) of the Act were enacted to eliminate from the electoral process appeals to those divisive factors which arouse irrational passions that run counter to the basic tenets of the Constitution.
Due respect for the religious beliefs and practices, race, creed, culture and language of other citizens is one of the basic postulates of our democratic system.
The line has to be drawn by the court between what is permissible and what is prohibited after taking into account the facts and circumstances of each case interpreted in the context in which the statements or acts complained of might have been made.
The court has to examine the effect of statements made by the candidate upon the minds and feelings of the ordinary average voter.
[171B D] F Ambika Sharan Singh vs Mahant Mahadev and Giri and others, and Ziyauddin Burhanuddin Bukhari vs Brijmohan Ramdas Mehra and Ors. [1975] Suppl.
S.C.R. 281, relied upon.
With a view to curb communal and separatist tendencies, section 123 (3) of the Act has been amended in 1961.
In order to determine whether certain activities come within the mischief of section 123 (3), regard must be had to the substance of the matter rather than to the mere form or phraseology.
The inhibition of section 123 (3) should not be permitted to be circumvented indirectly or by circuitous or subtle devices.
The court should attach importance to the effect and impact of the acts complained of and always keep in mind the paramount purpose, namely, to prevent religious influence from entering the electoral field.
The nature and consequence of an act may not appear n its very face but the same can be implied having regard to the language, H 162 the context, the status and position of the person issuing the statement, the appearance and known religion of the candidate, the class of persons to whom the statement of act is directed, etc.
[176C F] 5.
It would not be an appeal to religion if a candidate is put up be saying vote for him because he is a good Sikh or he is a good Christian or he is a good Muslim, but it would be an appeal to religion if it is publicised that not to vote for him would be against Sikh religion or against Christian religion or against Hindu religion or to vote for the other candidate would be an act against a particular religion.
It is the total effect of such an appeal that has to be borne in mind in deciding whether there was all appeal to religion as such or not.
In each case, therefore, the substance of the matter has to be judged.
[182E G] This question, however, has to be kept in view within proper limit and religious leaders have right freely to express their opinion on the comparative merits of the contesting candidates and to canvass for such of them as he considered worthy of the confidence of the electorates.
[183B] Shubnath Deograrm vs Ram Narain Prasnd an(l others, , Ram Dial vs Sant Lal and others, [1959] Supp.
2 S.C.R., 748 and Kultar Shingh vs
Mukhtiyar Singh; , , followed.
Whether the documents said to be Hukamnamas were actually Hunkamnamas or not should not be decided in a technical manner.
in these matter the Court has to examine the effect or the statements made by the candidate on his behalf upon the minds and the feelings of the ordinary voters of the country.
It is undisputed that Shri Akal Takht enjoys a unique position amongst the Sikhs.
It is indubitable that any communication from Shri Akal Takht which is represented by eminent members of the Sikh community as Hukamnama would have great religious persuasive value even though strictly speaking it might or might not be a Hukamnama.
[182A D] Zyauddin Burhanuddin Bukhari vs Brijmohan Ramdas Mehra Glory of the Akal Takht, p. 97 by Harjinder Singh Dilgeer, Singh The Sikh Religion Vol.
IV, p. 3 by M. A. Macauliff and a A History of the Sikhs by Khuswant Singh Vo. 1: 1469 1839, p. 63, referred to.
From the evidence on record, in the background of the fact that some communications from Akal Takht call it Hukamnama or any other name were issued and the issues of editorials of Akali Times were pointed out by the ex Chief Minister at the meetings, and the same had not been denied by him, it is apparant that appeal in the name of religion was made on behalf of the respondent No. 3.
Though some facts stated in the oral evidence about the meetings had not been stated in the petition, but when evidence was tendered and was not shaken in cross examination and the versions have a ring of truth in the background of other facts, the factum of appeal to religion by the respondent No. 3 has been proved.
This conclusion becomes irresistible in view of absence of any express denial by the ex Chief minister and in the absence of any explanation for not calling him as a witness on this point, [188 E to 189A] 163 8.
It is not a question of merely proving a fact by adverse presumption.
A In cases where there is positive evidence to prove a fact and there is no denial by the person who is most competent to deny that fact and no reason was given for his not giving evidence the conclusion is that the evidence advanced must be accepted.
In the instant case, in the background of his eminence and his position, as the ex Chief Minister, his relationship with respondent No. 3 and especially in view of the fact that respondent No. 3 had in fact been nominated by the same group on behalf of the Sikh community with which the ex.
Chief Minister was so intimately connected leads to the conclusion that the evidence advanced on behalf of the appellant must be accepted.
It is clear that the ex Chief Minister as well as the elected candidate himself represented to the electorate that respondent No. 3 was a nominee of the Akal Takht and that an appeal to vote for respondent No. 3 in the name of Akal Takht with all the consequences of Hukamnama of Akal Takht was highlighted before the electorate [185H; 186A D1 C 9.
In matters of this nature, the evidence naturally is mostly oral.
Especially where the charge is a grave one, namely, corrupt practice which if proved would disentitle the candidate to contest the election for sometime to come, the Court must proceed with caution.
[188C] Rahim Khan vs Khurshid Ahmed & ors., [1975] I S.C.R. 643 and Ch.
Razik Ram vs Ch.
I.S. Chauhan & ors., A.I R. 1975 S.C. 667, relied upon.
Kanhaiyalal vs Mannalal & ors.
; , and M. Narayama Rao vs G. Venkata Reddy & ors., [1977]1 S.C.R. 493, referred to, 10 While insisting on standard of strict proof, the Court should not extend or stretch this doctrine to such an extreme extent as to make it well nigh impossible to prove an allegation of corrupt practice.
Such an approach would defeat and frustrate the very laudable and sacrosanct object of the Act in maintaining Purity of the electoral process.
[189B] Ram Saran Yadav vs Thakur MIJneshawar Nath Singh & ors.
(Civil Appeal No. 892 (NCE) of 1980), relied upon.
The contentions of the respondent No. 3 that since it was a mixed constituency and his party was in alliance with CPI (M), it was unlikely and improbable to make an appeal in the name of religion, are rejected for the reason that if there is conclusive evidence to that effect then such a theory would not outweigh the facts proved.
These are only probabilities of a situation but if there is direct evidence of propaganda or campaign by candidate in the election in the name of religion, the probabilities of such a campaign not being made in view of other surrounding circumstances, cannot outweigh the direct evidence if the Court is otherwise inclined to accept such direct evidence.
[170B.C] Ambika Sharan Singh vs Mahant Mahadev and Giri and others, , followed.
For a proper verification of an affidavit or a petition based on certain informations, the source should be indicated.
But in the instant case? 164 this question was not examined further because no objection at any stage was taken.
[189 Ziyauddin Burhanuddin Bukhari vs Brijmohan Ramdas Mehra & ors Padmabati Dasi vs Rasik Lal Dhar.
I.L.R. XXXVII Calcutta 259 at 260 and Hardwari Lal vs Kanwal Singh, followed.
