Standing Order 31 of the 1st Respondent/Public Sector Undertaking prescribed a detailed procedure for dealing with cases of misconduct; and for imposing major penalty, the employer had to draw up a chargesheet and give an opportunity to the delinquent workman to make his representation within 7 days.
If the allegations were controverted, an enquiry had to be held by an officer to be nominated by the management and in such an enquiry reasonable opportunity of explaining and defending the alleged misconduct had to be given to the workman.
Suspension of the delinquent workman pending enquiry was also permitted.
At the end of the enquiry, if the charges were held proved, and it was provisionally decided to impose a major penalty, tho delinquent workman bad to be afforded a further reasonable opportunity to represent why the penalty should not be imposed on him.
Standing Order 32 provided for a special procedure in case of a workman was convicted for a criminal offence in a court of law or where the General Manager was satisfied for reasons to be recorded in writing that it was inexpedient or against the interests of security to continue to employ the workmen ', viz., the workman could be removed or dismissed from service without following the procedure laid down in Standing Order No. 31.
429 The appellant an Assistant in the 1st Respondent undertaking was A removed from service on the ground that it was no longer expedient to employ him.
The management dispensed with the departmental enquiry, after looking into the secret report of one of their officers that the appellant had misbehaved with the wife of an employee and that a complaint in respect thereof had been lodged with the police.
In the reference to the Industrial Tribunal, the Tribunal held that as the employer dispensed with the disciplinary enquiry in exercise of the power conferred by Standing Order 32, it could not be said that the dismissal from service was not justified, and that if there were allegations of misconduct, the employer was quite competent to pass an order of removal from service without holding any enquiry any in view of the provisions contained in Standing Order 32, and rejected the reference.
Allowing the appeal, by the employee to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The reasons for dispensing with the enquiry do not spell out what was the nature of the misconduct alleged to have been committed by the appellant and what prompted the General Manager to dispense with the enquiry.
[437D] 2.
As there was no justification for dispensing with the enquiry, imposition of penaly of dismissal without the disciplinary enquiry as contemplated by Standing Order 31 is illegal and invalid.
[437F] 3 The respondent shall recall and cancel the order dated August 24, 1970 removing the appellant from service and reinstate him and on the same day the appellant shall tender resignation of his post which shall be accepted by the respondent.
The respondent shall pay as and by way of back wages and future wages, a sum of Rs. l.5 lakhs to the appellant within 2 months which shall be spread over from year to year commencing from the date of removal from service.
The appellant shall be entitled to relief under Section 89 of the Income tax Act, 1961 for which he shall make the necessary application to the appropriate authority.
who would consider granting of relief.
[438C D;F] F 4.
Where an order casts a stigma or affects livelihood, before making the order, principles of natural justice in a reasonable opportunity to present one s case and controvert the adverse evidence must have full play.
Even he Constitution which permits dispensing with the inquiry under Article 311 (2) a safeguard is introduced that the concerned authority must specify reasons for its decision why it was not reasonably practicable to hold the inquiry.
[435 A B] 5.
(i) Standing Order 32, nowhere obligates the General Manager to record reasons for dispensing with the inquiry as prescribed by Standing Order 31.
On the contrary, the language of Standing Order 32 enjoins a duty upon the General Manager to record reasons for his satisfaction why it was inexpedient ar against the interest of the security of the State to continue to employ the workman.
Ressons for dispensing with the enquiry an reasons for not continuing to employ the workman stand, wholly apart from each other.
[435C D] 430 (ii) A Standing Order which confers such arbitrary.
uncanalised and drastic power to dismiss an employee by merely stating that it is inexpedient or against the interest of security to continue to employ the workman is violative of the basis c requirement of natural justice, as tho General Manger can impose penalty of such a drastic nature as to affect the livelihood and put a stigma on the character of the workman without recording reasons why disciplinary enquiry is dispensed with and, what was the misconduct 13 alleged against the employee.
[435D E] 6 When the decision of the employer to dispense with the enquiry is questioned, the employer must be in a position to satisfy the Court that holding of the enquiry will be either counter productive or may cause such irreparable and irreversible damage which in the facts and circumstances of the case need not be suffered This minimum requirement cannot and should not be dispensed with.
[436B C] L. Michael and Anr.
vs M/s. Johnston Pumps India Ltd ; , referred to.
It is time for the 1st respondent public sector undertaking to recast Standing Order 32, and to bring it in tune with the philosophy of the Constitution failing which the vires of the said standing Order would have to be examined in an appropriate proceeding.
[438D]
