Section 2, sub section (47) of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 defines rateable value to mean the value of any land or building fixed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye laws made there.
under for the purpose of assessment to property taxes.
Sub section (I) of Section 116 lays down that the rateable value of any land or building assessable to property taxes shall be the annual rent at which such land or building may reasonable be expected to be let from year to year, less a sum equal to 10% of such annual rent Sub section 3 of sec.
120 provides that the liability of the several owners of any building which is, or purports to be, severally owned in parts or flats or rooms, for payment of property taxes or any instalment thereof payable during the period of such ownership shall be joint and several.
The appellants and petitioners challenged in the High Court of Delhi the assessments with regard to property tax made by the Municipal Corporation under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 aud the Punjab Municipal Act 1911 in respect of four categories of properties situated in Delhi and New Delhi areas.
The Municipal authorities contended that the ratio of the decision in Dewan Daulat Ram vs NDUC was that whatever be the figure of the standard rent whether determined by the Controller under Section 9 of the Rent Act or arrived at by the assessing authority by applying the principles laid down the Rent Act, must be taken as the measure of rateable value of the building for the purpose of assessability to property tax, irrespective of any other considerations; (2) that where any premises constructed on or after 9th June 1955 have not been let out at any time and have throughout been self occupied, the standard rent of such promises would be determinable under the provisions of sub section (2) (b) of Section 6 of the Delhi Rent Control Act l958 and 440 any rent which could be agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant if tho premises were let out to a hypothetical tenant would be deemed to be the standard rent of the premises and the formular set out in sub.
section (l) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6 would not be applicable for determining the standard rent by reason of non obstante clause contained in the opening part of sub section (2) of Section 6; and (3) that since in some of tho cases the plot of land on which the premises stands, cannot be transferred without the previous consent of the Government, it bas no market value and its market price cannot be ascertained and hence the standard rent of tho premises cannot be determined on the principles set out in sub sections (1) (A) (2) (b) or (1) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6 and consequently, the residuary provision in sub section (4) of Section 9 would apply and the standard rent would have to be fixed in accordance with the principles laid down in that provision.
On tho question of determination of rateable value for four categories of properties for the purpose of assessability to property tax, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The relevant provisions of Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 and tho Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 in respect of determination of rateable value for the purpose of assessability to property tax are almost identical as observed by Supreme Court in Diwan Daulat Ram vs N. D.M.C. ; and it would therefor be sufficient to refer to the provisions of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (for short, the Act).
[453E] It would appear from the provisions of ss 114 and 115 and the Act that the general tax is leviable on land and building as a whole and separate portions of large and buildings are not assessable to general tax as distinct and independent units save and except where any portion of the land or building is liable to a higher rate of general tax under the proviso to clause (d) of sub section (I) of Section 114 or is exempt from the general tax by reason of its being exclusively occupied or used for public worship or for a charitable purpose under sub section (4) of Section 115 in which case such portion of the land of building is deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.
[451A B] 1.2.
The basic assumption underlying sec.
120 (3) of the Act is that tho building as a whole is to be assessed to the property taxes and not each separate part or flat or room belonging to a separate owner and the liability or the several owners for payment of the amount of property taxes assessed on the building is to be joint and several so that each of them would be liable to pay the whole amount of the property taxes assessed on the building vis a vis the Corporation.
The amount of property taxes a assessed on the building would, of course, be liable to be divided amongst the several owners in the proportion of the area comprised in the part or flat or room belonging to each owner, but so far as the Corporation is concerned the liability of the several owners will be joint and several.
[452B C] 1.3.
Under the provisions of the Act, criteria for determining rateable value of a building is the annual rent at which such building might reasonable be expected to be let from year to year less certain deductions.
441 The word 'reasonably ' in the definition of rateable value in section 116 (1) is very important.
What the owner might reasonably expect to get from a hypothetical tenant, if the building were let from year to year, affords the statutory yardstick for determining the rateable value.
Now, what is reasonable is a question of fact and it depends on the facts and circumstances of a given situation.
Ordinarily, a bargain between a willing lessor and a willing lessee uninfluenced by any extraneous circumstances may afford a guiding test of reasonableness and in normal circumstances, the actual rent payable by a tenant to the landlord would afford reliable evidence of what the landlord may reasonably expect to get from the hypothetical tenant, unless the rent is inflated or depressed by reason of extraneous considerations such as relationship, expectation of some other benefit.
There would ordinarily be a close approximation between the actual rent received by the landlord and the rent which he might reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant.
But in case of a building subject to rent control legislation this approximation may and often does get displaced, because under rent control legislation the landlord cannot claim to recover from the tenant anything more than the standard rent and his reasonable expectation must, therefore, be limited by the measure of the standard rent lawfully recoverable by him.
[452E H, 453A] (2) The controversy in Dewan Daulat Ram 's case (supra) was not whether the figure of standard rent of a building should be taken as its rateable value even where the rent which the owner reasonably expects to get from a hypothetical tenant is less than the figure of the standard rent but whether the contractual rent receivable by the landlord from the tenant should be taken to be the rateable value even if it be higher than the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Rent Act.
The Court held (i) that even if the standard rent of a building has not been fixed by the Court under Section 9 of the Rent Act, the landlord cannot reasonably expect to receive from a hypothetical tenant anything more than the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the Rent Act and this would be so equally whether the building has been let out to a tenant who has lost his right to apply for fixation of the rent by reason of expiration on the period of limitation prescribed by Section 12 of the Rent Act or the building is self occupied by the owner, and therefore, in either case, the standard rent determinable under the provisions of the rent Act and not the actual rent received by the landlord from the tenant, would constitute the correct measure of the rateable value of the building; (ii) that in each case the assessing authority would have to arrive at its own figure of the standard rent by applying the principles laid down in the Rent Act for determination of the Standard Rent and determine the rateable value of the building on the basis of the actual rent received by the landlord and that the rateable value of the building must be held to be limited by the measure of the standard rent determinable on the principles laid down in the Rent Act, and it would not exceed such measure of the standard rent, (iii) that even if the landlord was lawfully entitled to receive the contractual rent from the tenant, such contractual rent could not be taken to be the rateable value of the building, because the reasonable expectation of the landlord to receive the contractual rent from hypothetical tenant could not possibly exceed the standard rent determinable in accordance with the provisions laid down in the Rent Act and (iv) that the rateable value of a building cannot exceed the 442 measure of standard rent whether determined by the Controller under Section 9 of the Rent Act or arrived at by the assessing authority by applying the principles laid down in the Rent Act, but it may in a given case be less than the standard rent having regard to various attendant circumstances and considerations [455C D; 454C H; 455A] 3.1.
The definition of "standard rent" in section 2 (k) of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (for short, the Rent Act) is not an inclusive but an exhaustive definition and it defines the standard rent to mean either the standard rent referred to in Section 6 or the increased standard rent under Section 7.
It is significant to Dote that it does not contain any reference to Section 9, sub section (4).
Wherever, therefore any reference is made to standard rent in any provision of the Rent Act, it must mean standard rent as laid down in Section 6 or increased standard rent as provided in Section 7 and nothing more.
Section o lays down the principles for determination of standard rent in almost all conceivable classes of causes and Section 7 provides for increase in the standard rent where the landlord has incurred expenditure for any improvement, addition or structural alteration in the premises.
[460C E] 3 2.
Section 9, as the definition in sec.
2 (k) clearly suggests and the marginal note definitely indicates does not define what is standard rent but merely lays down the procedure for fixation of standard rent.
The Controller is entrusted by sub sections (1) and (2) of section 9 with the task of fixing the standard rent of and premises having regard to the principles set out in section 6 or the provisions of Section 7 and any other relevant circumstances of the case.
The words having regard to . "the circumstances of the case" undoubtedly leave a certain measure of discretion to the Controller in fixing he standard rent.
But this discretion is not such an unfettered and unguided discretion as to enable the Controller to fix any standard rent which he considers reasonable.
He is required to fix the standard rent in accordance with the formula laid down in Section 6 or Section 7 and he cannot ignore that formula by saying that in the circumstances of the case he considers it reasonable to do so.
The only discretion given to him is to make adjustments in the result arrived at on the application of the relevant formula, where it is necessary to do so by reason of the fact that the landlord might have made some alteration or improvement in the building or circumstances might have transpired affecting the condition or utility of the building or some such circumstances of similar character The compulsive force of the formula laid down in Section 6 for the determination of standard rent and the provisions of Section 7 for increase in standard rent is not in any way whittled down by sub section (2) of Section 9 but a marginal discretion is given to the Controller to mitigate the rigour of the formulae where the circumstances of the case so require.
However, in case if it is not possible to determine the standard rent of any premises on the principles set out in Section 6, then Section 9(4) provides that in such a situation the Controller may fix such rent as would be reasonable having regard to the situation, locality and condition of the premises and the amenities provided therein and whore there are similar or nearly similar premises in the locality, having regard also to the standard rent payable in respect of such promises.
But the basic condition for the applicability of sub section (4) of Section 9 is that it should not be possible to determine the standard rent on the principles set out in Section 6.
But even while 443 fixing such rent, the Controller does not enjoy unfettered discretion to do what he likes and he is bound to take into account the standard rent payable in respect of similar or nearly similar premises in the locality.
The standard rent determinable on the principles set out in section 6, therefore again becomes a governing consideration.
[460E; G H; 461A C, E F; G] The Court laid down the following principles for determining rateable value in respect of four categories of properties involved in these appeals and writ petitions.
[452D] (A) Where the properties arc self occupied i.e. Occupied by the owners: 4. 1.
Where the premises are self occupied and have not been let out to any tenant, it would still be possible to determine the standard rent of the premises on the basis of hypothetical tenancy.
The question in such a case would be as to what would be the standard rent of the premises if they were lot out to a tenant.
Obviously, in such an eventuality the standard rent would be determinable on the principles set out in sub section (1) (A) (2) lb) of Section 6 of the Rent Act.
The standard rent would be the rent calculated on the basis of 7 1/2 per cent or 8.1/4 per cent per annum of the aggregate amount of the reasonable cost of construction and the market price of the land comprised in the premises on the date of commencement of the construction [462H; 463A] 4. 2.
It is difficult to see how the provision enacted in sub section (2) (b) of Section 6 can be applied for determining the standard rent of the premises when the premises have not been actually let out at any time.
Sub section (2) (b) of Section 6 clearly contemplates a case where there is actual letting out of the premises as distinct from hypothetical letting out, because under this provision, the annual rent agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant at the time of first letting out is deemed to be the rent for a period of five years from the date of such letting out and it is impossible to imagine how the concept of first letting out can fit in with anything except actual letting out and how the period of five years can be computed from the date of any hypothetical letting out.
It is only from the date of first actual letting out that the period of five years can begin to run and for this period of five years, the annual rent agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant at the time of first actual letting out would be deemed lo be the standard rent.
Sub section (2) (b) of Section 6 can have no application where there is no actual letting out and hence in case of premises which are constructed on or after 9th June, 1955 and which have never been let out at any time, the standard rent would be determinable on the principles laid down in sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Section 6.
So also in case f premises which have been constructed before 9th June, 1955 but after 2nd June, 1951 the standard rent would, for like reasons, be determinable under the provisions of sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Suction 6 if they have not been actually let out at any time since their construction.
But if these two categories of premises have been actually let out at some point of time in the past, then in the case of former category, the annual rent agreed upon between the landlord and the tenant when the premises were first actually let out shall be deemed to be the standard rent for a period of five years from the date of such letting out and in the case 444 of the latter category, the annual rent calculated with reference to the rent at which the premises were actually let for the month of March 1958 or if they were not so let, with reference to the rent at which they were last actually let out shall be deemed to be the standard rent for a period of seven years from the date of completion of the construction of the premises.
However, even in the case of these two categories of promises the standard rent after the expiration of the period of five years or seven years as the case may be, would be determinable on the principles set out in sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Section 6.
Thus in the case of self occupied residential premises, the standard rent determinable under the provisions of sub section (2) (a) or (2) (b) of Section 6 in cases falling within the scope and ambit of those provisions and in other cases, the standard rent determinable under the provisions of Sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Section 9 would constitute the upper limit of the rateable value of the premises Similarly, on an analogous process of reasoning, the standard rent determinable under the provisions of sub section (2) (a) or (2) (b) of Section 6 in cases falling within the scope and ambit of those provisions and in other cases, the standard rent determinable under the provisions of sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Section 6 would constitute the upper limit of the rateable value so far as self occupied non residential premises are concerned.
The rateable value of the premises, whether residential or non residential, cannot exceed the standard rent, but, it may in a given case be less than the standard rent.
[463E H; 464A F] (B) Where the properties are partly self occupied and partly tenanted: 5.1.
It is the premises as a whole which is liable to be assessed to property tax and not different parts of the premises as distinct and separate units.
But while assessing the rateable value of the premises on the basis of the rent which the owner may reasonably expect to get if the premises are let out, it cannot be overlooked that where the premises consist of different parts which are intended to be occupied as distinct and separate units the hypothetical tenancy which would have to be considered would be the hypothetical tenancy of each part as a distinct and separate unit of occupation and the sum total of the rent reasonably expected from a hypothetical tenant in respect of each distinct and separate unit cannot obviously exceed the standard rent of such unit and the assessing authorities would therefore have to determine the standard rent with a view to fixing the upper limit of the rent which can reasonably be expected by the owner on letting out such unit to a hypothetical tenant.
[466DF] 5.2.
Where the case falls within sub section (2) (a) or (2) (b) of Section 6, no problem arises, because whether the distinct and separate unit of which the standard rent is to be determined is self occupied or .enanted makes no difference, for in either case, the standard rent would be governed by one or the other of these two provisions.
So also in cases falling outside sub section (2) (a) and (2) (B) of Section 6, it would make no difference whether the distinct and separate unit of which the standard rent is to be determined is self occupied or tenanted; for in either case, the standard rent would be determinable under the provisions of sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) or (1) (B) (2) (b) of Section C.
But the question is, how is the formula set out in sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) or (1) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6 to be applied? Obviously there would be no difficulty in applying the 445 formula, if the premises of which the standard rent is to be determined consist of the entire building.
Then the reasonable cost of construction of the building can be taken and it can be aggregated with the market price of the land comprised in the building on the date of commencement of construction of the building and 7 1/2 percent of such aggregate amount would represent the standard rent of the building.
But whore the building consists of more than one distinct and separate units and the standard rent to be determined is that of any particular unit, the formula may present some difficulty of application if it is sought to be applied literally in relation to that particular unit alone and by itself, because even if the reason able cost of construction of that particular unit can be ascertained, it would not be possible to determine "the market price of the land comprised in the premises on the date of the commencement of construction" since the entire building and not merely that particular unit would be standing on the land and the land on which the building is standing would be land comprised in the building and it would be irrational and absurd to speak of it as land comprised in that particular unit.
The formula can, however, be applied for determining the standard rent of a particular unit by computing the standard rent of the building in accordance with the formulas and then apportioning the standard rent so computed amongst the different units of occupation comprised in the building on the basis of floor area, taking into consideration differences, if any, on account of the situation and condition of the various units and the amenities provided in such unit.
This would be the most rational way in which the market price of the land comprised in the building on the date of commencement of construction can be spread ever amongst the different units of Occupation comprised in the building.
The standard rent of each unit would have to be determined on the principles set out above and within the upper limit fixed by the standard rent, the assessing authorities would have to determine the rent which the owner may reasonable expect get if such unit were let out to a hypothetical tenant and in arriving at this determination, the assessing authorities to take into account the same factors which have already been discussed in this judgment while dealing with the question of assessment of self occupied properties.
The sum total of the rent which the owner may reasonably expect to Bet from a hypothetical tenant in respect of each distinct and separate unit o ' occupation calculated in the manner aforesaid, would represent the reasonably value of the building.
This formula for determination of rateable value would apply irrespective of whether any of the distinct and separate units of occupation comprised in the building are self occupied or tenanted.[466G H; 467A H; 468A B] (C) Where the land on which the property is Constructed is lease hold land with a restriction that the lease hold interest shall not be transferable without the approval of the lessor: 6.1.
Some of these writ petitions and appeals are concerned with eases where premise have been constructed by the owners on land taken on sub lease from a Cooperative House Building Society which has in its turn taken a lease from the Government.
One of the clauses in the sub lease executed by the Cooperative House Building Society in favour of each of its members provided that the owner who has constructed pre 446 mises on the plot of land sub leased to him cannot sell, transfer or assign his lease hold interest in the plot of land to any one except a member of the Cooperative House Building Society and even so far as sale, transfer or assign to a member of the cooperative House Building Society is concerned, it can not be made except with the previous consent in writing of the Government which the Government may give or refuse in its absolute discretion, and in case the Government choose to give its consent, the Government would be entitled to claim 50% of the unearned increase in the value of the land at the time of such sale, transfer or assignment and moreover, if the Government so desires, it would have a pre emotive right to purchase the plot of land after deducting 50 per cent of the unearned increase in the value of the plot of land.
This co tenant in the sub lease is clearly a covenant running with the land and even where hale, transfer or assignment of the plot of land has taken place with the previous consent in writing of the Government this covenant would continue to bind the purchaser, transferee or assignee.
[469F H] Commissioner of Wealth Tax V. P. N Sikand ; referred to.
Merely because the plot of land on which the premises are constructed cannot be sold, transferred or assigned except to a member of Cooperative House Building Society and without the prior consent of the Government, it does not Necessarily mean that those can be no market price for the plot of land.
It is not as if there is total prohibition on the sale, transfer or assignment of the plot of land, so that in no conceivable circumstance, it can be sold, transferred or assigned.
The plot of land can be sold, transferred or assigned but only to one from amongst a limited class of persons namely, those who are members of the Cooperative House Building Society and subject to the Rules and Regulations, any eligible person can be admitted to the membership of the Cooperative House Building Society.
There is also a further restriction, namely that the sale, transfer or assignment can take place only with the prior Consent of the Government.
But subject to these restrictions, the sale transfer or assignment can take place.
It cannot.
therefore be said that the market price of the plot of land cannot be ascertained.
[470G H; 471A B] 6.3.
To determine what would be the market price of the plot of land on the date of commencement of construction of the premises, one must proceed on the hypothesis that the prior consent of the Government has been given and the plot of land is available for sale, transfer or assignment and on that footing, ascertain what price it would fetch on such sale, transfer or assignment.
Of course when the class of potential buyer, transferees or assignees is restricted, the market price would tend to be depressed.
But even so, it can be ascertained and it would not be correct to say that it is incapable of determination.
There is also one other factor which would to depress the market price and that stems from the clause in the sub lease which provides that on sale, transfer or assignment of the plot of land, the Government shall be entitled to claim 50% of the unearned increment in the value of the plot of land and the Government shall also be entitled to purchase the plot of land at the price releasable 447 in the market after deducting therefrom 50% of the unearned increment.
since the leasehold interest of the sub lease in the plot of land is cut down by this burden or restriction, the market price of the plot of land cannot be determined as if the leasehold interest were free from this burden or restriction This burden or limitation attaching to the leasehold interest must be taken into account in arriving at the market price of the plot of land, because any member of the Cooperative House Building Society who takes the plot of land by way of sale, transfer or assignment would be bound by this burden or restriction which runs with the land and that would necessarily have the effect of depressing the market price which be would be inclined to pay for the plot of land.
This mode of determination of the market price has the sanction of the decision of this Court in N.S. Sikand 's Case (Supra).
[471C H] In the instant case, therefore, the market price of the plot of land at the date of commencement of construction of the premises was ascertainable on the basis of the formula indicated above notwithstanding the restriction on transferability contained in the sub lease and the standard rent of the premises constructed on the plot of land was determinable under the pro visions of sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) or [1) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6.
The argument of the Delhi Municipal Corporation that in all such cases resort has to be made to the provisions of sub section (4) of Section 9 for determination of the standard rent of the premises must be rejected [472C D] (D) Where the property has been constructed in stages (7) When any adulation is made to the premises at a subsequent stage, three different situations may arise.
Firstly, the addition may not be of a distinct and separate unit of occupation but may be merely by way of extension of the existing premises which are self occupied.
In such a case the original premises together with the additional structure would have to be treated as a single unit for the purpose of assessment and its rateable value would have to be determined on the basis of the rent which the owner may reasonably expect to get, if the premises as a whole are lot out, subject to the upper limit of the standard rent determinable under the provisions of sub.section (1) (A) (2) (b) of Section 6.
Secondly, the existing promises before be addition might be tenanted and the addition might be to the tenanted premises so that the additional structure also forms part of the same tenancy.
Where such is the case, the standard rent of the premises as a whole and within the upper limit fixed by such standard rent the assessing authority would have to determine the rent which the owner may reasonably expect to get if the premises as a whole are let out as a single unit to a hypothetical tenant and in such a case, the actual rent received would be a fair measure of the rent which the owner may reasonably expect to receive from such hypothetical tenant unless it is influenced by extra.
commercial considerations.
Lastly, the addition may be of a distinct and separate unit of occupation and in such a case, the rateable value of the premises would have to be determined on the basis of the formula laid down for assessing the rateable value of premises which are partly self occupied and partly tenanted.
The same principles for determining of rateable value would obviously apply in case of subsequent additions to the existing premises.
[474C G] 448 (8) The formula set out in sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) and (1) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6 cannot be applied for determining the standard rent of an addition, as if that addition was the only structure standing on the land.
The assessing authorities cannot determine the standard rent of the add structure by taking the reasonable cost of construction in the additional structure and adding to it the market price the land and applying the statutory percentage of 7 1/2 to the aggregate amount.
The market price of the land cannot the added twice over, once while determining the standard rent of the original structure and again while determining the standard rent of the additional structure.
Once the addition is made, the formula set out in sub section (1) (A) (2) (b) and (1) (B) (2) (b) of Section 6 can be applied only in relation to the premises as a whole and where the additional structure consists of a distinct and separate unit of occupation, the standard rent would have to be apportioned in the manner indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
[475A C] 9.
Merely because the owner does not produce satisfactory evidence showing what was the reasonable cost of construction of the promises or the market price of the land at the date of commencement of the construction, it cannot be said that it is not possible to determine the standard rent on the principles set out in sub section (I) (A) (2) (b) or (1) (B) (2)(b) of Section 6.
[473] 10.
The Court suggested that 20% self occupancy rebate which was allowed prior to 1980 but was later discontinued should be resumed and said that self occupied residential premises should be treated on a more favourable basis than tenanted premises for the purpose of assessability to property tax.
[466B C]
