The Central Government as an 'appropriate Government ' referred the Industrial dispute between the Appellant employees ' Association and the first Respondent employer in each of the Appeals under Sec.
10 (1) (d) of the to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal.
A preliminary objection was raised that the CENTRAL Government was not the 'appropriate Government ' in relation to the said industrial disputes and consequently the Central Government had no power under Sec.
10 (l) (d) of the Act to make the five references and that the Tribunal would have no jurisdiction to entertain the same The Appellant Association repelled this objection by contending that the workmen were 'dock workers ' within the meaning of the expression in the and as they were working at Mormugao Port, a major port in the Union Territory of Goa, Daman Diu, the Central Government would be the 'appropriate Government ' in relation to the industrial dispute and consequently the references were valid and competent.
374 The Tribunal held that the workmen covered by the reference who were iron Ore samplers were 'dock workers ' as defined in the and as they were working in a major port, in a Union Territory, the Central Government would be the 'appropriate Government ' for referring the industrial dispute.
The Tribunal over ruled the preliminary objection and set down the references for final hearing.
The first respondent employers filed applications under Article 227 in the High Court which held that the workmen, who were iron ore samplers, were neither comprehended in the expression 'dock workers ' as defined in the .
nor involved in any work connected with or related to a major port.
and were not involved in an industrial dispute concerning a major port and therefore the Central Government was not the appropriate Government ' for referring the industrial dispute.
It further held that the Central Government is not the State Government for the Union Territory of Goa, Daman and Diu under Section 2 (a) (i) of the but it is the Administrator appointed under Article 239 and therefore the Central Government was not the 'appropriate Government ' and had no jurisdiction to make the references.
The rule was made absolute and the references quashed.
Allowing the Appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The Central,Government as the 'appropriate Government had made the references The High Court was clearly in error in quashing the references.
The judgment of the High Court is quashed and set aside and the award of the Tribunal on the preliminary point about the competence of the Central Government to make the reference under Section 10(1) of is confirmed.
The tribunal will be at liberty to examine the contention whether iron ore samples are involved in any work connected with or related to a major part or are dock workers and come to its own decision uninfluenced by the view taken by the High Court.
As the dispute is an old one, the Tribunal is to give top priority and dispose of the matter within a period of six months.
[386G; 387D E, C] 2 (i) Indisputable the is a Central Act enacted after the commencement of the and the relevant definitions having been recast to meet the constitutional and statutory requirements the expressions 'Central Government, 'State Government ',and 'Union Territory ' must receive the meaning assigned to each in the unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context in which it is used.
No. such repugnancy was brought to the notice of the Court.
[384B C] (ii) On a conspectus of the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the Union Territories Act 1963, it clearly transpires that the concept of State Government is foreign to the administration of Union Territory and Article 239 provides that every Union Territory is to be administered by the President.
The President may act through an Administrator appointed by him.
Administrator is thus the delegate of the President.
His position is wholly different from that 375 Of a Governor of a State.
Administrator can differ with his Minister and he must then obtain the orders of the President meaning thereby of the Central A Government.
The Administrator of Union Territory does not therefore qualify for the description of a State Government.
The Central Government is therefore the 'appropriate Government ' [384F G] (iii) The High Court fell into an error in interpreting clause (c) of Section 3 (60) of the which upon its true construction would show that in the Union Territory there is no concept of State Government but wherever the expression 'State Government ' is used in relation to the Union Territory, the Central Government would be the State Government.
The very concept of State Government in relation to Union Territory is obliterated by the definition.
[383D H] Satya Dev Bushahri vs Padam Dev & Ors., ; and the State of Madhya Pradesh v, Shri Moula Bux & Ors. ; , held inapplicable.
(i) The definition of three expression 'Central Government ' (Section 3 (8), 'State Government ' (Section 3 (60)), and Union Territory ' (Section 3 (62A)) in the Would unmistakably show that the framers of the Constitution as also the Parliament in enacting these definitions have clearly retained the distinction between State Government and Administration of Union Territory as provided by the Constitution.
It is especially made clear in the definition of expression 'Central Government ' that in relation to the Administration of a Union Territory the Administrator thereof acting within the scope of the authority given to him under Article 239 of the Constitution.
would be comprehended in the expression 'Central Government.
When this inclusionary part is put in juxtaposition with exclusionary part in the definition of the expression State Government ' which provides that as respects anything done or to be done after the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, it shall mean, in a State, the Governors and in a Union Territory, the Central Government, the difference conceptually speaking between the expression ' State Government ' and the 'Administration of a Union Territory ' clearly emerges There is no room for doubt that the expression Administration of a Union Territory ', Administrator however having been described, would not be comprehended in the expression State Government as used in any enactment These definitions have been modified to bring them to their present form at by the Adaptation of Laws (No.1) Order, 1956.
[386E G] (ii) The High Court clearly fell into an error when it observed that the inclusive definition of the expression 'State Government, does not necessarily enlarge the scope of the expression but may occasionally point to the contrary; [386C]
