The appellant was charged with the murder of one Om Prakash.
The prosecution story was (i) that at about 10 p.m. in the night, at a place where there was no light and which was about 2 furlongs away from the guard room at Hindon Bridge towards Ghaziabad, the appellant along with two others killed the deceased by stabbing with knife; (ii) that three police personnel posted at the guard room, one of whom had a torch, ran to the spot on being informed by some passerby and caught hold of the appellant who had a knife stained with blood; (iii) that the other two assailants managed to escape.
The appellant pleaded (1) that he was a taxi driver in which the three passengers including the deceased were traveling; (2) that after crossing the Bridge the passengers started quarreling among themselves, with the result his attention was diverted resulting in a cyclist being dashed against (3) that when the car stopped the three passengers got down, went a little away from the road and started assaulting the deceased with a knife (4) that he went there to rescue the deceased and in that process his wearing apparel got blood soaked; (5) that the assailants ran away after assaulting the deceased; and (6) that no blood stained knife was received from him.
Out of the six eye witnesses examined, four did not support the prosecution story and were declared hostile.
One of the remaining two police witnesses denied the fact of seeing the appellant giving any knife blow while the other had made a firm statement that he did see the act of giving the knife blow.
The trial court convicted the appellant section 302/34 IPC and sentenced him to imprisonment for life.
In appeal, the High Court discarded the evidence in regard to the infliction of the blows, but, affirmed the conviction on circumstantial evidence which according to the High Court was: (I) an attempt by the appellant to escape and his arrest after a chase; (ii) he being found to be in possession of 574 the blood stained knife; (iii) his clothes having become blood stained; (iv) if the appellant was trying to rescue the deceased, he would have received injuries in the scuffle; and (v) if the appellant had really tried to intervene in the way he claims, he being a well built man could have saved the life of the deceased.
Allowing the appeal by the appellant, ^ HELD: (I) There is no evidence as to whether apart from the torchlight which the police witnesses focussed, if any other light was available.
We agree with the trial Court as also the High Court that the two police witnesses were present at the spot and in the manner indicated by them.
But the evidence regarding the directions to which the three persons ran away is discrepant.
Chase by itself does not seem to be an important feature particularly when the total distance for which chase is said to have been made was about 22 25 feet.
It is conceivable that he had not moved but the police witnesses ran to reach him because they were anxious to catch hold of any one from the group who was available.
[576H; 577 AB;] (2) The appellant 's stand that in the process of rescuing the deceased his wearing apparel were soaked with human blood is a sufficient explanation The fact that no injuries have been sustained by him while trying to rescue the deceased by itself is not an implicating circumstance because the assailants having no reason to injure him may not have assaulted him.
By sheer chance as well the appellant may have escaped injuries.
[577E; and G] (3) The evidence regarding the appellant holding the knife in the dark night is not impressive and does not arouse confidence as it is against human conduct and no one would keep holding such an incriminating material as a blood stained knife.
Moreover, there is no justification to discard the evidence of PW. 2, the cyclist who was injured by the appellant 's car.
[577E and 576G] (4) In a case of circumstantial evidence law is well settled that the chain of circumstances must be complete and must clearly point to the guilt of the accused.
Broad perspectives have to be kept in view.
In the instant case, the circumstances do not really complete the chain so as to lead to the conclusion that the appellant and no other could have been the assailant.
[576F and G] (5) It is well established that the powers of Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution are plenary and restrictions in the exercise, if any, are self imposed.
Ordinarily Supreme Court does not enter into re appreciation of evidence but where evidence is placed and the conviction appears to the Court to be not justified in law, nothing stands in the way in directing reversal of conviction.
[578F]
