Respondent 1 was the Station House Officer and Respondents 2 to 4 were attached as constables to the Police Station.
The prosecution alleged that a complaint was filed against the deceased for cattle trespass.
The Respondent pursuant to the said complaint sought to extort illegal gratification from the deceased for hushing up the case.
Respondent 2 succeeded in obtaining Rs. 100 and made a further demand of Rs. 200.
The deceased refused to oblige him and made a complaint to the Superintendent of Police, who forwarded it to Respondent 1 for inquiry and report.
This incensed Respondent 1.
The deceased was arrested and brought to the Police Station by Respondents 3 and 4 at about 10.00 A.M. Same day at about 6.00 P.M. the deceased succumbed to injures which were caused to him by Respondents while he was in their custody.
The Sessions Court tried the four Respondents, convicted each of them under section 304, Part 2 of the Penal Code while Respondent I was also convicted under section 220 of the Penal Code and all were sentenced to different terms of imprisonment.
The Respondents appealed to the High Court and a Single Judge set aside their order of convictions and sentences.
Allowing the Appeal of the State, 622 ^ HELD: 1.
It is impossible to sustain the judgment of the High Court as it has totally overlooked crucial evidence led by the prosecution and taken an unrealistic view of unequivocal facts.
It has not even adverted to the reasons given by the trial court for holding the Respondents guilty of the offences of which they were convicted.
[625B C] 2.
It is quite clear that upon the evidence led by the prosecution only one conclusion is possible, which is, that the Respondents inflicted injuries upon Brijlal while he was in their custody, thereby causing his death.
[635F] 3.
It is well settled that, as a matter of law, a dying declaration can be acted upon without corroboration.
There is not even a rule of prudence which has harden d into a rule of law that a dying declaration cannot be acted upon unless it is corroborated.
The primary effort Or the Court has to be to find out whether the dying declaration is true.
If it is, no question of corroboration arises.
It is only If the circumstances surrounding the dying declaration are not clear or convincing that the Court may, for its assurance, look for corroboration to the dying declaration.
[628D E] The instant case.
is a typical illustration of that class of cases in which the Court should not hesitate to act on the basis of an uncorroborated dying declaration The circumstances leave no doubt that the dying declaration made by the deceased to the Judicial Magistrate to the effect that he was beaten by Darogah and the constables at the Police Station is true in every respect and it is safe to accept the same.
[628F; G; 629A B] Khushal Rao vs The State of Bombay, ; , Harbans Singh vs State of Punjab, [1967] Supp.
ISCR 104 and Gopalsingh vs State of M.P, , followed.
The distinction between murder and culpable hom cide not amounting to murder is often lost sight of, resulting in undue liberality in favour of undeserving culprits like the respondent police officers Except in cases covered by five exceptions mentioned in section 300 of the Penal Code, culpable homicide is murder if the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if the act falls within any of the three clauses of section 300, namely, 2ndly, 3rdly and 4thly.
[630 F G] The instant case, appears to fall under the clause '2ndly ' of section 300 since the act by which the death of was caused, was done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the Respondents knew to be likely to cause his death.
It is regrettable that the Sessions Court convicted the Respondents under section 304 instead of convicting them under sect on 302 of the Pen 11 Code.
This Court, would not however pursue the matter further since the State did not fled an appeal against the judgment of the Sessions Court.
[630H; 631A] 5.
The record of the case is disproportionately bulky to the narrow Point which is involved in the case.
It is not an unusual experience that the wood is missed for the trees when a Judge is confronted with a jumbled up mass of data 623 relevant and irrelevant.
it is necessary in such cases to find the central point of the case and to concentrate upon evidence which bears upon that point.
Petty details which befog the real issue and contradictions in the evidence which are inevitable when a story is narrated under the stress of a grave crime, ought not to be permitted to tilt the scales of justice.
The more a Judge gets bogged down in superfluous details the greater is the likelihood of his straying away from evidence which can clinch the issue.
[625C E] R In the instant case, the High Court missed or mistook the salient features of the case and embarked upon a hair splitting exercise while appreciating the evidence.
Remand orders are often passed mechanical,y without a proper application of mind.
In this case, the Magistrate was led into passing an order of remand on the basis of the usual statement that the offence of which the accused was charged was still under investigation.
What is important is that deceased had not committed any offence at all for which 1 could be remanded and, far from being an accused, he was in the position of a complainant.
Respondent 1 was the architect of his remand and the motive for obtaining the remand order was to keep him in custody so as to prevent him from disclosing to his people who beat him and where.
[627D F] 7.
It is necessary that the Government amends the law appropriately so that policemen l who commit atrocities on persons who are in their custody are not allowed to escape by reason of paucity or absence of evidence.
Police Officers alone and none else.
can give evidence as regards the circumstances in which a person in their custody comes to receive injuries while in their custody.
Bound by ties of a kind of brotherhood, they often prefer to remain silent in such situations and when they choose to speak they put their own glass upon facts and pervert the truth.
The result is that persons on whom atrocities are perpetrated by the police in the sanctum sanctorum OF the Police Station, are left without evidence to prove who the offenders are.
The law as to the burden of proof in such cases may be re examined by the legislature so that hand maids of law and order do not use their authority and opportunities for oppressing the innocent citizens, who look to them for protection.
[631C E]
