Section 19 of the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act 1971 (1971 Act, for short) provides for recognition of a union if it complies with certain conditions specified in the section.
Section 20 enumerates the rights of a recognised union.
Clause (b) of sub sec.
(2) of s.20 confers an exclusive right on a recognised union to represent workmen of an undertaking in certain disputes and makes the decision or order made in such proceedings binding on all the employees while it denies such right to a workman to appear or act or to be allowed to represent in any proceedings under the except in a proceeding in which the legality or propriety of an order of dismissal, discharge, removal, retrenchment.
termination of service or suspension of an employee is under consideration.
After a strike, the respondent employer entered into a settlement in respect of a number of pending industrial disputes with its union, which was recognised under the 1971 Act.
Clause 17 of the Settlement provided that the 493 company shall deduct an amount equivalent to 15% of the gross arrears payable under the Settlement to each employee towards contribution to the fund of the recognised union The appellant, a non recognised union challenged in a writ petition before the High Court the constitutional validity of Clause 17 of the Settlement on the grounds, inter alia.
(i) that Clause 17 permits a compulsory exaction not parented by the Payment of Wages Act from the arrears payable to the workmen who are not the members of the recognised union; (ii) that section 20 of the 1971 Act is unconstitutional, since (a) it 1 unquestionably denies to the workman who are not members of a recognised union, the fundamental freedom guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (a) and(e) inasmuch as it inheres the pernicious tendency to compel the Workmen to join the union which has acquired the status of a recognised union even if it followed a socio economic or socio political philosophy contrary to the philosophy of non members; (b) it denies to the unrecognised union, the right to effectively participate in any proceeding concerning the workmen of an industrial undertaking, some of whom have formed a separate trade union and (c) it does not treat all the unions at par as the members of non recognised union are compelled to be bound by the action of the recognised union.
The Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the writ petition and the same was affirmed in appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court.
Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal by the appellant, ^ HELD: 1.1.
In order to appreciate the controversy between the parties a brief review of the Scheme of the 1971 Act would be advantageous.
On the advent of industrial revolution which aimed at mass production of commodities, large scale industrial units came to be set up resulting in concentration of workmen at one place under one employer.
Trade union movement representing the organised labour developed as an adjunct of political party.
The organised Labour as a vote banks was assiduously wooed by political parties.
Every political party with a view to controlling vote banks set up its labour wings.
Combinations and fragmentations of politics] parties had the pernicious effect on trade union.
Multiplicity of political parties had its spill over in multiplicity of trade unions seeking to represent workmen in an industrial undertaking or industry, as the case may be.
The fall out of the multiplicity of unions was inter union and intra union rivalry which threatened peaceful working of the industrial undertaking or the industry.
Each union, as the unfortunate experience shows, tried to over reach the rival by making occasionally experience and untenable demands.
The emerging situation led to conflict and confrontation disturbing industrial peace and harmony directly affecting production.
Therefore, a need was felt that where there are multiple unions seeking to represent workmen in an undertaking or in an industry, a concept of recognised union must be developed In fact, even amongst trade union leaders there was near unanimity that the concept of recognised union as the sole bargaining agent must be developed in the larger interest of industrial peace and harmony.
National Commission on Labour also after unanimously and whole heatedly expressing itself in favour of the concept of recognised union and it being clothed with powers of sole bargaining agent with exclusive right to r present workmen, addressed itself only to the question of the method of ascertaining which amongst various rival unions must be accorded the status of a recognised union and it was agreed that the union which 494 represents the largest number of workmen working in the undertaking must acquire the status as that would be in tune with the concept of industrial democracy.
[499H; 501B; 502G H; 503A B; D G] 1.2.
It is therefore clear that every one was agreed that where there are multiple unions in an industrial undertaking or an industry, the union having the largest membership of the workmen must be clothed with the status of recognised union and consequently as the sole bargaining agent.
The under lining assumption was that the recognised union represents all the workmen in the industrial undertaking or in the industry.
Thus, the 1971 Act was enacted as its long title shows to provide for the recognition of trade unions for facilitating collective bargaining for certain undertakings, to state their rights and obligations, to confer certain powers on unrecognised unions; to provide for declaring certain strikes and lockouts as illegal strikes and lock outs; to define and provide for the prevention of certain unfair labour practices; to constitute courts (as independent machinery) for carrying out the purposes of according recognition to trade unions and for enforcing the provisions relating to unfair practices etc.
[504A B; 499E F] 1.3.
Status to be the sole bargaining agent as a recognised union is a hard won battle and need not be permitted to be frittered away by a sentimental approach that where trade union movement has ideological overtones, such a provision would compel workmen either to become members of a union, whose socio political philosophy is not in tune with his own or suffer isolation as such workman cannot forge a tool of a trade union or even if they forge one, the employer can ignore it with impunity.
The matter cannot be viewed from the perspective of same ideloguis but has to be examined in the large perspective of public interest of peace and harmony in the industry, healthy industrial relations and large national interest which eschews strikes, lock outs, conflict and confrontation.
[504H, 505A B] 2.1.
Sec. 20, sub sec.
2 while conferring exclusive right on the recognised union to represent workmen in any proceeding under the simultaneously denying the right to be represented by any individual workman has taken care to retain the exception as enacted in Sec.
2A of the .
This legal position is reiterated in Sec.
20(2) (b).
Therefore, while interpreting Sec.
20(2) (b), it must be kept in view that an individual workman, who has his individual dispute with the employer arising out of his dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or termination of service will not suffer any disadvantage if any recognised union would not espouse his case and he will be able to pursue his remedy under the .
Once this protection is assured, the question is whether the status to represent workmen conferred on a recognised union to the exclusion of any individual workman or one or two workmen and who are not members of the recognised onion would deny to such workmen the fundamental freedom guaranteed under article 19(1) (a) and 19(1) (c) of the Constitution.
[506B D] 2.2.
The restriction on the right to appear and participate in a proceeding under the to a workman who is not prepared to be represented by the recognised union in respect of a dispute not personal to him alone such as termination of his service does not deny him the freedom 495 of speech and expression or to form an association.
Conferring the status of A recognised union on the union satisfying certain pre requisites which the other union is not in a position to satisfy does not deny the right to form association [506E.F] 2.3.
Forming an association is entirely independent and different from its recognition.
Recognition of a union confers rights, duties and obligations Non conferring of such rights, duties and obligations on a union other than the recognised union does not put it on an inferior position nor the charge of discrimination can be entertained.
The members of a non recognised association can fully enjoy their fundamental freedom of speech and expression as also to form the association.
The Legislature has, in fact, taken note of the existing phenomenon in trade unions where there would be unions claiming to represent workmen in an undertaking or industry other than recognised union.
Sec.22 of 1971 Act confers some specific rights on such non recognised unions, one such being the right to meet and discuss with the employer the grievances of individual workman The Legislature has made a clear distinction between individual grievance of a workman and an industrial dispute affecting all or a large number of workmen In the case of even an unrecognised union, it enjoys the statutory right to meet and discuss the grievance of individual workman with employer.
It also enjoys the statutory right to appear and participate in a domestic or departmental enquiry in which itsh member is involved.
this is statutory recognition of an unrecognised union.
The exclusion is partial and the embargo on such unrecognised union or individual workman to represent workmen is in the large interest of industry, public interest and national interest.
Such a provision could not be said to be violative of fundamental freedom guaranteed under article 19(1)(a) or 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
[506H; 507A D] 3.
Where a representative union acts in exercise of the powers conferred by Sec 20(2) it is obligatory upon it to act in a manner as not to discriminate between its members and other workmen of the undertaking who are not its members.
However when a settlement is reached in a proceeding under the in which a representative union has appeared, the same is to be binding on all the workmen of the undertaking This would mean that neither the representative union nor the employer can discriminate between members of the representative union and other workmen who are not members.
Both the benefits, advantages, disadvantages or liabilities arising out of a settlement in any proceeding under the to which a representative union is a party shall be equally applicable to each workman in the undertaking There shall not be the slightest trace of discrimination between members and non members both as regards the advantages and also as regards the obligations and liabilities.
Any other view of Sec.
20(2)(b) would render it unconstitutional and invalid as being violative of article 14.
Equal treatment of members and non members is implicit in the section and by its interpretation this Court only makes it explicit.
[511F H; 512A B] (4) It is well known that no deduction could be made from the wages and salary payable to a workmen governed by the Payment of Wages Act unless authorised by that Act.
A settlement arrived at on consent of parties can however permit a deduction as it is the outcome of understanding between the parties even though such deduction may not be authorised or legally permissible under the Payment of Wages Act.
[512D E] H 496 (5) If under a settlement with the representative union some benefits accrue to the workmen, and upon a true interpretation of Sec.
20(2)(b), it is held all encompassing and therefore binding on all workmen employer alike, all the benefits would be available to the workmen who are not members of the representative union and who may have formed a rival union.
If these work i men could not be denied the benefits, they would enjoy an unfair advantage if from the package deal covered by the settlement, they draw benefits and abjure liabilities.
therefore, a clause like Clause 17 of the Settlement has to be understood in the context of strengthening the trade union movement and to free it from financial constraints.
Workmen who are members of a union may pay fee for membership and enjoy the advantage or membership put if by the action of the representative union all workmen acquire benefit or monetary advantage, the members and non members alike can be made to make common sacrifice in the large interest of trade union movement and to strengthen the trade union which by its activities acquired the benefits for all workmen.
Payment to trade union fund in these circumstances can be styled as quid pro quo for benefits acquired.
It can neither be said to be compulsory exaction nor a tax.
Therefore, there is nothing objectionable in Clause 17 of the Settlement which directs the employer to deduct 15% of the gross arrears payable to each employee under the settlement as contribution to the trade union funds.
Thereby the workman is not subscribing to the philosophy of rival union but he is merely paying the price of the advantage obtained.
Another view would make the union members suffer and the non members benefit, a situation which must at all costs be avoided.
Therefore clause 17 of the Settlement would not be invalid despite the lack of consent of the workmen who are members of the appellant union.
The settlement having been made by the representative union, its right to represent all workmen would imply the consent of the members of the rival union.
This is the legal consequenee of the right of the representative union to represent all workmen and the binding effect of its action.
[513G H; 514A E] Reg.
vs Duffield, 5, Cox 's Criminal Case, 404 referred to.
Raja Kulkarni and Ors.
vs State of Bombay [1954] SCR 384, relied upon.
Rum Prasad Vishwakarma vs The Chairman Industrial Tribunal, , held in applicable.
Girja Shankar Kashi Ram vs Gujarat Spinning and Weaving Mills Ltd. [1962] 2 Supp.
SCR 890 and Santuram Khudai vs Kimatrai Printers & Processors (P) Ltd. & Ors., ; , distinguished.
