Through this petition filed under Article 32 of the Constitution the petitioner prayed for the issue of a writ in the nature of quo worranto to the respondent K.P. Tewari who had been appointed in November, 1984 as a Minister of the Government of Uttar Pradesh under Article 164(1) of the Constitution by the Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh even though Shri Tewari was not a member of either House of the State Legislature.
The petitioner contended (i) that in the judgment of Har Sharan Verma vs Shri Tribhuvan Narain Singh, Chief Minister of U.P. and Anr., (AIR where it had been held that the appointment of a person as Chief Minister could not be challenged on the ground that he was not a member of the Legislature of a State at the time of appointment, this Court had not considered the effect of the amendment of Article 173 (a) of the Constitution by the Constitution (Sixteenth) Amendment Act, 1963; (ii) that after the amendment of Article 173 of the Constitution by the Constitution (Sixteenth) Amendment Act, 1963 it was not open to the Governor to appoint a person who was not a member of the Legislature of the State as a Minister and that Article 164(4) of the Constitution would only be applicable to a person who had been a Minister but who ceased to be a member of the Legislature for some reason such as the setting aside of his election in any election petition; and (iii) that the debates of the Constituent Assembly suggested that a person should be a member of the Legislature at the time of his being chosen as a Minister.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: (I) By the Sixteenth Amendment clause (a) of Article 173 of the Constitution is amended by the addition of a clause which requires a candidate at an election to the Legislature to make and subscribe before some person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation 548 according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule to the Constitution.
Earlier it was only after a person was elected or nominated as a member of the Legislature of a State that he was required by Article 188 of the Constitution to make and subscribe an oath or affirmation before taking his seat as such member in the form mentioned in the Third Schedule to the Constitution.
The above requirement has to be complied with by an elected or nominated member of the State Legislature even after the Sixteenth Amendment.
[550H; 551A; E;H] (2) The object of introducing the amendment in clause (a) of Article 173 of the Constitution was to provide that not only before taking his seat shall a member of the Legislature take the oath prescribed by the Third Schedule as required by Article 188 of the Constitution but that even before standing for election, a candidate must take the same oath.
This is to ensure that only a person having allegiance to India shall be eligible for membership of the Legislature.
[552C D] (3) Article 177, ensures the implementation of the constitutional principle contained in clause (2) of Article 164 of the Constitution which provides that the Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the Legislative Assembly of the State.
A Minister in a State under our Constitution discharges that responsibility by virtue of the provisions contained in Article 177 of the Constitution which enables him to participate in the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly even though he may not be its member with the right to vote.[553F;G] (4) It does not appear that the debates of the constituent Assembly suggest that a person shall be a member of the Legislature at the time of his being chosen as a Minister.
An amendment was proposed to that effect in the Constituent Assembly to the draft Constitution but was not accepted: [553H; 554A C] (5) The fear expressed by the petitioner that a person who does not owe his allegiance to the Constitution and is not willing to uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India would have an opportunity to become a Minister if he is not required to become a member of the Legislature after having made and subscribed an oath or affirmation as prescribed by Article 173(a) of the Constitution is not well founded because under clause (3) of Article 164 of the Constitution a Minister for a State is required to take an oath of allegiance to the Constitution and to undertake to uphold his office in the from prescribed in the Third Schedule.
[554C E] (6) No material change has been brought about by reason of the amendment of Article 173(a) of the Constitution in the legal position that a person who is not a member of the State Legislature may be appointed as a Minister subject, of course, to clause (4) of Article 164 of the Constitution according to which a Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.
[554H; 555A] (7) By enacting Article 164(4) of the Constitution the makers of the Constitution provided for a situation where a Minister may lose a seat in the 549 Legislature after appointment as the result of an election petition for example A Or may not be a member when he is appointed.[555B C] Har Sharan Verma vs Shri Tribhuvan Narain Singh, Chief Minister of U.P. and Anr., ; , Constitution Assembly Debates dated June 1 1949, Vol.
VIII at p. 521 and Har Sharan Verma vs Chandra Bhan Gupta & Ors.
, A.l.R. 1962 Allahabad 30], referred to.
