Whether landowner has to wait for a term of three years before terminating tenancy.
The PEPSU Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1955 which was originally passed in 1955 and amended in 1955 was again amended in 1956.
The Act purports to amend and consolidate the law relating to tenancies of agricultural land and to provide for certain measures of land reforms.
A tenancy may be terminated in accordance with the provisions of the Act or on any of the grounds enumerated in section 7; namely non payment of rent within a period of six months, subleting without written consent, cessation of personal cultivation of the tenant, user of the land in a manner which is likely to render it unfit, and refusal by the tenant on demand in writing to execute a kabuliyat.
In the case of tenancies subsisting at the commencement of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Second Amendment) Act, 1956, section 7 A provided for two grounds for termination of tenancy in addition to the grounds specified in section 7, namely, (i) that the land comprising the tenancy has been reserved by the landlord for his personal cultivation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter II, and (ii) that the landowner owns 30 standard acres or less of land and the land falls within his permissible limit.
In the case of tenancies commencing after the commencement of Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Second Amendment) Act, 1956, section 8 provided that the minimum term of the tenancy shall be three years, subject to the provisions of section 7.
In the appeals to this Court on the question, whether in the case of tenancies commencing after the commencement of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Second Amendment) Act, 1956, section 8 provided for an additional ground for terminating a tenancy, namely, the expiry of the period of tenancy provided it is not less than three years.
639 Dismissing the Appeals, ^ HELD: The proper way of looking at the scheme of sections 7, 7 A and 8 is to hold that while section 7 enumerates the grounds on which any tenancy may be terminated, section 7 A provides for additional grounds on which tenancies subsisting at the commencement of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 may be terminated and section 8 provides for the termination of a tenancy commencing after the commencement of the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 apart from the grounds mention d in section 7.
That is why section 7 itself uses the word 'no tenancy shall be terminated except in accordance with the provisions of the Act or except on any of the following grounds. ' that is to say, a tenancy may be terminated either on the grounds mentioned in section 7 or in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[642A C]
