The services of the appellent who was appointed to the post of Sales Tax Officer, by an order dated March 22, 1972 on probation for a period of two years, but continued thereafter in service without any order confirming him in his appointment were terminated on March 31, 1975.
The writ petition filed in the High Court of Gujarat, challenging the said terminated was dismissed, by a judgment dated April 21, 1976.
Finding no basis for the allegation of mala fide on facts the court held that there was no right to confirmation on the expiry of the period of probation, and therefore, there was no violation of the provisions of Clause (2) Article 311 of the Constitution.
An appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the Division Bench, on March 28, 1977.
Hence the appeal, by special leave of the Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD 1.1.
The allegation of mala fides is wholly baseless and has not been established.
Where a finding of fact has been rendered by a learned Single Judge of the High Court as a Court of first instance and thereafter affirmed in appeal by an Appellate Bench of that High Court, the Supreme Court should be reluctant to interfere with the finding unless there is very strong reason to do so.
[635C D1 2.1 When the order of appointment recited that the appellant would be on probation for a period of two years, it conformed to Rule 5 of the Recruitment Rules which prescribes such period of probation.
Under the Rule the period of probation may be extended in accordance with the rules.
The period of two years specified in the Rule is merely the initial period for which an officer may be appointed on probation and does not represent the maximum period of probation In terms of the said rule the period of probation may be extended.
[635E F] 633 2.2 The power to extend the period of probation must not be confused A with the manner in which the extension may be effected.
The one relates to power, the other to mere procedure.
Merely because procedural rules have not been framed does Dot imply a negation of the power.
In the absence of any rule indicating the manner for extending the period of probation, it is sufficient that the power is exercised fairly and reasonably, having regard to the context in which the power has been granted.
[635G H] B 3.1 There is no question of any legitimate expectation of being confirmed or even right to confirmation on the expiry of two years of probation and on successfully completing the qualifying tests and training undergone by a Government employee.
It was open to the State Government to consider the entire record of service rendered by its employee and to determine whether he was suitable for confirmation or his services should be terminated.
The function of confirmation implies the exercise of judgment of the confirming authority on the overall suitability of the employee for permanent absorption in service.
[636A B] 3.2 The contention that the appellant should have been heard before his services were terminated is not correct since the order of termination does not contain any stigma or refer to any charge Or misconduct on the part of the appellant and the termination was on the basis of an overall appreciation of his record of service disentitling him to be absorbed in the service.
No distinction lies between a probationer whose services are terminated on the expiry of two years and a probationer who has completed the normal span of two years and whose services are terminated some time later after he has put in a further period of service.
It is perfectly possible that during the initial period of probation the confirming authority may be unable to reach a definite conclusion on whether the candidate should be confirmed or his services should be terminated.
Such candidate may be allowed to continue beyond the initial period of two years in order to allow the confirming authority to arrive at a definite opinion.
A candidate does not enjoy any greater right to confirmation if he is allowed to continue beyond the initial period of probation.
[636G H; 637A B]
