The appellant Bank filed a suit for the recovery of the amount of loan together with interest thereon granted to Respondent No. I who had not only executed a promissory note but also a bond hypothecating the standing crop of his lands situated at Khandu and Surjipada in Rajasthan.
Respondents 2 and 3 being guarantors for the repayment of the loan were also proceeded against.
The Trial Court overruled the preliminary objection raised by the Respondents as to the maintainability of the Suit, in view of sections 207 and 256 of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955.
But the High Court, while allowing the Civil Revision Application set aside the judgment of the Trial Court and dismissed the suit.
Hence the appeal by special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
^ HELD: 1.1 A combined reading of sections 207 and 256 of the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 would show that the jurisdiction of the civil courts is barred only in respect of suits and applications of the nature specified in the Third Schedule to the Act and in respect of suits or applications based on a cause of action in respect of which any relief could be obtained by means of a suit or application of the nature specified in the Third Schedule.
The civil court has no jurisdiction to entertain a suit or proceeding with respect to any matter arising under the Act or the Rules made thereunder, provided that a remedy by way of a suit, application or appeal or otherwise is provided in the Act.
the long title of which shows that it was passed in order "to consolidate" and amend the law relating to tenancies of agricultural lands and to provide for certain measures of land reforms and matters connected therewith.
[787C D; 788A] 1.2.
Entry 35 is described in the Third Schedule as a "General" entry, that is to say, not relatable to any particular section of the Act.
The 785 suit filed by the Bank cannot fall under this "General" or "residuary" entry.
A loan given by a Bank to an agriculturist, which is in the nature of a commercial transaction, is outside the contemplation of the Act and cannot be said to be in respect of any matter arising under the Act.
[787G; 788A B] 1.3.
The business of the Bank, in so far as lending transactions are concerned, is not to lend moneys on mortgages but the business is to lend moneys.
In this particular case, the Bank lent a certain sum of money to respondent 1 in the usual course of its commercial business and nothing could be further removed from the contemplation of the Act than such a transaction.
It is only by way of a collateral security that the Bank obtained a hypothecation bond and a deed of mortgage from respondent 1 and a letter of guarantee from respondents 2 and 3.
The assumption that the mortgage has executed in pursuance of section 43 of the Act and, therefore, residuary Entry 35 of the Third Schedule is attracted, is not correct.
[788G H; 789A] 2.
On the question of jurisdiction, one must always have regard to the substance of the matter and not to the form of the suit.
Approaching the matter from that point of view, primarily and basically the suit filed by the Bank is one for recovering the amount which is due to it from the respondents on the basis of the promissory note executed by respondent No. I and the guarantee given by respondents 2 and 3.
The reliefs sought for also make it clear that the suit is not one to enforce the mortgage and, even assuming that it is, the mortgage not having been executed under section 43 of the Act, nor being one relatable to that section, the residuary Entry 35 can have no application.
If that entry is out of way, there is no other provision in the Act which would apply to the instant suit and therefore, the civil court has jurisdiction to entertain the suit filed by the appellant Bank.
[789C E]
