The Collector validated certain transfers on the applications of appellants U/5.
6 of the M. P. Abolition Act 1950 but a revision was taken by the Commissioner section 50 of the M. P. Land Revenue Code 1959 (for short, the Code) against the order Or the Collector.
The appellants ' contention before the Commissioner that he had no jurisdiction or power to revise the order of the Collector was rejected.
The Board of Revenue in the revision and the High Court in a writ petition filed by the appellants confirmed the view of the Commissioner.
Hence this appeal.
The appellants contended (i) that the order of the Collector was not revisable under the Code because the Abolition Act was a Code or a law complete in itself and conferred no powers of revision or appeal outside the Abolition Act and therefore the Commissioner had no jurisdiction to entertain suo moto revision; (ii) that since there was a right of appeal under sec.
84 of the Abolition Act, no revisional power could be exercised either by Commissioner or by the Board of Revenue under the Code; and (iii) that even assuming that the Abolition Act and the Code were statutes in pari materia, they possess two clear cut and separate powers, that is to say, no suo moto revision could lie to the Revenue Officers unless a revision or appeal was Sled before the Commissioner by the party.
Dismissing the appeal, to this Court ^ HELD: (1) A perusal of the schemes of the Abolition Act and the Code clearly indicates that the two Acts were in pari materia and the revenue officers were exercising powers under both the Acts cognately.
There was no clearcut distinction between a Revenue Officer acting under the Abolition Act and acting under the Code.
This being the position, it is manifest that the revisional powers could be exercised by the Revenue Officers under section 50 of the Code and even under the Abolition Act as well.
[802D E] 801 (2) Under the provisions of, the Abolition Act as also the Code, both the Commissioner and the Board were appellate as also revisional authorities.
Thus, when two powers were conferred on the said officers in a sort of a combined capacity, it cannot be said that merely because the formality of filing a regular appeal before the Commissioner or the Board was not adopted, a suo moto revision would not lie [802H; 813A B] In the instant case, both the Commissioner and the Board of Revenue had appellate as also revisional powers Both these powers being conferred on the same authority, the difference between the exercise of a revision or appeal was a mere idle formality and was of no consequence [803C D]
