Section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960(for short, the Tamil Nadu Act) deals with the eviction of tenants and postulates that a tenant shall not be evicted whether in acquisition of a decree or otherwise except in accordance with the provisions of s.10 or sections 14 16 Section 10(2)(i) of the Tamil Nadu Act provides for the eviction of a tenant on the ground of non payment of rent.
It lays down that where the Controller is satisfied that the tenant has not paid or tendered the rent within 15 days after the expiry of the time fixed in the Agreement y f tenancy or in the absence of any such Agreement, by the last date of the month next following that for which the rent is payable, he (tenant) undoubtedly commits a default The proviso to sub s.2 provides that in any case falling in clause (i), if the Controller is satisfied that the tenant 's default to pay or tender rent was not wilful, he may, notwithstanding anything contained in s.11, give the tenant a reasonable time, not exceeding 15 days to pay or tender the rent due by him to the landlord upto the date of such payment or tender and on such payment or tender the application shall be rejected.
The Explanation which was added by Act 23 of 1973 to the said proviso stipulates that for the purpose of sub s 2 of s 10, default to pay or tender rent shall be construed as wilful, if the default by the tenant in the payment or tender of rent continues after the issue of two months notice by the landlord claiming the rent.
In Civil Appeals Nos.
1178 of 1984, 1992 of 1982, 2246 of 1982 and 1659 of 1982, the respondents landlords issued notices to the appellants tenants demanding the amount of rent in arrears and thereafter filed eviction petitions against the appellants tenants, inter alia, on the ground of "wilful default".
All the appellants tenants complied with the notices issued by their respective landlords except the appellant tenant in Civil Appeal No. 1659 of ]982 where he made part payment only.
However in Civil Appeal 3668 of 1982 and 4012 of 1982 the respondents landlords had filed eviction petitions against the appellantstenants without issuing such notices before filing of eviction petitions.
In all the 644 appeals, the Madras High Court passed and/or confirmed, as the case may be, the orders of eviction holding that the ground of`willful ' default mentioned in section 10(2)(i) had been proved against the tenants.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
The common question of law involved in these appeals was as to what is the interpretation of the term "wilful default" in the Explanation to the Proviso of sub s.2 of section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Act.
Counsel for the appellants tenants contended (i) that despite the explanation it is open to the court on an appraisement of the circumstances of each case to determine whether or not the default]t was wilful and in doing so it cannot be guided wholly and solely by the Explanation which is merely clarificatory in nature and (ii) that mere non payment of arrears of rent after issue of two months ' notice cannot in all circumstances automatically amount to a wilful default if the non payment does not fulfil the various ingredients of the term "wilful default".
On the other hand it was argued by counsel for the respondents landlords (i) that the very purpose of the Explanation is to bring about uniformity in court decisions by laying down a conclusive yardstick in the shape of the Explanation and once it is proved that after issue of two months ' notice if the tenant does not pay the arrears within the stipulated period of two months, he is liable to be ejected straightaway.
On the question of interpretation of the terms`wilful default ' appearing in the proviso to s.l0(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act coupled with the Explanation, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Fazal Ali and A. Varadarajan JJ.
(majority) 1.
Though the Court is concerned mainly with the Tamil Nadu Act, yet in order to understand the contextual background of the words `wilful default ' and its proper setting, it Will be useful to refer to those Acts which contain the term wilful default ' either in a negative or in positive form.
These Acts are (l) A P. Buildings (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act of 1960, the Orissa House Rent Control Act 1967 and the Pondichery Buildings Lease and Rent Control Act 1969, (hereinafter referred to as the A.P. Act, Orissa Act and Pondicherry Act respectively).
Although the default contemplated by these Acts is wilful yet it has been put in a negative.
Form which undoubtenly gives sufficient leeway to the tenant to get out of the rigors of the statutory provision the relevant provisions of these Acts relating to eviction of tenants on the ground of 'wilful default ' in payment of rent contemplate that a default simpliciter would not be sufficient to evict the tenant but it must further be shown that the default was not wilful.
These Acts are however, silent on the mode and the manner in which a court may decide as to what is wilful and what is wilful.
Thus these Acts have left it to the courts to decide this question.
So far as the Tamil Nadu Act is concerned, it makes a marked improvement by broadening the ambit of 'wilful default ' in the proviso to section 10(2) which is further clarified by an Explanation added to it subsequently.
Before coming to any conclusion it may be necessary to examine the exact meaning of the words 'wilful default ' as also the interpretation and the scope of the Proviso and the Explanation.
[657H; 658A] 2.
The words 'wilful default ' would mean a deliberate and intentional default knowing fully well the legal consequences thereof.
A consensus of the 645 meaning of the words `wilful default ' appears to indicate that default in order to A be wilful must be intenional, deliberated and calculated and conscious, with full knowledge of legal consequences flowing therefrom.
[660B; 661A B] `A Dictionary of Low ' by L.B. Co zon, page 361; Words and Phrases volume 11 A (Permanent Edition) page 268; Words and Phrases Vol.
45, pages 296.
Webster 's Third New International Dictionary Vol.
III page 2617 and Volume I page 590 and Black 's Law Dictionary(4th Edn.) page 1773 referred to.
The well established rule of interpretation of a proviso is that a proviso may have three e . rate functions.
Normally, a proviso is meant to be an exception to something within the main enactment or to qualify something enacted the in which but for the proviso would b. within the purview of the enactment.
In other words, a proviso cannot be ton apart from the main enactment nor can it be use, to nullify or set at naught the real object of the main enactment.
Whil interpreting a proviso sure be taken that it is used to remove special cases from the general enactment and provide for them separately In short, generally speaking a proviso is intended to limit the enacted provision so as to except something which would have otherwise been within it or in some measure to modify the enacting clause.
Sometimes a proviso may be embedded in the main provision and becomes an integral part of it so as to amount to a substantive provision itself.
To Sum up, a proviso may serve four different purposes: 1.
qualifying or excepting certain provisions from the main enactment; 2.
it may entirely change the very concept of the intendment of the enactment by insisting on certain mandatory conditions to be fulfilled in order to make the enactment workable; 3.
it may be embedded in the Act itself as to become an integral part of the enactment and thus acquire the tenor and colour of the substantive enactment itself; and 4.
it may be used merely to act as an optional addenda to the enactment with the sale object of explaining the real intendment of the statutory provision.
[661D E; 664C D; 665H; 666A C ] Craies in `Statute Law ' (7th Edn.) Page 218, Odgers in 'Construction of Deeds and Statutes ' (Fifth Edn.) 317, 318.
Sarathi in Interpretation of Statutes ' page 294 2951.
referred to.
Local Government Board vs South Stoneham Union Ishverlal Thakorelal Almala vs Motiobhai Nagjibhai [1966] I SCR 367.
Madras and Southern Maharatta Railway Co. Ltd. vs Bezwada Municipality.
AIR 1944 C71.
West Derby vs Metropolitan Life Assurance Co. Rhodda Urban district Council v Taff Vale Railway Co. and Jennings and Another v KellY referred to.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Mysore, etc vs Indo Mercantile Bank Ltd. [1959] Z Supp.
SCR 256, Shah Bhojraj Kuverji Oil Mills and Ginning Factory vs Subhash Chandra Yograj Sinha ; State of Rajasthan 646 vs Leela Jain [1965] I SCR 276, Sales Tax officer, Circle 1, Jabalpur vs Hanuman Prasad [1967] I SCR 831, commisioner of Commercial Taxes and Ors.
vs R.S. Jhaver and Ors.
[1968] I SCR 148, Dwarka Prasad v Dwarka Das Saraf [19761 1 SCC 128 and Hiralal Rattanlal etc.
vs State of U.P. and Anr. etc.
[19731 I SCC 216 relied upon.
The next question is as to what is the impact of the Explanation on the Proviso which deals with the question of wilful default It is now well settled that an explanation added to a statutory provision is not a substantive proviso,o in any sense of the term but as the plain meaning of the word itself shows, it is merely meant to explain or qualify certain ambiguities which may have crept in the statutory provision.
From a conspectus of the authorities, it is manifest that the object of an Explanation to a statutory provision is (a) to explain the meaning and intendment of the Act itself; (b) where there is any obscurity or vagueness in the main enactment, to clarify the same so as to make it consistent with the dominant object which it seems to subserve, (c) to provide an additional support to the dominant object of the Act in order to make it meaningful and purposeful; (d) an Explanation cannot in any way interfere with or change the enactment or any part thereof but where gap is left which is relevant for the purpose of the Explanation, in order to suppress the mischief and advance the object of the Act it can help or assist the court in interpreting the true purport and intendment of the enactment; and (e) it cannot, however, take away a statutory right with which any person , under a statute has been clothed or set at naught the working of an Act by becoming an hindrance in the interpretation of the same.
[666F G ; 668G H; 669A C] Sarathi in Interpretation of Statutes, p. 329; Swarup in Legislation and Interpretation ' pages 297 298 and Bindra in 'Interpretation of Statutes ' (5th Edn.) page 67, referred to.
Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co.
Of India Ltd. and Anr.
vs Commercial Tax Officer and Ors.
[1961] I SCR 902, Bihta Cooperative Development Cane Marketing Uaion Ltd. and Anr.
vs The Bank of Bihar and Ors. ; and Dattatraya Govind Mahajan and Ors vs State of Mahararashtra and Anr ; relied upon.
Although almost every State has its own Rent Act, neither the Explanation nor the statutory clause concerning the term 'wilful default ' is mentioned therein.
These Acts seem to proceed only on the simple word default ' and perhaps to buttress their intention they have laid down certain guidelines to indicate the grounds of ejectment wherever a default takes place.
Looking generally at such Acts, they seem to have first provided statutorily a particular date or time when the tenant on being inducted under the contract of tenancy, is to pay the rent.
Such a provision may or may not be against the contract of the tenancy 647 and if it is to that extent, it overrides the contract, This, therefore, gives sufficient notice to any tenant inducted in any premises that he must pay the lent according to the yardstick set out by the Act, failing which he runs the risk of being evicted for default.
Some Acts, however, have provided a particular number of defaults to enable the Rent Controller or Court to find out whether such a default would entitle the landlord to get an order of eviction There are some other Acts which have made rather ingenious and, apt provisions for expediting the process of eviction in case of default by providing that whenever a suit for eviction is filed against a tenant on the ground of default, the tenant in order to show his bona fides must first deposit the entire rent, arrears and cost in the court of the Rent Controller where the action is field on the very first date of hearing, failing which the court or the authority concerned would be fully justified in striking down the defence and passing an order of eviction then and there.
The dominant object of such a procedure is to put the tenants on their guard.
It is true that such provisions are rather harsh but if a tenant goes on defaulting then there can be no other remedy but to make him pay the rent punctually unless some drastic step is taken.
These Acts, therefore, strike a just balance between the rights of a landlord and those of a tenant.
For deciding the present cases, it is not necessary to go either into the ethics or philosophy of such a provision because the Court is concerned with statutes having different kinds of provisions.
The relevant provisions of the A.P., Orissa and Pondichery Acts are almost in pari materia the proviso to Section 10(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act.
The only difference between the Tamil Nadu Act and the other Acts is that whereas an Explanation is added to the proviso to s.l0(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act, no such Explanation has been added to the provisions of the other three Acts.
Hence the Court has to consider the combined effect of the proviso taken in conjunction with the Explanation.
From an analysis of the various concomitants of the Explanation, the position seems to be that (a) there should be a default to pay or tender lent; E (b) the default should continue even after the landlord has issued two months ' notice claiming the arrears of rent; and (c) if, despite notice, the arrears are not paid the tenant is said to have committed a wilful default and consequently liable to be evicted forthwith.
[669E H; 670A D, F G] F 5 (ii) The Explanation, does not at all take away the mandatory duty cast on the Controller in the Proviso to decide if a default is wilful or not.
Indeed if the landlord chooses to give two months notice to his tenant and he does not pay the rent, then, in the absence of substantial and compelling reasons, the Controller or the court can certainly presume that the default is wilful and order his eviction straightaway.
There is no force in the view that whether two months notice for payment of rent is given or not, it will always be open to the Controller under the Proviso to determine the question of 'wilful default ' because that would render the very object of explanation otiose and nugatory.
[673D E] 6.
Two factors mentioned in s.10(2)(i) seem to give a clear notice to a tenant as to the mode of payment as also the last date by which he is legally supposed to pay the rent.
This, however, does not put the matter beyond controversy because before passing an order of eviction under the proviso, it must also be 648 proved that the default was wilful and if the Controller is of the opinion that the default in the circumstances and facts of the case was not wilful, in the sense that it did not contain any of the qualities or attributes of a wilful default as indicated, he may give the tenant a reasonable time, not exceeding 15 days, to pay the entire rent and if this is complied with, the application for ejectment would stand rejected.
The difficulty, however .
is created by the Explanation which says that once a landlord gives a Iwo months ' notice to his tenant for paying the arrears of rent but the tenant continues in default even thereafter, then he is liable to be evicted.
There is a good deal of force in this argument which has its own advantages.
In the first place, it protects the court from going into the intricate question as to what is a wilful default and whether or not the conditions of a wilful default have been satisfied which, if permitted would differ from case to case and court to court.
But the difficulty is that if such a blanket ban is put on the court for not examining the question of wilful default once the conditions laid down in the Explanation are satisfied then it would undoubtedly lead to serious injustice to the tenant.
A subsidiary consequence of such an interpretation would be that even though the tenant, after receipt of the notice, may be wanting to pay the arrears of rent but is unable to do so because of unforeseen circumstances like, death, accident, robbery, etc.
which prevent him from paying the arrears, yet under the Explanation he has lo be evicted.
Another difficulty in accepting the first view, viz., if two month 's notice is not given, the tenant must not be presumed to be a wilful defaulter, is that in such a case each landlord would has to maintain a separate office so that after every default a two months ' notice should be given and if no notice is given no action can be taken against a tenant.
The correct view in the matter is in the following terms.
(i) Where no notice is given by the landlord in terms of the Explanation, the Controller.
having regard to the four conditions spelt out in this judgment has the undoubted discretion to examine the question as to whether or not the default committed by the tenant is wilful, If he feels that any of the conditions mentioned is lacking or that the default was due to some unforeseen .circumstances, he may give the tenant a chance of locus paenitentiae by giving a reasonable time, which the statute puts at 15 days, and if within that time the tenant pays the rent, the application for ejectment would have to be rejected.
(ii) If the landlord chooses to give two months ' notice to the tenant to clear up the dues and the tenant does not pay the dues within the stipulated time of the notice then the Controller would have no discretion to decide the question of wilful default because such a conduct of the tenant would itself be presumed to be wilful default unless he shows that he was prevented by sufficient cause or circumstances beyond his control in honouring the notice sent by the landlord.
[671G H; 672A D; F; 673F H; 674A B] N.
Ramaswami Reddiar vs S.N. Periamuthu Nadar, 1980 Law Weekly (vol.
93) p. 577 and Khivaraj Chordia vs C. Maniklal Bhattad AIR 1966 Madras 67 approved.
Rajeswari vs Vasumal Lalchand AIR 1983 Madras 97, referred to.
In the light of the above principles and tests to be applied by courts in deciding the question of wilful default, the Court allowed Civil Appeals Nos.
1178 of 1984, 1992 of 1982 and 2246 of 1982 and dismissed rest of the appeals.
[678B] 649 Per Mukharji.j.
(dissenting) A l(i) Default has been construed in various ways depending upon the context. ' Default ' would seem to embrace every failure to perform part of one 's contract or bargain.
It is a purely relative term like negligence.
It means nothing more, nothing less.
than not doing what is reasonable under the circumstances not doing something which you ought to do.
having regard to the transaction.
Similarly, default in payment imports something wrongful, the omission to do some act which, as between the parties, ought to have been done by one of them.
It simply means non payment, failure or omission to pay.
Default happens in payment of rents under various contingencies and situations.
Whether the default is wilful or not is also a question of fact to be proved from evidence, direct and circumstantial drawing inferences from certain conduct.
If the Courts are free to decide from varying circumstances whether default was wilful or not, then divergence of conclusions are likely to arise one judicial authority coming to the conclusion from certain circumstances that the default was wilful, another judicial authority coming to a contrary conclusion from more or less same circumstances.
That creates anomalies.
In order to obviate such anomalies and bring about a uniform standard that Explanation explains the expression, wilful" and according to the Explanation added, a default to pay or tender rent small be construed", as wilful if the default by the tenant n th payment of rent continues after issue of two months ' notice by the landlord claiming the rent.
If that is the position, in a case where the landlord his given notice to the tenant claiming the rent and the tenant has not paid the same for two months, then the same must be construed as wilful default, whatever may be the cause for non payment.
Whether in a particular case default is wilful or not, must be considered in accordance with the definition provided in the Explanation to Proviso to sub section (2) of section 10 of the Act.
If it was intended that the courts would be free to judge whether in a particular set up of facts, the default was wilful or not where no notice has been given, then in such a case there was no necessity of adding this Explanation to the Proviso which is a step to the making of the findings under clause (l) of sub section (2) of section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Act.
It is well settled that Legislature does not act without purpose or in futility.
[680E G; 681B E; 682E F] _ .
_ Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary Vol. 1.
Third Edition.
page 757, Prem 's Judicial Dictionary.
1 196 t page 483.
The Dictionary of English Law page 597 Fakir Chander Datt and Other vs Ram Kumar Chatterji Indian Appeals.
Vol XXXI.
p. l9 n referred to, I(ii) If a definition is provided of an expression, then the courts are not free to construe the expression otherwise unless it is so warranted by the use of the expression such as "except otherwise provided or except if the context otherwise indicates.
" There is no such expression in the instant case.
There may be in certain circumstances intrinsic evidence indicating otherwise.
Here there is none.
[682C D] 2(i) The expression "shall be construed" would have the effect of providing a definition of wilful default in the proviso to sub section (2) of section 10.
According to the explanation, a default to pay or tender rent "shall be construed", 650 as wilful if the default by the tenant in the payment of rent continues after issue of two months ' notice by the landlord claiming the rent.
If that is the position, in a case where the landlord has given notice to the tenant claiming the rent and the tenant has not paid the same for two month 's, then the same must be construed as wilful default, whatever may be the cause for non payment.
The Legislature has chosen to use the expression "shall be construed as wilful" if after a notice by the landlord for two months ' failure to pay or tender rent on the part of the tenant continues, and if it is wilful then under sub section(2) clause (1) read with the proviso as explained by the Explanation, the Controller must be satisfied and give an order for eviction.
The Legislature has provided an absolute and clear definition of 'wilful default ' Other circumstances cannot be considered as wilful default.
It is true that Legislature has not chosen to use language to indicate that in no other cases, the default could be considered to be wilful except one default case which has been indicated in the Explanation.
But it is not so necessary be cause Legislature has defined 'wilful default by the expression that default to pay or tender rent shall be construed ' meaning thereby that it will mean only this and no other.
Therefore, a default will be construed as wilful, only where the landlord has given notice and two months have expired without payment of such rent.
[682 B R C; H; 681 D F; 683A] 2(ii)Statutory provisions must be construed, if it is possible, that absuridity and mischief may be avoided.
Where the plain and literal interpretation of a statutory provision produces a manifestly absurd and unjust result, the court might modify the language used by the Legislature or even ( 'o some violence to it so as to achieve the obvious intention Or the Legislature and produce rational construction and just results.
Ironing out the creases is possible but not rewriting the language to serve a notion of public Policy held by the judges [683C: 684B] 2(iii) Where two constructions are possible, one which avoids anomalies and creates reasonable results should be preferred but where the language is clear and where there is a purpose that can be understood and appreciated for construing in one particular manner, that is to say, avoidance of divergence of judicial opinions in construing wilful default and thereby avoiding anomalies for different tenants, it would not be proper in such a situation to say that this definition of wilful default was only illustrative and not exhaustive.
The Proviso to sub section (2) of section 10 cannot be cons trued as illustrative when the Legislature has chosen to use the expression "shall be construed".
[683D F] In the aforesaid view ot the matter, the individual appeals are disposed of accordinglY. that is to saY. OnlY those appeals of tenants are dismissed where eviction orders were passed after two months ' notice had been given and there was continuance of default, and the rest of the appeals are allowed.
1685B C] Seaford Court Estates Ltd. vs Asher [1949] 2 All E.R. 155 at pages 164 (CA), Regina vs Barnet London Borough Council Ex parte Nilish Saah, 1983 (2) Weakly Law Reports p. 16 at p. 30., Carrington and others vs Therm a Stor Ltd. 1983 (1) Weakly Law Reports p. 138 at p. 142.
referred to. 651
