The correct test to determine whether a contract made before the partition of India on behalf of the Governor General in Council comes within the purview of cl.
(a) of article 8(1) of the Indian Independence (Rights, Property and Liabilities) Order, 1040 1947, so as to be deemed to have been made on behalf of the Dominion of Pakistan, is either (1) if the contract was made on August 15, 1947, it would have been a contract for the purposes of the Dominion of Pakistan ; or (2) if Pakistan had existed on the day the contract was made, it would be a contract for the purposes of Pakistan.
Union of India vs Chinu Bhai jeshing bhai, I.L.R. 1953 Bom. 117, approved.
The purpose of a contract is not to be confused with the ultimate disposal of the goods supplied thereunder since such disposal can in no way determine or modify it.
Nor do the powers of control over military stores vested in the joint Defence Council by article 8(c) of the joint Defence Council Order, 1947, and saved by article 3(2) of the Indian Independence (Rights, Property and Liabilities) Order, 1947, whereby the goods might be transferred anywhere in India, make any difference and the rights and liabilities accruing from such contracts fall entirely to be adjudged by the provisions of the Indian Independence Order and not by the joint Defence Council Order.
The concluding part of article 8(1) makes it quite clear that the Article makes no distinction between contracts where the consideration is either executed or executory in nature and applies equally to both.
Elahi Bux vs Union of India, A.I.R. 952 Cal.
471 and Krishna Ranjait vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1954 Cal.
623, approved.
Union of India vs Loke Nath, A.I.R. 1952 Cal.
140, disapproved.
Consequently, in a case where the Union of India was sought to be made liable an the basis of a contract entered into on behalf of the Governor General of India in Council for the supply of fodder to the Manager, Military Farms, Lahore Cantonment, which was in Pakistan on August 15, 1947, and the trial Court found for the Union of India but the High Court, taking the view that the fodder constituted military stores under the exclusive control of the joint Defence Council on August 15, 1947, liable to be transferred anywhere in 'India, reversed that finding, the contract, even assumig that view to be correct, must be held to be one exclusively for the purposes of Pakistan as from the at date and the Union of India could not be made liable thereunder.
