The respondent was the owner of a factory carrying on the business of manufacturing dyes, chemicals and pharmaceuticals from a number of years.
By the Finance Act of 1961 'synthetic organic dyestuffs (including pigment dyestuffs) and synthetic organic derivatives used in any dyeing pro 833 cess ' were added as Item 14D in the First schedule to the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 with effect from March 1,1961, and consequently the respondent became liable to pay excise duty imposed by the Act on two of its products known as cibanogenes which were being manufactured.
On November 23, 1961, the Central Government issued a notification under Rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 exempting the dyes specified in the Schedule annexed thereto from the whole of the excise duty leviable thereon if and only if such dyes had been manufactured from any other dye on which excise duty or countervailing customs duty had already been paid.
Cibagenes and cibanogenes which were being manufactured by the respondent belonged to the class of dyes referred to in the Schedule annexed to the said notification.
In pursuance to the correspondence exchanged between the respondent and the Superintendent of Central Excise, the Deputy Superintendent was instructed to receive duty on such fast colour bases which went into the production of Cibagenes or cibanogenes (processed dyes) by the respondent, and the respondent accordingly paid the duty and was exempted from payment of duty on cibanogenes manufactured by it.
The departmental audit party, later on noticed that the concession shown to the respondent was not in order, since it was only when duty had been paid on the basic dyes at the time of their manufacture when they were chargeable to duty and they had been purchased by the respondent there after, the respondent would get exemption from the duty payable on the products manufactured by it by employing such basic dyes.
It was further of the view that there was short levy of excise duty on account of the above mistake since the respondent had paid excise duty on the basic dyes at 30 % ad valorem whereas it was liable to pay duty at 30% ad valorem on the products manufactured by it which were costlier than the basic dyes.
In pursuance to the aforesaid objection, the Assistant Collector issued five notices under Rule 10 A of the Central Excise Rules to the respondent calling upon it to show cause as to why the deficit amount of excise duty should not be recovered The respondent, denied its liability and contended that it had cleared the products manufactured by it in accordance with the Rules and pleaded that there was no justification to conclude that it was required to pay excise duty on the fast colour bases used by it in manufacturing the said goods voluntarily and that Rule 10 A of the Rules was not applicable to the case and so demand could be made.
The Assistant Collector overruled the 834 objections or the respondent and directed it to pay the amount which had been demanded in the notices by issuing appropriate notices of demand.
Aggrieved by the demand notices, the respondent filed a writ petition questioning their correctness, and for an order directing the excise authorities not to recover the amounts.
The High Court, allowed the writ petition and held that the respondent was entitled to the benefit of the exemption under the notification in respect of the goods manufactured by it, as excise duty had been paid on the dyes used in the manufacture of the said goods, and directed the excise authorities not to recover the sums mentioned in the Demand notices.
In the appeals to this Court, on the questions (i) Whether the respondent was entitled to the benefit of the exemption notification dated November 23, 1961 when the dyes said to have been used by the respondent in the manufacture of other dyes were not liable for payment of excise duty when they were manufactured and (ii) Whether the demands fell within the scope of Rule 10 A or under Rule 10 of the Central Excise Rules 1944.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The exemption notification dated November 23.
1961 specifically states that if and only if the dyes are manufactured from any other dye on Which excise duty or counter vailing customs duty has already been paid, the exemption can be availed of by the manufacturer of such dyes.
[ 843B; E] (ii) Payment of excise duty on dyes was possible only if they had been manufactured after the introduction of Item 14D into the First Schedule to the Act.
[843F] In the instant case, the dyes which were used by the respondent had been manufactured prior to that date.
[843F] Innamuri Gopalan & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh, , distinguished.
Hansraj Gordhandas vs H. H. Dave, Assistant Collector of Central Excise & Customs, Surat & two Ors. , inapplicable.
(iii) A voluntary payment of excise duty on dyes which were not liable for such payment would not earn any exemption under the notification.
[845F] IN the instant case, the principle of promissory estoppel cannot be pleaded.
The respondent had not done anything prejudicial to its interest relying upon any representation made on behalf of the department.
It is 835 not the case of the respondent, that it would not have manufactured the dyes but for the advice given by the Department.
The respondent, had before it the exemption notification which alone could be the basis for its actions The Department was not expected to tender legal advice to the respondent on a matter of this nature.
[845C D.] 2.
(a) The points of difference between Rule 10 and 10 A of the Rules are that: (i) Rule 10 applies to cases of short levy through inadvertence, error, collusion or mis construction on the part of an officer, or through mis statement as to the quantity, description or value of the excisable goods on the part of the owner.
Rule 10 A a residuary clause applies to those cases not covered by Rule 10, and (ii) Under Rule 10, the deficit amount could not be collected after the expiry of three months from the date on which the duty or charge was paid or adjusted in the owners account current or from the date of making the refund, Rule 10 A does not contain any such period of limitation.
[846P H] (b) In calculating the period of limitation, the expression `paid ' in Rule 10 should not be literally construed as `actually paid ' but as `ought to have been paid ' in order to prevent a person who had not paid any excise duty at all which be should have paid from escaping, from the act of Rule 10 of the Rules.
[847B C] N.B. Sanjana Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Bombay & Ors.
vs Elphinstone Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. ; , Assistant Collector of Central Excise, CALCUTTA Division vs National Tobacco Co.
Of India Ltd., and Gursahai Saigal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Punjab; , referred to.
In the instant case, there has been no assessment of the manufactured goods at all as contemplated by Rule 52 of the Rules and the delivery of the goods has taken place contrary to Rule 52A of the Rules.
The Department was virtually inveigled into a trap by the respondent suggesting that it was too eager to pay excise duty on certain goods which to the knowledge of the respondent were hot liable for excise duty with the object of getting the benefit of the right to clear its products which were liable for higher excise duty because of their increased value without paying any duty at all.
Rule 10 of the Rules deals with four kinds of mistakes on the part of an officer which bring a case within its sweep.
Of them `inadvertence ', `error ' and `mis construction ' are mistakes which can be committed unilaterally by the officer himself.
`Collusion ' involves pact between two or more persons to defraud the Government.
This case does not involve any unilateral mistake on the part of an officer or collusion nor where through mis statement as to quantity, description or value of goods on the part of the owner short levy has occasioned.
Further, the error in this case has not taken place at the time of the assessment or at the time when assessment ought to have been made under Rule 52.
[848H; 849F H] 836 In the instant case, the discussion and correspondence between the assessee and the officers had taken place on December 20, 1961, December 22, 1961 and January 4/6, 1962 without reference to the actual goods.
The goods were actually manufactured and cleared afterwards.
The reply of the Superintendent of Central Excise dated January 4/6, 1962 was in the nature of advice and not an assessment as contemplated under Rule 52.
This case is not therefore covered by Rule 10 at all.
Rule 10 A which is a residuary provision is, therefore, necessarily attracted.
The plea of limitation raised on the basis of Rule 10 of the Rules does not therefor survive.
[850A B]
