The appellant 's family consisted of himself, his wife, and five children three daughters and two sons.
On March 17, 1970, the appellant affected a partition of all his properties by a registered document between himself and his two minor sons.
The appellant retained 1.85.63 hectors of land for himself.
The first son Was allotted 7.10.24 hectors and the younger son was allotted 3.54.82 hectors.
The appellant 's wife purchased in 1958, 5.74.87 hectors of land by utilising her Sridbanam money.
On the failure of the appellant to file a return under section 7 (1) of the Act voluntarily, the Authorised Officer issued a notice Form 4 under .
8(1) of the Act.
The appellant thereupon filed a return on December 12, 1915 stating that he and his wife were holding Only 7.67.91 hectors.
Thereafter the Authorised Officer issued separate notices to the appellant and his wife to file further representations, if any, and to appear before him for enquiry.
Separate representations were filed reiterating the original stand that the lands allotted to the minor sons under the partition as also the lands acquired by the appellant 's wife with the Sridhanam amounts could not be taken into account while computing the extent of the appellant 's holding.
The Authorised Officer rejected these contentions and held that the appellant was holding an extent of 18.26.28 ordinary hectares equivalent to 11.48.55 standard hectares of land and he was eligible to retain only 8.40.00 standard hectares.
926 Aggrieved by the said order, the appellant preferred an appeal before the Land Tribunal, which allowed the appeal taking the view that since the sons of the appellant had become divided from him by the deed of partition executed in 1970, long prior to the appointed day specified in the Act, and the lands standing in the name of the appellant 's wife belonged to her independently in her own separate right, there was no justification for clubbing together the lands of the appellant with those of his wife and sons, and that the definition of ' family" under section (10) of the Act was not attracted to this case, and the appellant was well within the ceiling limit.
The State respondent challenged the decision of the Land Tribunal before the High Court in a Civil Revision Petition under section 50, which set aside the decision and restored the Order passed by the Authorised Officer.
The High Court held: (1) that a combined reading of In definition of ' family" contained in s 2(10) and the provision contained in section 4 (2), makes clear that notwithstanding any transaction of partition entered into prior to the appointed day, the minor sons of a person will I for the purposes of the Act, be Ideated as members of the family of such person together with his wife and unmarried daughters.
and (2) that in computing the extent of the holding of the family" as defined in the Act (he separate property of the wife had to be included by reason of the express provision contained in section 4 (2).
Dismissing the appellant 's appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that the lands standing in the names of the wife and the two minor sons of the appellant as their separate properties were also liable to be included in the holding of the appellant for the purpose of fixation of ceiling under section 4 of the Act.
[9 3 6F] 2.
(i) The provisions of the Pondicherry Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act 1973 are applicable to all holders of Land in the Union Territory of Pondicherry irrespective of their religion, community etc.
It is therefore, fallacious to assume that the ' family" referred to in the Act must conform to the concept of the joint family as known to Hindu Law.
The concept OF a joint family is totally foreign to personal laws of some of the communities.
[934F G] 2.
(ii) It is manifestly wrong to approach the interpretation of the sections of the Act with the preconceived notion that in using the expression "family", the Legislature had intended to connote an undivided family as known to the Hindu Law and that after a partition had taken place in a Hindu joint family there cannot be a family ' consisting of the father and his divided minor sons for the purpose of fixation of ceiling under the Act.
[934G] 927 2.
(iii) The fact that the definition of "family" contained in section 2 (10) A does not treat the major sons of a person as members of his family is a clearly pointer that an undivided Hindu family was in the contemplation of the Legislature when it enacted the definition section [934H; 936A] 3.
Sub section (3) (a) of section 4 which provides that in calculating the extent of land held by a member of a family or by an individual person, the share of the member of the family or of the individual person in the land held by an undivided Hindu family shall be taken into account, furnishes a conclusive indication that the "family" mentioned in the Act is wholly distinct and different from an 'undivided Hindu family. ' [935B] In the instant case, the circumstance that a partition had taken place disrupting the joint family consisting of the appellant and his minor sons is of no relevance in determining the total extent of the holding of the appellant in accordance with the provisions of section 2 (10) read with s 4 of the Act.
A special statutory unit consisting of the persons satisfying the description contained in clause (10) of section 2 as constituting a "family" for the purpose of fixation of ceiling has been created.
The stress is only on the existence of the relationship, and unity of title or jauntiness of holding in relation to properly are not essential elements.
Under the definition contained in section 2 (10), a person, the wife or husband of such person and his or her minor sons and unmarried daughters together constitute a "family".
[935C D] 4.
The position emerging from the provisions of section 2 (10) and section 4(1) (2), is that the properties held by the minor sons of the appellant individually as well as the lands separately owned by his wife, purchased by her with her Sridhanam amounts, are all liable to be taken into account while computing the total extent of holding of the family of the appellant.
[935F] 5.
Explanation IV to section 7 proceeds on the footing that for purposes of computing the ceiling and determining the area of surplus land to be surrendered.
the lands held separately by the husband and wife are to be pooled together.
The liability to surrender excess land is to be fixed in proportion to the extent of land held separately by the two spouses, [936B] 6.
The purpose of section 4(4) is to peg down the process of determination of ceiling area to the state of things that obtained on the 'appointed day ' and it is for the said purpose that the sub section provides that in calculating the extent of land held by and person, any land which was transferred, by sale, gift or otherwise Dr partitioned by that person after the appointed day but before the commencement of the Act, shall be taken into account, as if such land had not been transferred or partitioned.
[936D E] 928
