Section 169 (1) of the Companies Act provides that the Board of directors of a company shall, on the requisition of such number of members of the company as is specified in sub section (4), forthwith proceed duly to call an extraordinary general meeting of the company, Sub section 4(a) says that the number of members entitled to requisition a meeting in regard to any matter shall be in the case of a company having a share capital, such number of them as held at the date of the deposit of the requisition, not less than one tenth of such of the paid up capital of the company as at that date carries the right of voting in regard to that matter.
The Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Ltd. (for short, the Cotton Mills Company), had 10 lakhs shares out of 39,00,000 shares of Rs. 10/ each in the respondent Swadeshi Polytex Ltd. (for short, the Polytex Company).
On 855 27th October, 1977, the Collector of Kanpur passed an order under section 182A A of the U.P. Land Revenue Act 1901 (for short, the Land Revenue Act, road with section 5 of the U.P. Government Electrical Undertakings (Dues Recovery Act 1958 appointing a Receiver in respect of the Cotton Mills Company, since it could not meet the wage bill, the dues of the U.P. Electricity Board and several other monetary claims against it from about 1975 76 on account of a serious set back in its financial position.
By the said order, he empowered the Receiver to seize 1 lakh of shares of the Polytex Company and to pledge them in favour of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh against a loan for the purpose of meeting the dues payable to the employees of the Cotton Mills Company.
He made a further order under section 14g of the Land Revenue Act read with section 5 of the U.P. Government Electrical Undertakings (Dues Recovery) Act 1958 attaching the remaining 9 lakhs shares of the Polytex Company held by Cotton Mills Company and empowering the Receiver to seize them.
Pursuant to the Orders of the Collector, the Receiver seized 10 lakhs shares held by the Cotton Mills Company and pledged 3 5 lakhs shares in favour of the Government of U.P. and kept the remaining 6.5 lakhs shares with him.
The Cotton Mills Company and four others share holders who together held 10,01,950 shares of Rs. 10 each in the Polytex Company sent a notice to the Polytex Company under section 169 of the Act requiring the Board of Directors of Polytex Company to consider and pass certain resolutions regarding removal of its Managing Director and three directors and appointment of some other persons in their place.
Pursuant to such requisitions, the directors of the Polytex Company resolved to hold the extraordinary meeting on March 28, 1984.
However, the meeting could not be held, since some of the share holders had obtained temporary injunctions restraining the holding of the meeting.
The matter ultimately came up before the Supreme Court in Special Leave Petitions when it directed the High Court to make an order for holding the meeting notwithstanding any order of injunction etc.
issued by any other court or authority in India.
Accordingly, the meeting was filed for 14th August 1984.
But, in the meanwhile, appellant No. 1 moved an application before the High Court, in an appeal already pending between the Cotton Mills Company and the Polytex company questioning the right of the requisitionists to issue notice under section 169 of the Act to call the extraordinary general meeting.
The High Court dismissed the application Hence this appeal by Special Leave.
The appellants contended that: (1) Since a Receiver had been appoint ed by the Collector in respect of the shares held by the Cotton Mills Company and they had also been attached, the shares held by the Cotton Mills Company could not be taken into consideration for determining the required qualification to issue the notice under s 169 of the Act requisitioning the extraordinary general meeting and that if those shares were omitted from consideration then the shares held by the other requisitionists would not be sufficient to issue the said notice.
In other words the extraordinary general meeting had not been validly called since the Cotton Mills Company had 856 ceased to enjoy the privileges of a member of the Polytex Company by reason of the appointment of a Receiver by the Collector of Kanpur in respect of the ten lakhs shares in the POLYTEX Company held by the Cotton Mills Company, the attachment of the 9 lakhs shares out of the said 10 lakhs and also the pledge of 3,50,000 shares out of the said 10 lakhs shares with the Government of Uttar Pradesh as security for the loans advanced by it; (ii) The order OF the Collector being an order in the nature of a charging order; the Receiver had obtained an equitable right in the shares in question and there being no other legal or equitable right which would prevail over it, the Cotton Mills Company had lost its right to the shares; and (iii) By virtue of an order made by the Central Government on April 13, 1978 under 8.
18AA (1) (a) of the Industrial (Development & Regulation) Act 1951 taking over the management of Swadeshi Cotton Mills along with its five other industrial units, the Cotton Mills Company had lost the right to exercise its voting rights in respect of the shares in question.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) In the Act, the expressions 'a member ', 'a share.
holder ' or 'holder of a share ' are used as synonyms to indicate the person who is recognised by a company as its owner for its purposes.
What does ownership of a share connote ? Ownership in its most comprehensive signification says Salmond, 'denotes the relation between a person and any right that is vested in him.
That which a man owns in this sense is a right '.
The right of ownership comprises benefits like claims liberties, powers, immunities and privileges and burdens like duties, liabilities, disabilities.
Whatever advantages a man may have as a result of the ownership of a right may be curtailed by the disadvantages in the form of burdens attached to it.
As observed by Dias, an owner may be divested of his claims etc.
arising from the right owned to such an extent that he may be left with no immediate practical benefit.
He remain the owner nonetheless because his interest will outlast that of other persons in the thing owned.
The owner possesses that right which ultimately enables him to enjoy all rights in the thing owned by attracting towards himself those rights in the thing owned which for the time being belong to others, by getting rid of the corresponding p73 burdens.
[871 D F] 1.
(ii) Section 41 of the Act defines the expression "member" of a company.
Subject to section 42 of the Act, a company or a body corporate may also become a member.
When once a person becomes a member, he is entitled to exercise all the rights of a member until he ceases to be a member in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
A persons ceases to be a member by transferring his share to another person, by transmission of his share by operation of law, by forfeiture of share, by death, or by any other reason known to law.
A person who is a shareholder of a company has many rights under the Act.
Some of them, are: (i) the right to vote at all meetings Section 87.
(ii) the right to requisition an extraordinary general meeting of the company or to be a joint requisitionists (Section 169), (iii) the 857 right to receive notice of a general meeting (Section 172).
(iv) the right to A appoint proxy and inspect proxy register (Section 176), (v) in the case of a body corporate which is a member, the right to appoint a representative to attend a general meeting on its behalf (Section 181) and (vi) the right to require the company to circulate his resolution (Section 188).
Therefore, it is clear from the relevant provisions of the Act which are referred to above that a member can participate and exercise his vote at the meetings of a company in accordance with the Act and the articles of association of the company.
[875 G, 876 A, 878 A B,] 2.
(i) Section 150 of the Act requires every company to keep a register of members containing the names, address and the occupation, IF any, of each member and other particulars mentioned therein.
The privileges of a member can be exercised by only that person whose name is entered in the Register of Members.
A Receiver whose name is not entered in the Register of Members cannot exercise any of these rights unless in a proceeding to which the Company concerned is a party an order is made authorising him to do so.
Even where the holder of a share whose name is entered in the Register of Members hands over his shares with blank transfer forms duly signed, the transferee would not be able to claim the rights of a member as against the company concerned until his names is entered in the Register of Members.
[875 D, 880 D 13, 881 G] Mathalone vs Bombay Life Assurance Co. Ltd., ; and Messers Howrah Trading Co. Ltd. vs The Commisioner of Income tax, Calcutta, [1959] Supp.
2 S.C.R. 448, followed.
In re: Wala Wynaad Indian Gold Mining Company, [18821 , Kurapati Venkata Mallayya & Anr.
vs Thondeput Ramaswami & Co. & Anr.
[1963] Supp. 2 S.C.R 995 and Jagat Tarini Dasi vs Naba Gopal Chaki, Cal. 305, referred to.
Wise vs Landsdell, and Morgan & Anr.
vs Gray &: Ors., at p.87, relied upon.
2, (ii) A perusal of the provisions of s.182A of the Land Revenue Act shows that there is no provisions in it which states that on the appointment of a Person as a receiver the property in respect of which he is so appointed vests in him similar to the provision in s.l7 of the Presidency Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 where on the making of an order of adjudication the property of the insolvent wherever situate would vest in the official assignee, or in s.28(2) of the which states that on the making of an order of adjudication, the whole of the property of the insolvent would vest in the court or in the official Receiver.
Sub section (4) of section 182A of the Land Revenue Act provides that Rules 2 to 4 of Order XL of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 shall apply in relation to a Receiver appointed under that section.
A Receiver appointed under order XL of the Code of Civil Procedure only holds the property committed to 858 his control under the order of the court but the property does not vest in him.
A receiver appointed by a court or authority in respect of a property holds it for the benefit of the true owner subject to the orders that may be made by such court or authority.
Under s.51 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 a Receiver may be appointed by a civil court on the application of a decree holder in execution of a decree for purposes of realising the decree debt.
This is only a mode of equitable relief granted ordinarily when other modes of realisation of the decretal amount are impracticable.
A Receiver appointed under that section will be able to realise the amounts due from a garnishee and his powers are akin to the powers of a Receiver appointed under Order 40 Rule I of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
But be would not have any beneficial interest in the assets of the judgment debtor.
He collects the debts not as his own but as an officer of the court.
Thus whatever may be the other powers of a Receiver dealing with the property which is custodia legis while in his custody, he is not to be construed as either an assignee or beneficial owner of such property.
[880 A, 887 H, 888 A B, 882 H] 2.
(iii) Section 137 of the Act provides that if any person obtains an order for the appointment of a Receiver of, or of a person to manage, the property of a company, or if any person appoints such Receiver and any powers contained in any instrument he shall within thirty days from the date of the passing of the order of the making of the appointment under the said powers, give notice of the fact to the Registrar; and the Registrar shall on payment of the prescribed fee, enter the fact in the register of charges maintained under s.130 of the Act.
It is not clear in the instant case whether any entry had been made in the register of charges of the order of appointment of Receiver.
Even granting that such an entry had been made, it would not have the effect of taking away the right of the Cotton Mills Company to exercise the right to vote in respect of the shares in question.
[884 C E] 3.
There is no substance in the argument based on ss.153B, 187B and 187C of the Act.
Section 153 of the Act states that no notice of any trust, express implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register of members or of debenture holders.
Section 153B of the Act requires that notwithstanding anything contained in s.153 where any shares in, or debentures of a company are held in trust by any person, the trustee shall, make a declaration to the public trustee.
Section 187B of the Act provides that save as otherwise provided in s.153B but notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of the Act or any other law or any contract, memorandum or articles, where any shares in a company are held in trust by a person as trustee, the rights and powers (including the right to vote by proxy) exercise able at any meeting of the company or at any meeting of any class of members of the company by the trustee as a member of the company cease to be exercisable by the trustee as such member and become exercisable by the public trustee.
Section 187C of the Act makes it incumbent upon a person whose name is entered in the Register of Members of a company but who does not hold the beneficial interest in the share in question in such form as may be prescribed specifying the name and other particulars of the persons who holds the beneficial interest in such share.
The Companies (Declaration of beneficial Interest in shares) Rules, 1975 are made in this connec 859 tion.
It is obvious from the foregoing that none of the provisions referred A to above has any bearing on the question before this Court.
Thus, more appointment of a Receiver in respect of certain shares of a company without more cannot, therefore, deprive the holder of the shares whose name is entered in the Register of Members of the Company the right to vote at the meeting of the company or to issue a notice under s.169 of the Act.
1884 F H, 885 A C] 4.
Under Rule 76 of Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the shares in a Corporation which are attached may be sold through a broker.
In the alternative such shares may be sold in public auction under Rule 77 thereof.
On such sale either under Rule 76 or under Rule 77 the purchases acquires title.
Until such sale is effected, all other rights of the judgment debtor remain unaffected even if the shares may have been seized by the officer of the court under Rule 43 of Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the purpose of effecting the attachment, or through a Receiver or though an order in terms of Rule 46 of Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure may have been served on the judgment debtor or on the company concerned.
The consequence of attachment of certain shares of a company held by a shareholder for purposes of sale in a proceeding under s.149 of the Land Revenue Act is more or less the same.
The effect of an order of attachment is what s.l49 of the Land Revenue Act itself says.
Such attachment is made according to the law in force for the time being for the attachment and sale of movable property under the decree of a civil court [886 B C, 885 D] 5.
(i) It is to be Doted that a charging order under the English Law is not the same as an attachment of property or appointment of a Receiver under the Land Revenue Act.
Charging Orders under the English Law are made under order 50 of the English Supreme Court Practice under which the English court may for the purpose of enforcing a judgment or order of that court under which a debtor is required to pay a sum of money to a creditor make an order imposing on any such property of the debtor as may be specified in the order, a charge for securing the payment of any money due or to become due under the judgment or order.
Such an order is referred to as the 'charging order '.
A charging order on the property or assets of the debtor is one of the modes of enforcement of a judgment or order for the payment of money to the creditor.
It is, however, not a direct mode of enforcement in the sense that the creditor can immediately proceed to recover the fruits of his judgment, but it is rather an Indirect mode of enforcement in the sense that it provides the creditor with security, in whole or in part, over the property of the debtor.
It makes the creditor secured creditor who having obtained his charging order must proceed, as may be necessary according to the nature of the property charged, to enforce his charge in order to obtain the actual proceeds of his charge to satisfy his judgment, in whole or in part.
Subject to the other provisions of law a charge imposed by a charging order will have effect and will be enforceable in the same court and in the same manner as an equitable mortgage created by the debtor by writing under his hand.
An order of attachment cannot, therefore, have the effect of depriving the holder of the shares of his title to the shares Therefore, the attachment of the shares in the Polytex Company held by the Cotton 860 Mills Company had not deprived the Cotton Mills Company of its right to vote at the meeting or to issue the notice under s.169 of the Act.
[887 B F, 888 C] Hawks vs Mc Arthur & Ors.
[l9SIl 1 All E.R. 22, inapplicable.
(ii) The fact that 3,50,000 shares have been pledged in favor of the Government of Uttar Pradesh also would not make any difference.
Sections 172 to 178 A of the deal with the contract of pledge.
A pawn is not exactly a mortgage.
The two ingredients of a pawn are: "(1) that it is essential to the contract of pawn that the property pledged should be actually or constructively delivered to the pawnee and (2) a pawnee has only a special property in the pledge but the general property therein remains in the pawner and wholly reverts to him on discharge of the debt.
A pawn therefore is a security where by contract a deposit of goods is made as security for a debt The right to property vests in the pledged only so far as is necessary to secure the debt.
The pawner however has a right to redeem the property pledged until the sale.
Under s.116 of the if the pawnor makes default in payment of the debt, or performance, at the stipulated time, of the promise, in respect of which the goods were pledged, the pawnee may bring a suit against the pawnor upon the debt or promise, and retain the goods pledged as a collateral security, or he may sell the thing pledged, on giving the pawnor reasonable notice of the sale In the case of a pledge, however, the legal title to the goods pledged would not vest in the pawnee.
the pawnee has only a special property.
A pawnee has no right of foreclosure since he never had absolute ownership at law and his equitable title cannot exceed what is specifically granted by law.
In this sense, a pledge differs from a mortgage in view of the foregoing the pawnee in the instant case i.e. the Government of Uttar Pradesh could not be treated as the holder of the shares pledged Fin its favour.
The Cotton Mills Company continued to be the member of the Polytex Company in respect of the said shares and could exercise its right under s.l69 of the Act.
[888 D H, 889 A.Cl Lallan Prasad vs Rahmat Ali & Anr., ; pp.
238 239 Bank of Bihar vs State of Bihar & Ors., [1971] Supp.
S.C.R. 299 and Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India, ; refereed to.
There is no substance in the contention that on the passing of an order by the Central Government under s 18A (1) (a) of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 taking over the management of the Cotton Mills Company alongwith its five other industrial units, the Cotton Mills Company lost its right to exercise its voting rights 861 in respect of the shares in question.
What was taken over under the above A said orders was the management of the six industrial units referred to therein and not all the rights of the Cotton Mills Company.
The shares belong to the company and the orders referred to above cannot have any effect on them.
Hence the passing of the orders under s.l8AA (1) (a) of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 has no effect of the voting rights of the Cotton Mills Company.
[889 B H, 890 A]
