The appellant Corporation levied licence fee for use of premises and land for soaking coconut husks under Schedule IV of the Calicut City Municipal Act 1961, Subsequently restyled as the Kerala Municipal Corporation Act 1961.
The respondents were carrying on the trade of soaking coconut husks, and as they had not taken out the requisite licence, the Commissioner of the Corporation issued notices to show cause why they should not be prosecuted.
The respondents challenged the validity and legality of the notices in Writ Petitions to the High Court, contending that if the licence fee is levied as a fee, no service is rendered or special advantage or favour is conferred by the Corporation for collecting such fee and that there is DO quid pro quo and that the relevant provisions of the Act do not enable the Corporation to levy such a fee.
It was further contended that if the levy is treated is a tax, it is beyond the taxing powers of the Corporation.
The Corporation contested the Writ Petitions justifying the fee as licence fee and that it had the power to levy a tax of the nature levied by it.
A Single Judge of the High Court allowed the Writ Petitions, and quashed the impugned licence fee as not legal in the absence of conferment of special benefits in respect of persons who soak coconut husks.
It was further held that the power to levy the various taxes conferred on the Corporation under Chapter V of the 1961 Act did not comprehend the impugned levy and consequently the tax was not valid and legal.
The writ appeals of the Corporation were dismissed.
1009 Allowing the Appeals, this Court ^ HELD: By numerous recent decisions of this Court it is well settled that the traditional concept in a fee of quid pro quo is undergoing a transformation and that though the fee must have relation to the services rendered or the advantages conferred, such relation need not be direct, a mere casual relation may be enough.
It is not necessary to establish that those who pay the fee must receive direct benefit of the services tendered for which the fee is being paid.
If one who is liable to pay receives general benefit from the authority levying the fee the element of service required for collecting fee is satisfied.
It is not necessary that the persons liable to pay must receive some special benefit or advantage for payment of the fee.
[1012E F] In the instant case, it is incontrovertible that the appellant Corporation is rendering numerous services to the persons within its areas of operation and that therefore the levy of the licence fee as fee is fully justified.
Soaking coconut husks emit foul odour and contaminates environment.
The Corporation by rendering scavanging services, carrying on operations for cleanliness of the city, to make habitation tolerable is rendering general service of which amongst others respondents are beneficiaries.
a The decisions of the Single Judge and of the Division Bench are set aside and the Writ Petitions of the respondents are dismissed.
[1012 G H] Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors.
vs Mohd. Yasin Others vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Others ; & M/s Amarnath Om Prakash and Others vs State of Punjab & Ors.
(1985) I SCC 345 referred to.
