The Project and Equipment Corporation of India Ltd. was formed in 1971 as a wholly owned subsidiary company of State Trading Corporation, a Government of India Undertaking.
In 1976 it was separated and since then it functions as a separate Government of India Undertaking.
The appellant who joined the service under the State Trading Corporation originally and later exercised his option to serve the Project and Equipment Corporation with effect from November 9, 1976.
The appellant while working as Deputy Finance Manager Grade II applied for and obtained (a) an advance in the amount of Rs. 16,050 for purchasing a plot of land on April 4, 1979 for which he executed the requisite agreement as required by 'the Project & Equipment Corporation of India Ltd., House Building Advance (Grant and Recovery) Rules, and (b) an advance in the amount of Rs. 11,000 for purchase of a new motor cycle on July 7, 1979 as admissible under "the Project and Equipment Corporation conveyance Advance (Grant and Recovery) Rules.
Under these rules non utilisation of the amounts within the time limit will impose a liability of the refund of the entire amount forth with together with penal interest thereon.
The appellant failed to utilise the amounts and also to refund the same.
Therefore, coercive steps were taken to recover the entire amount of the House Building advance from his pay by stopping the payment of his salary from 16th November, 1979.
As regards the conveyance advance, the receipts etc.
for purchase made in 1980 were accepted.
On July 22, 1980 a memorandum was served upon the appellant stating therein that the competent authority proposes to hold an enquiry against him under Rules 27 of the Project and Equipment Corporation of India Employees (Conduct, Discipline & Appeals Rules, 1975 in respect of the aforesaid mis utilization of the advances.
The committee of Management in exercise of the powers conferred by sub rule (4) of Rule 27 of the 1975 rules appointed one Sri A.S. Nangia, its Chief Marketing Manager as the Enquiry Officer to enquire into the two charges against the appellant.
The appellant submitted on June 13, 1980 a detailed statement pointing out that for various reasons therein mentioned so as to explain why there was delay in refunding the advance and specifically pleaded that in view of the fact that the first advance was sought to be recovered by withholding his salary and adjusting the pay towards the advance and charging penal interest and in the second case by accepting the document evidencing purchase of scooter no misconduct could be said to have been committed 648 by the appellant and the disciplinary enquiry was uncalled for.
The enquiry officer in his report after recapitulating allegations and explanation simply concluded that the appellant has contravened Rule 10 (1) (c) (i) of the House Building Advance Rules, and also rules 8 and 10 (1) of the Conveyance Advance Rules and therefore committed misconduct punishable under Rule 4 (1) (iii) of the 1975 Rules.
Pursuant to the report of the Enquiry Officer, the Executive Director for and on behalf of the Committee of Management of the corporation made an order PEC : P 5 (8) 77 dated February 4, 1981 stating that the Committee of management agrees with the findings of the inquiry officer and imposes the punishment of removal from service with effect from the date of the order.
The appeal preferred to the Appellate Authority was rejected as per the Memorandum dated May 21,1981 signed by one Anand Krishna claiming to act for and on behalf of the Board of Directors.
The appellant, therefore approached the High Court of Delhi under article 226 of the Constitution questioning the correctness and validity of the findings of the inquiry officer and the decision of the Disciplinary Authority as well as the appellate authority inter alia on the ground that the inquiry was held in violation of the principles of natural justice and the quasi judicial authority failed to give reasons in support of its order and the action taken against the appellant was per se arbitrary and violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as the allegation contained in the heads of charges, even if unrebutted, do not constitute a misconduct within the meaning of the expression in 1975 Rules.
In order to sustain the maintainability of the writ petition, the appellant also contended that the respondent is an instrumentality of the State and is comprehended in the expression 'other authority ' in article 21 of the Constitution.
The writ petition came up for admission before a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court.
It was dismissed in limine observing that the writ petition is not maintainable on the facts presently set out in the petition.
Hence this appeal by special leave Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1: 1.
Public sector undertakings and other instrumentalities of the State are comprehended in the expression other authority" in Article 12 of the Constitution.
[660A] 1: 2.
Once it is conceded that the respondent corporation is an instrumentality of the State and is therefore, comprehended in the expression 'other authority ' in article 12 of the Constitution, it is indisputable that it is amenable to the writ jurisdiction under articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution.
Apart from the concession, the tests collated in the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Ajay Hasia etc vs Khalid Mujib Sheravardi and Others etc ; for determining whether a particular body is an instrumentality of the State are fully satisfied and therefore on precedent and concession it is satisfactorily established that the respondent Corporation is an instrumentality of the State within the 649 meaning of the expression 'other authority ' under article 12 of the Constitution and is amenable to the writ jurisdiction.
The writ petition filed by the appellant in the High Court was thus maintainable.
[660D E] 2.
When once it is conceded that the respondent was amenable to the writ jurisdiction, the question that will arise is whether the matter should be remitted to the High Court as the High Court has rejected the writ petition in limine on the ground that the respondent was not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
In order not to protract the litigation involving livelihood of the party approaching the Supreme Court for justice, the Court can set down the appeal for final hearing on merits, which they did in the instant case.
[660F H] 3:1 It cannot be said that executive action which results in denial of equal protection of law or equality before law cannot be judicially reviewed nor can be struck down on the ground of arbitrariness as being violative of article 14.
[661E F] 3:2 The scope and ambit of Article 14 have been the subject matter of a catena of decisions.
It is well settled that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in executive/administrative action because any action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve the negation of equality.
One need not confine the denial of equality to a comparative evaluation between two persons to arrive at a conclusion of discriminatory treatment.
An action per se arbitrary itself denies equal protection of law.
It is thus too late in the day to contend that an executive action shown to be arbitrary is not either judicially reviewable or within the reach of Article 14.
[662A, F G, 663A B] Ajay Hasaia etc.
Khalid Majid Shehravardi and Ors[1981] 2 S.C.R 79; E.P.Royappa vs State of Tamil Nadu and anr.
; ; D. section Nakara vs Union of India [1983] I S C. C. 305 and Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India [1978] 2 section C. R. 621 followed.
Wisdom of the legislative policy may not be open to judicial review but when the wisdom takes the concrete form of law, the same must stand the test of being in tune with the fundamental rights and if it trenches upon any of the fundamental rights, it is void as ordained by article 13, Conceding for the present purpose that legislative action follows a legislative policy and the legislative policy is not judicially reviewable, but while giving concrete shape to the legislative policy in the form of a statute, if the law violates any of the fundamental rights including article 14, the same is void to the extent as provided in article 13.
If the law is void being in violation of any of the fundamental rights set out in Part II of the Constitution, it cannot be shielded on the ground that it enacts a legislative policy.
[661F H] 5.
Even if the respondent Corporation is an instrumentality of the State as comprehended in article 12, yet the employees of the Corporation are not governed by Part XIV of the Constitution.
However it could not be 650 said that the protection conferred by Part III on the public servant is comparatively Less effective than the one conferred by Part XIV.
Therefore the distinction sought to be drawn between protection of part XIV of the Constitution and part III has no significance.
[663B C, 665A] Managing Director.
Uttar Pradesh Warehousing Corporation & Anr.
vs Vinay Narayan Vajpayee; ; at p. 784, relied upon.
Even if the facts alleged in two heads of charges are accepted as wholly proved, yet that would not constitute misconduct as prescribed in Rule 5 and no penalty can be imposed for such conduct, for the reason that while Rule 25 which prescribes penalties specifically provides that any of the penalties therein mentioned can be imposed on an employee for misconduct committed by him.
Rule 4 does not specify a misconduct.
Rule 4 styled as 'General ' specifies a norm of behaviour but does not specify that its violation will constitute misconduct.
In Rule 5, it is nowhere stated that anything violative of Rule 4 would be per se a misconduct in any of the sub clauses of Rule 5 which specifies misconduct.
[666B D] 6:2.
A general expectation of a certain decent behaviour in respect of employees keeping in view corporate culture may be a moral or ethical expectation.
Failure to keep to such high standard of moral; ethical or decorous behaviour befitting an officer of the company by itself cannot constitute misconduct unless the specific conduct falls in any of the enumerated misconduct in Rule 5.
Any attempt to telescope Rule 4 into Rule 5 must be looked upon with apprehension because Rule 4 is vague and of a general nature and what is unbecoming of a public servant may vary with individuals and expose employees to vagaries of subjective evaluation.
What in a given context would constitute conduct unbecoming of a public servant to be treated as misconduct would expose a grey area not amenable to objective evaluation.
Where misconduct when proved entails penal consequences, it is obligatory on the employer to specify and if necessary define it with precision and accuracy so that any ex post facto interpretation of some incident may not be camouflages as misconduct.
[665 D G] M/s Glaxo Laboratories (I) Ltd vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Meerut & Others; , followed.
Seeking advance and granting the same under relevant rules is at best a loan transaction.
The transaction may itself provide for payments and the consequences of failure to repay or to abide by the rules.
If the rules for granting the advance themselves provided the consequence of the breach of conditions, it would be idle to go in search of any other consequence by initiating any disciplinary action in that behalf unless the 1975 Rules specifically incorporate a rule that the breach of House Building Advance Rules and the conveyance advance rules, would by themselves constitute a "misconduct".
Therefore Rule 4 (1) is not only, not attracted but in this case no attempt was made to establish the correction.
And 651 as far as Rule 4 (1) (iii) is concerned, an advance not refunded in time where it was recovered by withholding the salary of a highly placed officer may not disclose a conduct unbecoming of a public servant.
Therefore, the first head of charge is an eye wash, It does not constitute a misconduct if it can be said to be one even if it remains unrebutted.
The inquiry officer has not said one word how the uncontroverted facts constitute a conduct unbecoming of a public servant, or he failed to maintain absolute integrity.
Regarding the conveyance advance the position is the same.
The appellant for no fault has been punished sub silencio.
[667F H, 668A, D E, 669H] 7:2.
Now if what is alleged as misconduct does not constitute misconduct not by analysis or appraisal of evidence, but per se under 1975 Rules the respondent had neither the authority nor the jurisdiction nor the power to impose any penalty for the alleged misconduct.
An administrative authority who purports to act by its regulation must be held bound by the regulation.
[670H, 671A] 8.
In the matter of public employment if the termination is held to be dba, a declaration can be granted that the man continues to be in service.
[671G, 672A] Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh.
Raghuvanshi & Anr. ; @ 655.
Western India Automobile Association vs Industrial Tribunal, Bombay and Ors.[1949] F.C.R. 321 at 340.
The duty to give reasons would permit the court hearing a petition for a writ of certiorari to ex facie ascertain whether there is any error apparent on the record.
A speaking order will at its best be reasonable and at its worst be at least a plausible one.
If reasons for an order are given there will be less scopes for arbitrary or partial exercise of power and the order ex facie will indicate whether extraneous matters were taken into consideration by authority passing the order.
[672D E] M.P. Industries Ltd. vs Union of India and Others ; at 472; Vadacha Mudaliar vs State of Madras, A.I.R. 1952 Madras 276; Bhagat Raja v Union of India and Others, ; @ 320; referred to.
Here, the findings of the inquiry officer are merely his ipse dixit.
No reasons are assigned for reaching the finding and while recapitulating evidence self contradictory positions were adopted that either there was no misconduct or there was some misconduct or double punishment was already imposed.
Rule 27 (19) casts an obligation upon the inquiry officer at the conclusion of the inquiry to prepare a report which must inter alia include the findings on each article of charge and the reasons therefore.
The report is prepared in contravention of the aforementioned rule.
The situation is further compounded by the fact that the disciplinary authority which is none other than Committee of Management of the Corporation while accepting the report of the inquiry officer which itself was defective did not assign any 652 reasons for accepting the report of the inquiry officer.
Further sub rule (ii) of Rule 35 provides amongst others that the Appellate Authority shall consider whether the findings are justified or whether the penalty is excessive or inadequate and pass appropriate orders within three months of the date of appeal.
In order to ascertain whether the rule is complied with, the order of the appellate authority must show that it took into consideration the findings the quantum of penalty and other relevant considerations.
There is no material for showing that the appellate authority acted in consonance with its obligation under Rule 35.
[672E H, 673A D E] 9:3.
Therefore, the order of removal passed by the Disciplinary Authority is illegal and invalid for the reasons (i) that the action is thoroughly arbitrary and is violative or article 14; (ii) that the alleged misconduct does not constitute misconduct within the 1975 Rules; (iii) that the inquiry officer himself found that punishment was already imposed for the alleged misconduct by withholding the salary and the appellant could not be exposed to double jeopardy; and (iv) that the findings of the inquiry officer are unsupported by reasons and the order of the Disciplinary Authority as well as the Appellate Authority suffer from the same vice.
[673H. 674A B] 10:1.
Once the order of removal from service is held to be illegal and invalid and the appellant being in public employment, the necessary declaration must follow that he continues to be in service uninterruptedly.
Ordinarily, it is well settled that if termination of service is held to be bad, no other punishment in the guise of denial of back wages can be imposed and therefore, it must as a necessary corollary follow that he will be entitled to all the back wages on the footing that he has continued to be in service uninterruptedly.
If the appellant had procured an alternative employment he would not be entitled to wages and salary from the respondent But it is equally true that an employee depending on salary for his survival when he is exposed to the vagaries of the court litigation cannot hold on to a slender distant hope of judicial process coming to his rescue and not try to survive by accepting an alternative employment, a hope which may turn out to be a mirage.
Therefore, the appellant was perfectly justified in procuring an alternative employment in order to keep his body and soul together as also to bear the expenses of litigation to vindicate his honour, integrity and character.
[674B G] 10:2.
However, in the instant case, the appellant should be paid 50% of the back wages for the rest of the period during which he remained unemployed.
This is so because the conduct of the appellant cannot be said to be entirely in consonance with corporate culture.
As a highly placed officer he was bound to strengthen the corporate culture and he should have acted within the spirit of the regulations both for house building advance and conveyance advance, which are devised to help the employees.
There has been lapse in totally complying with these regulations by the appellant though it neither constitutes misconduct to attract a penalty nor substantially good enough for initiation of disciplinary inquiry.
[675A C] 653
