Section 3 (2) (d) Whether regulating includes in the context prohibiting.
Interpretation of statutes Whether some words may be used in different senses in the Same sentence.
Words and phrases Regulation and Prohibiting Meaning and scope of.
Due to failure of monsoon in the years 1981 82, there was a steep fall in production of paddy and it became necessary for the State Government of Tamil Nadu to build up its buffer stocks for distribution through the public distribution system throughout the State.
ID the circumstances, the State Government had no other alternative but to introduce a monopoly procurement scheme with a view to procure the maximum stock of paddy by banning purchase by traders.
This was in addition to compulsory levy on dealers of paddy and rice to the extent of 50% under cl. 5 (1) of the Tamil Nadu Paddy & Rice (Regulation of Trade) Order, 1974.
1029 In exercise of the powers conferred under section 3 of the read with the Government of India, Ministry of Agriculture (Department or Food) Order GSR 800 dated Juno 9, 1978 issued under section 5 of the Act with the prior concurrence of the Government of India, the State Government accordingly promulgated the Tamil Nadu Paddy (Restriction on Movement) Order, 1982 on October 22, 1982.
Clause 3 (1A) of the Order prohibited transport, movement or otherwise carrying of paddy outside the State by road or rail or otherwise except under and in accordance with the conditions of a permit issued by an officer authorised in that behalf.
By GOMS No. 293 dated May 11, 1982 the State Government introduced sub cl.
(IA) to cl. 3 of the Order which prohibited transport; movement or otherwise carrying of paddy outside places notified by cl. 3 of the Order by road or rail or otherwise.
Thereafter, on June 20, 1983, the State Government made a further amendment to the newly inserted cl. 3 (IA) which clamped a complete ban on transport, movement or otherwise carrying of paddy outside the Thanjavur District, Chidambaram and Kattumannarkoil Taluks in South Arcot District and Musiri, Kulithalai, Lalgudi and Tiruchirapalli Talulks in Tiruchirapalli District.
The appellant along with other traders assailed the constitutional validity of cl. 3 (IA) of the Order, as amended, which placed a complete ban on transport, movement or otherwise carrying of paddy outside the Thanjavur district and the aforesaid Taluks in South Arcot and Tiruchirapalli districts as being violative of articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 301 of the Constitution The High Court repelled the contentions and dismissed the writ petitions.
In the appeal, the appellant contended that the impugned cl. 3 (IA) of the Order was ultra vires the State Government on two grounds, namely: (1) The delegation of a specific power under s 3 (2) (d) of the Act to State Government by the aforesaid notification dated June 9, 1978 issued by the Central Government under section 5 of the Act to regulate storage, transport, distribution, disposal etc.
Of an essential commodity, in relation to foodstuffs, does not carry with it The general power of the Central Government under sub section
(1) of section 3 to regulate or prohibit the production, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.
And (2) That the word regulating ' in cl.
(d) of section 3 (2) of the Act does not take in 'prohibiting ' and as such there cannot be a total prohicition on transport, movement or otherwise carrying of paddy out of the areas in question under (d) but only regulation of such activities in the course of trade and commerce by grant of licences or permits.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Sub s (2) of section 3 of the offers no fresh powers but is merely illustrative of the general poweres by sub section
(1) of section 3 without exhausting the subjects in relation to such powers can be exercised.
Although cl.
(d) of sub section
(2) of section 3 with a specific power, the general power to issue the impugned 1030 order flows from the provisions of sub section
(1) of s.3 which stands delegated to the State Government by virtue of the notification issued under section S of the Act.
[1042H; 1043B] Santosh Kumar Jain vs The State, [I951] SCR 303, and Emperor vs Sibnath Banerjee, LR [1945]] 72 IA 241, followed.
Nanalal Navalnathji Yogi vs Collector of Bulsar & Ors.
AIR 1981 Guj.
approved.
Atulya Kumar vs Director of Procurement & Supply, AIR 1953 Cal.
548, approved.
_ Tarakdas Mukherjee vs State of West Bengal, and Lila Biswas vs State of West Bengal, , approved.
Sujan Singh vs State of Haryana, AIR 1998 Pun, 363, State of Uttar Pradesh vs Suraj Bhan, AIR 1972 All. 401 and Bejoy Kumar Routrai vs State of Orissa AIR [1976] Orr.
138, overruled.
The word 'regulation ' cannot have any rigid or inflexible meaning as to exclude 'prohibiting '.
It is difficult to define the word 'regulate ' as having any precise meaning.
It has different shades of meaning and must take its colour from the context in which it is used having regard to the purpose and object of the legislation, and the Court must necessarily keep in view the mischief which the legislature seeks to remedy.
The question essentially is one of degree and it is impossible to fix any definite point at which 'regulation ' ends and prohibition ' begins.
The power to regulate does not necessarily include the power to prohibit, and ordinarily the word 'regulate ' is not synonymous with the word 'prohibit '.
This is true in a general sense and in the sense that mere regulation is not the same as absolute prohibition.
But the power to regulate carries with it full power over the thing subject to regulation and in obsence of restrictive words, the power must be regarded as plenary over the entire subject.
It implies the power to rule, direct and control and involves the adoption of a rule or guiding principle to be followed or the making of a rule with respect to the subject to be regulated.
The power to regulate implies the power to check and may imply the power to prohibit under certain circumstances, as where the best or only efficatious regulation consists of suppression.
[1045G H; 1046E F Narendra Kumar vs Union of India, Slaitery vs Naylor, LR [1888] AC 446 and Municipal Corporation of the City of Toronto vs Virgo, LR , Corpus Juris Secundum, vol.
76 at p. 611 and Webster s Third New International Dictionary, vol II, p 1913 and Thorter Oxford Dictionary, vol.
II, 3rd edn., p. 1784, referred to State of Mysore vs H. Sanjeeviah, ; , distinguish and limited.
1031 The source of power to issue an order under cl.
(d) of sub section
(2) of A section 3 of the Act being relatable to the general powers of the Central Government under sub section
(1) of section 3, there is no justification for giving a restricted meaning to the word 'regulating, ' in cl.
(d) of sub section
(2) of section 3 of the Act so as not to take in 'prohibiting '.
A word may be used in two different senses in the same section.
[1050B C] The Act is a piece of socio economic legislation and its predominant object is to provide in the interests of general public, for the control of the production, supply and distribution of, and trade and commerce in, certain essential commodities.
Such control can be exercised in a variety of ways otherwise than by placing compulsory levy on the producers, for example, by fixing a controlled price for foodstuffs, by placing a limit on the stock of foodstuffs to be held by a wholesale dealer, commission agent or retailer by placing sales except in certain specified manners etc.
All these arc nothing but regulatory measures.
Placing a ban on inter State or inter State movement or export of foodstuffs is one of the ways to regulate and control and such ban prevents the spiral rise in prices of such foodstuffs by artificial creation of shortage by unscrupulous traders.
The various Control Orders issued by the Central Government under sub section
(1) of s 3 of the Act or by the State Governments under section 3 read with section 5 have introduced a system of checks and balances to achieve she object of the legislation i.e. to ensure equitable distribution and availability of essential commodities at fair prices.
Special public interest in an industry e. g. that it is engaged in the production of a commodity vitally essential to the community, may justify the regulation of its production, supply and distribution and its trade and commerce, provided such regulation is not arbitrary and has a rational nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
[1048C D; 1047F H; 1048A] If one part of the country or of a State is faced with a famine or even acute shortage of foodstuffs.
it is not unreasonable for the Government to acquire foodstuffs from the surplus areas and distribute the same in areas where they are most needed.
Since there was steep fall in production of paddy due to failure of monsoons the State Government of Tamil Nadu was justified not only to reimpose compulsory levy on the producers of paddy to the extent of 50% but also to introduce a scheme for a monopoly purchase of paddy by the Government with a view to build up its buffer stock for distribution through the public distribution system throughout: the State.
[1049E G] State of Tamil Nadu vs Hind Stone & Ors.
[19811 2 SCC 205, C. K Krishnan vs State of Tamil Nadu [1975] 2 SCR 715, Krishan Lal Praveen kumar & Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., , Suraj Mal Kailash Chand & Ors, vs Union of India & Ors., and Bishamber Dayal Chandra Mohan & Ors.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
, ; , relied on. 1032
