The respondents plaintiffs gave a lease of an open plot lo the appellant defendant for a period of 10 years for the purpose of running a flour mill after making necessary construction thereon at a yearly rent.
In the lease deed there was a clause for the renewal of the term, and also that if it was not renewed, the lessors were given the right to recover vacant possession on removal of construction at the expiry of the initial term.
There was no renewal of the term on the expiry of 10 years lease period and the appellant defendant was permitted to bold over.
Later by a notice nuder section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act the respondent called upon the appellant defendant to vacate and hand over vacant possession As the notice was not complied with a suit in ejectment was filed against the a appellant defendant The trial court negatived all the daffiness that were raised by the appellant defendant and decreed the suit for ejectment in favour of the respondents plaintiffs.
The appellant defendant challenged the decres by an appeal to the District Court and while the appeal was pending the State by a Notification dated 26th March, 1980 applied Part II of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 to the village where the suit premises were situated.
The appellant defendant with the permission of the court raised the contention in the appeal that he was entitled to the protection of Part II of the Act and since none of the grounds on which eviction could have been made under Part II had been made out by the respondents plaintiffs they were not entitled to recover possession.
This contention was refuted ml behalf of The respondents plaintiffs on the ground that in view of the proviso to s 50 of the Act and particularly the latter part thereof Part II of the Act had no retrospective operation so far as 1052 pending appeals were concerned and such appeals had to be disposed of as if Part II of the Act was not applicable.
The Assistant Judge took the view that the proviso to section 50 read with the latter part thereof expressly enacted that pending appeals arising out of decrees or orders passed before the coming into operation of the Act had to be disposed of as if the Act had not been passed and therefore the appellant defendant was not entitled to any protection as claimed by him and the respondents plaintiffs were entitled to the decree for possession and dismissed the appeal.
The second appeal of the appellant defendant to the High Court was summarily dismissed.
In the appeal to this Court on the question: whether a pending appeal would be governed by the Bombay Rents, Hotel Rates and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947 Upon the Part II of the Act being made applicable in the area in which the suit premises were situated during its pendency .
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Having regard to the two decisions in Chandrasingh Manibhai and others vs Surjit lal Ladhamal Chhaabda and others, and Shah Bhojraj Kuverji Oil Mills and ginning factory v, Subhash Chandra Yograj Sinha; , it is clear that sub secs.
(2) and (3) of section 12 are prospective but sub sec.
(1) thereof is retrospective in operation.
[1056B] 2.
By the Bombay Act 3 of 1949 three changes were made by the legislature, (i) it deleted the words other than execution proceedings and appeals" appearing in brackets from the proviso and inserted a new para graph at the end of that proviso dealing separately with execution proceedings and appeals, (ii) it inserted the words 'or shall be continued in such Courts as the case may be" in that proviso, and (iii) it deleted the word "thereupon" from the proviso.
the object of amendments made at (ii) and (iii) was to remove the judicial confusion caused by Courts taking conducting views on the question whether the Act (1947 Act) applied only to transferred cases and not others.
By the amendment made at i i) what war there in the body of the proviso was relegated to a new separate paragraph and no change was effected except that the effect of the wide expression ' all suits and proceedings" was re emphsised and further clarified by using the words "execution proceedings and appeals arising out orders, passed before the coming into operation of this Act" in the new paragraph.
[1060G H; 1061B C] 3.
(i) The substantive part of section 50, the proviso thereto and the new paragraph added at the end of the proviso has to be read as a whole to know the true nature and scope of the proviso.
[1059B] (ii) Under the substantive part of section 50 on the coming into force of 11 the Act (the 1947 Act) the two earlier enactments (the 1939 Act and the 1053 1944 Act) stand repealed.
If nothing more was said then section 7 of the A Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904 would have come into play and would have had the effect of saving the legal proceedings or remedies in respect of any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the repealed enactments.
In other words, all suits and proceedings including execution proceedings and appeals arising therefrom which were pending on the relevant date and which were governed by the provisions of the repealed Acts would have been saved and the rights and obligations of the parties thereto would have been worked out under the relevant provisions of the repealed Acts.
But the proviso which provides for special savings clearly indicates that pending suits and original proceedings in which decrees and orders have not been passed alone should be governed by the provisions of the Act and not execution proceedings and appeals arising out of such decrees and orders passed before the coming into operation of the Act.
[1061E G; 1062A B] (iii) The proviso was and has been enacted to provide for special savings which suggests that it has not been introduced merely with a view to qualify or create exceptions to what is contained in the substantive part of section 50.
Secondly, it does appear that the Legislature while framing the Act (the 1947 Act) was enacting certain provisions for the benefit of tenants which conferred larger benefits on them than were in fact conferred by the earlier enactments which were repealed, this is clear if regard be had to the wider definition of the expression tenant ' adopted in section S (II) and therefore, the Legislature thought it advisable that in regard to pending suits and original proceedings of the description or categories specified therein, in which the decrees and orders were not passed the provisions of the Act should be made applicable.
It is with this intention that the proviso to section 50 has been enacted in the manner it has been done.
[1062C E] (iv) While extending the larger benefits of the 1947 Act to tenants the Legislature has used a very wide expression, namely, "all suits and proceedings between a landlord and tenant" so as to include within that category suits and proceedings filed under the repealed Acts as also under the general law or Transfer of Property Act [1062F] (v) The proviso read with the separate paragraph added thereto will have to be regarded as an independent provision enacting a substantive law of its own by way of providing for special savings.
[1062G] Shankarlal Ramrotan vs Pandharinath Vishnu, 53 Bom.
L. R. 319, approved.
In the instant case, an appeal (arising out of a decree passed in a suit filed under the Transfer of Property Act) was pending when Part II of the Act was made applicable to village Kalwada, (where the suit property was situated) would be directly covered by the proviso read with the separate paragraph added there(o and the appeal was liable to be decided and disposed of as if the 1941 Act had not been passed, that is it had to 1054 be disposed of in accordance with the law that was then applicable to it.
The Assistant Judge as well as the High Court were therefore right in coming to the conclusion that the appellant defendant was not entitled to any protection of the 1947 Act as claimed by him.
[1063B Dl
