Rule 312 of the Railway Establishment Manual provides that seniority of railway servants transferred on their own request from one railway to another should be allowed below that of the existing confirmed officiating railway servants in the relevant grade.
To explain the purport and effect of r. 312, the Railway Board ' issued a Circular No. 1565A dated January 31, 1950 which provided that on transfer at the employee 's own request his position should be at the bottom of the seniority list of all permanent employees of his grade, if he is permanent and at the bottom of the whole list of permanent and temporary employees if he is temporary.
The Railway Board 's subsequent Circular dt.
31st Dec. 1966 sought to clarify that the term 'officiating ' in Rule 312 includes temporary staff as well.
The appellant, who was holding a substantive post of a clerk in the Northern Eastern Railway was transferred on October 15, 1958 on his own request to The South eastern Railway and was posted at the Sealdah Division.
He was however placed below the temporary staff, namely, respondents 7 to 45 in the seniority list of the clerks in the Sealdah Division prepared he the respondent Southern Eastern Railway in 1967.
After rejection of his two representations in the year 1967 and a reminder to the Chief Personnel Officer dated December 21, 1973 against the wrong fixation of his inter se seniority, he filed a writ petition in the High Court on 30th April 1975 challenging the said seniority list.
The learned Single Judge held that in pursuance of Rule 312, the relevant seniority of the appellant was governed by the Railway BOARD 'S Circular No. 1565A and not by its subsequent Circular dated December 31, 1966, and ordered the Railway Administration to refix his seniority below all permanent 19 ent and officiating clerks on the date of his transfer in the Sealdah Division, but above the temporary clerks in that Division with consequential benefits.
On appeal by the respondent the Division Bench upheld the view of the learned single Judge but, observed that due to inordinate delay on the part of the appellant in moving the court, there was no justification for interfering with the promotions already made of respondents No. 7 to 45 and ordered that he should be placed immediately below the remaining respondents.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) It would appear from the facts that there was no delay, much less inordinate delay, on the part of the appellant in filing the petition under article 226 of the Constitution for the protection of his right as to inter se seniority.
In fact, he had made three representations in the matter but without any redress [22E F] (2) There can be DO doubt on the terms of r. 312 of the Manual road with Railway Board 's Circular No. 1565A dated January 31, 1950 that the appellant had to be placed below all the existing confirmed and officiating staff in the relevant grade, irrespective of the date of his confirmation or the length of his service.
He was not governed by the Railway Board 's Circular dated December 31, 1966 on the date of his transfer.
[23H; 24A] (3) According to the ordinary connotation, the word 'officiating ' is generally used when a servant having held one post permanently or substantively, is appointed to a post in a higher rank, but not permanently or substantively, while still retaining his lien on his substantive post i.e. officiating in That post till his Confirmation.
In contrast, the word 'temporary ' usually denotes a person appointed in the civil service for the first time and the appointment is not permanent but temporary i.e. for the time being, with no right to the post.
Therefore, the Railway Board 's interpretation in the aforesaid Circular dated December 31, 1966 of the 'officiating ' in r. 312 of the Railway Establishment Manual, as including both officiating as well as temporary staff, was apparently wrong.
[24D E] (4) The Railway Board 's Circular dated October ],1964 also provides that if a person has been promoted not on the date on which he should have been promoted to some administrative error then the employee should assigned correct seniority vis a vis his juniors already promoted irrespective of the date of promotion and the the pay of such employee in higher grade on promotion be fixed proforma at the stage which he would have reached if he bad been promoted at the proper time Was no reason for the Railway Administration to have deprived the appellant of the benefit of the aforesaid circular, particularly in view of an earlier decision of the High Court in Lal Mohan Paul 's case.
[24H; 25A B] Lal Mohan Paul vs The General Manager, Eastern Railway, Calcutta & Ors Civil Rule No. 620 (W)/70 dated April 23 1974 approved. 20
