The petitioners 1 Assistants are covered by the Central Secretariat Service Rules, 1962 (Rules, for short).
They challenged under article 32 the correctness of the Select List for the grade of Section Officers for the years 1978, 1979 and 1980 and the common seniority list dated April 26, 1979 as also the provisional supplementary list of Assistants on the ground: (i) that the quota rule had broken down as direct recruitment had not been made in many years and on account of such failure, fixation of seniority with reference to the rotational method was not available to be followed; and (ii) that Select List as contemplated by the Rules had not been framed for quite a long period and in the absence of such a select list framed in time, select lists of 1978, 1979 and 1980 prepared without following the criterion of length of service of officers in the grade of Assistants was not only unfair and arbitrary worked out prejudicially to the petitioners.
The petitioners prayed that the select list and seniority list be republished on the basis of length continuous service in the grade of Assistants and promotion to the grade of Section Officers be granted from the dates when Assistants junior to them were promoted as Section Officers.
On the other hand, Respondent No. 1 Union of India argued that there had been regular direct recruitment into the Service in all years except only two, viz., 1966 and 1970.
Thus, the quota rule has, therefore, really not broken down as pleaded by the petitioners and the Rules, having contemplated a scheme of direct recruitment and promotion, quota and rota have to work together and since the manner of fixation of seniority is covered by statutory rules, the petitioners are, not entitled to claim determination of seniority on the basis of length of service.
272 Dismissing the Writ Petitions, ^ HELD:1 (i) It will be appropriate if a detailed reference to the Rules is made in order to ascertain the Scheme.
The Rules contemplate that there shall be separate cadres in respect of Section Officers ' grade and the Assistants ' Grade and these shall be constituted for each Ministry or Office specified in Column 2 of the first schedule.
Sub rule (6) of Rule 13 prescribes that 50% of the vacancies in the Assistants ' grade in any cadre is to be filled by direct recruitment on the results of the competitive examinations to be conducted by the Commission from time to time and the remaining vacancies are to be filled by substantive appointment of persons included in the select list for the Assistants ' grade in that cadre.
Such appointments are to be made in the order of seniority in the select list except when for reasons to be recorded in writing, a person is not considered fit for appointment in his turn.
When difficulties were experienced in working out the Rule, two provision were added to sub rule(6).
The first proviso provided that substantive vacancies in any cadre reserved for direct recruitment on the appointed day against which no direct recruits have been appointed may be filled by substantive appointments made after the date of commencement of the Central Secretariat Service (Third Amendment) Rules, 1970, of persons included in the Select List for the Assistants ' grade in that cadre.
The second proviso was to the effect that if sufficient number of candidates are not available for filling up the vacancies in a cadre in any year by direct recruitment as aforesaid, the unfilled vacancies in the direct recruitment quota in that cadre shall be filled by the substantive appointment of persons included in the Select List for the Assistants ' Grade in that cadre.
" Sub rule (6)(a) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in sub rule (6), the substantive vacancies reserved for direct recruitment as on 30th June 1979 on each cadre against which no direct recruits have been appointed till that date plus 50% of the number of such substantive vacancies n the cadre may be filled by substantive appointments made after the date of commencement of Central Secretariat Service (Third Amendment) Rules, 1979, of persons included in the select list for the Assistants ' grade in that cadre." [276D; 278C D; H; 279A] 1(ii).
Rule 18, sub rule(3) makes provision for the rule in the matter of fixation of inter se seniority for the Assistants ' grade.
Direct recruits are to rank inter se in the order of merit in which they are placed in the competitive examination on the result of which recruitment is effected.
Recruits of an earlier examination are to rank senior to those of a later examination, Persons appointed substantively to the grade from the select list for that grade shall rank inter se according to the order in which they are so appointed and the inter se seniority between direct recruits and persons substantively appointed to the grade for that grade shall be regulated in accordance with the provision made in the Fourth Schedule.
Clause 3 of Regulation 3 in the Fourth Schedule provides that direct recruits to a grade and persons substantively appointed to the Grade from the Select List for the Grade shall be assigned seniority inter se according to the quotas of substantive vacancies in the Grade reserved for direct recruitment and the appointment of persons included in the Select List, respectively.
The proviso to Clause 3 of Regulation 3 provides that persons appointed substantively in accordance with the provi 273 sions of sub rule (6) of rule 13 to the Grade from the Select List in any cadre in any year, against direct recruitment vacancies for which direct recruits are not available shall be placed en bloc below the last direct recruit appointed in that year irrespective of the quotas reserved for direct recruits and persons included in the Select List.
[279F G; 279H; 280A] 2.
(i) The Rules have held the field for 22 years now.
During this period direct recruitment had not been made only in two years being 1966 and ]970 Though in the writ petitions a general stand had been adopted that direct recruitment had not been made in several years, after the counter affidavit was filled and it was emphatically asserted that excepting in these two years direct recruitment had been made in other years, there has been no challenge to that assertion.
There is no doubt that quota and rota have got to go hand in hand and if the quota is not properly adhered to, the rota System must fall.
In fact, the scheme is such that it can operate in an appropriate way only when recruitment is effected through both the processes as envisaged.
In the instant case, the difficulty was experienced in working out the process with the quota fixed by the Rules had not been adhered to for one reason or the other and vacancies were being carried forward for being filled up in future years.
This situation necessitated insertion of the first proviso to sub rule (6) or rule 13 in August 197() and the other proviso in 1977 as also sub rule (6) (a) in 1979.
The grievance voiced in these writ petitions obviously relates to a period prior to the modification of the scheme.
[280H; 281A D] 2 (ii) Unless there is any serious failure in implementing the Rules and grave injustice is done to some individuals or a group of officers, it would not be proper to interfere with the working of the scheme and dislocate the inter se seniority of the officers in these grades.
No mala fides has been pleaded nor has any grave injustice been established in the writ petitions.
At the most a case of improper working of the scheme with reference to some of the officers has been alleged.
Hari splitting arguments, if accepted, might indicate that some of the petitioners have not been promoted to the grade of Section Officers as and when due.
This Court is of the view that if there has been substantial compliance in implementing the scheme under the Rules, judicial interference is not called for.
[282B C] Dr. G. Marulasiddaiah vs Dr. T.G. Siddapparadhya & Ors. ; , N.K. Chauhan & Ors vs State of Gujarat State of U.P. & Ors.
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 449 & V.T. Khanzode & Ors.
vs Reserve Bank of India & Anr. ; referred to.
S.B. Patwardhan & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors.
; & A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors ; held inapplicable.
