The appellant Pratibha Rani, the estranged wife of the first respondent Suraj Kumar, filed a criminal complaint against her husband, his father, his three brothers and a brother in law in the court of the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana, alleging; (i) that she was married to the first respondent at Ludhiana on 4 2. 1972 according to Hindu rites and customs; (ii) that the aforesaid persons, namely, father, brothers and brother in law of the first respondent attended the marriage and demanded dowry from the appellants ' parents as consideration for the marriage; (iii) that the dowry articles mentioned in the list worth Rs 60,000 in the form of gold ornaments, clothes and other valuables were given and entrusted to the respondents and four others at Ludhiana at the time of 'doli ' on 5. 2. 1972 in the presence of Kapur Chand Jain and six others; (iv) that all the six respondents, from the time of marriage started teasing, harassing and beating her and they kept her without even food to extract more money from her parents; (v) that they turned out the appellant with her children in the beginnings of 1977 (vi) that after a great deal of persuasion and intervention by Panchayatdars, respondent No. I came 192 to Ludhiana and took her to his house, after giving an undertaking in writing on 21.
6. 1977 not to misbehave with and not to maltreat the appellant and her children; (vii) that after some time all the respondents in the Complaint not only started again maltreating the appellant and misbehaving with her, but also brought the appellant at 4.30 a.m.
On 11.12.80 and left her near Kailash Cinema Chowk, (viii) that the articles (the stridhana) mentioned in the list appended to the complaint were never given by the respondents to the appellant for her use but were retained by them illegally and with the dishonest intention of causing wrongful gain to themselves and wrongful loss to the appellant y (ix) that when the appellants ' husband and his brother, Vishwinder Kumar, respondent 1 and 5 in the complaint, came to Ludhiana on 10 2.81 to attend the proceedings started by the appellant under section 125 Criminal Penal Code her parents persuaded them to return the articles entrusted to them at the time of the marriage but they flatly refused to comply with that demand; (x) that the articles have not been returned in spite of service of notice dated 17.12.81 on the first respondent; (xi) that the respondents in the complaint have dishonestly, thus, converted the articles belonging to the appellant for their use in violation of the instructions of the appellants ' parents given at the time of the marriage to give the articles for the appellants ' use and that (xii) they individually and jointly committed the offences under sections 405 and 406 Indian Penal Code.
Thereupon respondent No. 1 filed Criminal Misc.
Application No. 4876 of 1981 in the Punjab and Haryana High Court under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the criminal proceedings and the complaint taken on file by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ludhiana under section 406 IPC and his order summoning them.
A Learned Single Judge of the High Court relying strongly upon the observations made by a Full Bench of that High Court in Vinod Kumar Sethi & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
reported in allowed the petition and quashed the proceedings arising out of the appellants ' complaint, observing that the allegations in the appellants ' complaint are similar to the one in that case and therefore, fully covered by the ratio in that decision.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD; (Per E.lzal Ali, J.) (on behalf of Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. and himself) 1.1 The stridhan property of a married woman cannot acquire the character of a joint property of both the spouses as soon as she enters her matrimonial home so as to eliminate the application of section 406 IPC.
The position of stridhan of a Hindu married woman 's property during coverture is absolutely clear and unambiguous; she is the absolute owner of such property and can deal with it in any manner she likes She may spend the whole of it or give it away at her own pleasure by gift or will without any reference to her husband.
The entrustment to the husband of the stridhan property is just like something which the wife keeps in a bank and can withdraw any amount when ever she likes without any hitch or hindrance.
Ordinarily, the husband has no right or interest in it with the sole exception that in times of extreme distress, as 193 in famine, illness or the like, the husband can utilize it but he is morally bound to restore it or its value when he is able to do so.
This right is purely personal to the husband and the property so received by him in marriage cannot be proceeded against even in execution of a decree for debt.
[206F; 201D E] Suraj Kumar & Anr. vs Pratibha Rani, Criminal Misc.
Petition No. 4876 of 1981 Punjab & Haryana High Court reversed.
Vinod Kumar Sethi & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Anr.
; Surinder Mohan vs Smt Kiran Saini, 1977 Chandigarh Law Reporter 212; Kailash Vati vs Ayodhya Parkash, ILR (1977) 1 Punjab & Haryana 642 (FB) overruled.
1.2 A perusal of the allegations made in the complaint undoubtedly makes out a positive case of the accused having dishonestly misappropriated the articles handed over to the n in a fiduciary capacity.
To characterise such an entrustment as a joint custody or property given to the husband and the parents is wholly unintelligible.
A perusal of the list reveals that so far as the jewellery and clothes, blouses, nighties and gowns are concerned they could be used only by the wife and were her stridhan.
By no stretch of imagination could it be said that the [ornaments and sarees and other articles mentioned above could also be used by the husband.
If, therefore, despite demands these articles were refused to be returned to the wife by the husband and his parents, it amounted to an offence of criminal breach of trust.
All the ingredients of an offence under section 405 IPC were pleaded and a prima facie case for summoning the accused was made out.
In such circumstances, the complaint should have been given an opportunity by the High Court to prove her case rather than quashing the complaint.
Such an exercise of jurisdiction by the High Court under section 482 Cr.
P. is totally unwarranted by law.
[203A; 204B D; 203B C] 2.1 Criminal law and matrimonial home are not strangers.
Crimes committed in matrimonial home are as much punishable as anywhere else.
The mere factum of the husband and wife living together does not entitle either of them to commit a breach of criminal law and if one does then he/she will be liable for all the consequences of such breach.
In the case of stridhan properly also, the title of which always remains with the wife though possession of the same may sometimes be with the husband or other members of his family, if the husband or any other member of his family commits such an offence, they will be liable to punishment for the offence of criminal breach of trust under sections 405 and 406 IPC.
Just as a newly married woman living in the same house and under the same roof cannot be expected to keep her personal property or belongings like jewellery, clothing, etc.
under her own lock and key thus showing a spirit of distrust to the husband at the very behest, a husband cannot be permitted to cast his covetous eyes on the absolute and personal property of his wife merely because it is kept in his custody, thereby reducing the custody to a legal farce.
On the other hand, even if the personal property of the wife is jointly kept it would be deemed to be expressly or impleedly kept in the custody of the husband and i f he dishonestly misappropriates or refuses 194 to return the same, he is certainly guilty of criminal breach of trust, and there can be no escape from this legal consequence.
[207E G; 208B Cl 2.2 It is an anathema to suppose that when a civil remedy is available, a criminal prosecution is completely barred.
The two remedies are under civil law and the other under criminal law are not mutually exclusive but coextensive and essentially differ in their content and consequences.
Therefore, it cannot be said that, if the husband dishonestly misappropriates the stridhan property of his wife though kept in his custody, that would not par prosecution under section 406 IPC or render the ingredients of section 405 IPC nugatory or abortive.
To say that because the stridhan of a married woman is kept in the custody of her husband no action against him can be taken as no offence is committed is to override and distort the real intent of law.
[208E F] 3.1 Neither section 27 of the nor section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, go to the extent of providing that the claim of a woman on the basis of stridhan is completely abolished, or that a remedy under the criminal law for breach of trust is taken away.
All that the two sections, provide is that if the husband refuses to return the stridhan property of his wife, it will be open to the wife to recover the same by a properly constituted suit.
[204G H; 205A] 3.2 Section 27 of the merely provides for an alternate remedy and does not touch or affect in any way the criminal liability of the husband in case it is proved that he has dishonestly misappropriated the stridhan of his wife.
It cannot also be spelt out from any textbook or the sastric law of the Hindus that these two Acts take away the stridhan right of a woman at the most these Acts merely modify the concept of stridhan.
[205C D] Bhai Sher Jang Singh & Anr.
vs Smt.
Virinder Kaur, approved.
Surinder Mohan vs Smt.
Kiran Saini, 1977 Chandigarh Law Reporter 212 over ruled.
4.1 It is neither appropriate nor apposite to import the concept of partner ship of husband and wife for the simple reason that the concept of partnership is entirely different from that of the husbands ' keeping the stridhan in his custody.
From the definition of the partnership in section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, it is manifest that in a partnership the wife must by some clear and specific act indicate that the stridhan which has been entrusted to the husband is to be used for a partnership business and the losses of the firm, if any, would have to be shared by both.
A pure and simple act of entrustment of the stridhan to the husband does not attract any of the essential ingredients of a partnership as defined in the Partnership Act.
When the essential conditions of a partnership do not exist.
the mere factum of entrustment of stridhan would not constitute any co ownership or legal partnership, There is also no 195 question of the wife, constituting herself a partner with her husband merely by allowing him to keep the article or money in his custody.
Further, in this case, there is, neither any pleading nor any allegation that after her marriage, the appellant transferred all her properties to her husband for carrying on a partnership business in accordance with the provisions of the Partnership Act.
Therefore, a criminal prosecution under section 406 IPC is maintainable.
[209E; 210B C; G; 211C D] Vinod Kumar Sethi & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Anr.
; Surinder Mohan etc.
V. Smt.
Kiran Saini, 1977 Chandigarh Law Reporter 212; Kailash Vati vs Ayodhya Parkash, ILR (1973) 1 Punjab & Haryana, P 612; Kailash Nath Agarwal & Ors.
vs Prem Pal Agarwal & Anr.
case No. 676 of 1981 connected with Crl.
case No. 2753 of 1981 decided on 22.12.83 Allahabad High Court overruled.
In the instant case, however, there is neither any allegation nor anything in the complaint to show that when the wife entered her matrimonial home she had entrusted property to her husband so as to make him part owner of the same.
Therefore, the question Or the husband having dominion over the property does not at all arise.
In fact the wife has nothing to do With the partnership, if any and the husband is a pure and simple custodian of the property and cannot use the Same for any purposed without her consent.
[210E F] The concept of stridhan property of a married woman becoming joint property of both the spouses as soon as she enters her matrimonial home and continues to be so until she remains there or even if there is a break in the matrimonial alliance, is in direct contravention of Hindu law of Sadayika which has been administered since more than a century by High Court, Privy Council and also the Supreme Court.
[212C D] 4.2 The Full Bench decision in Vinod Kumar 's case would not only render the provisions of section 406 IPC inapplicable and nugatory even if the husband has the audacity or the importunity of refusing to return the stridhan of his wife, but also be in direct contravention of a long course of decisions of Supreme Court on the ingredients of section 405 IPC.
[212A B] By a pure and simple figment of the fertile imaginations, the Judges in the Vinod Kamat 's case seem to have rewritten the law of criminal breach of trust contained in sections 405 and 406 IPC so as to carve out an imaginary exception to the application of the Penal Code more tragic consequence of the view taken by the High Court is that even if there is a break in the matrimonial alliance and the wife wants her husband to return her exclusive property and he refuses lo return even then the provisions of section 406 IPC would not apply.
It is an extreme travesty of justice for a court to say that whenever a married demands her stridhan property from her husband she should be driven to the dilatory process of a civil court and her husband would be debarred from being prosecuted by a criminal court.
By a strange and ingenious process of holding that such an act of a husband does not attract the provisions of the 196 Penal Code, as the property being joint there is no question of the husband being a trustee or holding the same in a fiduciary capacity.
Such a view is not only contradictory but what the High Court has said before regarding the applicability of section 27 of the and the nature of stridhan is also neither in consonance with logic and reason nor with the express provisions of the Penal Code and seems to be inspired by a spirit of male chauvinism so as to exclude the husband from criminal liability merely because his wife has refused to live in her matrimonial home.
The High Court, functioning in a civilised and socialistic society such as ours cannot play such a havoc with judicial interpretation of an important branch of law.
The High Court cannot make a complete volte face by holding that these very properties after marriage become joint property of both the spouses.
The High Court has not realised that the theory or philosophy of matrimonial home propounded by it stands directly contradicted by its own observations.
[212D H; 213A; H; 214A] 4.3 The fundamental core of the offence of criminal breach of trust is that a property must be entrusted and the dominion of the property should be given to the trustee.
In the present case, all these conditions, even according to the findings of the High Court though not its conclusions are clearly established.
[217C] Chelloor Manaklal Narayan Ittiravi Nambudiri vs State of Travancore; AIR 1953 SC478; Jaswantrai Manilal Akhaney vs State of Bombay; , ; State of Gujarat vs Jaswantlal Nathalal ; ; Sushil Kumar Gupta vs Joy Shankar Bhattacharjee; , ; Superintendent [4] SCC 230 referred to.
Harihar Prasad Dubey v Tulsi Das Mundhra & Ors.
AIR 1949 Calcutta 207; Akharbhai Nasarali vs Md. Hussain Bhai AIR 1961 MP 37; Basudeb Patra vs Kana.
Lal Haldar, AIR 1949 Calcutta 207, Bhai Sher Jang Singh and Anr.
vs Smt.
Virinder Kaur, 1979 Crl.
L J. 493; Avtar Singh and Anr vs Kirpal Kaur, Crl.
No. 2144 of 1979 and Cr l Misc.
No. 2145 of 1979 approved.
Vinod Kumar Sethi & Ors.
v State of Punjab and Anr.
ATR 1982 Punjab 372; Surinder Mohan etc.
vs Smt.
Kiran Saini, 1977 Chandigarh Law Reporter 212; Kailash Nath Agarwal & Ors vs Prem Pal Agarwal & Anr.
Case No. 676 of 1981 connected with Crl.
case No. 2753 of 1981, Allahabad High Court: Kailash Vati vs Ayodhya Parkash, ILR (1977) 1 Punjab d: Haryana 642 overruled.
For the purpose of exercising its power under section 482 Cr. PC to quash a First Information Report or a complaint the High Court would have to proceed entirely on the basis of the allegations made in the complaint or the documents accompanying the same per se.
It has no jurisdiction to examine the correctness or otherwise of the allegations.
In case no offence is committed on the allegation and the ingredients of section 405 and 406 IPC are not made out, the High Court would be justified in quashing the proceedings.
In the present case, the allegations are both clear, specific and unambiguous and 197 therefore, the complaint should have been given a chance to prove her case.
It is, of course open to the accused at the trial to take whatever defences that were open to him or her but that stage had not yet come and therefore, the High Court was totally ill advised to speculate on the merits of the case at that stage and quash the proceedings.
Since all the facts stated in the complaint constituted an offence under section 406 IPC, the appellant cannot be denied the right to prove her case at the trial by pre empting it the very behest by the order passed by the High Court.
[223D H; 224D E ] Vinod Kumar Sethi & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Anr, , over led.
L.V. Jadhav vs Shakarrao Abasaheb Pawar & Ors.
AIR 1983 SC 1219; Smt.
Nagawa vs Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi & ors.
[1976] Supp.
SCR 123 applied.
OBSERVATION (It is surprising to find that so deeply drowned and inherently engrossed are some of the High Courts in the concept of matrimonial home qua the stridhan property of a married woman that they simply refuse to believe that such properties are meant for the exclusive use of the wife and could also be legally entrusted to the husband or his relations.
Thus, if the husband or his relations misappropriate the same and refuse to hand it over to the wife and convert them to their own use and even though these facts arc clearly alleged in a complaint for an offence under section 405/406 IPC, some courts take the view that the complaint is not maintainable.
Thus even when clear and specific allegations are made in the complaint that such properties were entrusted to the husband, they refuse to believe these hard facts and brush them aside on the ground that they are vague, and completely shut their eyes to the fact that the husband could also be guilty under section 405/406 IPC in view of the clear allegations made in the complaint.
In other words, the High Courts simply refuse to believe that there can be any such entrustment and even if it is so, no offence is committed.
Such an approach amounts to a serious distortion of the criminal law, resulting in perpetrating grave and substantial miscarriage of justice to the wife at the hands of the High Courts.
The Supreme Court cannot continuance such a wrong and perverse approach.) [224G H, 225A C] Per A. Varadarajan, J. (dissenting) 1.1 In the absence of a separate agreement and specific entrustment by the wife to the husband and or his relations and vice versa of the property of the husband to the wife and or her relation, it would not be possible to draw an inference of entrustment of custody or dominion over the property of one spouse to the other and his or her relations so as to attract the stringent provisions of section 406 IPC.
The offence of criminal break of trust is cognizable and non bailable and punishable with imprisonment for a term of three years or with fine or with both.
In the absence of such a separate agreement for specific entrustment of the property of either spouse the appropriate remedy would appear to be by way of a civil suit where there is scope for the parties to the marriage coming together at the instance of relations, elders and well wishers and patching up their differences.
[241G H; 242A] 198 1.2 Entertaining complaints of the irate wife or husband against the husband or wife without even an allegation of a specific and separate agreement constituting entrustment of the property of the wife of the husband would have disastrous effects and consequences on the peace and harmony which ought to prevail in matrimonial homes.
[242B]
