For the assessment years 1961 62 and 1962 63, the corresponding valuation dates of which were March 31, 1961 and March 31, 1962, assessment orders were made under the Wealth Tax Act on March 24, 1961 and March 23, 1962 respectively while the notice of demands were served on the assessee on April 11, 1961 and April 11, 1962 respectively.
Against the said notices of demand the assessee preferred appeals on May 9, 1961 and May 9, 1962 respectively.
For the purpose of determining the assessee 's net wealth, the assessee 's claim for a deduction of certain sums representing the estimated liabilities on account O? ' income tax and wealth tax was rejected in both assessments by the Wealth Tax Officer.
On appeal by the assessee, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner of Wealth Tax allowed a part of the claim.
In appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, the Revenue contended that since the assessee had disputed the wealth tax liability of Rs. 22,679/ in respect of the assessment year 1960 61 and the sum of Rs. 39,692/ in respect of the assessment year 1961 62, he was not entitled to a deduction of the same, being barred by reason of the provisions of section 2(m) (iii) (a) of the Wealth Tax Act.
The Tribunal rejected the said contention and held that section 2 (m)(a) was not attracted as the tax had not become payable on the relevant valuation dates.
The Wealth Tax References made at the instance of the Revenue were decided in favor of the assessee by the High Court of Gujarat by its common judgement in Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Kantilal Manilal reported in The present appeal by special leave arises therefrom.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 In order to invoke the bar prescribed by Section 2(m) (iii) (a) of the Wealth Tax Act it is necessary for the Revenue to establish that both 298 requirements therein are satisfied, that is to say, that an amount of the tax is outstanding on the valuation date and further that the amount is claimed by the assessee in an appeal as not being payable by him.
[302E F] 1.2 An amount of tax is outstanding if it is payable and has remained unpaid.
In other words, if there is a debt due and there has been no payment of the debt.
There are three stages in respect of an income tax liability.
The tax liability comes into existence on the last day o f the previous year relevant to the assessment year.
Thereafter when the assessment proceedings take place an assessment order is made quantifying the assessable income and determining the tax payable.
Thereupon, a notice of demand is served for payment of the tax, and the tax then becomes payable and a debt becomes due to the Revenue.
A survey of the provisions of the Wealth Tax Act contained in Sections 14 to 17 and Section 30 makes it clear that in all material respects the scheme of the Wealth Tax Act is in this regard substantially, the same as that incorporated in the Income Tax Act.
The notice of demand requiring payment of the tax, interest or penalty is issued pursuant to Section 30 of the Act.
If the amount remains unpaid within the periods specified in the notice the amount of the tax is said to be outstanding [303D F] 1.3 Section 2(m)(iii)(a) of the Wealth Tax Act comes into play only after a demand for payment of tax has been made.
The clause, read in its entirety, speaks of a debt owed by the assessee represented by an amount of tax "payable in consequence of any order" passed under the relevant tax statute and "outstanding on the valuation dates." [303H; 304A] 1.4 The expression "debt owed" is a debt which the assessee is under an obligation to pay and, therefore, it includes both a liability to pay in present as well as a liability to pay in future an ascertainable sum of money.
Both kinds of liabilities are included within the expression "debt owed".
But Section 2(m)(iii)(a) narrows the scope down to a liability which exists in present time because the clause speaks of tax outstanding in consequence of an order passed under the relevant taxing statute.
[304B C] 1.5 In the present case, the notice of demand in each case was served after the valuation date had been passed.
There was no demand already subsisting on the respective valuation dates.
As the notices of demand respecting the wealth tax liability of Rs. 22,679 and Rs. 39,692 were served on the assessee subsequent to the valuation dates, if cannot be said that on the respective valuation dates the amount of tax were outstanding.
In the result a material requirement of Section 2(m) (iii) (a) is not satisfied and therefore, it cannot be invoked by the Revenue.
[304D E] Commissioner of Wealth Tax vs Kantilal Manilal, , approved.
Doorga Prasad vs The Secretary of State, , quoted with approval 299 Kesoram Industries & Cotton Mills Ltd. vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax (Central), Calcutta, ; , followed.
1.6 The appeals in the present case, though filed subsequent to the respective valuation dates, would none the less have sufficed to bring the second requirement of section 2 (m) (iii) (a) into operation.
But for Section 2 (m) (iii) (a) an amount of a tax outstanding on the valuation date would constitute a debt owed by the assessee on the valuation date, and the assessee would be entitled to claim its deduction in the process of computing his net wealth.
Parliament, however, intended that if the amount of the tax was challenged by the assessee as not being payable by him by recourse to any of the statutory remedies prescribed in the relevant Act, such claim to deduction would be barred.
Plainly, in order to give full effect to that intent it is immaterial whether the statutory remedy is being availed of on the valuation date or has been taken thereafter.
A challenge by the assessee that the amount outstanding is not payable by him is sufficient to bar his claim to deduction whether the challenge is subsisting on the valuation date or is initiated after the valuation date has passed.
[305 D; A C] Late P. Appauoo Pillai vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Madras, overtuled.
