The respondent in the appeal an election, filed an election petition challenging the election of the appellant to the Assembly.
He contended in the petition that in the election to the Haryana Legislative Assembly from Jind constituency one Dog Ram filed nomination paper.
His name was proposed by Ram Pratap, an elector of the constituency.
Dog Ram Candidate was registered as an elector at serial No. 177 and house No. 57 in part 39 of the electoral roll of the constituency whereas the proposer was registered as elector at serial No. 313 and house No. 6 in part 39 of the same constituency.
The name and postal address of Dog Ram were correctly given in the nomination paper but the part of the electoral roll was mentioned as 57 instead of 39 by an inadvertent mistake committed by the person who filed the nomination paper.
Similarly, in the case of the proposer, the serial number of the elector and the number of the constituency were given correctly but the number of his house was wrongly entered in the column meant for the part of the electoral roll.
At the time of scrutiny no other candidate or proposer objected to the acceptance of the nomination paper of Dog Ram but the Returning Officer on his own rejected the nomination paper on the ground that particulars of the candidate and the proposer have been wrongly entered in the nomination paper.
The appellant contested the election petition contending that the Returning Officer had compared the admittedly inaccurate particulars given in the nomination paper with those entered in the part of the voters ' list mentioned in the nomination paper and found them to be incorrect and asked candidate Dog Ram to show the names of himself and his proposer in the electoral roll and that as the candidate was unable to do so he rejected the nomination paper and was right in doing so.
In the nomination paper the serial numbers in the voters ' list of the candidate and his proposer have been correctly given as 177 and 313 respec 322 tively but the part numbers have been given wrongly as 57 and 6 respectively which are their respective house numbers instead of the correct part No. 39.
In the appeal to the High Court the question was as to whether the nomination paper of Dog Ram was improperly rejected.
On the evidence led by the parties the Single Judge found that the candidate Dog Ram and his proposer were registered as voters in the constituency and were qualified to contest the election and propose the candidate respectively.
It was further found that errors in regard to electoral roll numbers of the candidate and the proposer in the electoral roll and the nomination paper do not constitute defects of a substantial character as mentioned in the proviso to Section 33(4) of the Act.
The Single Judge accepted the evidence of P.W. 2 that when he and the candidate presented the nomination paper the Returning Officer told them that it was in order and held that the Returning Officer had thus tripped them into an error and 'observed that had he told them that there were some discrepancies in the nomination paper they would have either made the corrections then and there and would have gone more fully prepared to meet objections at the time of the scrutiny.
Accordingly the election petition was allowed and appellant 's election was declared as void.
On the ground that the nomination paper of Dog Ram was improperly rejected.
The elected candidate appealed to this Court, Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: l.
The Returning Officer in the instant case could not be said to have improperly rejected the nomination paper of Dog Ram.
[340G] 2.
It is not possible to say generally and in the abstract that all errors in regard to electoral roll numbers of the candidate and the proposer in the electoral rolls or nomination papers do not constitute defects of a substantial character.
They would not be defects of a substantial character only if at the time of the scrutiny the Returning Officer either by himself with the materials placed before him during the scrutiny or with the assistance of the candidate For his proposer or any other person is able to find out the correct serial number of the candidate and the proposer in the electoral roll.
If that is not the case, he would be committing a grave error by accepting the nomination paper without verifying whether the candidate is a voter in that or any other constituency of the State and whether the proposer is a voter in that constituency [334G H: 335Al 3.
No amount of evidence can be looked into upon a plea which was never put forward in the pleadings.
In the instant case, there is no allegation in the election petition that there was any assurance by the Returning Officer at the time of receipt of the nomination paper that there was nothing wrong in it.
In the absence of any such allegation in the election petition, the evidence of proposer P.W. 2, which is not even corroborated by the evidence of any other witness that he and the candidate presented the nomination paper to the Returning Officer and showed him the voters ' list and that he told them 323 then that the nomination paper was in order, is not acceptable.
In the circumstances the Single Judge was not justified in accepting the evidence of P.W. 2 and holding that the Returning Officer was guilty of tripping the candidate and the proposer by any assertion on his part into any one believing that there was nothing wrong in the nomination paper.
[335B; C E] 4.
The candidate and the proposer are always expected to go fully pre pared to meet any objection that may be raised by any candidate or even by Returning Officer himself suo moto at the time of the scrutiny and they cannot be expected to go any the less prepared merely because the Returning Officer had received the nomination paper without raising any objection.
It is at the time of scrutiny which is done in the presence of all concerned that the nomination papers come up for more detailed consideration at the hands of the Returning Officer against whom there is no estoppel in regard to the statutory duty of scrutiny.
[335F G] 5(i) The evidence of P.W. I is largely corroborated by the Returning Officer 's order.
R.W. I is an advocate and was himself a candidate but retired at a later stage.
He stated that the electoral rolls were lying on the table of the Returning Officer at the time of the scrutiny.
There is no reason for not accepting this evidence of R.W. 1.
[336D E] 5(ii) The electoral rolls were lying on the Returning Officer 's table at the time of the scrutiny and therefore, there would have been no necessity for Dog Ram and P.W. 2 to ask the Returning Officer to give them the electoral roll relating to their village for clearing his doubt.
The evidence of P.W. 2 is therefore not acceptable.
[336F] 5(iii).
The evidence of P.W.3 that the Returning Officer did not ask Dog Ram to show the names of himself and his proposer in the electoral roll is inconsistent with the allegations in the election petition as also the evidence of P.W. 2 that the Returning Officer said so.
Therefore, the evidence of P.W. 3 is not acceptable.
The evidence of R.W. 1 is accepted.
The Returning Officer found discrepancy in the names, serial number and part number mentioned in the nomination paper on the one hand and those found in the electoral roll with reference to those numbers on the other and that on account of his in ability to ascertain with the particulars made available before him whether the candidate Dog Ram and his proposer P.W. 2 were electors in the constituency he asked the candidate Dog Ram to point out the names of himself and his proposer in the electoral roll to satisfy him that they are electors in the constituency and that as he was unable to do so, he rejected the nomination paper by his order exhibit P.W. l/B. [337G H; 338A] Hira Singh Pal vs Madan Lal ; , Ram Awadesh Singh v Sumitra Devi & Ors ; and Viveka Nand Giri vs Nawal Kishore Sahi ; ; not applicable.
