The respondent, a permanent commissioned officer of the Indian Army holding the substantive rank of captain and the acting rank of major, as a result of certain incidents which are alleged to have taken place on November 5 and 6, 1975 was ordered to be tried by a general court martial.
On March 13, 1976, the court martial announced its finding subject to confirmation, the finding being "Not guilty of all the charges.
" The General Officer Commanding, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar and Orissa Area, the third appellant, who was the confirming authority, did not confirm the verdict and by his order dated April 3, 1976, sent back the finding for revision.
The same general court martial, therefore, reassembled on April 14, 1976, and after hearing both sides and taking into consideration the observations made by the third appellant in his said order dated April 3, 1976, adhered to its original view and once again announced the finding subject to confirmation, that the respondent was "Not guilty of all the charges".
The third appellant reserved confirmation of the finding on revision by a superior authority, namely, the General Officer, Commanding in Chief, Central Command, Lucknow, the second appellant, and forwarded the papers to him.
By his order dated May 25, 1976, the second appellant did not confirm the finding on revision of the general court martial.
The charges made against the respondent, the finding and the nonconfirmation thereof were promulgated as required by Rule 71 of the Army Rules.
Thereafter, the Chief of the Army Staff under Rule 14 of the Army Rules 1954 issued the impugned show cause notice dated November 12, 1976 stating that the Chief of the Army Staff had carefully considered the facts of the case as also the respondent 's defence at the trial and being satisfied that a 416 fresh trial by a court martial for the said offences was inexpedient, he was of the opinion that the respondent 's misconduct as disclosed in the proceedings rendered his further retention in the service undesirable.
and called upon the respondent to submit his explanation and defence, if any, within twenty five days of the receipt of the said notice.
Along with the said notice copies of abstracts of evidence and the court martial proceedings were forwarded to the respondent.
The respondent, thereupon, filed in the High Court of Allahabad a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India being Civil Miscellaneous Writ No. 84 of 1976, which was allowed by a Division Bench of the said High Court.
Hence the appeal by special leave Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Where the threat of a prejudicial action is wholly without jurisdiction, a person cannot be asked to wait for the injury to be caused to him before seeking the Court 's protection.
If, on the other hand, the Chief of the Army Staff had the power in law to issue the said notice, it would not be open to the respondent to approach the court under Article 226 of the Constitution at the stage of notice only and in such an event his writ petition could be said to be premature.
This was, however, not a contention which could have been decided at the threshold until the court had come to a finding with respect to the jurisdiction of the Chief of the Army Staff to issue the impugned notice.
Having held that the impugned notice was issued without any jurisdiction, the High Court was right in further holding that the respondent 's writ petition was not premature and was maintainable.
[420C E] 2.
Whether the Chief of the Army Staff was competent to issue the impugned notice of show cause depends upon the relevant provisions of the and the Army Rules 1954.
Under Section 153 of the , no finding or sentence of a general, district or summary general, court martial shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided by the .
Under Section ]60 of the , the confirming authority has the power to direct a revision of the finding of a court martial only once.
There is no power in the confirming authority, if it does not agree with the finding on revision, to direct a second revision of such finding.
In the absence of any such confirmation, whether of the original finding or of the finding on revision, by reason of the provisions of Section 153 the finding is not valid.
Therefore, in the case of the respondent, the finding of the general court martial on revision not having been confirmed was not valid.
Equally, there is however, no express provision in the which empowers the holding of a fresh court martial when the finding of a court martial on revision is not confirmed.
[427C F] 3.
Though it is open to the Central Government or the Chief of the Army Staff to have recourse to Rule 14 of the first instance without directing trial by a court martial of the concerned officer, there is no provision in the or in Rule 14 or any of the other Rules of the Army Rules which 417 prohibits the Central Government or the Chief of the Army Staff from resorting in such a case to Rule 14.
[429F G] In the present case, the Chief of the Army Staff had, on the one hand, the finding of a general court martial which had not been confirmed and the Chief of the Army Staff was of the opinion that the further retention of the respondent in the service was undesirable and, on the other hand, there were three difference conflicting decisions of different High Courts on this point which point was not concluded by a definitive pronouncement of this Court.
In such circumstances, to order a fresh trial by a court martial could certainly be said to be both inexpedient and impracticable and the only expedient and practicable course, therefore, open to the Chief of the Army Staff would be to take action against the respondent under Rule 14, which he did.
The action of the Chief of the Army Staff in issuing the impugned notice was, therefore, neither without jurisdiction nor unwarranted in law.
[430B D] Capt.
Kashmir Singh Shergill vs The Union of India & Another, Civil Writ No. 553 of 1974 decided on November 6, 1974 by Prakash Narain, J., approved.
G.B. Singh vs Union of India and Others, [1973] Crl.
L.J. 485; Major Manohar Lal vs The Union of India and Anr.
, ; J.C. 13018 Subedar Surat Singh vs The Chief Engineer Projects (Beacon) C/o.56 A.P.O. AIR 1970 J. & K 179 referred to.
