Section 167, item 8, of the , provides that if any goods the importation of which is for the time being prohibited or restricted by or under Ch.
IV of the Act, which Chapter includes section 19, be imported into India contrary to such prohibition or restriction, such goods shall be liable to confiscation and any person concerned in such importation shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding three times the value of the goods or not exceeding one thousand rupees.
By section 183 of this Act it is provided:" Whenever confiscation is authorised by this Act, the officer adjudging it shall give the owner of the goods an option to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as the officer thinks fit.
" The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, by section 3(1) empowers the Central Government by an order to make provision for prohibiting, restricting, or otherwise controlling, the import, export, carriage coast wise or shipment as ships ' stores of goods of any specified description.
Sub section (2) of that section provides that all goods to which any order under sub section
(1) applies, shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been prohibited or restricted under section 19 of the , and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly, 1152 except that section 183 thereof shall have effect as if for the word 'shall ' the word 'may ' are substituted.
The petitioner imported certain goods the import of which had been prohibited by the Central Government under section 3(1) Of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act.
By an order of the Collector of Customs, made under section 167, item 8, of the , these goods were confiscated and a penalty of Rs. 1,000, was imposed on the petitioner.
The petitioner challenged the validity of this order.
Held : (1) Section 3(2) of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947, does not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
It does not by its own force give any discretion to the Customs authorities at all, and its only effect is to apply the ,.
to certain cases.
(2) Section 183 Of the , does not authorise confiscation of goods.
It assumes that a power to confiscate under other provisions of the Act exists.
It is not a statutory provision in two parts with regard to which it may be said that one part offends article 14 while the other part does not.
The section contains only one statutory provision.
(3) Section 167, item 8, of the Sea Customs : 'Act, 1878, does not offend article 14 of the Constitution.
