Section 3B of the Orissa Sales Tax Act 1917 empowers the State Government to declare from time to time any goods or class of goods to be liable to tax on turnover of purchases.
The proviso provides that no tax shall be payable on the sales of such goods or class of goods declared under this section.
Section 5(1) prior to its amendment by the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977 provides that the tax payable by a dealer under the Orissa Act should be levied on his taxable turnover at such rate not exceeding thirteen percent and subject to such conditions as the State Government might from time to time by notification specify.
On May 23, 1977 the State Government issued two notifications.
Notification No. SRO 372/77 was made under section 3B amending the earlier notification dated April 23, 1976.
This notification made standing trees and bamboos agreed to be severed liable to tax on the turnover of purchase with effect from 27 June 1, 1977.
Notification SRO No. 373177 issued under the first proviso to section 5(1) of the Orissa Act amended with effect from June 1, 1977 the second of the two notifications of April 23, 1976 and directed that the tax payable by a dealer under the Orissa Act on account of purchase of bamboos agreed to be severed and standing trees agreed to be severed would be at the rate of 10%.
On December 29, 1977 the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Ordinance, 1977 was promulgated amending the Orissa Act with effect from January, 1978.
With effect from the same date two notifications SRO No 900177 and SRO No. 901177 were issued; the first notification which was issued under the provisions of section 3B and in supersession of all previous notifications on the subject, declared that the goods mentioned in Column (2) of the schedule to the notification were liable to be taxed on the turnover of purchase with effect from January 1, 1978.
Entries 2 and 17 in the schedule of this notification specified "bamboos agreed to be severed" and "standing trees agreed to be severed" respectively.
Notification No. 901/77 issued under section 5 (1) was in supersession of all previous notifications in that regard.
The State Government, by this notification, directed that with effect from January l 1978 the tax payable by a dealer under the Orissa Act on account of purchase of goods specified in column (2) of the schedule to the notification would be at the rate specified against it in column (3) thereof.
The rate of purchase tax for bamboos agreed to be severed and standing trees agreed to be severed was prescribed at 10%.
The Ordinance was repealed and replaced by Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act of 1978.
A large number of writ petitions were filed before the High Court impugning the notifications dated May 23, 1977 and December 29, 1977.
One group of petitioners consisted of those who had entered into agreements with the State for the felling, cutting, obtaining and removing bamboos from forest areas for the manufacture of paper (bamboo contracts), and the other group consisted of those who had entered into agreements for the purchase of standing trees (Timber Contracts).
The bamboo contracts were a grant of exclusive right and license to fell, i cut and remove bamboos from the forest.
Under the terms of auction the respondent was bound to pay a minimum royalty irrespective of the quantity of bamboos cut and removed.
The Governor of the State was called the "grantor" of the licence.
The bamboo contracts were in respect of different areas for periods ranging from 11 to 14 years with an option to renew the agreements for further periods.
The respondent in CA No. 219182 contended before the High Court that the subject matter of the Bamboo contract was not a sale or purchase of goods but was a lease of immovable property or in any went was a creation of an interest in immovable property by way of grant profit a prendre which amounted to an easement under the and that for that reason the royalty payable under the bamboo contracts could not be made exigible to either sales tax or purchase tax and that the impugned provisions of the notifications were ultra vires the Act.
It was also contended that the bamboo contract was 28 a works contract and for this reason also the transaction was not exigible to sales tax or purchase tax, and since the two notifications of December 29, 1977 were expressed to be made in supersession of all earlier notifications on the subject, the liability to sales tax under the said notifications of May 23, 1977 was wiped out.
In Civil Appeal No. 220/82 the bids of the respondent firm at auctions held by the Government in respect of trees standing in forest areas were accepted and on confirmation of the bids by the competent authority it entered into agreements with the Government for felling and removing such trees.
The respondent, in turn, sold the trees felled by it in the form of logs to others At the relevant time the respondent was successful at five auction sales and on ratification of the bids entered into five separate agreements (timber contracts) for felling and removing the trees standing in the forest areas.
After the issue of the notifications of May 23.
1977 the respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court against the State and the Sales Tax and Forest Authorities contending (I) that the levy of purchase tax on standing timber agreed to be severed was beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature and (2) the notifications imposed a tax both at the point of sale and at the point of purchase and for this reason were invalid and ultra vires the Act.
It was also contended that timber contracts were works contracts and the amounts payable under them were not exigible either to purchase tax or sales tax.
The High Court allowed all the writ petitions and quashed the impugned notifications.
In appeal to the Supreme Court the State contended that the subject matter of the impugned provisions is "goods" within the meaning of the term in the Sales of Goods Act and the Orissa Act, and that what was made exigible to tax under the impugned provisions notifications, was a completed purchase of goods.
^ HELD: (I) Notification SRO Nos.
372/77 and 373/77 dated May 23, 1977, (2) entries Nos. 2 and 17 in the schedule to notification No. 900177 and (3) entries Nos. 2 and 17 in the schedule to notification No. 901177 dated December 29, 1977 levying purchase tax at the rate of ten per cent on the purchase of bamboos agreed to be severed and standing trees agreed to be severed, are not ultra vires either Entry 54 List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India or the Orissa Sales Tax Act 1947 but are constitutional and valid [145D F] (a) The Legislative competence to enact the Orissa Act, which was a pre constitution enactment, was derived from section 100 (3) of the Government of India Act, 1935 read with Entry 48 in List II in the Seventh Schedule to that Act.
While Entry 48 spoke of "taxes on the sale of goods" Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution speaks of "taxes on the sale or 29 purchase of goods.
" The addition of the word "purchase" in Entry 54 permits the State Legislature to levy a purchase tax and does not confine its taxing power merely to levying sales tax.
[62F; H] (b) A cantena of decisions of this Court had held that the expression "sale of goods" had been used in the Government of India Act, 1935 in the same sense in which it is used in the and that it authorised the imposition of a tax only when there was a completed sale involving transfer of title to the goods.
While construing Entry 54 in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the constitution interpretation was adopted and any attempt by the State Legislature to give that expression an artificial meaning or an enlarged meaning or to bring within its scope what would not be comprehended within that expression would be unconstitutional and ultra vires.
[63F; 64G H; 63G] State of Madras vs Cannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd. ; ; The Sales Tax Officer Pilibhit vs Messrs. Budh Prakash Jai Prakash [955] 1 SCR 243, 247.
Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd. M.P. & Anr.
vs P. Dube Sales Tax Officer Bhopal Region Bhopal & Anr.
AIR 1964 SC 1037; K.L. Johar & Co vs Deputy Commercial Tax Officer ; Joint Commercial Tax Officer Harbour Div.
II Madras vs Young Men 's India Association (Reg.) Madras & Anr. ; ; State of Maharashtra & Anr.
vs Champalal Kishanlal Mohta [1971] 1 SCR 46, followed.
(c) Although a State is free to impose a tax at one or more points in a series of sales or purchases in respect of the same goods, the Orissa Act has adopted a single point levy by enacting the proviso to section 3 under which no tax is payable on the sale of goods or class of goods declared under that section to be liable to tax on the turnover of purchases.
The proviso to section 8 states that "the same goods shall not be taxed at more than one point in the same series of sales or purchases by successive dealers.
" Therefore, where in a series of sales or purchases tax is levied at a particular point neither sales tax nor purchase tax can be levied at another point in the same series.
[65C E] (d) Since any attempt on the part of the State to impose by legislation tax on sales or purchases in respect of what would not be "sale" or a "sale of goods" under The is unconstitutional, any attempt by it to do so in the exercise of its power of making subordinate legislation, would be equally unconstitutional.
Similarly.
where any rule or notification travels beyond the ambit of the parent Act, it would be ultra vires the Act.
Equally, sales tax authorities purporting to act under the Act or under any rule made or notification issued thereunder cannot travel beyond the scope of such Act, rule or notification.
Thus, the sales tax authorities under the Orissa Act cannot assess to sales tax or purchase tax, a transaction which is not a sale or purchase of 30 goods or assess to sales tax any goods or class of goods which are liable to purchase tax or assess to tax, whether sales tax or purchase tax, goods at another point in the same series of sales or purchases of those goods by successive dealers who are liable to be taxed at a different point in that series.
[65G H: 56A C] (2) There is no substance in the argument of the respondent that by the impugned provisions a new class of goods.
not known to law, had been created.
The definition of the expression "goods ' in both the and the Orissa Act which is almost in identical terms, includes "things attached to or forming part of The land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale." [66E; G H] (a) An examination of the definitions of movable property and immovable property given in the General Clauses Act, Registration Act and Transfer of Property Act, show that things attached to the earth are "immovable property.
" The term "attachment" means "rooted in the earth as in the case of trees and shrubs." Thus, while trees rooted in the earth are immovable property as being things attached to the earth by reason of the definition of the term "immovable property" in various statutes namely the General Clauses Act and the Orissa General Clauses Act and the Registration Act read with the definition of the expression "attached to the earth" given in the Transfer of Property Act, standing timber is "movable property" by reason of its exclusion from the definition of "immovable property" in the Transfer of Property Act and the Registration Act and by being expressly included within the meaning of the term "movable property" given in the Registration Act.
[67E; 68F; 68G H; 69A] (b) The term "standing timber" has been judicially recognised as "a tree which ii in a state fit for the purposes of being used as wood for buildings, houses, bridges, windows, whether on the tree or cut and seasoned", that is, a tree meant to be converted into timber so shortly that it could already be looked upon as timber for all practical purposes even though it is still standing.
Thus, trees which are ready to be felled would be standing timber and therefore "movable property." While trees (including bamboos) rooted in the earth being things attached to the earth are immovable property and if they are "standing timber", are movable property, trees (including bamboos) rooted in the earth which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale are not only movable property but also goods.
[o9D E; 70B C] Smt.
Shantabai vs State of Bombay & Ors.
; , 275 6, followed.
(c) The distinction which existed in English law between fructus naturales (natural growth of soil regarded as part of the soil until severance) and fructus industriales (which are chattels considered as representing the labour and expense of the occupier and thing independent of the land) does not exist in Indian law.
In a case of this nature the only question that falls for consideration in Indian law is whether a transaction relates to "goods" or "movable 31 property".
If it is sale of immovable property, a document of the kind specified in section 17 of the Registration Act is required to be compulsorily registered but a document relating to sale of goods or of movable property is not required to be registered.
Secondly under Entry 54 of List 11 of the Seventh Schedule the State cannot levy a tax on the sale or purchase of any property other than goods.
[71C D] 3.
The respondent 's contention that the impugned provisions levied a purchase tax on immovable property and not on goods and that the State Government has travelled beyond its taxing power has no merit.
[71F] (a) The High Court erred in holding that the impugned provisions amounted to levying a tax on an agreement to sell and not on actual sale or purchase, that standing trees being unascertained goods continued to be the property of the State Government until felled and therefore the title to such trees or bamboos is transferred in favour of the Forest Contractor only when the trees or bamboos were felled and severed in accordance with the terms of the contract.
There is a fallacy in the reasoning of the High Court in that the High Court read merely the description of the goods given in the impugned provisions by itself and not in conjunction with their governing words.
[71G H; 72A B] (b) Tax levied under section 3B is not on goods declared under that section but on the turnover of purchases of such goods.
A reading of the notification, issued under sections 3B and 5(1) as a whole makes it clear that the taxable event is not an agreement to sever standing trees or bamboos but the purchase of bamboos or standing trees agreed to be severed.
[72C D] (c) The use of the terms "agreed" in the description of goods showed that there must be an agreement between the buyer and the seller and under this agreement standing trees as also bamboos must be agreed to be severed.
According to the definition of "goods" such severance may be either before sale or under the contract of sale, The makes a distinction between sale and agreement to sell and provides that where there is a transfer from the buyer to the seller of property in the goods which are the subject matter of the agreement to sell, the contract of sale is a sale but when the transfer of property in the goods is to take place at a future time or subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled it is an agreement to sell which becomes a sale when the time elapses or such conditions are fulfilled.
In the first case the contract is "executed contract" while in the second it is "executory." [72E; 73C D] (d) A conspectus of the relevant sections o, the shows that a purchase would be complete when the goods (in the case standing trees or bamboos) are specific goods.
If these factors exist, then unless a different intention appears either from the terms of the contract or can be inferred from the conduct of the parties and other circumstances of the case, the property in such goods would pass from the seller to the buyer when the contract is made and it is immaterial whether the time of payment of the price or the time of 32 taking their delivery (of standing trees agreed to be severed or bamboos agreed to be severed or both) is postponed.
If, however, there is an unconditional contract for the sale of unascertained goods then unless a different intention appear , the property in them would be transferred to the buyer when the goods are ascertained and it would be immaterial whether the time of payment of the price or the time of taking delivery of standing trees agreed to be severed or bamboos agreed to be severed or both is postponed.
In either event, the sale and purchase would be completed before severance.
Therefore for the impugned provisions to apply the severance of the standing trees or bamboos must not be before sale but under the contract of sale, that is, after the sale thereof is completed.
The absence in the impugned provisions of the words "before sale or under the contract of sale" thus made no difference.
The subject matter of the impugned provisions was goods and the tax levied thereunder was on the completed purchase of goods.
[76F H; 77A C] 4.
The High Court has confused the question of interpretation of the impugned provisions with the interpretation of Timber Contracts and Bamboo Contracts.
The question of the validity of the impugned provisions had nothing to do with the legality of any action taken thereunder to make exigible to tax a particular transaction.
If a notification is invalid, all action taken under it would be invalid also.
Where on the other hand, a Notification is valid, an action purported to be taken thereunder contrary to the terms of that notification would be bad in law without affecting in any manner the validity of the notification.
Were the interpretation placed by the High Court on the Bamboo contracts and the Timber Contracts correct, the transactions covered by them would not be liable to be taxed under the impugned provisions and any attempt or action by the State to do so would be illegal but the validity of the impugned provisions would not be affected thereby.
There is no merit in the challenge to the validity of the impugned provisions on the ground of their unconstitutionality.
[77D; F H; 78A] 5.
(a) The High Court also erred in its view that bamboos and trees agreed to be severed were the same as bamboos and timber after they were felled and that since bamboos and trees were liable to tax at the sale point, taxation of the same goods at the purchase point amounted to double taxation and that this was contrary to the provisions of the Orissa Act.
[78C] (b) Not only does the Orissa Act expressly forbids double taxation but it also forbids the levying of tax at more than one point in the same series of sales or purchases by successive dealers This is evident from the provisos to sections 3B and 8.
Under the proviso to section 3B no tax is payable sales of goods or class of goods declared under that section to be liable to tax on the turnover of purchases.
Under the proviso to section 8 the same goods are not to be taxed at more than one point in the same series of sales or purchases by successive dealers.
[78E F] (c) The two notifications of December 29, 1977 were issued as a result the Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) ordinance 1977 which later became the 33 Orissa Sales Tax (Amendment) Act, 1978, while the two notifications of May 23, 1977 were issued prior to the amendment.
[79A] (d) Prior to January 1, 1978 under section 5(1) tax was payable by a dealer on his taxable turnover of sales as also purchases at n certain fixed percentage.
This rate applied both to sales tax and purchase tax.
But the purchase tax was payable only on the turnover of purchases of goods declared B under section 3B.
In respect of goods not so declared a dealer was liable to pay only sales tax.
Under the proviso to this section, if goods were declared to be liable to purchase tax, no tax was payable on sales of such goods.
Under section 5(1) the State Government was required to issue t notification only when it wanted to fix a rate of tax higher or lower than that specified in this section.
If no such notification was issued then the tax payable, be it sales tax or purchase tax, was to be at the rate mentioned in section 5(l).
Where, however, any goods were declared under section 3B to be liable to tax on the turnover of purchases, the notification prescribing a higher or lower rate of sales tax issued under the first proviso to section 5(1) would thereupon ceases to be observative by reason of the operation of the proviso to section 3B and it was not necessary to repeal expressly that notification.
It was also not necessary for the State Government to issue a notification fixing the rate of purchase tax unless it wanted to fix a rate higher or lower than that specified in section 5(1).
Where no such notification was issued, the rate of purchase tax would be the one which was mentioned in section 5(1).
[79C H] (e) After January 1, 1978 no rate of tax was specified in the Orissa Act.
Under section 5(1) the State Government is given power to notify from time to time the rate of tax sales tax or purchase tax by issuing notifications.
The notification dated December 29, 1977 issued under section 5(1) does not contain any entry in respect of bamboos, or timber or in respect of bamboos agreed to be severed or standing trees agreed to be severed.
If they were liable to sales tax, they would fall under the residuary entry No. 101 and be liable to sales tax at the rate of seven percent.
If any goods feeling under the residuary entry or any other entry in that notification are declared under section 3B to be liable to tax on the turnover of purchases, the residuary entry or that particular entry would automatically cease to operate in respect of those goods by reason of the proviso to section 3B without there being any necessity to delete that particular entry or to amend the residuary entry by excluding those goods therefrom.
It would be necessary for the State Government to issue a notification specifying the rate of purchase tax on those goods because unlike what the position was prior to January 1, 1978, on and after that date the new sub section 5(1) does not specify any rate of tax but leaves it to the State Government to notify it from time to time.
The High Court was in error in holding that the impugned provisions were ultra vires the Orissa Act as they amounted to "double taxation." [80A E] 6.
(a) There was no substance in the contention that the two notifications of December 29, 1977 having been made in supersession of all previous notifications issued on the subject their effect was to wipe out all tax liability which accrued under the earlier notifications of May 23, 1977.
[80G H] 34 (b) The word "supersession" in the notifications of December 29, 1977 was used in the same sense as the words "repeal and replacement" and, there fore, does not have the effect of wiping out the tax liability under the previous notifications.
All that was done by using the words "in supersession of all previous notification" in the Notifications of December 29, 1977, was to repeal and replace the previous notifications and not to wipe out any liability incurred under the previous notifications.
[146C D] (c) Both sections 3B and 5(1) in express terms conferred power upon the State Government to issue notification from time to time.
Under these provisions the State Government can issue a notification and repeal and replace it by another notification.
[81C] (d) The issuance of the notifications became necessary by reason of the change brought about in the scheme of taxation in 1977.
With effect from January 1, 1978 unless a notification was issued specifying the rate of tax, no dealer would be liable to pay any tax under the Orissa Act.
Under the amended section if the State Government wanted to tax any goods Or class of goods at a higher or lower rate it issued notifications specifications specifying such rate.
Since no rate of lax was specified in the new section but was left to the State Government to fix it, it was necessary to issue a notification consolidating all previous notifications on the subject in respect of goods liable to purchase tax which the State Government did.
[82E; 83A; C; D] 7.
(a) Timber contracts were not works contracts but were agreements to sell standing timber.
[146D] (b) Timber contracts were not transactions of sale or purchase of standing trees agreed to be severed They were merely agreements to sell such trees.
The property in the trees passed to the respondent firm only in the trees which were felled, that is, in timber, after all the conditions of the contract had been complied with and after such timber was examined and checked and removed from the contract area.
The impugned provisions, therefore, did not apply to the transactions covered by the Timber Contracts [98 A B] (c) A conspectus of the terms of the Sale Notice, the Special Conditions of Contract, the General Conditions of Contract and the various statutory provisions shows that the heading "sale notice of timber` ' as also the use of the words ' timber and other forest products will be sold by public auction" are not determinative of the matter.
The other terms and conditions of the contract make it clear that the Timber Contracts were not unconditional contracts for the sale of goods in a deliverable state and the property in the trees specified in Schedule I of the Contract did not pass to the respondent firm when each of the contracts was made.
The signing of the Timber Contracts did not result in a concluded contract because each contract was conditional upon the y State Government ratifying the acceptance of the bid, the ratification order did not become an unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliver able state for the respondent firm had no right to sever the trees and take them away before complying with the other conditions of the contract, namely, furni 35 shing a Coupe Declaration Certificate within the prescribed time, registering the property mark or trade mark, making the security deposit and so on.
This apart, the respondent firm was not at liberty to fell trees of his choice nor was he entitled to remove the felled trees by any route which it liked but only by specified routes.
[95F H; 96B C; 97A B] (d) Although under rule 40 of the Orissa Forest Contract Rules 1966, Rules stipulates that the respondent, firm was not entitled to any compensation for loss sustained by reason of fire, tempest, disease, natural calamity or any wrongful act of a third party this only showed that after a Timber Contract was concluded the risk passed to the respondent firm.
Under section 26 of the when the property is transferred to the buyer, the goods are at the buyer 's risk whether delivery had been made or not; but this section is qualified by the phrase "unless otherwise agreed.
" The Timber Contracts in this case were subject to contract to the contrary.
This is made clear by rule 44 which states that "all forest produce removed from a contract area in accordance with these rules shall be at the absolute disposal of the forest contractor." [97E H] 8.
(a) On the question whether the words "timber" and "logs" mean the same thing in commercial parlance the no material had been produced by the parties.
Where a term has not been statutorily defined or judicially interpreted and there is insufficient material on record as to the meaning of the words, the Court must seek to ascertain its meaning in common parlance with such aid as is available to it.
The court may take the aid of dictionaries in such cases to ascertain its meaning in common parlance.
In doing so, the Court must bear in mind that a word is used in different senses according to its context and a dictionary gives all the meanings of a word and the Court would have to select the particular meaning which would be relevant to the context in which it has to interpret that word.
[104E; 105B C; 146G H] (b) The Orissa Act does not define the term "timber" or "logs.
" The statutory definition of "timber" given in the Orissa Forest Act, 1972 is that timber includes "trees fallen or felled and all wood cut up or sawn." The Madras Forest Act, 1882 and the , the two Acts in force in the State of Orissa prior to the enactment of the Orissa Forest Act, 1972 too have not given any exhaustive definition of the term "timber.
" But what is apparent from these definitions is that the word "timber" is not confined merely to felled trees in the forests In subsequent Act like the Orissa Forest Produce (Control of Trade) Act, 1981 the concept that timber is not merely felled trees has been emphasised.
Therefore.
a conspectus of the meanings given to the term "timber" in statutes, different dictionaries and as judicially interpreted by this Court as well as by some High Courts shows that it means "building material, generally wood, used for building of houses, ships etc. and the word is applied to wood of growing trees capable of being used for structural purposes.
Hence, collectively to the trees themselves." A log according to the dictionaries means a bulky mass of wood now usually an unhewn portion of a felled tree or a length cut off for firewood.
These logs will be nothing more than wood cut up or 36 sawn and would be timber.
Similarly, a beam is timber sawn in a particular way.
So too ratters would be timber logs put to a particular use.
In ordinary parlance a plank would be flattened and smoothed timber.
; 107A D; F] Mohanlal Vishram vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh, Indore [1969] 24 STC 101; G. Ramaswamy and others vs The State of Andhra Pradesh and others [1973] 32 STC 309, approved and Krupasindhu Sahu & Sons vs State of Orissa [1975] 35 STC 270.
overruled.
(a) Sales of dressed or sized logs having been assessed to sales tax, sales to the respondent Firm of timber by the State Government from which logs were made by the respondent firm cannot be made liable to sales tax as it would amount to levying tax at two points in the same series of sales by successive dealers, assuming that the retrospectively substituted definition of "dealer" in clause (c) of section 2 of the Orissa Sales Tax Act, 1947 is valid.
[147B C] (b) Sales of logs by the respondent firm during the period June 1, 1977 and December 31, 1977 would be liable to tax at the rate of ten percent.
Assuming that the sales had been assessed to tax at the rate of six percent as contended by reason of the period of limitation prescribed by section 12(8) of the Orissa Act, the respondent firms assessment for the relevant period cannot be re opened to reassess such sales at ten per cent.
[147D E] 10.
(a) The Bamboo Contract is not a lease of the contract area to the respondent company in CA 219182.
Nor is it a grant of an easement to the respondent company, as it was not a grant of any right for the beneficial equipment of any of the respondent company.
In addition to the right of entry there are other important rights flowing from the contract.
It is a grant of a profit a prendre which in Indian law is a benefit to arise out of land and thus creates an interest is immovable property.
A profit a prendre is a benefit arising out of land and in view of section 3(26) of the General Clauses Act, it is "immovable property" within the meaning of the Transfer of Property Act.
[147F H] (b) There are countervailing factors which 80 to show that a Bamboo contract is not a contract of sale of goods.
It is a grant of exclusive right and licence to fell, cut, obtain and remove bamboos.
The person giving the grant the Governor of the State, is referred to as "grantor"; the consideration payable is "royalty" which is not a term used in legal parlance for the price of goods sold.
It is not an agreement to sell bamboos standing in the contract area with the accessory licence to enter upon such area for the purpose of felling and removing bamboos nor is it for a particular felling season only.
It is an agreement for a period ranging from fourteen, thirteen and eleven years with the option to renew the contract for further terms of twelves years.
The payment of royalty has no relation to the actual quantity of bamboos cut and removed.
The respondent company was bound to pay a minimum royalty and the royalty paid was always in excess of the royalty due on the bamboos cut in the contract areas.
The Bamboo contract conferred upon the respondent company a 37 benefit to arise out of land, namely, the right to cut and remove bamboos which would grow from the soil coupled with several ancillary rights and was thus a grant of a profit a prendre.
Being a profit a prendre or a benefit to arise out of land any attempt on the part of the State Government to tax the amounts payable under the Bamboo Contract would not only be ultra vires the Orissa Act but also unconstitutional as being beyond the State 's taxing power under Entry 54 in List II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
[119C; E; 120B D; 121G H] 11.
The decision of Firm Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel & Co. vs The State of Madhya Pradesh on which the appellant relied is not good law and has been overruled by decisions of larger Benches of this Court.
(State of Madhya Pradesh vs Yakinuddin ; [148A] M/s Mohanlal Hargovind of Jubbulpore vs Commissioner of Income Tax C.P. & Berar Nagpur L.R. [1949] 76 I A. 235; ILR 1949 Nagpur 892; AIR 1449 PC 311; Ananda Behra and another vs The State of Orissa and another ; and Smt.
Shantabai vs State of Bombay & Orissa ; 275 6 referred to; and Board of Revenue Etc.
vs A.M. Ansari Etc.[1976] 3 SCR 661 held 1 inapplicable.
(a) The case of State of M.P. vs Orient Paper Mills Ltd. on which the appellant relied is not good law as that decision was given per incurium and had laid down principles of interpretation which are wrong in law.
The basic and salient features of the agreement before the Court in Orient Paper Mills ' Case were the same as in the case of Mahadeo vs State of Bombay and the Court was not justified in not adverting to that case and the other cases referred to on the ground that these cases dealt with the general law of real property.
[142 H; 143A].
(b) The enunciation of law made by the Court in the Orient Paper Milts case that a document should be so construed as t o bring it within the ambit of a particular statute relevant for the purpose of the dispute before the court and that in order to do so, the Court could look at only such of the clauses of the document as also to just one or more, of the consequences flowing from he document which would fit in with the interpretation which the court wanted to put on the document to make that statute applicable, is fraught with considerable danger and mischief as it may expose documents to the personal predilictions and philosophies of individual judges depending upon whether according to them it would be desirable that documents of the type they have to construe should be made subject to a particular statute or not.
[139E G] (c) Secondly, in observing that the State Government, for reasons best known to it had "left the exploitation of the forest resources in part to the private sector" the court had overlooked that it was a matter of policy for the State to decide whether such transactions should be entered into or not, whether the transactions entered into by the State was for the industrial development of 38 the State and whether the transaction ensured employment for the people of the area and so on.
(d) Thirdly, the nature and meaning of a document cannot be deter mined by its end result or one of the consequences which flow from it.
In look in merely at the end result of the agreement the court overlooked a firmly established principle that both the agreement and the sale must relate to the same subject matter and therefore, there cannot be an agreement relating to one kind of property and a sale as regards another.
[141C D] (e) In coming to the conclusion that the term "royalty" used in the document before it was merely a 'euphimism" for the "price of timber".
the court overlooked the fact that the amount of royalty payable by the respondent was consideration for all the rights conferred upon it under the contract though it was to be calculated according to the quantity of bamboos felled.[141H; 142A] 13.
Where there are two or more conflicting views of this court on the same point the proper course for the High Court or even for smaller Benches of this court is to find out and follow the views expressed by larger Benches of this court in preference to those expressed by smaller benches This practice has crystallised into a rule of law declared by this Court.
[142E F] U.O.I. vs K.S. Subramanian [1977]1 SCR 87, 92, followed.
A works contract is a compendious term to describe conveniently a contract for the performance of work or services in which the supply of materials or some other goods is incidental.
In the instant case, the timber Contracts being agreements relating to movable property and the Bamboos Contracts being a grant of an interest in immovable property, cannot be works contracts.
The payee of the price, namely, the Government has not undertaken to do any work or labour.
It was the contractor who had to enter upon the land to fell the trees and remove them.
So is the case of Bamboo Contracts.
[144H; 145A] Commissioner of Sales tax, M.P. v Purshottam Premji [1970] 26 STC 38, 41 S.C., referred to.
