The idol of Gopalji was installed by one Purshottam Lal in his house at Vrindavan, which later became the temple of the deity.
The founder who had no issue, performed Seva Puja of the deity so long as he was alive and thereafter it was performed by his wife.
By his will exhibit A 2, he dedicated his entire property to the deity, and made his wife the Mohatmim/ Shebait without any power to transfer any property.
In accordance with the directions of her husband, the wife adopted the second respondent by a registered deed after performing the necessary religious ceremonies.
After the death of the wife, the appellant in the appeal worked as Pujari in the temple with the consent of the second respondent 's guardian and natural father.
Later he denied the rights of the second respondent and contended that the founder 's wife executed her last will and testament exhibit A 6 bequeathing her bank deposits, government bonds, household articles, utensils etc.
to the appellant to be kept by him in his custody, so long as the second respondent was a minor and to be responsible for the seva puja and raj bhog of the deity and the management of the deity 's properties.
A suit was filed by the respondents, for recovery of possession of the idol and temple of Gopalji and for the money lying in deposit with the bank, the zamindari abolition compensation etc.
373 The trial court held the adoption of the second respondent to be duly authorised and valid and found that the founder 's wife had validly executed the will exhibit A 6, but could not transfer the shebaiti rights to the second respondent thereby and that the second respondent had, however become the Mohatmim/Shebait by reason of the adoption, and found that the movable properties and the cash claimed by the appellant under the will were the personal properties of the wife and that the appellant had become entitled to them as a legatee under the will and that the other properties belong to the first respondent Gopal Ji, and decreed the suit in part.
In the appeal by the appellant, and the cross objections filed by the second respondent, the additional district judge found that as the adoption was without the authority of the husband to adopt, it was invalid in law and following this Courts ' decision in K.K. Ganguli v Pama Banerjee, AIR held that the second respondent had not become shebait under the will and allowed the appeal and dismissed the corss objections and the suit in full.
In the second appeal, the High Court following this Courts ' decision in Angurbala Mullick vs Debabrata Mullick, [1951] 2 S.C R. 1125 that shebaiti is heritabal property, held shebaiti is property & found that no restriction had been placed in the will of the founder in regard to the shebaiti, and therefore the wife had succeeded to the limited right of shebait as the heir of her husband and it became enlarged into an absolute right under section 14(1) of the and that as there was on other heir or successor to the founder, the wife 's appointment of the second respondent as the shebait under her will exhibit A 6 was valid in law.
The second appeal was accordingly allowed in part except in respect of certain items enumerated in the plaint, and cash in fixed deposit with a bank.
Dismissing the appeal, to this Court.
, ^ HELD: (Per Varadarajan J.) 1.
The text of Hindu Law and the two decisions of this Court in Profulla Choronl Requittee vs Salya Chornal Requittee and Ram Rattan vs Bajrang Lal Angurbala Mullick vs
Debabrata Mullick, [1951] 2 S,C R 1125 show that shebait ship is in the nature of immovable property heritable by the widow of the last male holder unless there is an usage or custom of a different nature in cases where the founder had not disposed of the shebaiti right in the endowment created by him.
[382B C] In the instant case, the founder (Purshottam Lal) had not made any disposition regarding shebaiti right in his will, exhibit A 2 dated 14 4 1944 where by he created the endowment.
No custom or usage to the contrary had been pleaded.
Therefore, the widow (Asharfi Devi) had succeeded to the shebaiti 374 right held by him on his death as a limited owner and that right had become enlarged into an absolute right by the provisions of Section 14(1) of the and she could transfer that right by a will in favour of a person who is not a non Hindu and who could get the duties of shebait per formed either by himself or by any other suitable person.
[382C D] 2.
The second respondent has acquired the shebaiti right under the will exhibit A 6.
No interference is called for with the judgment of the Single Judge of the High Court in the Second appeal.
[382E] (Per Sabyasachi Mukharji J. 'concurring) ' 1.
It is well settled that shebaitship is heritable.
This Court in Angurbale Mullick vs Debabrata Mullick, 119511 2 S.C.R. 1125 recognised the right of a female to succeed to the religious office of shebaitship in view of the Hindu Women 's Right to Property Act 1937.
Section 14(1) of the enlarged the limited right of a Hindu female to the absolute right of the holder.
[382H; 383A] In the instant case, the property in the nature of shebaitship devolved on Smt.
Asharfi Devi under the will of her husband, Shri Purushottam Lal dated April 14, 1944.
This will had not restricted the property in any manner in shebaitship bequeathed to Smt.
Asharfi Devi could therefore make a will in respect of shebaitship.
[383B C] 2.
It is not necessary, to express any opinion on the correctness or otherwise of the views expressed in K.K. Ganguli vs Panna Banerjee, ;
