The, State of Andhra Pradesh was constituted under the consisting of two areas known as the 'Andhra Area ', and the 'Telangana Area '.
There were different laws governing the village administration in the two areas.
The village establishment in the Andhra Area which previously formed part of the State of Madras consisted of headmen and karnams who were village officers and talyaris, vettis and neergantis who were village servants.
Their appointment and conditions of service were governed by the Madras Hereditary Village Offices Act, 1895.
In the Telangana Area, the village establishment consisted of the posts of patwaris, mali, patels and police patels who were village officers and sethsindhis and neeradis who were village servants The State Government appointed a Committee called the Village Officers Enquiry Committee to review the existing system of part time officers working at the village level.
The Committee submitted its report in 1961 that it was necessary to reorganise the village establishment by appointment of full time officers with larger volume of work.
It also recommended that steps should be taken to reduce the number of posts by merger of functions and increasing the area over which the village officers could exercise jurisdiction.
In course of time, the Governor of Andhra Pradesh promulgated rules under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution called the Andhra pradesh 510 (Andhra Area) Village Offices Service Rules, 1969 providing for the regulation of the recruitment and conditions of service of holders of village offices in the Andhra Area of the State of Andhra Pradesh with effect from May 22, 1969, The State Legislature passed the Andhra Pradesh Watans (Abolition) Act, 1978 which came into force with effect from December 8, 1977 abolishing all the watans village offices in the Telangana Area of the State.
Simultaneously the Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Village Offices Service Rules, 1978 were promulgated by the Governor with effect from 7th December 1977 providing for the recruitment and conditions of service of the village officers in the Telangana Area.
The village officers in both the areas were however still part time officers.
On January 6, 1984 on the recommendation of the State Government.
the Governor promulgated the Andhra Pradesh Abolition of Posts of part time Village Officers Ordinance, 1984 (Ordinance No. 1 of 1984).
Section 2(d) of the Ordinance defined the expression 'part time village officer ' as a person who held any of the village offices of headman, munsiff, reddy, monigar, peddakapu, patel, karnam or patwari or triune officer or holder of any such village office by whatever designation it may be locally known including their assistants.
Section 3 of the Ordinance declared that the posts of part time village officers in the State of Andhra Pradesh as defined in section 2(d) thereof stood abolished with effect on and from the date of the commencement of the Ordinance which came into force at once, and every person who held the post of part time village officer in any art of the State would with effect on and from that date cease to hold such posts.
By virtue of this provisions the posts of part time village officers ceased to be in existence on January 6, 1984 and the incumbents of those posts ceased to he employees of the Government on and from that date.
The Ordinance was not replaced by an Act of the State Legislature but it was succeeded by four ordinances namely Ordinance No. 7 of 1984, 13 of 1984, 18 of 1984 and 21 of 1984.
The petitioners who were part time village officers questioned the constitutional validity of this Ordinance by petitions filed both in this Court and in the High Court.
The petitions filed in the High Court were withdrawn to this Court under Article 139 A.
The Counsel for the Petitioners did not urge the other points in view of these decisions.
Gazula Dasaratha Rama Rao vs The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; , B.R. Sharkaranarayana & Ors.
vs The State of Mysore & Ors., (A.l.R. 1966 S.C.C. 1571), K Rajendran & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu 511 It was however contended ml behalf of the petitioners (i)that the Ordinance was void and ineffective due to lack of application of mind by the Governor to the subject matter of the Ordinance, (ii) that the Ordinance having lapsed as the Legislature did not pass an Act in its place, the posts which were abolished should be deemed to revived, and the issue of successive ordinances the subsequent one replacing the earlier one did not serve any purpose, and (iii) that the abolition of posts and the consequent deprivation of the right of the petitioners to hold the said posts amounted to an infringement of their fundamental right to life and personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution .
Dismissing the Writ Petitions.
^ HELD: 1.
Under Article 123 of the Constitution the President can promulgate an ordinance on the advice of the Council of Ministers to meet the requirement of a situation when either House of Parliament is not in session.
Similarly under Article 213 of the Constitution the Governor may issue an ordinance on the advice of this Council of Ministers when the Legislative Assembly or where there are two Houses of the Legislature in a State either of them is not in session.
Since under Article 85 of the Constitution it is not permissible to allow a period of six months to intervene in the case of each Mouse of Parliament between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first meeting in the next session and since under clause (2) of Article 123 of the Constitution an ordinance has to be laid before both Houses of Parliament and would cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, it cannot be said that either House can be avoided by the President beyond seven and a half months after the passing of an ordinance.
It is open to Parliament if it chooses to approve it or not.
Having regard to the conditions prevailing in India the Constitution makers thought that the ordinance making power should be given to the President to deal with unforeseen or urgent matters The position under Article 213 of the Constitution is also the same.
[523D G] 2.
The Legislative action under our Constitution is subject only to the imitations prescribed by the Constitution and to no other.
Any law made by the Legislature, which it is not competent to pass, which is violative of the provisions in Part III of the Constitution or any other constitutional provision is in effective.
[525G H] 3.
The motives of the legislature in passing a statute is beyond the scrutiny of courts.
Nor can the courts examine whether the legislature had applied its mind to the provisions of a statute before passing it.
The propriety expediency 'and necessity of a legislative act are for the determination of the legislative authority and are determination by the courts.
An ordinance passed either under Article 123 or under Article 213 of the Constitution stands on the same footing.
When the Constitution says that the ordinance making power is 512 legislative power and an ordinance shall have the same force as an Act, an ordinance should be clothed with all the attributes of an Act of legislature carrying with it all its incidents, immunities and limitations under the Constitution.
It cannot be treated as an executive action or an administrative decision.
Gazula Dasaratha Rama Rao vs The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors" ; B.R. Shankaranarayana & Ors., vs The State of Mysore & Ors, (A.I.R. , K. Rajendran & Ors.
vs State of Tamil Nadu & Ors., 11982] 3 S.C.R. 628, Lakhi Narayan Das vs The Province of Bihar, []949) F.C.R. Vol.
Xl 693, R.R. Garg etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
[19821 I S.C.R. 947 and A.K. Roy etc.
vs Union of India & Anr.
, ; at page 299.
referred to.
Article 213 of the Constitution does not say that the Ordinance shall be void from the commencement on the State Legislature disapproving it.
It says that it shall cease to operate.
It only means that it should be treated as being effective till it ceases to operate on the happening of the events mentioned in clause (2) of Article 213.
In the instant case, the Andhra Pradesh Abolition of Posts of Part time Village Officers ordinance 1984 deals with two separate matters.
By clause 3 it abolishes the posts of part time village officers on the commencement of the Ordinance and it further declares that every person who held the post of a part time village officer would cease to hold that post with effect from that date.
By clause 4 and other allied provisions, the Ordinance has provided for the creation of posts of Village Assistants and appointment and conditions of service of Village Assistants who are full tin e employees of the Government.
There is no doubt that a separate provision is made in clause 5 of the Ordinance for payment of some amount to the ex part time village officers [528H; 529A C] 5.A mere disapproval by Parliament or the State Legislature of an ordinance cannot, however, revive closed or completed transactions.
The abolition of the posts and the declaration that the incumbents of those posts would cease to be holders of those posts under clause 3 of the Ordinance being completed events.
there is no question of their revival or the petitioners continuing to hold those posts any longer.
Even if the other provisions of the Ordinance have ceased to be in force, there can be no constitutional difficulty arising therefrom because it is open to the State Government to create new posts in exercise of its powers under Article 162 of the Constitutional as long as the field is not occupied by an Act of the Legislature or a rule made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.[531 E F] State of Orissa vs Bhupendra Kumar Bose, [1962] 2 Supp. 380, referred to.
Steavenson vs Oliver 151 English Reports 1024, referred to.
