The appellant a Forester was compulsorily retired from service by an Order dated October 12 , 1962 passed by the Chief Forest Officer , Government of Tripura.
He filed a writ petition before the Judicial Commissioner impleading , (I) The Secretary to the Government of India , Ministry of Home Affairs; (2) The Chief Commissioner , Tripura; (3) The Secretary to the Government of Tripura , Forest Department; and (4) The Chief Forest Officer , Government of Tripura as respondents.
His main grievance was (i) that the penalty of compulsory retirement was imposed upon him without affording him an adequate opportunity of being heard; and (ii) that the enquiry held against him was in violation of the principles of natural justice.
On the other hand , the respondent contended (i) that the punishment of compulsory retirement does not tantamount to dismissal or removal from service as contemplated by article 311 (1) and therefore , no formal enquiry was necessary to be held before imposing the penalty; and (ii) that adequate opportunity was afforded to the appellant during the enquiry to controvert the charges and defend himself.
The Judicial Commissioner held that the appellant was appointed by the Chief Commissioner , and therefore , the Chief Forecast Officer , a subordinate of the Chief Commissioner was not competent to impose the penalty of compulsory retirement and thus the order was bad on merits.
But , he dismissed the petition holding that it was not properly constituted.
Allowing the appeal by the appellant , ^ HELD: (t) The Judicial Commissioner should not have taken upon 640 himself to raise the objection that in the absence of Union of India being made a party , the petition was not properly constituted when the respondents did not raise such a contention.
Respondent No. i is shown to be the Secretary to the Government of India , Ministry of Home Affairs.
If there was technical err or in the draftsmanship of the petition by a lawyer , a Forester a class IV low grade servant should not have been made to surfer.
An oral request to correct the description of the first respondent would have satisfied the procedural requirement.
The Court could have conveniently read the cause title as Government of India which means Union of India through the Secretary.
Ministry of Home Affairs instead of the description set out in the writ petition and this very petition would be competent by any standard.
Moreover , the appointing authority of the appellant , the Chief Commissioner of the Government of Tripura as well the Chief Forecast Officer who passed the impugned order were impleaded and they represented the administration of Tripura Government as well as the concerned officers.
Therefore , not only the petition as drawn up was competent but no bone of contention could be taken about its incompetence.
[644G H; 645A D] (2) The Judicial Commissioner rightly held that the impugned order of compulsory retirement was imposed by an authority not competent to impose the same and therefore it is ab initio illegal and invalid.
[645F] (3) (i) Where relevant service rules provide for an age of superannuation and permit compulsory retirement in public interest on reaching a certain age lower than the age of superannuation , and order of compulsory retirement according to relevant service rules cannot be styled as imposing a penalty and obviously article 311 (2) will not be attract .
An order of compulsory retirement differ both from an Order Of dismissal and an order of removal from service , in that it is not a form of punishment prescribed by the rules , and involved no penal consequences in as much as the person who retires is entitled to pension proportionate to the period of service standing to his credit.
But , where there is no rule fixing the are of compulsory retirement or if there is one and the servant is retired before that age prescribed therein , then that can he regarded only as dismissal or removal within article 311 (2).
[645G H;6645A B] Sham Lal vs The State of Uttar Pradesh , [1955] S.C.R. 26 and State of Bombay vs Saubhagchand M. Doshi , ; , referred to.
(ii) In the instant case , it is admitted that the relevant service rules prescribed an age of superannuation.
It was not pointed out that the relevant rules fixed some other age beyond which and before reaching the age of superannuation , a Government servant can be compulsory retired in public interest.
Nor is it claimed that the order of compulsory retirement in this case was made under the relevant service rules in public interest.
At any rate , it is crystal clear that the appellant was aged only 42 when the order of compulsory retirement was made.
It was not sought to be supported on the ground that the appellant having put in service for a certain number of years , he could have been compulsorily retired.
On the contrary , it is admitted that the order of compulsory retirement was by way of penalty imposed upon him 641 for misconduct after an enquiry.
Obviously therefore article 311(2) will be attracted and an enquiry in accordance with the rules of natural justice would be a pre requisite before imposing any penalty.
[647C F] 3.
(iii) It is clear from the facts that the enquiry was held in violation of principles of natural justice and is vitiated.
If the enquiry was illegal , any punishment imposed as a result of the enquiry must fail.
Therefore, the order of compulsory retirement is bad for more than one reason and liable to be set aside and is hereby set aside.
Once the order of compulsory retirement is set aside , the appellant continues in service.
But , it is not possible to direct his reinstatement in service , since he has reached the age of superannuation as on December 6 , 1978.
Therefore.
he would be entitled to backwages and pension which is comes to Rs. 1,00,000 from the date of compulsory retirement on October 16 , 1962 upto and inclusive of December 31 , 1984.
The respondent shall pay pension at the rate of Rs. 400 from January 1 , 1984 .
Now that the amount is payable in one lump sum , presumably the Government may resort to sec.
192 of the Income Tax Act.
But let it be made distinctly clear that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of Sec. 89 and Rule 21A of the Income Tax Rules and he is entitled to relief , under Sec. 89.
Therefore , while computing the total amount the Court has kept the spread over in view and in no year any income tax is deductible from the meagre salary of this low paid class IV employee.
If therefore , any deduction is made towards income tax while making the payment , it is incombent upon the Tripura Administration to take all necessary steps to obtain the relief for the appellant under Sec. 89 of the Income Tax Act read with Rule 21A of the Income Tax Rules.
[647B G]
