The appellant who was a British citizen of Indian origin , came on a temporary visit to India for a period of three years in July 1966 as he had a family holding in Messrs Atul Drug House Limited , to survey the business situation and to make a decision for his future stay in the country.
Along with him he brought a Mercedes Benz car as part of his personal baggage , free of duty , under the Tripe trique convention under which he was entitled to retain the car for a maximum period of one year.
After his arrival in India he was appointed as Managing Director of the Company and this required his presence in the country for quite some time and therefore the appellant applied to the Joint Chief Controller of Imparts & Exports for the issue of an import license to keep the said car for more then one year , but that application of his was rejected by the Chief Controller on the ground that he had not come to India for permanent settlement , On the appellant informing the Chief Controller that he had reconsidered his decision and decided to stay in India permanently , the Chief Controller required him to submit amongst other documents an affidavit counter signed either by the High `Commission for India in Tanzania or the Indian Embassy at Nairobi in Kenya or a Notary Public.
It appears that the appellant before his arrival in India had with him an affidavit sworn before the Third Security , High Commission for India at Dar es Salaam stating that he was taking up appointment as a Director of Messrs Atul Drug house Limited and it would therefore necessitate his presence in India for a period of three years at least.
When the Chief Controller asked the appellant to produce an affidavit along with the application for grant of an import license , what he did was to score out the words 'for three years ' and 774 added in ink the word 'permanently '.
The Chief Controller rejected the application on the ground that the affidavit submitted by him was a forged document.
Admittedly , the Mercedes Benz car had been repatriated out of India by the appellant within the period provided under the Tripe trique convention.
The appellant was prosecuted by the Central Bureau of Investigation in the Court of the Additional Chief.
Presidency Magistrate , Bombay for commission of an alleged offense punishable under section 420 of the Indian Penal Code , on the allegation that he had made a false declaration before the Assistant Collector of Customs , Bombay that he was a tourist and had come to Bombay to stay for a period of six months knowing full well that he had sworn an affidavit before the Third Secretary , High Commission for India at Dar es Salaam that he would remain in India for a period of three years.
The aforesaid affidavit was put in evidence by the prosecution.
The Customs authorities led no evidence in support of the charge.
The learned Chief Presidency Magistrate after a trial lasting over four years acquitted the appellant on the ground that the prosecution had failed to establish the charge beyond all reasonable doubt.
He further held that the appellant was falsely implicated at the instance of one Shah , the other Managing Director , in a struggle to gain control over the Company.
The Delhi Special Police Establishment had in the meanwhile filed a challan against the appellant in the Court of the Judicial Magistrate (First Class) , Delhi on February 10 , 1971 for commission of an alleged offense punishable under sections 420 and 471 read with s.467 of the Indian Penal Code.
The learned Magistrate framed charges against the appellant under ss.420 , 467 and 471 read with s.467 of the Indian penal Code directing him to stand trial in a Court of Sessions.
The learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court however on a reference by the Additional Sessions Judge , Delhi under s.438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898 quashed the charge farmed against the appellant under ss.467 and 471 read with s.467 of the Indian Penal Code and remanded the case to the Metropolitan Magistrate , Delhi with the direction that he should proceed to try the appellant for commission of an alleged offense punishable under s 420 read with s.511 of the Indian Penal Code.
Allowing the Appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
In the facts and circumstances of the case , it would be extremely doubtful whether the ingredients of an offense under s.420 read with s.511 of the Indian Penal Code were made out.
The appellant might come forward with an explanation , namely , that he acted an honest belief that he could make use of the unutilized affidavit lying with him and it could not be said that the explanation so offered would not be a reasonable explanation.
[779B D] 2.
In the instant case , there was absence of any dishonest intention or means rea on the part of the appellant when he made use of the affidavit sworn by him before the third Secretary , High Commission for India at Dar es Salaam.
It was foolish on his part to have altered the affidavit by scoring out the words 'for three years ' and to have added in ink the word 'permanently ' , 775 The appellant could as well have got an affidavit sworn before the Notary Public at Bombay and forwarded it along with his application for grant of an import licence.
Admittedly , the Chief Controller of Imports & Exports was not cheated nor was there any attempt to cheat him.
The Mercedes Benz car brought by the appellant , free of duty , was repatriated by him out of India within the prescribed period of one year.
[776H; 777A; 779 E] 3.
Although the rule against double jeopardy guaranteed under article 20(2) U of the Constitution or the plea autrefois acquit under s.403 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1898 are not available to the appellant since the alleged offenses were not substantial the same but were separate all distinct , it would not subserve the interests of justice to direct the prosecution of the appellant over again before the Metropolitan Magistrate , Delhi for an act of indiscretion in substituting the word 'permanently ' for the words 'for three years ' in the affidavit which the circumstances suggest was an honest but a foolish act , particularly when he had been acquitted of a somewhat similar charge by the Additional Chief Presidency Magistrate , Bombay wherein the affidavit was relied upon by the prosecution as a piece of evidence to substantiate the charge that he made a false declaration before the Assistant Collector of Customs , Bombay.
The adoption of such a course after a lapse of nearly 20 years would not only entail a fresh trial but subject the appellant to undue harassment and ultimately may result in an acquittal.
[778G H; 779E F]
