The Chief Justice of the High Court received a letter from the guardian of a student of the Medical College in Simla complaining about the ragging of freshers by senior students within as also outside the college campus and the hostel.
The guardian of the student had annexed along with the said letter to the Chief Justice , a letter received by him from his son.
The Division Bench of the High Court presided over by the Chief Justice treated these two letters as constituting the Memo of Writ Petition , but directed that these two letters should not be placed on the record of the proceeding in view of the request made by the guardian that the identity of the writer should not be disclosed in the proceedings.
The Division Bench registered the two letters as a Writ Petition , and issued notice to the State Government, and the Principal of the Medical College.
After bearing the respondents the Division Bench came to the conclusion that the practice of ragging was prevalent in the Medical College on a noticeable scale and that ragging took the form of subjecting freshers including female students to inhuman and humiliating treatment degenerating even into physical violence 677 and that the college authorities had not been able to effectively control such ragging.
It gave various directions which included a direction to the State Government to constitute a Committee Anti Ragging Committee to go into the question and make recommendations in regard to the curative , preventive and punitive measures to be adopted by the college authorities to control and curb the evil of ragging.
Anti Ragging Committee recommended that the State Government could initiate legislation which makes ragging a cognizable offence an l prescribe punishment commensurate with the crimes committed.
When the matter was taken up again for hearing the Division Bench directed the State Government to file an affidavit indicating the action taken on the Report.
An affidavit to the effect that the State Government had 'taken notice of the recommendations to initiate legislation this behalf if found necessary and so advised," was filed on behalf of the State Government.
The Division Bench further directed the State Government to initiate legislation against ragging and for this purpose granted the State Government 6 weeks ' time.
In the appeal by the State , to this Court it was contended that the Court could not give directions to the State Government to initiate legislation on ragging Allowing the Appeal.
^ HELD.
The Division Bench was clearly in error in issuing a direction to the Chief Secretary to file an affidavit within 6 weeks setting out the action taken by the State Government with a view to implementing the Committee 's recommendation.
[684] 2.
The direction given by the Division Bench was really nothing short of an indirect attempt to compel the State Government to initiate legislation with a view to curbing the evil of ragging.
[683C] 3.
It is entirely a matter for the executive branch of the Government to decide whether or not to introduce any particular legislation.
But the Court certainly cannot mandate the executive or any member of the legislature to initiate legislation , howsoever necessary or desirable the Court may consider it to be.
That is not a matter which is within the sphere of the functions and duties allocated to the judiciary under the Constitution.
[683E F] 4.
If the executive is not carrying out any duty laid upon it by the Constitution or the law , the Court can certainly require the executive to carry out such duty and this is precisely that the Court does when it entertains public interest litigation.
[683F] 678 section When the Court passes any orders in public interest litigation , the Court does so not with a view to mocking at legislative or exhaustive authority or in a spirit of confrontation but with a view to enforcing the Constitution and the law , because it is vital for the maintenance of the rule of law that the obligations which are laid upon the executive by the Constitution and the law should be carried out faithfully and no one should go away with a feeling that the Constitution and the law are meant only for the benefit of a fortunate few and have no meaning for the large number of half clad half hungry people of this country.
[684B C] 6.
It is now settled law that this Court under Article 32 , and the High Courts under Article 226 , can treat a letter as a Writ Petition and take action upon it.
It is not every letter which may be treated as a Writ Petition by the Supreme Court or the High Court.
It is on , y where a letter is addressed by an aggrieved person or by a public spirited individual or a social action group for enforcement of the constitutional or legal rights of a persons who by reason of poverty , disability or socially or economically disadvantaged position find it difficult to approach the court for redress that the Supreme Court or the High Court would be justified , nay bound , to treat the letter as a Writ Petition.
There may also be cases where even a letter addressed for redressal of a wrong done to an individual may be treated as a Writ Petition where the Supreme Court or the High Court considers it expedient to do so in interests of justice.
This is an innovative strategy which has been evolved by the Supreme Court.
It is a highly effective weapon in the armoury of the law for reaching social justice to the common man.
[684G H; 685A C] 7.
The Division Bench was , certainly right in entertaining the two letters as a Writ Petition , but it was wholly in error in directing that these two letters on which the Division Bench acted should not be placed on the record of the proceedings and the identity of the guardian and the student should not be , disclosed.
It would be contrary to all canons of fair play and violative of all principles of judicial propriety and administration to entertain a Writ Petition without disclosing the identity of the petitioner, though the court , knows who the petitioner is.
[685D F]
