The respondent plaintiff filed a suit for eviction against the appellant defendant on the ground that the tenant committed default in payment of rent.
The defendant contested the suit contending that he was not in default.
An application was filed by the respondent landlord for a direction under Sec.
11A of the (Bihar Buildings Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1947 to the defendant tenant to deposit the rent in arrears; and a further direction to deposit the future rent from month to month.
The trial judge ordered the appellant to deposit the rent in arrears at the rate of Rs. 32 per month and thereafter to continue to deposit the rent at the rate of Rs. 12 20 per month.
The defendant preferred a revision petition which was dismissed.
The suit was fixed for hearing.
The tenant moved an application for adjournment which was rejected.
the plaintiff witnesses were examined and the suit was decreed ex parte.
On an application moved by the defendant praying for relief under 826 Order IX Rule 13 CPC, the trial judge set aside the ex parte decree and set down the suit for proceeding further from the stage it was decreed ex parte.
The respondent landlord moved an application contending that as there was irregularity and delay in depositing the rent, the defence of the appellant be struck off for his failure to strictly comply with the order made under Section 11A, but the trial judge rejected it on the ground that the earlier order was made prior to the date on which the suit was decreed ex parte; on the setting aside of the ex parte decree and revival of the suit, the order giving directions for deposit of future rent does not per se revive and therefore even if there was some default on the part of the tenant in depositing the rent, his defence cannot be struck off.
The respondent landlord moved a revision petition before the High Court.
A Division Bench interpreted the expression 'shall ' in Sec.
11A of the Act, as mandatory, and finding that there was default in making the deposit for the months mentioned in the landlords ' application, it could be shown that there was non compliance with the order passed under Sec.
11A, and therefore 'the tenant will have to bear the consequence thereto. ' It further held that 'once a default is found, the courts are powerless; the statutory consequences are bound to follow, ' It made the rule absolute and set aside the order of the trial judge refusing to strike off the defence of the appellant and directed the trial judge to note that the defence of the appellant would be deemed to have been struck off due to non compliance of the order Passed under Section 11A.
Allowing the Appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) Failure to comply with an earlier direction should not necessarily visit the tenant with the consequence of his defence being struck off because there might be myriad situations in which default may be committed.
The Court should adopt such a construction as would not render the court powerless in a situation in which ends of justice demand relief being granted.
[835 F F] In the instant case, the High Court had adopted a construction of Section 11A of the Act which would defeat the beneficient nature of the pro vision.
The decision of the High Court is set aside because it proceeds on the basis that once there is default, the tenant must suffer the consequences of it.
The trial judge held that once a suit ended in an ex parte decree the earlier direction for making necessary deposit given under Sec.
11A would remain ineffective even if the ex parte degree is set aside and would not revive, was rightly disapproved by the High Court.
The trial judge did grant relief to the tenant by refusing to strike off the defence, but on an erroneous view of the law.
The High Court reversed it on yet another erroneous view of law holding that the court was powerless to grant any relief once a default is established.
[835 F H; 836 A B].
827 (ii) The tenant has deposited all the arrears.
There was some irregularity in making the deposit but it was not of such a nature as to visit the tenant with the consequence of striking off his defence.
The judgment of the High Court directing that the defence be deemed to be struck off is set aside and the order of the trial judge is restored.
[836 C] 2 (i) Section I IA, can he styled as a check on the tendency of the defendant to protract the litigation by frivolous defences more especially where the duty to pay the rent is unmistakably admitted.
[830 F] (ii) In a suit for eviction, Sec.
11A enables the court to give a direction to pay rent which is claimed to be in arrears as also to compel, the defendant who continues to remain in possession during the pendency of the proceedings to perform his obligation to deposit the rent regularly.
It also enables the court to determine the rate of rent at which the deposit shall be made, where in a case there is a dispute as to the rate of rent.
[830 G] (iii) An undeniable feature of the tenancies in this country is that, the tenancy is generally oral and no written record is usually available to furnish evidence as to the terms of lease.
Giving a receipt for the rent paid has not still become a part of the culture of a landlord.
Therefore, where eviction is sought on the ground of non payment of rent, it places a tenant at a comparative disadvantage if the landlord chooses to claim rent at the rate which is beyond the capacity of the tenant to pay.
In such a situation, the tenant will be exposed to double jeopardy in that on a prima face pleading he will be directed to deposit the rent at the rate claimed by the landlord, if the court has no power to determine rate at an interim stage.
Such power is conferred by Section 11A on the Court.
It is whole some provision which would advance justice.
[830 H; 83 1 A C] 3.
Where the legislature uses the two words may and shall in two different parts of the same provision prima facie it would appear that the Legislature manifested its intention to make one part directory and another mandatory.
But that by itself is not decisive.
The power of the court still to ascertain the real intention of the Legislature by carefully examining the scope of the statute to find out whether the provision is directory or mandatory remains un impaired even where both the words are used in the same provision, [833 H; 834 A] In the instant case, if one ascertains the intendment of the legislature, the purpose for which the provision was enacted, the beneficent nature of the statute to protect the harassed tenant, it does not require long argument to hold that the expression 'shill ' was used not with a view to making the provision mandatory or imperative but it to was be directory.
Such a construction would advance the purpose for which the Act was enacted namely the protection of tenants.
It will also not render the court powerless in the face of harsh facts where striking off the defence would be nothing short of miscarriage of justice.
[833 D E] 828 R.V Inhabitants of Great Bolton, (1828) 8B & 71 at 74 Govindlal Chaganlal Patel vs The Agricultural Produce Market Committee, Godhra and others, [1976]1 SCR 451, referred to.
Where the court fixes a time to do thing, the court always retains the power to extend the time for doing so.
148 of the Code of Civil procedure provides that where any period is fixed or granted by the court for the doing of any act prescribed or allowed by the Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period, even though the period originally fixed or granted may have expired.
The principle this section must govern in not whittling down the discretion conferred on the court, by Section 11A of the Act.
[834 F G] Shyamcharan Sharma v Dharamdas, ; , referred to.
