Clause (1) in Appendix I to the Telegraphic Engineering Service (Class II) Recruitment Rules, 1966 (1966 Rules, for short), provided that promotion of a Junior Engineer to the post of Assistant Engineer shall be entirely by promotion on the basis of selection of Junior Engineers through a qualifying departmental examination.
Sub clause (1) provided that the departmental qualifying examination shall be open to Junior Engineers who were recruited and absorbed in that grade against the vacancies of a year, ordinarily not less than five years prior to the year of announcement of the said examination.
Sub clause (4) of Appendix I to the Telegraphic Engineering Service (Group Posts) Recruitment Rules, 1981 (1981 Rules, for short) which superseded the 1966 Rules envisaged a qualifying cum competitive examination for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers.
and the Note appended to sub cl.
(4) provides that for a period of 2 years after the commencement of the 1981 Rules, the first two examinations shall only be competitive for which the eligibility shall be restricted to only those officers who have already qualified in the Departmental Qualifying Examination held before the commencement of these Rules.
" The appellants/Junior Engineers, who were recruited in the year 1973, challenged in the High Court the constitutionality of the Note appended lo clause (4) of Appendix I to 1981 Rule 5 on the ground that note 4 appended to clause I introduces discrimination in that Junior Engineers Or 1972 and prior batches will alone be able, if they had cleared the qualifying examination, to take the competitive examination which would be held under 1981 Rules and as only the competitive examination was to be held, Junior Engineers of 1973 and subsequent batches, even if they have put in five years of qualifying service, would be denied an opportunity to take the examination, and that this is an invidious manner of denying them the opportunity to take the examination and thereby deny them equality of opportunity in the matter of promotion.
The learned Single Judge held that the Note to clause (4) of Appendix I to the 1981 Rules was ultra vires.
On appeal by the respondent Union of India, the Division Bench of the High Court held that the Note was not ultra Vires.
882 Dismissing the appeal by the appellants, the Court, ^ HELD: (I) By sheer passage of time, this appeal and even the main petition have become infractions.
Even in service jurisprudence the clock of history, sometimes, cannot be put back and even if it is found that the respondents have committed an error in implementing the statutory rules no relief can be granted.
This is one such case.
[885F G] (2) If by 1982, nearly 4,000 Junior Engineers of pre 1973 batches had become eligible for taking competitive examination, the department would be perfectly justified in keeping the examination open only to persons who have put in such long service and leaving others to wait for the next examination.
If for taking examination this aspect introduces classification, it is based on rational and intelligible differentia which has a nexus to the object sought to be achieved.
By the note, for a period of two years only pre 1973 Junior Engineers who had cleared qualifying examination were given a chance to take competitive examination.
If this introduces a classification, it is valid.
It caters to a well known situation in service jurisprudence that there must be some ratio of candidates to vacancies.
And it is based on long experience as a rational basis for classification.
Viewed from this angle, there is nothing in the policy underlying the note to rule (43 as being either discriminatory or arbitrary or denying equality of opportunity in the matter of promotion.
lt had the desired effect of not having glutt of Junior Engineers taking examination compared to fewer number of vacancies.
Length and experience were given recognition by the note.
The promotion can be thus by stages exposing the promotion; l avenue gradually to persons having longer experience.
This seems to be the policy underlying the note and therefore there is nothing improper or unconstitutional in it.
[888D G]
