The appellants were operating stage carriage services on inter State routes between the States of Mysore and Andhra Pradesh The procedure envisaged counter signature of permits in pursuance to the inter State agreements entered into by the two States under s.63 (3) of the .
On March 27, 1963 the Government of Andhra Pradesh issued a notification under section 9 (1) of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles laxation Act, 1963 exempting from the payment of tax under the said Act of stage carriages registered in the State of Mysore and operating on routes which lie in both the State of Mysore and Andhra Pradesh.
The appellants satisfied the conditions envisaged in the notification and were exempted from payment of Motor Vehicle tax.
On January 25, 1968 the State of Mysore published and approved a scheme under section 68 of the .
the scheme authorised the State Transport Undertaking in the State of Mysore to operate exclusively stage carriage services on certain routes and the said scheme came into force with effect from January 1, 1969.
The scheme envisaged that the existing permit holders on the inter State routes could continue to operate on such inter State routes subject to the condition that their permits would be rendered ineffective on the over lapping portions of the notified routes which lay within the State of Mysore.
After the scheme came into force the question of renewal of countersignatures of certain stage carriages permits came up for consideration and the authorities in the State of Mysore declined to countersign the stage carriage 891 permits.
Consequently the operators in the State of Andhra Pradesh could not continue to operate their services on the notified routes.
On their representations a meeting of the Home Secretaries of the two States was held on November 7, 1969 and it was resolved that notwithstanding the inter State Agreements, the ten routes which included the three routes on which the appellants were operating the stage carriage services should be deleted from the purview of the inter State Agreements and that the Mysore State operators who were operating the services on inter State routes would have to pay tax for plying the motor vehicles in the Andhra Pradesh from the quarter commencing from January 1, 1970.
No notification was, however, issued under section 9 (1) of the Act cancelling the exemptions which had been granted earlier in respect of the motor vehicles which were operating on the inter State routes including the motor vehicles of the appellants.
A demand was made by the officers in the State of Andhra Pradesh asking the appellants to pay tax under the Act with effect from January 1, 1970.
Being aggrieved by the notices of demand, the appellants filed Writ Petition under Article 226 questioning the validity of the notices of demand issued to them contending (i) that in the absence of a notification issued under Section 9 (1) (b) of the Act revoking the exemption which had been granted earlier, it was not open to the State of Andhra Pradesh or any of the officers functioning under the Act to demand payment of motor vehicles tax under the Act in respect of their motor vehicles, (ii) that the impugned notices of the demand issued by the authorities calling for payment of motor vehicles tax with effect from January 1. 1970 were invalid and unenforceable and (iii) that since the appellants had spent large sums of money on the business of running the stage carriage services on the routes in question, it was not open to the, State of Andhra Pradesh to withdraw the said concession unilaterally.
The High Court rejected the contentions and dismissed the Writ Petition holding that since it was not necessary to issue a notification under section 9 ,(1) for granting the exemption from payment of tax payable under the Act, it was also not necessary to issue a notification under section 9 (1) of the Act for withdrawing the exemption already granted and normally the demand made was sufficient to reimpose the tax payable under the Act.
G Allowing the appeals on the question whether the exemption granted by the Government of Andhra Pradesh from payment of tax by a notification dated March 27, 1963.
issued under section 9 (1) of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Taxation Act 1963 in respect of motor vehicles operated on certain inter State routes came to an end with effect from January 1, 1970, the Court, 892 ^ HELD: (1) The appellants were entitled to claim the exemption from payment of tax granted by the notification issued under section 9 (1) of the Act during the relevant period.
The judgment of the High Court in so far as it held that the appellants were not entitled to the exemption is set aside.
The impugned notices of the demand are quashed.
[904H; 905A B] (2) Section 9 of the Act provided that the Government may by notification grant an exemption of the tax payable by any person or class of persons and lt may cancel or vary such exempting, reduction or other modification.
[899D E] ( (3) The expression 'notification ' is defined in section 2 (d) of the Act as a notification published in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette.
[892E] (4) Once a notification is issued under section 3 in respect of any motor vehicle, the tax becomes payable by the registered owner of the motor vehicle or any other person having possession or control thereof.
Such a person can be exempted from payment of tax only by notification issued under section 9 (1) of the Act.
A notification issued under section 9 being a statutory instrument can be cancelled or modified in the manner prescribed by the Act and in no other way.
[899F G] (5) The State Government can grant exemption from payment of tax or cancel the exemption already granted only in accordance with section 9 (1).
That is the legislative mandate.
[90OA B] (6) In the instant case, no notification was issued as provided by Cl.
(b) of section 9 (l) of the Act either cancelling or withdrawing or varying the exemption granted earlier by the notification issued under section 9 (1).
[900B] (7) The agreement arrived at by the Home Secretaries on November 7, 1969 could not be considered as equivalent to an agreement entered into between the two States, unless and until both the Governments agreed to give effect to it and it was not effective on its own force It was only recommendatory in character.
(901B.C] (8) A notification published in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette dated March 24th, 1971 under section 63 (3A) of the indicated that the Government of Andhra Pradesh had not taken a firm decision on the question whether the routes in question should be de recognised or excluded from the purview of the inter State Agreements.
By the said notification the State Government of Andhra Pradesh invited objections from persons who were effected to make their representations.
This notification was cancelled and a second notification was issued on June 22, 1972 and this notification was also cancelled and a third notification containing similar proposals was issued on September 10, 1973.
It clearly indicated that at no material point of time the routes in question had ceased to be recognised by either of the States.
The 893 contention that the motor vehicles in question were not within the purview of the notification issued under section 9 (1) of the Act with effect from January 1, 1970 cannot be accepted.
[901D H: 902A H: 903A G] (9) It was possible that the two States could have entered into inter State Agreement before March 2, 1970 without following the elaborate procedure prescribed under sub section
(3A) of section 63 of the .
The resolutions adopted at the meeting of Home Secretaries were not effected by both the State Governments and the order passed by the Government of Andhra Pradesh on December 29, 1969 unilaterally merely directed the Commissioner of Andhra Pradesh to takes further action.
It is, however, not shown that before the said date when sub section 3 (A) of the section 63 came into force any inter State Agreement concluded by both the State Governments on the aforesaid lines had come into existence.
[904C F]
