The appellant was initially appointed in the Respondent Public Sector Undertaking as an Assistant Store Keeper and later selected as a Store Keeper.
The office order recited that the appellant had been appointed as Store Keeper till further orders, that his appointment was purely temporary, that he will be on probation for period of 6 months, and that the appointment may be terminated at any time by a month 's notice.
On successful completion of the probation period of six months, the appellant was informed that 'he was continued in service on a regular basis until further order. ' The appellant was later transfer red and the Transfer Order was challenged by him in a suit, and an obtained an interim order restraining the undertaking from implementing the transfer order.
The Employees ' Union submitted a charter of demands and it was followed by a notice threatening direct action by the members of the Union.
The appellant was an active worker of the union.
The employees went on strike, and 870 the Union submitted a list of workmen to the Corporation requesting the Corporation to give them the status of protected workmen as required by section 33(4 of the industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Appellant 's name appeared at S.No 2 in the Letter.
By an Office Order the services of the appellant were terminated with immediate effect in accordance with the terms and conditions of the service, and a cheque for one month 's pay in lieu of notice accompanied the order.
The appellant challenged the legality and validity of the order terminating his service in a Writ Petition and a Division Bench of the High Court dismissed the Petition.
It held that though on successful completion of the probation period, the appellant had been appointed on a regular basis as Store Keeper, he was non the less a temporary employee of the Corporation till the date on which his services were terminated.
The Corporation was not an Industrial Establishment within the meaning of the expression in the and therefore the Model Standing Orders enacted under the Act were not applicable to the Corporation.
The Order of termination of service was not violative of the Oil and Natural Gas Commission (Conduct, Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1964 as the service of the appellant was not dispensed with on the allegation of misconduct, but it was an order of termination of service simpliciter in accordance with Regulation 25.
As the service of the appellant were terminated not because of any personal bias of the officers of the Corporation, but because of his unsatisfactory work, the allegation of mala fides cannot be upheld.
Allowing the appeal to this Court, ^ HELD: 1 The judgment or the High Court is quashed and set aside and the rule is made absolute in the writ petition.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission is directed to pay Rs.2 lakhs to the appellant in lieu of backwages and compensation in lieu of reinstatement within a period of four weeks.
The appellant is entitled to relief under section 89, Income Tax Act, 1961 read with Rules 21 A of the Income Tax Rule, because the compensation awarded include salary which had been in arrears for 18 years as also the compensation in lieu of reinstatement [878H, 879A, E G] 2.
If the appellant was appointed on regular basis, his service cannot be terminated by one month 's notice.
If it was by way of punishment, as the High Court has found it to be so, termination is violative of the principles of natural justice in that no opportunity was given to the appellant to clear himself of the alleged misconduct which proved the real bans for making of the order of termination of service.
If it is discharge simpliciter, it would be violative of Article 16, because a number of store keepers junior to the appellant are shown to have been retained in the service and cannot be picked arbitrarily.
He had the protection of Article 16 which confers on him the fundamental right of equality and equal treatment in the matter of public employment.
The several communications which include a letter of appreciation and 871 a certificate eulogizing the services of the appellant, clearly show that the charge of unsuitability was either cooked up or conjured up for a collateral purpose of doing away with the service of an active trade union worker who because of his activities became an eye sore.
The view taken by the High Court that the termination of service was legal, valid or justified is not therefore tenable.
[877H, 878C] 4.
Ordinarily, where the order of termination of service is shown to be bad and illegal, the necessary declaration must follow that the employee continues to be in an uninterrupted serviced and he is entitled to full back wages.
[878D] In the instant case, the appellant was out of service from December 29, 1967.A period of nearly 18 years have rolled by and he would have to go back to some chagarined master.
On enquiry, the appellant informed that substantial and adequate compensation would be more acceptable to him than reinstatement with backwages.
[878E] Shri Sant Raj & Anr.
vs Sh.
O.P.Singla & Anr Civil Appeal No. 650/82 dated April 9, 1985 referred to.
An unbiased Judge, and an opportunity to controvert the allegation and to clear oneself are the minimum principles of natural justice which must inform the drastic power of dismissal affecting the livelihood of an employee.
[876F] 6.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission is an instrumentality of the State and is comprehended in the expression 'other authority ' in article 12, and any termination of service of the employee of the Corporation, if successfully questioned would permit the court to make a declaration that the employee continues to be in service.
Even if the employees of the Corporation, which is an instrumentality of the State, cannot be said to be the members of a civil service of the Union or an All India Service, or hold any civil post under the Union, for the purpose of Articles 310 and 311 and therefore, not entitled to the protection of article 311, they would none the less be entitled to the protection of the fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution that is they would be entitled to the protection of equality in the matter of employment in public service and they cannot be dealt with in an arbitrary manner.
[874G; 875C] Sukhdev Singh & Ors.
vs Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi & Anr, ; and A. L. Kalra vs Project and Equipment Corporation of India Ltd., referred to.
