In a road accident that took place two ladies were injured.
One succumbed to her injuries.
The offending vehicle was a pick up van belonging to a firm and was being driven by one of the partners.
Two claim petitions were filed one by the heirs of the deceased and the other by the injured.
The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal held that the van was being driven at the relevant time rashly and negligently.
The Tribunal awarded Rs. 75,000 as compensation to the heirs of the deceased and Rs. 3,000 to injured.
Before the Tribunal, the Insurance company contended that according to the terms of the contract of insurance as evidenced by the policy of insurance, the vehicle can be driven either by a driver in the employment of the insured or with the permission of the insured by one who holds a valid driving licence.
The Tribunal found that at the time of the accident, the vehicle was being driven by appellant No. 2, the partner of the firm, which was the owner of the vehicle and as the driver did not produce his driving licence, held that the driver did not have a valid driving licence and, in the absence of a valid driving licence, there was a breach of the contract of insurance and the insurance company was absolved from the liability under the policy of insurance.
A Division Bench of the High Court confirmed the findings of the Tribunal and dismissed the appeals by the firm and its partners.
On the question whether the insurance company under the contract of insurance is liable to satisfy the award, partly allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The insurance company has failed to prove that there was a breach of the term of the contract of insurance as evidenced by the policy of insurance on the ground that the driver who was driving the vehicle at the relevant time did not have a valid driving licence.
Once the insurance company failed to prove that aspect, its liability under the contract of insurance remains 952 intact and unhampered and it was bound to satisfy the award under the comprehensive policy of insurance.
[959B D] 2.
The award of the Tribunal as well as the judgment of the High Court are modified.
The Insurance Company is to satisfy the award with interest at 12 per cent from the date of the accident till payment.
[959D E] 3.
Where the pick up van belonging to the firm is being driven by a partner, it can be said that it is done with the permission of the owner of the firm or with its implied authority.
[956E] While dealing with the question whether the partner had a valid driving licence at the relevant time, both the Tribunal and the High Court fell into an error which resulted in giving a clean chit to the insurance company, Admittedly this pick up van could be used as a private carrier and the insurance company had issued a comprehensive insurance policy in respect of this van and at the relevant time it was in force.
[946E G] 5.
If a breach of a term of contract permits a party to the contract to not to perform the contract.
the burden is squarely on that party which complains of breach to prove that the breach has been committed by the other party to the contract.
The test in such a situation would be who would fail if no evidence is led.
[957B C] In the instant case, not an iota of evidence has been led by the insurance company to show that the second appellant did not have a valid driving licence to drive the vehicle.
The High Court took no notice of the fact that the van be.
longed to the firm and every partner for that reason would be the owner of the property of the firm.
It limited its enquiry to ascertain whether the driver was in the employ of the insurer.
It completely overlooked the fact that the driver appellant No. 2 was driving with the permission of the insured, the firm in this case.
[957C H; 951A B] 6.
On a proper analysis and interpretation of the term of contract of insurance, the insurance company cannot escape the liability if (a) the insured himself was driving the vehicle or (b) the driver was in the employment of the insurer and was driving on the order of the insurer or not being in such employment was driving under order of the insurer or (c) with his permission.
[958B C] 7.
The burden to prove that there was breach of the contract of insurance was squarely placed on the shoulders of the insurance company.
It could not be said to have been discharged by it by a more question in cross examination.
The second appellant was under no obligation to furnish evidence so as to enable the insurance company to riggle out its liability under the contract of insurance.
Further the R.T.A. which issued the driving licence keeps a record of the licences issued and renewed by it.
The insurance company could have got the evidence produced to substantiate his allegation.
Applying the test who would fail if no evidence is led, the obvious answer is the insurance company.
[958G H; 959A] 953
