The appellants husband and wife moved the High Court under Article 226 for quashing of a search warrant issued by respondent No. 2 Assistant Director, Enforcement, as also the warrant of authorisation issued by respondent No. 5 Commissioner of Income Tax and for a direction to return articles seized during the search of their house and for relief incidental and ancillary thereto.
The appellants alleged that respondent No. 6 an Assistant Com.
missioner of Income Tax, bore personal malice towards them, attributable to an incident concerning the servant of the appellants and an application for transfer of appeals pending before him was made to the Chairman Central Board of Direct Taxes by the first appellant.
Actuated by this persona; malice, respondent No. 6 first instigated respondent No. 2 to issue a search warrant under the authority of which a raid was carried out at the residence of the appellants which led to the seizure of certain documents including some foreign currency.
Thereafter when the appellants made various representations for return of documents, again instigated by respondent No. 6, 970 respondent No. 5 issued a warrant of authorisation under section 132 A of the Income Tax Act directing respondent No. 2 to deliver such books of accounts and other documents and goods seized during the search to the requisitioning officer.
The documents and material seized during the search had not been returned.
The High Court held that there was nothing illegal in the issuance of the search warrant, the consequent search, the seizure during the search and taking over of the documents by the Income Tax Department under Section 132 A and dismissed the petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended by the first appellant: (i) that respondent No. 2 acted in a manner contrary to law in issuing a search warrant without any material before him on which he could entertain a reasonable belief that any documents which in his opinion will be useful for, or relevant to, in investigation or proceedings under Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 are secreted in any place and (ii) that as the second respondent did not record his reasons in writing on which reasonable belief was entertained, the search warrant issued by him was illegal.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD 1.
When an officer of the Enforcement Department proposes to act under section 37 he must have reason to believe that the documents useful for investigation or proceeding under the Act are secreted.
The material on which the belief is grounded may be secret, maybe obtained through intelligence or occasionally may be conveyed orally by informants.
It is not obligatory upon the officer to disclose his material on the mere allegation that there was no material before him on which his reason to believe can be grounded.
Whether these grounds are adequate or not is not a matter for the Court to investigate.
[079F H: 977A C] section Narayanappa vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bangalore, ; relied upon.
The expression 'reason to believe ' is not Synonymous with subjective satisfaction of the Officer.
The belief must be held in good faith; it cannot be merely be a pretence.
It is open to the Court to examine the question to the limited extent whether the reasons for the belief have a rational connection or a relevant bearing to the formation of the belief and are not extraneous or irrelevant to tho purpose of the section.
[977 D E] 3.
Sub Section (2) of section 37 provides a shield against abuse of power inasmuch as that where an officer below the rank of the Director of Enforcement carried out the search, he must send a report to the Director of Enforcement.
[978C G] 971 In the instant case, the reply affidavit on behalf of the respondents I to 4 and the original papers, shown to the Court, indicate that there was material before the second respondent which furnished him grounds for entertaining a reasonable belief that some documents which would be useful in the investigation or proceeding under the Act were secreted in the house of the appellants and he was, therefore, fully justified in issuing the search warrant.
[975E H 976A B] Calcutta Discount Co Ltd. vs Income Tax Officer Companies District 1, Calcutta & Anr.
and R.S. Seth Gopikrishan Agarwal vs R.N. Sen, Assistant Collector of Customs & Ors., ; relied upon.
Section 37(2) provides that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure relating to searches, shall so far as may be, apply to searches directed under section 37(1).
Reading the two sections together, means that the methodology prescribed for carrying out the search provided in section 165 has to be generally followed.
The expression 'so far as may be ' has always been construed to mean that those provisions may be generally followed to the extent possible.
If section 165(1) was to be incorporated by pen and ink as sub section (2) of section 37, the legislature would have provided that the provisions of the Code relating to searches shall apply to the searches directed or ordered under section 37(1) except that the power will be exercised by tho Director of Enforcement or other officer exercising his power and he will be substituted in place of the Magistrate The provisions of sub section (2) of section 37 has not been cast in any such language.
It merely provides that tho search may be carried out according to tho method prescribed in section 165 (1).
[979E H;980A B] 5.
If it was the intention that reasons which furnish grounds for entertaining a reasonable belief were to be recorded in advance, appropriate words could have been incorporated in section 37(1), otherwise a simple one line section would have been sufficient that all searches as required for the purpose of this Act shall be carried out in the manner prescribed in section 165 of the Code by the Officer to be set out in tho section.
[980C] 6.
In order to give full meaning to the expression 'so far as may be ' sub section (2) of section 37 should be interpreted to mean that broadly the procedure relating to search as enacted in section 165 shall be followed.
But if a deviation becomes necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act in which section 37(1) is incorporated, it would be permissible except that when challenged before a court of law, justification will have to be offered for the deviation.
[980] R.S. Seth Gopikrishan vs R.N. Sen, Assistant Collector of Customs & Ors., ; and Pooran Mal etc.
vs Director of Inspection (Investigation) of Income Tax Mayur Bhavan, New Delhi & Ors., followed, 972 H.L. Sibal v Commissioner of Income, Tax, Punjab an Ors., ; Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs Ramkishan Shrikishan Jhaver referred to, New Central Jute Mills Co. Ltd. vs T.N. Kaul & Ors.
AIR 1976 Cal.
178 held over ruled.
The grounds which induced reasonable belief need not be stated in the search warrant.
In the instant case, the file submitted to the court unmistakably shows that there was material enough before the second respondent to form a reasonable belief which prompated him to direct the search.
That the documents seized during the search did not provide sufficient material to the officer for further action cannot be a ground for holding that the grounds which induced the reasonable beli f were either imaginary or fictitious or mala fide conjured up.[980E G] 8.
Legality in the method, manner or initiation of a search does not necessarily mean that anything seized during the search has to be returned.
After all in the course of a search, things or documents are required to be seized and such things and documents may furnish envidence .
Illegality of the search does not vitiate the evidence collected during such illegal search.
The only requirement is that the court or the authority before which such material or evidence seized during the search shown to be illegal, is placed has to be cautious and circumspect in dealing with such evidence or material.
[981B F] Radhakishan vs State of U.P. , [1963] Supp 1 SCR 408 at 411; and State of Maharashtra vs Natwarlal Damodardas Soni, ; relied upon.
The mere fact that during the pendency of the writ petition before the High Court the Enforcement Directorate decided to close the proceedings against appellant in respect of the material seized during the search, would not show that the search was mala fide or for reasons irrelevant or extraneous the exercise of power.
There is no warrant for the assertion that every search must result in seizure of incriminating material There can be cases in which search may fail or a reasonable explanation in respect of the documents may be forthcoming.
[982B E] In the instant case, as the documents and other materials have been sealed under the warrant of authorisation issued under section 132 A of the Income Tax Act, the Enforcement Directorate may legitimately case the proceedings.
[982E F] Pooran Mal etc.
vs Director Inspection (Investigation) of Income Tax Mayur Bhavan, New Delhi & Ors, ; and Income Tax Officer, Special Investigation Circle B, Meerut vs M/s Seth Brothers & Ors., ; relied on.
If the officer who issued the search warrant had material for forming a reasonable belief for the exercise of the power, the search cannot be styled as illegal and, therefore, no case is made out for directing return of documents on the supposition that the search and seizure were illegal.
[982G: 983A] 973 11.
The allegations of mala fides in the instant case were scanty and vague and completely misleading averments were made to support such a serious allegations against a responsible officer discharging his duties.
A nefarious attempt had eeen made to cook up a wholly imaginary allegation for attributing personal mala fides to the sixth respondent.
In the circumstances the allegation cannot stand.
