Raja Ram Jaiswal along with the members of his family purchased land bearing plot No. 26 with a building thereon admeasuring 2978 sq.
situated at K.P. Kakkar Road in March 1971.
The plan for a sound proof air condition ed cinema theatre on the said plot submitted by him was sanctioned both by the District Magistrate and the local municipality in December, 1970 and thereafter he applied for a certificate of approval under Rule 3 read with Rule 7 (2) of the U.P. Cinematograph Rules.
1951 for construction of a Cinema theatre.
The Hindi Sahitya Sammelan which was initially formed as a voluntary organisation in 1910 and registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act on January 8, 1914 retaining the same name had earlier acquired and taken possession from the Allahabad Municipal Board land admeasuring 7315 sq.
and in which a municipal school was located for purpose of building "Sangrahalaya" or a museum cum library cum reading room.
However no museum has come up and the land lies vacant.
This Sammelan raised objections to the grant of a permit for the constructions of the cinema theatre as in its view a theatre and a research cum study center can go ill together.
Overruling the objections, the District Magistrate, the Licensing Authority under the U.P. Cinema (Regulation) Act, 1955 granted the requisite certificate of approval, on March 24, 1972, under Rule 3 which would in law imply that having regard to the provisions of the 1955 Act, and 1951 Rules, there was no legal impediment to the construction of a cinema theatre on plot No. 26.
Having failed to thwart the grant of certificate of approval, the Sammelan wrote a letter on October 13, 996 1971 for acquiring land bearing plot No. 26 admeasuring approximately 2865 sq.
On the ground that it was needed for a public purpose namely for extension of Hindi Sangrahalaya of Hindi Sahitya Sammelan Prayag.
This Notification was published in the U.P. Government Gazette on February 9, 1974.A notice under section 4 (1) bearing the same date was served upon the petitioner as also the same was published in the locality.
The petitioner challenged the validity of the notification on diverse grounds in Writ Petition No. 1932/74 and obtained interim stay of taking over possession.
In the meantime, by Notification dated February 6, 1975, the earlier Notification dated January 31, 1974 was cancelled and a fresh Notification was issued to acquire "land bearing No. 62 admeasuring 8265 sq yds." and published in the U.P. Gazette on February lc. 1975.
Consequently Writ Petition No. 1932174 was got dismissed as infructuous.
A notice dated March 6. 1975 under section 5 of the Land Acquisition Act was served upon the petitioner inviting him to file his objections, if any.
The petitioner filed detailed objections on March 8, 1975 inter alia contending that the acquisition is for a company and the pre requisite for acquisition for a company having not been carried out, the acquisition is had in law.
It was also contended that the petitioner is not the Owner of plot No. '2 admeasuring 8265 sq.
yds Promptly on March 13, 1975, a corringendum was issued and published in the Gazette on March 22, 1975 correcting the notification dated February 6, 1975 to read that instead of plot No. 62 Plot No. 26 be read and instead of area 8265 sq.
yds., 2865 sq.
be read.
The substance of Gazette the notifications dated 15.2.1975 March 22, 1975 were not published in the locality as required under section 4 (1).
Tn between the issue of the notification and the corrigendum, the petitioner filed Writ Petition 3174175 questioning the validity Or the notification dated February 6, 1975 and duly amending the grounds after issue of the corrigendum.
The High Court negatived the challenges namely, (a) that the Notification was bad for non compliance first with the provisions or the Land Acquisition ((Companies)) Rules, 1953; and (b) that the acquisition proceedings are malafide but quashed the impugned notification on the ground of failure to cause public notice of the substance of Notification under section 4 (1) to be published is the locality.
Hence the State appeal (CA No. 2458/80) by special leave and the Special Leave Petition No. 9019/80 by Raja Ram.
Dismissing the State appeal and allowing in part the Special Leave Petition.
the Court.
^ HELD: 1.
When the validity of a Notification is questioned on the ground of malafides, proper parties affected by such an allegation must be impleaded in the petition.
In this case, Sammelan 's application for intervention under Order XX Rule 3 of the Supreme Court Rules 1966 must be granted though the Sammelan has not moved this Court against the High Court 's order rejecting the application for impleading.
[1004D E] 2.1 It is true that ordinarily courts do not interfere at the stage of Sec.
4 notification because it merely constitutes a proposal which will be meticulously examined after the objections arc filed under Section SA by tho person interested 997 in the land wherein all aspects of the matter can be threadbare gone into and examined.
However, as a notification under section 4 (I) initiates the proceedings for acquisition of land and uses the expression 'shall ' the mandate of the legislature bcomes clear and therefore, the infirmities therein cannot be wholly overlooked on the specious plea that the courts do not interdict at the stage of a more proposal.
11006 G] 2.2 A bare perusal of section 4 (1) clearly shows that in order to comply with the statutory requirements therein set out, a notification stating 'therein the land which is needed or is likely to be needed for a public purpose has to be published in the official Gazette.
The second part of the sub section provides that 'the Collector has to cause public notice of the substance of 'such notification to be given at convenient places in the locality in which the land proposed to be acquired is situated.
Both the conditions are mandatory.
Unless both these conditions are satisfied, section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act cannot be said to have been complied with.
Nor can Court whittle down a mandate of legislation recognised by a long line of decisions solely depending upon the facts of a given case; as is herer Further after the 1974 (U.P. Amendment and Validation Act VIII of 1974), Section 4 (1) on its true interpretation may unmistakably indicate that where the enquiry under Section 5 A is not dispensed with by resorting to Sec.
17 (4), compliance with the second part of Section 4 would be mandatory.
[1006H, 1007A D, 1009D E] Khub Chand and Ors.
vs State of Rajasthan and Ors.
, [1967] I SCR 120 at 125; Babu Barkya Thakur vs The State of Bombay, [1961] I SCR 128: Smt.
Somavanti and Ors.
vs The Sf are of Punjab & Ors., ; State of Mysore vs Abdul Razak Sahib, [1973] I SCR 856 referred to.
Gangadharaih vs State of Mysore &: Ors., (1961) Mys.
L.J. 883 approved.
2.3 It is not correct assume that the sole purpose behind publication of substance of Notification in locality, as required secondly in section 4 (1) of the Land Acquisition Act is to make requirement of section 5 A 'functionally effective.
[1009G] Where a decision of the Government to be effective and valid has to be notified in the Government Gazette, the decision itself does not become effective unless a notification in the Official Gazette follows.
Therefore, assuming that a notification is a formal expression of a decision of the Government to acquire land, unless the decision is notified in the Government Gazette by an appropriate notification, the proceedings for acquisition cannot be said to have been initiated and the decision would remain a paper decision, Section 4 (1) further requires that 'the Collector shall cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at convenient places in the said locality ' The expression 'such notification ' in the latter part of Section 4(1) and sequence of events therein enumerated would clearly spell out that first the Government should reach a decision to acquire land, then publish a notification under section 4 (1) and simultaneously or within a reasonable time from the date of the publication of the notification cause a notice to be published containing substance of such notification meaning thereby that notification which is pub 998 lished.
Obviously, therefore, there cannot he a publication in the locality prior to the issuance of the notification.
[1010B G] Babu Barkya Thakur vs The State of Bombay, [1961] I SCR 128; Narendra Bahadur Singh and Anr.
vs State of U.P. & Ors, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors.
vs Vishnu Prasad Sharma & Ors, ; held in applicable.
Mahendra Lal Jaini vs The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors, [1963] Supp.
I SCR 912 relied on.
3.1 Where power is conferred to achieve a purpose the power must be exercise reasonably and in good faith to effectuate the purpose.
And in this context 'in good faith ' means for legitimate reasons.
Where it is exercised for extraneous or irrelevant consideration or reasons, it is unquestionably a colourable exercise of power or fraud on power and the exercise of power is vitiated.
If the power to acquire land is to be exercised, it must be exercised bona fide for the statutory purpose and for none other.
If it is exercised for an extraneous, irrelevant or non germane consideration, the acquiring authority can be charged with legal malafides.
In such a situation there is no question of any personal ill will or motive [1018C E] Municipal Council of Sydney vs Compbell, [1925] A.C. 338 at 375 quoted with approval.
State of Punjab vs Gurdial Singh & Ors, [1980] I SCR 1071 explained and followed.
3.2 Where power is conferred to achieve a certain purpose, the power can be exercised only for achieving that purpose.
Section 4(1) confers power on the Government and .
the Collector to acquire land Deeded for a public purpose.
The power to acquire land is (o be exercised for carrying out a public purpose.
If the authorities of the Sammelan cannot tolerate the existence of a cinema theatre in its vicinity it cannot he said that such a purpose would be a public purpose.
The authority of the Sammelan may honestly believe that the existence of a cinema theatre may have the pernicious tendency to vitiate the educational and cultural environment of the institution and therefore.
it would like to wish away a cinema theatre in its vicinity.
That hardly constitutes public purpose.
The proclaimed need of land for putting up Sangrahalya is an easy escape route whenever Sammelan wants to take over some piece of land.
Need of the land for Sangrahalya is a figment of imagination consured up to provide an ostensible purpose for acquisition.
There is enough land roughly admeasuring 7315 sq.
Lying vacant and unutilised with the Sammelan for over a quarter of a century.
The Sangrahalya has not come up though this was the land which was taken from the Municipal Board for the avowed object of putting up a Sangrahalya.
The Sammelan moved on to Rangamanch and Natyashala and then ultimately adopted a position that when the land is made available, scheme will be devised for its proper use.
The Sammelan was ever interested in acquiring the land for effectuating any of its objects.
It was neither the plans nor the wherewithal nor any specific object 999 for which it needs land and it is unable to use over years the land already available at its disposal.
Therefore, the Sammelan was actuated by extraneous and irrelevant considerations in seeking acquisition of the land and the statutory authority having, 'known this fact yet proceeded to exercise statutory pwoer and initiated the process of acquisition.
[1017F H, 1018A B] 3.3 The power to acquire land was a exercised for an extraneous and irrelevant purpose and it was colourable exercise of power, namely, to satisfy the chagrin and anguish of the Sammelan at the coming up of a cinema theatre in the vicinity of its campus, which vowed to destroy.
There fore, the consideration dated 6 2.1975 is illegal and invalid.
[1019E F]
