The two appellants, who were the Managing Director and the Production Manager of a public limited company, were prosecuted by the respondent for alleged violations by their company of clauses 2 (c) (i) and 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Pulses, Edible Oil Seeds and Edible Oil Dealers Licensing Order, 1977 and clause 3 of the Madhya Pradesh Essential Commodities (Price Exhibition and Price Control) Order, 1977 read with sections 3 and 7 of the Essential Commodities Act (the Act, for short).
The appellants moved the High Court under sections 397 and 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the proceedings against them on the ground that they could not, in law, be prosecuted unless the company itself was prosecuted.
The High Court over ruled this contention and hence these appeals by special leave.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
Section 10 of the Act lists the persons who may be held guilty and punished when it is a company that contravenes an order made under Section 3 of the Act.
They are: (1) the company itself (2) every person who, at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, that is, the person in charge of the company, and (3) any director, manager, secretary or other officers of the company with whose consent or connivance or because of neglect attributable to whom the offence has been committed, that is, an officer of the company.
[722C F] 2.
It is clear from the language of Section 10 that there is no statutory compulsion that the person in charge or an officer of the company may not be prosecuted unless he be ranged alongside the company itself.
Each or any of them may be separately prosecuted or along with the company if there is a contravention of an order made under Section 3 of the Act by the company.
It does no lay down any condition that the person in charge or an officer of 720 the company may not be separately prosecuted if the company itself is not prosecuted.
Therefore the prosecutions of the appellants are maintainable and that there is nothing in Section 10 of the Act which bars such prosecution [722 G,H, 723F] State of Madras v C.V. Parekh and another, AIR 1971 S.C. 447, State of Gujarat vs Chandulal Jethalal, (1980) 21 Gujarat Law Reporter 353, Mirji Brothers Oil Mill vs State of Karnataka, and Santi Kumar Agarwala vs State, ILR.
1975 Cuttack 86, distinguished.
Durgamata Oil Mill vs Calcutta Municipality, 1978 Crl.
L.J. 222, D.K. Jain vs State, AIR 1965 All.
525 and Chander Bhan vs The State, 1975 All India Prevention of Food Adulteration, held inapplicable.
