Urban Family Clinic was set up by a Steel Plant for implementation of family welfare schemes.
The Chief Medical Officer of The Plant was the administrative officer for the Clinic.
The financial expenditure of the Clinic was borne by the Government of India.
Subsequently the Clinic was treated as an integral part of the administration of the Plant and its employees were absorbed with effect from February 4, 1976.
The appellants who were serving as Aaya/Attendants moved an application before the Labour Court for a relief that they are being wrongly treated as fresh employees from the date of absorption and that their services since the commencement of employment be treated as continuous for the purpose of gratuity, retrenchment and leave etc.
The management of the Plant contested the application contending that the Clinic was an independent unit set up by the Government of India and that it was not an integral part of the administration and, therefore, the services rendered prior to the absorption could not be treated as service under the Plant and, therefore, the application deserves to be dismissed.
The Labour Court allowing the application held that the Clinic had hardly any independent existence and that the employees of the Clinic were in reality and for all practical purposes the employees of the Plant.
Two revision petitions were filed before the Industrial Court one on behalf of the Plant, and the other on behalf of the appellants.
The Industrial Court dismissed the revision petition of the appellants with a further direction 1050 that the application before the Labour Court was liable to be dismissed.
While allowing The revision petition of the management, the Industrial Court held that family planning centers were run by different public undertakings and it was started as part of the general policy of the Government of India and even though the expenditure of the centre was reimbursed by the Government, the Clinic of the centre could not be said to be an industry within the meaning of expression in the Act nor could it be said to be incidental to the main business of the Plant.
The prayer in the application before the Labour Court that the appellants should be given additional and better wages and service conditions was beyond the competence of the Labour Court and consequently the application was not maintainable.
The writ petition filed by the appellants was dismissed by the High Court, Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The findings of facts as recorded by the Labour Court and which have neither been departed from nor questioned by the High Court clearly point to the inescapable conclusion that the Clinic had no independent existence of its own and that for all practical purposes it was under the administrative control of the Plant.
[1053 F] 2.
The Clinic had no independent existence.
In fact it was an euphemism to call it an independent undertaking.
It was part and parcel of the administrative set up.
The Clinic was managed by tho Chief Medical Officer of the Plant with a designation of Administrative Officer, and was accountable for the money received from the Government of India.
The labour Court was perfectly justified in holding that the employees of the Clinic were the employees of the Plant working in a department under the administrative control of Chief Medical Officer who was under the overall administrative control of the management of the Plant.
The Labour Court was perfectly justified in holding that since the inception of the Clinic the employees were the employees of the Plant and that the absorption was an acceptance of reality avoiding the pretence.
[1054 E; G H; 1055 A B] 3.
The Industrial Court was in error in concluding that whether the application as made was not maintainable.
The reasons which appealed to the Labour Court for holding that the application was maintainable are indisputably unquestionable and the view to the contrary is untenable.
[1055 C] 4.
The High Court has overlooked that Family Planning Scheme has to be implemented in larger national interest.
Public sector undertakings owned by the Government of India may be directed to carry out the scheme.
For this purpose the Clinic was set up under the administrative control of the Chief Medical Officer of the Plant.
If a hospital can be said to be run for the welfare of the employees of the Plant how the Clinic which would also be described as a hospital for giving advice in family planning could be differentiated from a hospital.
A modern hospital can as well have a family planning clinic.
The distinction drawn by the High Court lacks logic.
The Clinic was an integral 1051 department of the Plant and had hardly any independent existence.
The independent paper existence was found unworkable in the long run and therefore the Public Enterprises Committee directed to absorb the employees of the Clinic in the establishment of the Plant.
Accordingly no other view is possible than the on taken by the Labour Court.
[1055 E H] Bangalore water Supply &.
Sewerage Board etc.
vs R. Rajappa & others, 11978] 3 SCR 207, referred to.
