Senior Draughtsmen in the Ordnance Factories under the Ministry of Defence are either directly recruited or promoted from the post Draughtsmen.
At all relevant times all the Senior Draughtsmen throughout the above establishments were drawing the same pay scale of Rs. 205 280.
While revising the pay scale of various categories of employees, the Third Pay Commission recommended that the Draughtsmen should be placed in the scale of Rs. 330 560.
The Pay Commission also recommended that the Senior Draughtsmen should be divided into two groups and half the number of posts of Draughtsmen in the above organisations on the present pay scale of Rs. 205 280 be placed in the revised scale of Rs. 425 700 on the basis of seniority and the remaining half in the revised scale of Rs. 330 560.
Pursuant to the aforesaid recommendation, the Government of India by its Order dated 1st July, 1978 directed that only those senior Draughtsmen who were holding that post on 31st December, 1972 would be given the senior scale of pay i.e. Rs. 425 700.
The appellants who are senior Draughtsmen made representation to the Government of India against this grouping by the Third Pay Commission.
As the representations were not accepted, the appellants challenged the Order of the Government before the High Court in a Writ Petition contending that all the Senior Draughtsmen did the same kind of work and discharged same or similar duties and therefore there was no justification for distinction being made amongst the Senior Draughtsmen, providing two different pay scales on the basis of seniority.
The High Court dismissed the petition holding that it was open to the Government to fix two different pay scales for Senior Draughtsmen and that it was for the Government to decide what pay scale should be provided to the different classes of employees.
102 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) Where all relevant considerations are the same, persons holding identical posts and discharging similar duties should not be treated differently.
Therefore the Order passed by the Government of India implementing the impugned recommendation of the Third Pay Commission dividing the Senior Draughtsmen into two categories with two different pay scales on the basis of seniority violates Article 14 of the Constitution and is struck down.
Randhir Singh vs Union of India and Ors.
; , followed.
In the instant case the group of Draughtsmen entitled to the higher scale of pay is not selected by any process nor is it based on any merit cum seniority basis, but is based only on seniority cum fitness.
Moreover, the Senior Draughtsmen divided into two groups are in the same Department doing identical and same work.
It is not a case of different grades created on the ground of higher qualification either academic or otherwise or an entitlement by any other criteria.
Thus the classification between the two groups of Senior Draughtsmen is without any basis.
In view of the total absence of any plea on the side of the respondents that the Senior Draughtsmen who are placed in the advantageous group, do not perform work and duties more onerous or different from the works performed by the appellants group, it will have to be held that this grouping violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
[107 E F] Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1139; State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh, ; ; Unikat Sankunni Menon vs State of Rajasthan A.I.R. ; State of Mysore and Anr.
vs P. Narsingh Rao ; , distinguished.
