The respondent, an Advocate, was ordered to be detained by the State Government under Section 3(2) of the National Security Act, 1950.
He was taken into custody and detained.
The grounds of detention were supplied to him when he was detained.
The respondent challenged his detention in the High Court.
The High Court found: (1) that the representation of the detenu respondent had not been placed before the Advisory Board within three weeks as required by section 10 of the Act and such violation vitiated the continued detention of the respondent.
(2) that the Advisory Board had not considered the documentary evidence produced by the detenu and therefore the opinion formed by the Board that the respondent should be detained was not an appropriate one, (3) that the materials in the record which had been considered by the Advisory Board in formulating its recommendation to the State Government had not been transmitted to the Government, and the same was not available before the State Government, when it made the order of confirmation, (4) that the contents of the intelligence reports referred to in the grounds of detention had not been supplied to the detenu and he had, therefore, been deprived of the opportunity of making an effective representation against his detention.
The High Court consequently held that the detention of the respondent cannot be upheld, and directed the order of detention directing him to be detained for one year be quashed.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the State appellant, that the four grounds accepted by the High Court in quashing the detention was wrong and not sustainable as a ground for such quashing.
It was further contended that as a fact there had been compliance of section 10 of the Act within a week of commencement of the detention and as by then no representation from the respondent had been received, the same could not be placed before the Board along with the grounds of detention.
The respondent is a practising advocate and must have therefore properly placed his points 84 before the Advisory Board.
As the Board had not been sent the entire records, all the records were not available for the consideration of the State Government at the time of confirmation of the detention.
The respondent had actually been given in the grounds all the material details necessary for making an effective representation.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD : 1(a) While making of the reference under section 10 with the grounds of detention is a must, furnishing of the representation is conditional upon it having been made and receipt thereof by the appropriate Government.
Though under the general scheme of the Act definite and different periods have been prescribed for compliance with the step to step treatment of the matter, there is no obligation cast on the detenu to make a representation within any definite time.
[91 H; 92 A] (b) The procedure of the Advisory Board contained in section 11 of the Act indicates that the Board is to consider the materials placed before it and is entitled to call for such information as it may deem necessary from the appropriate Government or from any other person concerned and after hearing the detenu, if he wants to be heard in person, has to report to the appropriate Government within seven weeks from the date of detention.
[92 D E] (c) The legislative scheme in fixing the limit of three weeks in section 10 and the further limit of seven weeks in section 11, allows at least four weeks ' time to the Board to deal with the matter.
[92 E] (d) It is obligatory for the appropriate Government to forward the representation, when received, to the Board without delay because unless on the basis of the representation the appropriate Government rescinds the order of detention, the representation is a document intended for the Board.
Where the representation has been received the same should, as expeditiously as possible, reach the Board.
[92 H; 93 A] In the instant case the Board on receipt of the reference on August 22, 1984, directed its sitting to be convened for September 10,1984 for considering the justifiability of the respondents detention.
The State Government received the representation on August 30,1984, and placed the same before the Board on September 6,1984.
Six clear days had intervened between the receipt of the representation by Government and the placing thereof before the Board.
Admittedly, if the representation had reached the Board by September 5, 1984, the respondent would not be entitled to raise any objection.
Keeping the attendant circumstances in view, it is difficult to hold that the time taken by the State Government can amount to withholding of the representation which resulted in non compliance of section 10 of the Act so as to vitiate the detention.
It cannot also be said that there has been any negligence or remissness on the part of the State Government in dealing with the representation of the detenu or in the matter of causing the same to be placed before the Advisory Board.
No prejudice has been caused to the detenu on account of the delay of a day 85 beyond the statutory period in placing the representation before the Advisory Board inasmuch as the Advisory Board had caused the matter to be heard on the 10th September, 1984 and before the appointed date the representation was before the Board.
B; D; 95 D E] A.K. Roy, etc.
vs Union of Indian & Anr.
, ; ; Ichhu Devi Choraria vs Union of India & Ors., ; ; Khudi Ram Das vs State of West Bengai & Ors.,[1975] 2 S.C.R. 832; Frances Coralie Mullin vs W.C. Khambra & Ors.,[1980] 2 S.C.R. 1095 and Raisuddin alias Babu Tamchi vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr., ; ; referred to. 2(a) Under section 11(2) of the Act the report of the Advisory Board has to specify in a separate part thereof the opinion of the Board as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned and sub section
(4) provides, the proceedings of the Board and its report, except that part of the report in which the opinion of the Advisory Board is specified shall be confidential.
[95 G H] (b) The Board is not required to write out a judgment.
What is the unbiased and impartial conclusion on the materials available with reference to the grounds of detention as to whether the detention order when made and the continued detention of the person concerned are justified.
[96 E] In the instant case, the Advisory Board was constituted by three Judges of the High Court, one of them being the Chairman.
That justifies the assumption that the members of the Board by their professional ability and acumen were capable to assess the matter in a proper way and form an objective opinion on the basis of materials produced.
The detailed conclusions with reasons given by the Board show that the detenu made before the Board very lengthy arguments and cited a number of authorities in support of his submissions.
The High Court had therefore no justification to accept the submission of the detenu that the documentary evidence produced by the detenu had not been considered by the Board.
[96 B C; 96 F] 3.
(a) Under section 11(2) of the Act, the Board is required to submit its report and there is no obligation cast by the Act that the entire record of Board should be placed before the State Government.
Section 12 in its two subsections indicates two alternative courses open to the State Government on the basis of the report.
If the Board is of the view that there is no sufficient cause for detention of the person, the appropriate Government is obliged to revoke the detention and release the detenu.
On the other hand, where the Board is of the view that there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person, the appropriate Government may confirm the detention order and continue the detention.
The two provisions have been expressed in different language.
[96 G H; 97 A B] Nand Lal Bajaj vs State of Punjab & Anr.
1981 Cr. L.J. 1501, referred to.
86 (b) The procedure established by law does not require the entire record to be sent by the Board to the State Government; yet it is certainly proper that the record should be available for being looked into in such manner as the confirming authority considers appropriate before the final decision one way or the other is taken.
The grounds of detention were divided into two groups, one labelled as criminal activities and the other as extremist activities.
[97 H; 98 A] In the instant case, the documents produced by the detenu before the Board did not contain any material which could persuade the State Government to act in a different way.
The High Court was therefore not right to hold that the order of confirmation of detention was bad.
[98 F G] 4.
(a) Personal freedom is an invaluable treasure and the founding fathers took great care to protect it by making appropriate provisions in the Constitution.
Simultaneously taking into consideration the peculiar situations prevailing in the country, the right of the State to order preventive detention was also provided therein.
In order that personal freedom may not be curtailed beyond necessity and the executive administration may not make it an empty guarantee, detailed provisions were made in Article 22 providing an effective procedure in the matter of making of representation and scrutiny of the materials in the presence of the detenu and even hearing him, if he so desired, by an independent Board with adequate judicial bias.
[99 B C] (b) The detenu is not entitled to a disclosure of the confidential source of information used in the grounds or utilised for the making of the order What is necessary for the making of an effective representation is the disclosure of the material and not the source thereof By indicating that the facts have been gathered from confidential reports, a suggestive disclosure of the source has also been made.
[99 D E] State of Punjab & Ors. vs Jagdev Singh Talwandi, ; ; Beni Madhob Shaw vs State of West Bengal, AIR 1973 SC 2455; Har Jas Dev Singh vs State of Punjab, ; and Vakil Singh vs State of J & K, AIR 1974 SC 2337, referred to.
In the instant case, the grounds of detention were divided into two groups, one labelled as criminal activities and the other as extremist activities.
Against extremist activities it was further indicated, 'on the basis of confidential reports '.
The facts by way of accusations were detailed, but copies of the reports as such were not furnished.
The respondent had actually been given in the grounds all material details necessary for making an effective representation.
[98 H; 99 A]
