Pursuant to an investigative report in the "Indian Express" dated September 14, 1982, one of the advocates practising in the Supreme Court addressed a letter to one of the Judges of the Supreme Court depicting the horrid plight of bonded labour from Tamil Nadu working in the stone quarries at Raisen in Madhya Pradesh.
It was alleged: (a) Everyone recruited were paid a reimbursible advance of Rs. 1,000/ but the method of accounting is so manipulated that the debt instead of getting wiped out, increased in geometrical proportion and no workmen can have the employment until the entire debt repaid which is beyond the reach of the workmen; (b) The working conditions were bad.
There was no weekly holiday.
Sanitary conditions were in deplorable state.
The workmen were not paid any wages during rainy seasons, since the mines were shut off; (c) Not a single legislation enacted for the welfare of labour is implemented or respected and (d) Due to the inaction of the Labour Department of the Centre and the State like absence of a notification specifying minimum wages for the labour force employed in the mines, resulting in poultry and meagre payment there is naked and unabashed exploitation of workmen.
The report called for by the Supreme Court from the District Judge Bhopal confirmed the said allegations and further revealed that (a) on a complaint preferred 48 labourers were released by the Labour Department of Madhya Pradesh; (b) a complaint has been lodged with the police under the ; (c) two or three cases against the Contractors were instituted in fact and the said cases were pending; (d) the piece rate method of paying wages for digging a standard 'Khanti ' has resulted sometime to no payment at all for both the male and female labour employed; (e) a team of police force arrived from Tamil Nadu and liberated the workmen and repatriated them to Tamil Nadu and (f) the newspaper publicity had a very salutary and desired effect in as much as various contractors have given up efforts to recover the advances which was a good achievement.
The State of Madhya Pradesh admitted the findings of the District Judge, Bhopal and pointed out that in respect of flagstone mines, the appropriate Government is the Central Government under the payment of 127 Bonus Act, 1965 and the .
The Tamil Nadu Government have clarified as to how the labourers were duped and taken to Madhya Pradesh and confirmed the release of the labourers by their State Police.
The Court in the circumstances directed the Union of India as appropriate Government to issue a preliminary notification under section 5 of the setting out its proposal for information of persons likely to be affected thereby and specifying a date not less than two months from the date of the Notification on which proposals will be taken into consideration.
The Union of India accordingly issued necessary notification dated March 24,1982 and October 31, 1983 setting out the minimum piece rate of wages for various occupations in flagstone mines.
Disposing of the petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
Undoubtedly, mines have to work in larger public and national interest.
Therefore, in the very nature of things, there will be contractors and the workmen.
Contractor as is his wont, to augment his profit which motivates him to take contract and who is not shown to be altruistic, is bound to exploit the workmen.
The notorious method of exploitation is, pay as much less as possible despite all pretensions of Minimum Wages and Payment of Wages Act, take work for longer hours, prohibited by beneficent statutes like the Mines Act, the Factories Act and like statutes.
Both these when jointly practised enlarges the profit.
The law is that no employer can pay less than the minimum wages.
But this remains a paper promise unless an effective implementation machinery not overawed by these wealthy and generally unscrupulous contractors who can spread their tentacles over officials is set up.
[133 H; 134 A B; D] (The court expressed the hope that such a machinery would be set up jointly by the Union of India and the Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh.) [134 E] 2.
The State in discharge of its obligation under Articles 38, 41, 42 and 43 must extend the umbrella of protection to these poor and needy and unprotected workmen who are unable to negotiate on terms of equality and who may accept any terms to stave of hunger and destitution.
It is the State which must interpose between these two unequals to eschew exploitation.
[134 B C]
