The respondent in the appeal was a partnership firm dealing in timber and consisted of six partners.
It filed returns of its taxable turnover for the assessment years 1968 69 and 1969 70 under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 and the assessments were completed by the Sales Tax Officer.
Subsequently, the Sales Tax Officer discovered that the respondent firm owned a Saw Mill and that the Saw Mill was run by another partnership firm which consisted of the same partners as the respondent firm.
It was further noticed that during the relevant assessment years the Saw Mill firm had sold saw dust but had not been assessed to sales tax on that turnover.
The Sales Tax Officer took the view that both she respondents timber firm and the Saw Mill firm consisted of identical partners, the two businesses carried on respectively, by them had to be treated as the business of a single partnership firm and, therefore, the turnover of the sale of saw dust had to be included in the earlier assessments made on the respondent Timber firm.
The assessment orders were upheld by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
The appeals filed by the respondent Timber firm before the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal were allowed and the cases were remanded for fresh consideration.
The Revenue applied to the High Court, but the revision petitions were dismissed.
The High Court relying on the decision of this Court in State of 136 Punjab vs M/s. Jullundur Vegetables Syndicate, [1966] 17 STC 326 held that the Saw Mill partnership firm was a partnership firm distinct from the respondent Timber firm for the purposes of sales tax assessment and the turnover of the one could not be included in the turnover of the other.
Dismissing the Appeals to this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The approach adopted by the High Court is not sound.
The true solution has to be found not in the tax law but in the partnership law.
The orders of the High Court dismissing the Tax Revision Cases are maintained.
The orders of the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal remanding the case are confirmed.
Instead of the cases going back to the assessing officer they shall stand remanded to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
[144 D E] State of Punjab vs M/s. Jullundur Vegetables Syndicate [1966] 17 S.T.C. 326, distinguished.
In every case when the assessee professes that it is a partnership firm and claims to be taxed in that status, the first duty of the assessing officer is to determine whether it is, in law and in fact, a partnership firm.
For determining whether there is a firm, the assessing officer will apply the partnership law, subject of course, to any specific provision in that regard in the tax law modifying the partnership law.
If the tax law is silent, it is the partnership law only to which he will refer.
Having decided the legal identity of the assessee, that it is a partnership firm, he will then turn to the tax law and apply its relevant provisions for assessing the partnership income.
142 D F] Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal vs A. W. Figgies and Company and Others, , Jesingbhai Ujamshi vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay Mofussil, , Jeshingbhai Ujamshi vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay, , R.N. Oswal Hosiery and Mahabir Woollen Mills vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab, , Commissioner of Income Tax, A.P. III vs G. Parthasarathy Naidu & Sons.
, , Income Tax Commissioner for City of London vs Gibbs, 10 I.T.R. Suppl.
121, referred to.
In the instant case, there are two businesses, a business in timber and a business in saw dust.
Both businesses were carried on by the same partners, one as a partnership firm called K. Kelukutty, and the other under the name M/s. K.K.K. Sons Saw Mills, said to be a separate partnership firm.
On the material before the Court, it is not possible to say, whether there is one firm or two.
That is a question which appropriately falls for examination by the authorities constituted under the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963.
144 B C] 3.
Having regard to the definitions of "dealer" and "person" in sections 2 (viii) and 2 (xvi A) of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 a partnership firm must be regarded under that Act as an assessable entity separate and distinct from its individual partners.
However, the Act contains 137 no provision which bears on the identity of a partnership firm.
Therefore, recourse must be had for that purpose to the partnership law alone.
Where it is claimed that there are not one but two partnership firms constituted by the same persons and carrying on different businesses, the assessing authority must test the claim in the light of the partnership law.
It is only after that question has been determined namely, whether in law there is only one partnership firm or two partnership firms, that the next question arises: whether the turnover is assessable in the hands of the partnership firm as a taxable entity separate and distinct from the partner ? There is first a decision under the law of partnership, thereafter the second question arises, the question as to assessment under the tax law.
[139 C D; 142 G H; 143 A] 4.
Persons who have entered into partnership with one another are called individually "Partners", and collectively "a firm".
The relationship between those persons constitutes the partnership, and is founded in the agreement between them, the partnership agreement.
A partnership agreement is the source of a partnership, it also gives expression to the other ingredients defining the partnership, viz. specifying the business agreed to be carried on, the persons who will actually carry on the business, the shares in which the profits will be divided etc.
Each partnership agreement may constitute a distinct and separate partnership, and therefore distinct and separate firms.
The firm name is only a collective name for the individual partners but each partnership is a distinct relationship.
The partners may be different and yet the nature of the business may be the same.
An agreement between the partners to carry on a business and share its profits may be followed by a separate agreement between the same partners to carry on another business and share the profits therein.
The intention may be to constitute two separate partnerships and therefore two distinct firms.
Or to extend merely a partnership originally constituted to carry on one business to the carrying on of another business.
It will all depend on the intention of the partners.
The intention of the partners will have to be decided with reference to the terms of the agreement and all the surrounding circumstances, including evidence as to the interlacing or interlocking of management, finance and other incidents of the respective businesses.
[144 C H]
