The appellant 's husband was the tenant in respect of a shop under the respondent landlord since 1979.
In 1970 the respondent landlord served a notice on the appellant 's husband determining the tenancy.
Thereafter, he filed a petition under section 14 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for eviction of the tenant from the said shop on several grounds including the grounds of nonpayment of rent and sub letting.
The Rent Controller dismissed the petition.
Against the order of the Rent Controller the respondent landlord preferred an appeal before the Rent Control Tribunal and the tenant filed cross objections.
During the pendency of the appeal, the tenant died and the present appellant was substituted.
The Rent Control Tribunal remanded the case to the Rent Controller to decide the question of sub letting afresh after affording an opportunity to the parties to lead evidence.
Aggrieved by the order of the Rent Control Tribunal, the appellant filed an appeal in the High Court.
The respondent landlord filed cross objection and further raised a contention that in view of the death of the original tenant who continued to remain in possession of the shop as a statutory tenant, the widow and the heirs of the deceased tenant were not entitled to continue to remain in occupation thereof.
The High Court allowed the cross objection filed by the respondent landlord and passed a decree for eviction against the appellant mainly on the ground that the protection afforded to the statutory tenant by the Act was not available to the heirs and the legal representatives.
In appeal to this Court the appellant while relying upon Damadi Lal and Ors.
vs Parashram and Ors.
[1976] Supp.
S.C.R. 645 and V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal ; , contended that notwithstanding the determination of the statutory tenancy of the tenant in respect of any commercial premises, the position in law remains unchanged in so far as the tenancy in respect of commercial premises is concerned by virtue of the provisions of the Act.
The respondent, however argued (i) that the protection against the eviction after termination of tenancy afforded to a tenant by the Act creates a personal right in favour of the tenant who continues to remain in possession after termination of his tenancy without any estate or interest in 2 the premises and therefore on the death of such a tenant his heirs who had neither any estate or interest in the tenanted premises and who do not have any protection under the Act against eviction are liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary law of the land; and (ii) that the amendment to the definition of 'tenant ' with retrospective effect introduced by the Delhi Rent Control Amendment Act (Act 18 of 1976) to give personal protection and personal right to continue in possession to the heirs of the deceased statutory tenant in respect of residential premises only and not with regard to the so called statutory tenant in respect of commercial premises indicated that the heirs of so called statutory tenant, do not enjoy any protection under the Act.
Allowing the appeal, [Per Y. V. Chandrachud C.J. S.M. Fazal Ali, A.N. Sen and V.B. Eradi JJ.] ^ HELD: (1)(i) The term "statutory tenant" is used in English Rent Act and though this term is not to be found in the Indian Acts, in the judgments of the Supreme Court and also various High Courts in India, this term has often been used to denote a tenant whose contractual tenancy has been terminated but who has become entitled to continue to remain in possession by virtue of the protection afforded to him by the statutes in question; namely, the various Rent Control Acts prevailing in different States of India.
It is also important to note that notwithstanding the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Landlord, the tenant is afforded protection against eviction and is permitted to continue to remain in possession even after the termination of the contractual tenancy by the Act in question and invariably by all the Rent Acts in force in various States so long as an order of decree for eviction against the tenant on any of the grounds specified in such Acts on the basis of which an order or decree for eviction against the tenant can be passed, is not passed.
[14H; 15 A B] (1)(ii) Though provisions of all the Rent Control Acts are not uniform, the common feature of all the Rent Control Legislation is that a contractual tenant on the termination of the contractual tenancy is by virtue of the provisions of the Rent Acts not liable to be evicted as a matter of course under the ordinary law of the land and he is entitled to remain in possession even after determination of the contractual tenancy and no order or decree for eviction will be passed against a tenant unless any ground which entitles the landlord go get an order or decree for possession specified in the Act is established.
[25D E] (2)(i) It is clear from the definition of tenant, whether in the original Act or in the amended Act, that the tenant within the meaning of the definition of the term in the Act includes any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy.
[28 G] (2)(ii) Section 14 of the Act clearly postulates that despite the termination of the tenancy and notwithstanding the provisions of any other law which might have been applicable on the termination of the contractual tenancy, protection against eviction is applicable to every tenant as defined 3 in section 2(i) of the Act.
This section clearly establishes that determination of a contractual tenancy does not disqualify him from continuing to be a tenant within the meaning of this Act and the tenant whose contractual tenancy has been determined enjoys the same position and is entitled to protection against eviction.
The other sections in Chapter III also go to indicate that the tenant whose tenancy has been terminated enjoys the same status and benefit as a tenant whose tenancy has not been terminated, and a tenant after termination of his tenancy stands on the same footing as the tenant before such termination.
Chapter III A which provides for summary trial for certain applications also does not make any distinction between a tenant whose tenancy has been determined and a tenant whose tenancy has not been terminated.
Chapter IV which deals with deposit of rent consists of sections 26 to 29 and these sections make it clear that the tenant after determination of a tenancy is treated under the Act on the same footing as a tenant whose tenancy has not been determined.
Chapter VI though not very material for the purpose of adjudication of the point involved indicates that no discrimination is made in the matter of proceedings for eviction between the 'so called statutory tenant ' and a contractual tenant.
Chapter VII which consists of sections 44 to 49 makes provisions regarding obligations of landlords and also provides for penalties in appropriate cases.
The sections make it clear that the duties and obligations of landlords cast upon the landlord apply equally whether the tenant is a so called 'statutory tenant ' or the tenant is a contractual tenant.
It may, however, be noted that section 50 which bars the jurisdiction of Civil Courts in respect of certain matters does not in any way discriminate between a 'so called statutory tenant ' and a contractual tenant.
Thus, the various provisions of the Act, make it abundantly clear that the Act does not make any distinction between a 'so called statutory tenant ' and a 'contractual tenant ' and the Act proceeds to treat both alike and to preserve and protect the status and rights of a tenant after determination of the contractual tenancy in the same way as the status and rights of a contractual tenant are protected and preserved.
[30 A H; 31A] V. Dhanpal Chattiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; , relied upon.
(3)(i) The termination of the contractual tenancy in view of the definition of 'tenant ' in the Act does not bring about any change in the status and legal position of the tenant, unless there are contrary provisions in the Act; and, the tenant notwithstanding the termination of tenancy does enjoy an estate or interest in the tenanted premises.
This interest or estate which the tenant under the Act despite termination of the contractual tenancy continues to enjoy creates a heritable interest in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
The amendment of the definition of 'tenant ' by Act 18 of 1976 introducing particularly section 2(i)(iii) does not in any way mitigate against this view.
The said sub section (iii) with all the three Explanations thereto is not in any way inconsistent with or contrary to sub section (ii) of Section 2(1) which unequivocally states that 'tenant ' includes any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy.
In the absence of the provision contained in sub section 2(i)(iii), the heritable interest of the heirs of the statutory tenant would devolve on all the heirs of the 'so called statutory tenant ' on his death and the heirs of such tenant would in law step into his position.
[33 G H; 33 A C] Damadial & Ors.
vs Parashram & Ors.
[1976] Supp, S.C.R. 645 followed.
4 (3)(ii) Section 2(i)(iii) of the Act does not create any additional or special right in favour of the heirs of the 'so called statutory tenant ' on his death, but seeks to restrict the right of the heirs of such tenant in respect of residential premises.
As the status and rights of a contractual tenant even after determination of his tenancy when the tenant is at times described as the statutory tenant, are fully protected by the Act and the heirs of such tenants become entitled by virtue of the provisions of the Act to inherit the status and position of the statutory tenant on his death, the Legislature which has created this right has thought it fit in the case of residential premises to limit the rights of the heirs in the manner and to the extent provided in section 2(1)(iii).
However, the Legislature has not thought it fit to put any such restrictions with regard to tenants in respect of commercial premises in this Act.
So long as the contractual tenancy of a tenant who carries on the business continues, there can be no question of the heirs of the deceased tenant not only inheriting the tenancy but also inheriting the business and they are entitled to run and enjoy the same.
[33 D G] (3)(iii) The mere fact that in the Act no provision has been made with regard to the heirs of tenants in respect of commercial tenancies on the death of the tenant after termination of the tenancy, as has been done in the case of heirs of the tenants of residential premises, does not indicate that the Legislature intended that the heirs of the tenants of commercial premises will cease to enjoy the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act.
The Legislature could never have possible intended that with death of a tenant of the commercial premises, the business carried on by the tenant, however flourishing it may be and even if the same constituted the source of livelihood of the members of the family, must necessarily come to an end on the death of the tenant only because the tenant died after the contractual tenancy had been terminated.
[35 F H] (3)(iv) In case of commercial premises governed by the Delhi Act the Legislature has not thought to fit in the light of the situation at Delhi to place any kind of restriction on the ordinary law of inheritance with regard to succession.
It may also be borne in mind that in case of commercial premises the heirs of the deceased tenant not only succeed to the tenancy right in the premises but they succeed to the business as a whole.
It might have been open to the Legislature to limit or restrict the right of inheritance with regard to the tenancy as the Legislature had done in the case of the tenancies with regard to the residential houses but it would not have been open to the Legislature to alter under the Rent Act, the law of succession regarding the business which is a valuable heritable right and which must necessarily devolve on all the heirs in accordance with law.
The absence of any provision restricting the heritability of the tenancy in respect of the commercial premises only establishes that commercial tenancies notwithstanding the determination of the contractual tenancies will devolve on the heirs in accordance with law and the heirs who step into the position of the deceased tenant will continue to enjoy the protection afforded by the act and they can only be evicted in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
[36 B E] 5 (3)(v) As the protection afforded by the Rent Act to a tenant after determination of the tenancy and to his heirs on the death of such tenant is a creation of the Act for the benefit of the tenants, it is open to the Legislature which provides for such protection to make appropriate provisions in the Act with regard to the nature and extent of the benefit and protection to be enjoyed and the manner in which the same is to be enjoyed.
If the Legislature makes any provision in the Act limiting or restricting the benefit and the nature of the protection to be enjoyed in a specified manner by any particular class of heirs of the deceased tenant on any condition laid down being fulfilled, the benefit of the protection has necessarily to be enjoyed on the fulfillment of the condition in the manner and to the extent stipulated in the Act.
The Legislature which by the Rent Act seeks to confer the benefit on the tenants and to afford protection against eviction, is perfectly competent to make appropriate provision regulating the nature of protection and the manner and extent of enjoyment of such tenancy rights after the termination of contractual tenancy of the tenant including the rights and the nature of protection of the heirs on the death of the tenant.
[38 C F] (3) (vi) When the tenant is a Company or a Corporation or any body with juristic personality, question of the death of the tenant will not arise.
Despite the termination of the tenancy, the Company or the Corporation of such juristic personalities, however, will go on enjoying the protection afforded to the tenant under the Act.
It can hardly be conceived that the Legislature would intend to deny to one class of tenants, namely, individuals the protection which will be enjoyed by the other class, namely, the Corporation and Companies and other bodies with juristic personality under the Act.
[36 G H] (4) In the instant case there is no provision in the Act regulating the rights of the heirs to inherit the tenancy rights of the tenant in respect of the tenanted premises which is commercial premises, the tenancy right which is heritable devolves on the heirs under the ordinary law of succession.
The tenancy right of appellant 's husband therefore, devolves on all the heirs on his death.
The heirs and legal representatives of appellant 's husband step into his position and they are entitled to the benefit and protection of the Act.
Therefore, the High Court was not right in coming to the conclusion that the heirs of appellant 's husband the so called statutory tenant, did not have any right to remain in possession of the tenanted premises and did not enjoy any protection under the Act.
The judgment and order of the High Court is therefore set aside and the case is remanded to the High Court for decision of the appeal and the cross objection on merits.
The appeal is accordingly allowed to the extent indicated above.
[39 B; D E; G] Ganpat Ladha vs Sashikant Vishnu Shinde [1978] 3 section C. R. 198 dissented.
The Legislature may consider the advisability of making bona fide requirement of the landlord a ground of eviction in respect of commercial premises as well.
Per Bhagwati, J. (Concurring) Though genetically the parentage of the two legal conceits, namely, contractual tenancy and statutory tenancy is different, one owing its origin to contract and the other to rent control legislation, they are equated with each other and their incidents are the same.
If a contractual tenant has an estate or interest in the premises which is heritable, it is difficult to understand why a statutory tenant should be held not to have such heritable estate or interest.
In one case, the estate or interest is the result of contract while in the other, it is the result of statute.
But the quality of the estate or interest is the same in both cases.
When the rent control legislation places a statutory tenant on the same footing as a contractual tenant, wipes out the distinction between the two and invests a statutory tenant with the same right, obligations and incidents as a contractual tenant, why should it be difficult to hold that, just like a contractual tenant, a statutory tenant also has estate or interest in the premises which can be inherited.
[8 B F] It is true that there are certain observations in Ganpat Ladha vs Sashikant Vishnu Shinde, [1978] 3 section C. R. 198, which go counter to what the Court is holding in the present case and to that extent these observations must be held not to enunciate the correct law on the subject.
This Court was not really concerned in that case with the question or heritability of statutory tenancy.
The only question was in regard to the true interpretation of Section 5 (ii) (c) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act 1947 which is almost in same terms as Section 2 (1) (iii) of the Delhi Rent Control Act 1958 and while dealing with this question, the Court made certain observations regarding the nature of statutory tenancy and its heritability.
The attention of the Court was not focussed on the question whether a statutory tenant has an estate or interest in the premises which is heritable and no argument was advanced that a statutory tenancy is heritable.
It was assumed that a statutory tenancy is not heritable and on that footing the case was argued in regard to the true meaning and construction of Section 5 (ii) (c).
The observations made in that case to the extent to which they conflict with the judgment in the present case must therefore be regarded as overruled.
[9 A D]
