The appellant landlady filed a suit for recovering possession from the respondent tenant on the allegation that the demised property was situated beyond the municipal limits of the town, and was exempt from the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction), Act 1972, that it was let out to the respondent on a rent of Rs. 360 per mensem, that the tenancy had come to an end by efflux of the time fixed in the rent note, and that as the respondent was in arrears of rent to the extent of Rs. 3,960 she was entitled to recover possession of the premises with the arrears of rent.
The respondent oppose the suit contending that the property was situated within three kilometres of the municipal limits of the town and was, therefore, governed by the provisions of the Act, denied that the rent was Rs. 360 per mensem and contended that it was only Rs. 125 per mensem, denied that he had executed the rent note, and the tenancy had come to an end by efflux of time, that the amounts claimed as arrears of rent and mesne profits were wrong and excessive, that the notice to quit was invalid in law and that the suit was barred by the provisions of section 20 of the Act.
The Additional District Judge who tried the suit exercising jurisdiction as a Judge of Small Causes Court, found that the property was situate within three kilometres of the municipal limits and was governed by the provisions of the Act, that the tenancy for the period of 11 months under the rent note had come to an end by efflux of time, and the parties were governed by it, and that the suit was governed by the provisions of section 20 of the Act.
On the question whether the respondent was liable for eviction it was held that though the respondent had deposited the full amount of rent as claimed at Rs. 360 per mensem together with damages for use and occupation, interest and costs as required by section 20(4) of the Act amounting to Rs. 7,490 a day after the first hearing date fixed for the suit, as the respondent had contended in the written statement that the rent was Rs. 125 per mensem the deposit of Rs. 7,490 towards arrears, interest and costs was not unconditional and therefore invalid 584 and section 20(4) of the Act did not help the respondent.
The suit was accordingly decreed for eviction with arrears of rent and mesne profits.
The respondent filed a revision petition and a Division Bench of the High Court noticed that one of the conditions of section 20(4) of the Act was that the tenant should unconditionally pay or deposit the entire amount due together with interest and costs, and that section 20(6) says that any amount deposited under section 20(4) shall be paid to the landlord without prejudice to the pleadings of the parties, and that in the instant case the deposit would not be a conditional deposit merely because the respondent had contended in the written statement that the rent was Rs. 125 per mensem and not Rs. 360 per mensem as alleged in the plaint.
The civil revision petition was allowed and the suit was dismissed with costs.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The suit in the instant case, is not based on any of the grounds mentioned in section 20(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 and though the respondent is alleged to have been in arrears of rent to the extent of Rs. 3,960 there is no allegation in the plaint that he is in arrears of rent for not less than four months and had failed to pay the same to the appellant within one month from the date of service upon him of a notice of demand, which is the ground mentioned in clause (a) of section 20(2) of the Act.
[588 G H] 2.
No interference with the decision of the High Court is called for.
The District Judge should have normally dismissed the suit for want of jurisdiction in view of section 20(1) of the Act on his finding that the Act is applicable to the premises.
It is not known why he did not do so, but on the other hand proceeded to hold that the deposit by the respondent is not unconditional as required by section 20(4) of the Act and ordered his eviction on that basis.
[589 A B] 3.
It is not possible to construe section 20(4) in the manner done by the District Judge as that would amount to foreclosure of any defence regarding the quantum of rent even in cases where the amount alleged by the landlord is more than the actual rent agreed to between the parties.
[589 C] In the instant case, it had been found by the District Judge that the arrears of rent at the rate claimed in the plaint together with interest and cost had been deposited within the time mentioned in section 20(4) of the Act.
Merely because the tenant had failed to prove his case that the rent was only Rs. 125 per mensem and not Rs. 360 per mensem, the discretionary relief could not be denied to him.
[590 E; 591] Mangal Sen vs Kanchhid Mal, [1982] I SCR 331 at 336 distinguished.
The Act is a social piece of legislation which leans in favour of tenants.
It is not possible to lay down any broad and general proposition that 585 the discretionary relief should be denied to the tenant in all cases where he fails to prove his case regarding the quantum of rent even though he had deposited the rent at the rate claimed by the landlord in the plaint together with interest and costs within the time as required by section 20(4) of the Act.
[590 H; 591 B]
