Clause (ii) of Section 2 of (for short, the Act) which came into force on October 25, 1980, provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior approval of the Central Government, any order directing that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non forest purpose.
Explanation to section 2 of the Act defines "non forest purpose" as breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for any purpose other than reafforestation.
Respondent No. 1, who had been granted a mining lease in the year 1966 for a period of 20 years for mining and winning mica in respect of 80 acres of land in accordance with Mining Concession Rules, 1960 came across two other minerals, namely, felspar and quartz during the course of mining operations.
Under the conditions of the lease, Respondent No. I applied to the State Government to include the said minerals also in the earlier lease deed so that he could win and dispose of these minerals also.
Thereupon, the State Government and the lessee executed a Deed of Incorporation on April 6, 1983 allowing the lessee to win and carry away felspar and Quartz after paying the required royalty from the area over which he had been granted lease for mining mica.
On August 8, 1983 the Divisional Forest Officer wrote a letter to the lessee stating that the impugned mining area was situated within the reserved forest area and that, since previous approval of the Central Government had not been obtained for inclusion of felspar and quartz in the mining lease as required by the Act.
Respondent No. I could not be permitted to win felspar and quartz even through the Deed of Incorporation had been executed.
Aggrieved by the said letter, Respondent No. I filed a writ petition in the High Court contending that the provisions of the Act were not applicable to a case where the lease had been entered into prior to the coming into force of the Act and that there was no need to break up or clear any forest land other than the area of only 5 acres of land where mining operations were being carried on.
The High Court allowed the writ petition.
Hence this appeal by the State.
346 Disposing of the appeal, ^ HELD: (1) It is clear from a reading of clause (ii) of section 2 of the Act and the Explanation to that section that these two parts Or the section mean that after the commencement of the Act I o fresh breaking up of the forest land or no fresh clearing of the forest on any such land can be permitted by any State Government or any authority without the prior approval of the Central Government.
But if such permission has been accorded before the coming into force of the Act and the forest land is broken up or cleared then obviously the section cannot apply.
[350 D F] (2) In the instant case, it is not disputed that in an area of five acres out of eighty acres covered by the mining lease the forest land had been dug up and mining operations were being carried on even prior to the coming into force of the Act.
If the State Government permits the lessee by the amendment of the lease deed to win and remove felspar and quartz also in addition to mica it cannot be said that the State Government has violated section 2 of the Act because thereby no permission for fresh breaking up of forest land is being given.
The result of taking the contrary view will be that while the digging for purposes of winning mica can go on, the lessee would be deprived of collecting felspar or quartz which he may come across while he is carrying on mining operations for winning mica.
That would lead to an unreasonable result which would not in any way subserve the object of the Act.
[350 G H; 351 A] (3) While before granting permission to start mining operations on a vergin area section 2 of the Act has to be complied with, it is not necessary to seek the prior approval of the Central Government for purposes of carrying out mining operations in a forest area which is broken up or cleared before the commencement of the Act.
[351 B]
