The State Government respondent No. 1 issued a notification for auctioning a minor mineral quarry situated in the State.
The appellant offered the highest bid in the amount of Rs. 3.87 lakhs per annum as rent/royalty.
The Presiding Officer accepted the bid of the appellant.
The State Government however under the belief that the highest bid did not represent the adequate lease rent, exercised powers under clause (4) of sub rule 2 of Rule 130 or the Punjab Minor Mineral Concession Rules 1964 and declined to confirm the same.
Respondent No. 4 wrote a letter to the Chief Minister casting serious aspersions on those who participated in the auction, and made an offer that if the contract for a period of 5 years is given he was willing to pay Rs. 4.5 lakhs per year.
The Chief Minister accepted this offer.
Being aggrieved, the appellant challenged the order of the Chief Minister, in a writ petition before the High Court, contending that respondent No. 4 had participated in the auction and made false allegations against the appellant, and without giving him any opportunity, the offer of respondent No. 4 was accepted which has denied equality of opportunity to the appellant in the matter of distribution of the State largesse.
The High Court following the decision of this Court in Assistant Collector of Central Excise vs Jainson Hosiery Industries, ; , dismissed the writ petition on the ground that the appellant had an alternative remedy and that he must have exhausted the normal statutory remedies before invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226.
542 Being aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal to this Court and during is hearing filed an affidavit, that if the Court orders re auction, and if the highest bid falls short of Rs. 4.5 lakhs then he would undertake to accept the contract at the value of Rs. 5.5 lakhs per annum.
The Court held are auction and both the appellant and respondent No. 4 participated there in and the appellant offered the highest bid at the value of Rs. 25 lakhs.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
(i) The Court has imposed a restraint in its own wisdom on its exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 where the party invoking the jurisdiction has an effective adequate alternative remedy.
It has been expressly stated that the rule which requires the exhaustion of alternative remedies is a rule of convenience and discretion rather than a rule of law.
It does not oust the jurisdiction of the Court It is made specifically clear where the order complained against is alleged to be illegal or invalid as being contrary to law, a petition at the instance of a person adversely affected would lie to the High Court under Article 226 and such a petition cannot be rejected on the ground that an appeal lies to the higher officer or the State Government.
An appeal in all cases cannot be said to provide in all situations an alternative effective remedy.
[550 C F] In the instant case, power was exercised by the authority set up under the rules to grant contract.
The High Court did not pose to itself the question who would grant the relief when the impugned order is passed at the instance of a Chief Minister of the State.
This is therefore a case in which the High Court was justified in throwing out the petition on the untenable ground that the appellant had an effective alternative remedy.
[550 G H] Assistant Collector of Central Excise v Jainson Hosiery Industries, ; and The State of Uttar Pradesh v Mohammad Nooh, ; , referred to.
(2) (i) There is a clear distinction between the use and disposal of private property and socialist property.
Owner of private property may deal with it in any manner he likes without causing injury to any one else.
But the socialist or if that word is jarring to some, the community or further the public property has to be dealt with for public purpose and in public interest.
Tho marked difference lies in this that while the owner of private property may have a number of considerations which may permit him to dispose of his property for a song.
On the other hand, dispose at of public property partakes the character of a trust in that in its disposal their should be nothing hanky panky and that it must be done at the best price so that large revenue coming into the offers of the State administration would serve public purpose viz. the welfare state may be able to expand its beneficient activities by the availability of larger funds.
This is subject to one important limitation that socialist property may be disposed at a price lower than the market price or oven for a token price to achieve some defined constitutionally recognised Public purpose, one such being to achieve the goals set out in Part IV of the 543 Constitution.
But where disposal is for augmentation of revenue and nothing else, the State is under an obligation to secure the best market price available in a market economy.
[552 G H; 553 A] (ii) The Government is not free like an ordinary individual, in selecting recipient for its largesse and it cannot chose to deal with any person it please a in its absolute and unfettered discretion.
The law is now well settled that the Government need not deal with anyone, but if it does so, it must do so fairly and without discretion and without unfair procedure.
Even though the State is not bound to accept the highest bid, this proposition of law has to be read subject to the observation that it can be rejected on relevant and valid considerations, one such being that the concession is to be given to a weaker section of the society who could not outbid the highest bidder.
In the absence of it, the approach must be as clearly laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in K. N. Guruswamy vs The State of Mysore and Ors.
[19551 SCR 305.
Before giving up the auction process and accepting a private bid secretly offered, the authority must be satisfied that such an offer if given in open would not be outmatched by the highest bidder.
In the absence of such satisfaction, acceptance of an offer secretly made and sought to be substantiated on the allegations without the verification of their truth, which was not undertaken would certainly amount to arbitrary action in the matter of distribution of State largesse which by the decisions of this Court is impermissible.
1554 G H; 556 A B; 555 G H] Trilochan Mishra etc vs State of Orissa and Ors.
, State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors vs Vijay Bahadur Singh and Ors.
and State of Orissa and Ors.
vs Harinarayan Jaiswal and Ors.
; held inapplicable.
Raman Dayaram Shetty v The International Airport Authority of India and Ors. ; and Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy vs State of Jammu and Kashmir and Anr. ; relied upon.
Rule 28 of Punjab Minor and Mineral Concession Rules, 1964 permits contract for winning mineral to be granted by the Government by auction or tender.
It is open to the State to dispose of the contract by tender.
Even here the expression 'tender ' does not mean a private secret deal between the Chief Minister and the offerer.
Tender in the context in which the expression is used in rule 28, means 'tenders to be invited from intending contractors. ' If it was intended by the use of the expression 'tender ' in Rule 28 that contract can be disposed of by private negotiations with select individual, its validity will be open to serious question.
The language ordinarily used in such rules is by public auction or private negotiations.
The meaning of the expression 'private negotiations ' must take its colour and prescribe its content by the words which precede them.
And at any rate disposal of the State property in public interest must be by such method as would grant an opportunity to the public at large to participate in it, the State reserving to itself the right to dispose it of as best subserve the public weal.
[559 F H; 560 A B 544 Nand Kishore Saraf vs State of Rajasthan and Anr. ; and Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd).
Sindri and Ors.
vs Union of India and Ors.
; relied upon.
State of Uttar Pradesh vs Shiv Charan Sharma and Ors. etc.
[1981] Supp.
SCC 85 referred to.
In the instant case, it is clear that respondent No. 4 was not selected for any special purpose or to satisfy any Directive Principles of State Policy.
He surreptitiously ingratiated himself by a back door entry giving a minor raise in the bid and in the process usurped the most undeserved benefit which was exposed to the hilt in the court.
A unilateral offer, secretly made, not correlated to any reserved price made by the fourth respondent after making false statement in the letter was accepted without giving any opportunity to the appellant either to raise the bid or to point out the falsity of the allegations made by the fourth respondent in the letter as also the inadequacy of his bid.
The appellant suffered an unfair treatment by the State in discharging its administrative functions thereby violating the fundamental principle of fair play in action.
When he gave the highest bid, he could not have been expected to raise his own bid in the absence of a competitor.
Any expectation to the contrary betrays a woeful lack of knowledge of auction process.
And then some one surreptitiously by a secret offer scored a march over him.
No opportunity was given to him either to raise the bid.
Application of the minimum principles of natural justice in such a situation must be read in the Statute and held to be obligatory.
When it is said that even in administrative action, the authority must act fairly, it ordinarily means in accordance with the principles of natural justice variously described as fair play in action.
That having not been done, the grant in favour of the fourth respondent must be quashed.
[554 H; 555 A E; 560 D E]
