One Lala Gurdin, who had acquired extensive landed property in Kanpur died on December 10, 1861 leaving behind his widow Smt.
Amrit Kuer and three daughters: Smt.
Hazarao Kuer from his predeceased wife, and Smt.
Mewa Kuer and Smt.
Prago Kuer from Smt.
Amrit Kuer.
After the death of Gurdin his entire estate came into the hands of his widow Smt.
Amrit Kuer and after her death on August 1,1880, the three daughters of Lala Gurdin succeeded to the estate left by Smt.
Amrit Kuer, as limited owners.
They divided the property amongst themselves, each coming into possession of one third share.
When Smt.
Prago Kuer died on July 8, 1907 the estate remained with the two surviving daughters.
When Smt.
Hazaro Kuer died on January 24, 1914 the estate remained in possession of Smt.
Mewa Kuer, the last surviving daughter.
She also died on June 14,1923.
During their life time the three daughters had been making various alienations of the property that fell to their exclusive share.
Amongst a number of alienations in favour of different persons at different times, three sale deeds dated July 27,1901; July 17, 1914 and October 19,1915 are the subject matter of the appeals and the property covered by the 1901 and 1914 sale deeds are in possession of the appellants trust while the properties covered by the 1915 sale deeds are in the possession of Defendants 4 & 5 of Suit No. 25 of 1935.
The 1914 and 1915 sale deeds were jointly executed by Smt.
Mewa Kuer and her son Ram Dayal.
After the death of Smt.
Mewa Kuer in 1923, her surviving reversioners sought to challenge the various alienations made by the limited owners, some by Smt.
Amrit Kuer and the others made by the daughters of Lala Gurdin by way of two Suits Nos.
25 of 1935 filed by the two sons of Smt.
Hazaro Kuer and Suit No. 34 of 1935 filed by Madho Dayal son of Ram Dayal, on the 719 allegations (i) that there was no legal or pressing necessity for the transfers; (ii) that transfer by one of the daughters without the consent of the remaining daughters was void ab initio and no title passed on to the transferees; and (iii) transferees from the limited owners themselves had no valid title and so they could not pass a better title to others and thus those transfers were also bad.
The suits were contested by the transferees in possession seeking protection of section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act on the equitable principle feeding the Grant by estoppel in as much as even if there was any defect in the of title Mewa Kuer, the same has ceased when her two other sisters died and she become the sale Survivor.
The Additional Civil Judge found that, while sale deeds of 1914 and 1915 were for legal necessity as they had been executed by Smt.
Mewa Kuer when her two sisters had died, the sale deed dated 27th July, 1901 was also for legal necessity but as it was executed without the consent of the other two daughters it was invalid and not binding on the plaintiffs respondent.
Consequently the Trial Court dismissed Suit No. 25 of 1935 in respect of the sale deeds of 1914 and 1915, and partly decreed the suit pertaining to 1901 sale deed in view of the provisions of section 51 of the Transfer of Property Act in as much as these defendants appellants had made valuable constructions as bona fide purchasers and they were entitled to the market value of the constructions.
Suit No 34 of 1935 was also partly decreed and partly dismissed.
In the appeals filed by the present respondents plaintiffs and after perusing the cross objections filed by the present defendants appellants, the High Court reversed the finding of the trial court with regard to sale deeds of 1914 and 1915 held that they were not for legal and pressing need; and while confirming the finding of the trial court with regard to sale deeds dated July 27, 1901 further held that the present plaintiffs respondents should be given an opportunity to make an election under section 51 of the Transfer of Property Act, as to whether they would like to pay the compensation for the superstructures standing on the land in question or to sell their share in the land.
Consequently, the High Court allowed the appeals of the plaintiffs respondents in part and remanded the case to the trial court to afford an opportunity to the plaintiff to make election under section 51 of the Transfer of Property Act.
It was further held that the sale deeds of 1914 and 1915 being not for legal necessity the subsequent transfers made by the transferees of Mewa Kuer were bad.
Hence the appeals by certificate.
Allowing the appeals in part, the Court ^ HELD 1.1 If a Hindu dies leaving behind two widows they succeed as joint tenants with a right of survivorship.
They are entitled to obtain partition of the separate portions of property so that each may enjoy her equal share of the income accruing therefrom.
Each can deal as she pleases with her own life interest but she cannot alienate any part of the corpus of estate by gift or will so as to prejudice the right of survivorship or a future reversioner.
If they act together they can burden the reversion with any debts owing to legal necessity but one of them acting without the authority of the other cannot prejudice the 720 right of servivorship by alienating any part of the estate.
[728 G H] 1.2 The mere fact of partition between the two while it gives each a right to fruits of separate estate assigned to her, it does not imply a right to prejudice the claim of the survivor to enjoy full fruits of the property during her life time.
What is applicable to co widows is equally applicable to the case of daughters.
No distinction can be made on that account.
[726 C D, 729 A B] Gauri Nath Kakaji vs Mt. Gaya Kuer, followed.
Appalasuri vs Kannamma, approved.
2.1 The transfer made by one daughter without the consent of the other is only voidable at the instance of the other co limited owners or at the instance of the reversioners.
[729 D E] 2.2 Here, the alienations made by the daughters separately to different persons was never challenged by the other daughters.
Even the reversioners did not challenge those alienations during the life time of their mothers and they sought to challenge the alienations long after the death of the last limited owner Smt.
Mewa Kuer in 1923 and therefore, even if the partition between the daughters had no effect on the reversion it can safely be presumed that the transfer made by one of the daughters of the property exclusively in her possession had the consent of the other.
Further in any case Smt.
Mewa Kuer after the death of her two sisters came into exclusive possession of the entire estate left by Smt.
Amrit Kuer, widow of Lala Gurdin.
Therefore, the transferees would be entitled to the protection of section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act which substantially amounts to satisfying the equitable principle of 'feeding the grant by estoppel '.
[729 B C, D E] 2.3 In view of the fact that the trust has made valuable constructions involving a cost of 5 to 6 lakh rupees of the college building, the principal 's quarters, teacher 's quarters, hostel, library, dispensary etc.
it will be inequitable in the circumstances of the case to ask the appellants to pay the present market value of the land.
The acceptance of the amount by the plaintiffs respondents as determined by the trial court will itself amount to making a choice within the meaning of section 51 of the Transfer of Property Act.
From the materials on record and the attending circumstances it is clear that the reversioners were neither in a position to pay for the improvements nor inclined to do so and this is why they accepted the amount determined by the trial court.
Therefore, the High Court was not justified in remanding the case to the trial court to afford another opportunity to the plaintiffs to make a fresh choice.
[930 B D] 3.
What quantum of evidence will satisfy a particular court to come to a conclusion is entirely in the discretion of the Court, and therefore, the finding of the High Court with the regard to the two sale deeds of 1914 and 1915 cannot be interfered with.
[930 E F] 721
