A writ petition was filed in the Calcutta High Court claiming the following reliefs: (1) That the Chief Election Commissioner and the Chief Electoral Officer be restrained from acting, either by themselves or through their subordinates, in pursuance of the instructions or directions issued by them from time to time; (ii) that they should be restrained from scoring out any names from the electoral rolls which were finally published; (iii) that they should be restrained from issuing or publishing any notification under section 15 (2) of the Representation of People Act of 1951 without preparing the electoral rolls de novo after the disposal of the appeals against orders whereby claims and objections were decided; and (iv) that they should be restrained from holding elections to the West Bengal Legislative Assembly until the disposal of all the claims, objections and appeals under the Representation of People Acts of 1950 and 1951, The writ petitioners who were eight in number were enrolled as voters in the electoral roll of the West Bengal Legislative Assembly.
Some of them were office bearers of political parties like the West Bengal State Muslim League, West Bengal Unit of the Janta Party, All India Christian Demarcate Party and West Bengal Congress Legislative Party.
It was contended in the writ petition that the guidelines or instructions issued by the Chief Electoral Officer by circular dated March 12, 1981 asking all the District Officers and he sub Divisional Officers to make a de novo intensive revision of the electoral rolls for the general election to the Legislative Assembly, West Bengal, without reference to the then existing electoral rolls are vague, unreasonable and arbitrary as a result of which it would not be possible to hold free and fair elections on the basis of those rolls, and that the guidelines or instructions issued were blatantly violated in, certain cases, and that the exact extent of the polling areas was not demarcated clearly, no house to house visits were made and the names of the members of each household who had attained the age of 21 year on the prescribed date were not recorded in several cases By a Memorandum dated May 12, 1981 which was after the work of the intensive revision of the electoral rolls had begun, the Election Commission of India informed the Chief Electoral Officers of all the States and the Union Territories that its attention was drawn to certain irregularities in the matter of revision of electoral rolls and that in many cases lists pertaining to certain polling booths were found to be defective.
The Draft Electoral Roll which was published in September 1981 were manipulated by including therein not only Bangladesh Nationals but minors, dead persons and refugees from Assam who have living in refugee camps.
These manipulations in the electoral roll became possible because of the deliberate infiltration of the CPI (M) members of the Government staff in the election machinery as enumerators.
The infirmities in the electoral rolls were of such a basic and inherent character that unless a further de novo revision of the electoral rolls was undertaken, it would be unfair to allow the elections to be held on the basis of the said electoral rolls.
Complaints relating to individual cases were sent to the Election Commission but no attention was paid to them.
The scheme of the Election Law and the rules framed thereunder are so designed that unless all the objections were 495 decided by the appellate authority and the Registration Officer and the electoral rolls are correspondingly amended especially when a de novo revision A of the electoral rolls is directed to be made it is impermissible to issue a notification under section 15 (2) of the Act of 1951.
It was further alleged that nearly 8 lakhs complaints were filed in regard to the voters ' lists but no notice was issued to the concerned persons while deciding those complaints.
In a few cases where notices were sent not enough time was given to the complaints to appear before the concerned authorities to make their contentions.
Article 329 was no bar to the filing the writ petition under Article 226 as the petitioners were not challenging the 'commencement of polling '.
On February 12, 1982 a single judge of the High Court issued a rule on the writ petition and granted the ad interim relief prayed for.
The writ petition was directed to be listed on February 19, 1982 when, after some arguments, the matter was adjourned to February 25, 1982.
Thereafter four special leave petitions were filed in this Court against the ad interim orders passed by the Single Judge.
On February 23, 1982 certain directions were issued in one of those special leave petitions and it was later ordered that the single judge of the High Court should proceed to hear the matter.
The writ petition was heard by the Single Judge on February 25, 1982, who directed the respondents to the writ petition to take certain steps before issuance of the notification under section 15 (2) of the Act of 195], in effect, confirming the ad interim order dated February 12, 1982.
In the four appeals to this Court, the writ petitioners who succeeded in obtaining interim orders from the High Court are in the array of respondents.
Three of those appeals were filed by persons who contended that the High Court ought not to have interfered with the election process which was imminent.
The fourth appeal was filed by the Election Commission of India, the Chief Election Commissioner, and the Chief Electoral Officer who contended that the High Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition by reason of Article 329 (b) of the Constitution, that the election process which had already begun should not have been interfered with by the High Court and that the recommendation made to the Governor of West Bengal by the Election Commission under section 15 (2) of the Act of 1951 was being thwarted by frivolous and baseless objections raised by the writ petitioners.
In their counter affidavits to the writ petition it was contended that the electoral rolls which were prepared de novo after house to house enumeration in 198 1 and which were intensively revised in all the 294 assembly constituencies were finally published with the supplements on December 31, 1981.
On January 1, 1982 the finally published electoral rolls with the supplements were published in draft in the respective polling areas.
Claims and objections were specifically invited in the prescribed forms under the law.
It was further alleged that the petitioners were espousing the cause of unnamed and undisclosed persons through a writ petition, which does not claim to possess a representative capacity and that the upshot of the petition is that some three crores of voters were being deprived of an opportunity to exercise their franchise in order that an investigation should be made as to whether the names of some 5 lakhs persons should be included in or excluded from the electoral roll.
496 ^ HELD: [By the Court] The Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution field before the Calcutta High Court and transferred for disposal to this Court be dismissed.
All orders including stay, and the interim order granted by the High Court vacated and set aside.
The four Civil Appeals will stand disposed of in the light of the dismissal of the writ petition.
[525 G H] [Per Majority Chandrachud, CJ., Desai, Sen, Venkataramlah JJ.] 1.(a) The High Court acted within its jurisdiction in entertaining the writ petition and in issuing a Rule Nisi upon it, since the petition questioned the vires of the laws of election.
But, it was not justified in passing the interim orders dated February 12, and 19, 1982 and in confirming those orders by its judgment` dated February 25, 1982.
Firstly, the High Court had no material before it to warrant the passing of those orders.
The allegations in tho Writ Petition are of a vague and general nature on the basis of which no relief could be granted.
Secondly, though the High Court did not lack tho jurisdiction to entertain the Writ Petition and to issue appropriate directions therein, no High Court in the exercise of its power under Article 226 of the Constitution should pass any orders, interim or otherwise, which has the tendency or effect of postponing an election which is reasonably imminent and in relation to which its writ jurisdiction is invoked 1522 F H] (b) The High Courts must observe a self imposed limitation on their power to act under Article 226, by refusing to pass orders or given directions which will inevitably result in an indefinite postponement of elections to legislative bodies, which are the very essence of the democratic foundation and functioning of our Constitution.
That limitation ought to be observed irrespective of the fact whether the preparation and publication of electoral rolls are a part of the process of 'election ' within the meaning of Article 329 (b) of the Constitution.
[523 C D] 2.
(a) The Election Commission, or the Chief Electoral Officer or the Electoral Registration Officers have not in any manner acted in violation of the Constitution, the Representation of the People Acts of 1950 and 1951, or the Registration of Electors Rules 1960.
The Election Commission issued the various directives ex debito justiae as steps in aid of a fair election.
They are being observed faithfully and honestly, and shall be so observed until the deadline mentioned in section 23 (3) of the Act of 1950.
The manner in which the directives are being implemented cannot be regarded as unreasonable.
[523 F G] (b) It takes years to build up public confidence in the functioning of constitutional institutions, and a single court hearing, perhaps, to sully their image by casting aspersions upon them.
It is the duty of the courts to protect and preserve the integrity of all constitutional institutions, which are devised to foster democracy.
And when the method of their functioning is questioned, which it is open to the citizen to do, courts must examine the allegations with more than ordinary care.
[523 H; 524 A B] 497 (c) The Election Commission, the Chief Electoral Officer and the Electoral Registration Officers will not generate a feeling in the minds of the public that the elections held hitherto in our country over the past thirty years under the superintendence, direction and control of successive Election Commissions have been a pretense and a facade.
The public ought not to carry any such impression and the voters must go to the ballot box undeterred by the sense of frustration which the petitioners ' charges are likely to create in their minds.
There is no substance in the accusation that the voters ' lists have been rigged by the election authorities with the help of enumerators belonging to any particular political party.
Enumerators are mostly drawn from amongst teachers and Government servants and it is difficult to imagine that thirty five years after independence, they are totally colour blind.
They are the same in every State and every constituency.
The safeguard lies in the efficiency and impartiality of the higher officers who have to decide objections filed in relation to the voters ' lists.
That safeguard is not shown to have failed in the instant case.
[524 D G] (d) There is no voter in our country who does not have or cannot raise sum of ten paise to ventilate his objection to the voters ' list.
1525 D] 3.
Even assuming, that the preparation and publication of electoral rolls are not a part of the process of 'election ' within the meaning of Article 329 (b), the High Court ought not to have passed the impugned interim orders, where by it not only assumed control over the election process but, as a result of which, the election to the Legislative Assembly stood the risk of being postponed indefinitely.
[520 D E] 4.
Very often, the exercise of jurisdiction, especially the writ jurisdiction, involves questions of property rather than of Power.
The fact that the Court has the power to do a certain thing does not mean that it must exercise that power regardless of the consequences.
[520 F] 5.
Holding the elections to legislatures and holding them according to law are both matters of paramount importance.
On the one hand is the individual 's statutory right of franchise, on the other is the constitutional obligation imposed by Article 168.
[513 A] 6.
Preparation and revision of electoral rolls is a continuous process not connected with any particular election.
[513 C] 7.
The right to be included in the electoral roll or to challenge the inclusion of any name in the roll is a right conferred upon an individual and not upon any political party.
1513 F] NP Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer Namakkal Constituency ; Rampakavi Ravappa Belagali v Jatti Mohinder Singh Gill v Chief Election Commissioner New Delhi referred to.
498 [Per Baharul Islam J. dissenting] 1.
It cannot be said in the instant case, that in the revision of the electoral roll, all possible care as enjoined by the letter and spirit of the Constitution and the statutes was taken.
[539 E] 2.
A political party is not entitled to, under the law, to receive any notice but in the background of the illiteracy and ignorance and lack of political consciousness of a large section of the electorate, it is but proper and in consonance with the spirit of the Constitution and the Election Laws that notices be given to the leaders of political parties who file complaints or omnibus complaints and claims and objections.
[537 G H] 3.
No persons who are members of a political party or of an association affiliated to a political party should be appointed to be enumerators of voters so that there may not be any foul play or rigging in the preparation of the electoral roll.
Enumarators should be persons who are not affiliated, either directly or indirectly to any political party, whether in power or not; for this purpose, it is desirable that only Government officers including teachers of Government schools and colleges may be appointed enumerators and not of non government organizations or institutions, unless their rules debar their employees to be members of political parties.
[539 C D] 4.
The basic needs of a citizen of any civilized country are food, clothing.
education and health services.
A citizen of any modern democratic State has also an additional need, which is a political right.
It is the right of participation in the governance of the country directly or indirectly.
This participation of an adult citizen of our country starts with the right to vote for a candidate and elect a representative of his choice to the legislatures and other self governing institutions.
This right to vote presupposes a right to be enrolled as an elector provided, he has the requisite qualifications prescribed by the Constitution and the election laws and other statutes and he has none of the disqualifications enumerated in those laws.
[527 C D] 5.(i) The basis of election on adult franchise and the right to be registered as a voter at an election of a person with the requisite qualifications and having no disqualifications are constitutional mandates.
(ii) Parliament has made pro visions for the purpose of the preparation of the electoral rolls and matters connected therewith in the Representation of People Act 1950 and the Registration of Electors Rules 1960.
For the purpose of conduct of election to the Houses of Parliament and to the Houses of State Legislatures and to matters relating to such elections in the Representation of People Act, 1951 and the Conduct of Election Rules 1961.
[527 G H; 528 A] 6.
The basis of a free and fair election is the voters ' list prepared in accordance with the 1950 Act and the 1960 Rules.
If this is not so done, the electoral rolls will have no sanctity and the consequent election will also not inspire confidence of the people.
1529 C] 499 7.
Article 324 shows that for the purpose of preparing the electoral rolls for the purpose of conducting the elections, the Election Commission, A although a very high and independent constitutional functionary, does not have a staff of its own appointed and removable by it.
The staff made available to the Election Commission for the above purposes are the employees of a State or the Central Government.
They are not independent like the Election Commission, itself, but are liable to be influenced by the concerned Executive Government.
Illegal omission of the names of persons who were qualified from the electoral roll or inclusion of the names of persons who are not qualified or who have disqualifications has for reaching consequences.
[528D E] 8.
Section 21 of the 1950 Act provides for the preparation and revision of electoral rolls.
Qualifying date has been defined under Section 14 (b) as the "1st day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised" in relation to the preparation or revision of every electoral roll under Part III.
It is not permissible in normal circumstances to hold a general or bye election on an electoral roll unless it is revised under sub section (1) of section 21.
[530 A B; 531 G] 9.
The Elections Rules 1960 by Rules 10 and 11 provide for the publication of the draft roll and further publicity of the roll and the notice in Form 5.
A combined reading of Rules 18, 19 and 20 show that they are based on the principle of natural justice keeping in view the right of an eligible voter to be included in the electoral roll and the right of any person to see that the names of a persons not so eligible, but wrongly included earlier, be deleted from the electoral roll.
Rule 21 gives suo moto power to the registration officer to include names inadvertently omitted.
Rule 21 (A) gives suo moto power to the registration officer to delete the names of dead electors or of persons who have ceased to be or are not ordinarily residents in the constituency.
Rule 22 is very important.
It gives power to the registration officer to prepare a list, after compliance of Rules 18, 21 and 21A and publish the roll together with the list of amendments by making a complete copy thereof available for inspection and displaying a notice in Form 16 at his office.
Under sub rule (2) of Rule 22, on such publication, the roll together with the list of amendments shall be the electoral roll of the consistency".
Under sub rule (3) this roll shall be the 'basic roll" for the constituency.
Rule 23 provides for appeal from the decision of the registration officer under Rules 20, 21 and 21A to an appropriate authority.
These provisions disclose the importance to be given to the preparation of an electoral roll.
[532 C; 533 F H; 534 A] 10.
A perfect electoral roll is not possible.
But at the same time, it must be remembered that the name of any eligible voter should not be omitted or the name of any disqualified person should not be included in the electoral roll, in violation of any constitutional or statutory provisions.
The error, when pointed out, has to be removed.
It must also be remembered that a large section of the electorate of our country consist of illiterate people and not politically so conscious as to see that their names are in the electoral roll.
A duty is cast on the political parties to educate the electorate and take steps that the names of eligible persons are included in the electoral rolls and that 500 names of ineligible persons are deleted.
Erroneous inclusion or omission of the names of a few persons may not be of much consequence.
But if a considerable number of the names of such persons are either wrongly included in, or excluded from, the electoral roll, it will be of great consequence to a particular party either or in the opposition.
The electoral registration officer, therefore, cannot be fastidious as to whether the claims and objections are strictly in prescribed forms.
Even when there are omnibus objections by a political party or political parties, as in this case, filing claims and or objections, such claims and objections have to be inquired into and necessary action taken so that the correct opinion of the electorate may be reflected in the result of the election.
[534 B G]
