The earliest provision granting exemption from super tax in respect of inter corporate dividend was made as far back as 9th December, 1933 in a Notification issued by the Governor General in Council and it provided as follows: "The Governor General in Council is pleased to exempt from super tax: 779 (i) So much of the income of any investment trust company as is derived from dividends paid by any other company which has paid or will pay super tax in respect of the profits out of which such dividends are paid".
This provision came up for consideration before a Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay in CIT vs Industrial Investment Trust Co. Ltd. The High Court guided by a decision of this Court in CIT vs South India Bank held that the dividend income which was exempted under the notification would be the dividend income received by the assessee and not the said income less any further amounts" because the notification must be regarded a self contained one and not controlled by any other provisions of the Act and there was no warrant to construe the word income ' in the notification as total income nor to qualify the dividend computed under Section 12 of the Act.
A provision of a similar kind granting exemption from super tax in respect of certain specified categories of inter corporate dividend was introduced as Section 56A of the Income Tax Act 1922 by the Finance Act, 1953.
When the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 was repealed and the Income Tax Act, 1961 was enacted with effect from 1st April, 1902, Section 99, subsection (i) was introduced in the new Act exempting certain categories of income from super tax and one such category was that set out in clause (iv) of Section 99 sub section (1) which read as follows: "99.
(1) Super tax shall not be payable by an assessee in respect of the following amounts which are included in his total income (iv) if the assessee is a company, any dividend received by it from an Indian company, subject to the provisions contained in the fifth Schedule.
" This provision continued in force upto Ist March, 1965 subject to a minor inconsequential amendment made by the Finance Act, 1964.
This provision did not come up for interpretation before this Court only in Cloth Traders Case, but it came to be considered by some of the High Courts.
The three High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras C.I.T vs New Great Insurance Company Ltd. , C.I.T vs Darbhangha Marketing Company Ltd. and Madras Auto Service vs I.T.O. on a construction of clause (iv) of sub section (1) of section 99, took the view that the entire amount of dividend received by the assessee from an Indian Company was exempt from super tax and the exemption was not limited to dividend income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and forming part of the total income.
780 Section 99 sub section (i) remained in force only upto the close of the assessment year 1964 65 and by an amendment made by the Finance Act, 1965, Section 99 sub section (1) was omitted and chapter IVA and section 85A were introduced in the present Act with effect from Ist April, 1965.
Chapter IVA comprised section 80A to 80D providing for certain specified deductions to be made in computing total income, while Section 85A provided for deduction of tax on incorporate dividends.
This Section was also considered by the Bombay High Court in New Great Insurance Company 's Case.
The High Court observed that except for some minor verbal changes, section 85A was almost in the same terms as section 99 sub section (1) clause (iv), the only real difference being that the exemption granted under section 99 sub section (i) clause (iv) was in regard to super tax, while the deduction allowed under section 85A was in regard to income tax, and held that under section 85A also, the deduction admissible was in respect of the entire dividend received by the assessee from an Indian Company and not in respect of dividend income minus deductions allowable under the provisions of the Act in computing 'total income ' The spate of legislative changes did not come to an end with the enactment of section 85A.
The Original Chapter VIA and certain other sections including section 85A were deleted from the present Act by Finance (No with effect from Ist April, 1968 and replaced by the new Chapter VIA which contains a fasciculus of sections from section 80A to section 80VV.
Section 80A sub section (1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee there shall be allowed from his gross total income, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Chapter VIA the deduction specified in Section 80C to Section 80VV and sub section (2) of that Section imposed a ceiling on such deductions by enacting that the aggregate amount of such deduction shall not in any case, exceed the gross total income of the assessee.
The expression "gross total income" is defined in clause (V) of Section 80B to mean the total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before making any deduction under Chapter VIA or under Section 280D. Section 80M is the new section which corresponds to the repealed Section 85A and it provides for deduction in respect of certain categories of inter corporate dividends.
Several amendments were made subsequently in this section but they relate primarily to the percentage of the income to be allowed as a deduction.
One amendment that was made by the Finance Act, 1968 was that the words "received by it" occurring in sub section (1) of Section 80M were omitted with effect from Ist April, 1968, so that right from the date of its enactment, section 80M sub section (1) was to be read as if the words "received by it" were not in the opening part of that provision.
Petitioner No. 1 was incorporated as a Limited Company and Petitioner No. 2 a Director and shareholder therein.
Petitioner No 1 received dividends on shares held by it in different domestic companies and paid interest on monies borrowed for the purpose of investment in such shares.
In the course of its assessment for the assessment years 1970 71 up to 1980 81, 781 Petitioner No. 1 claimed that the deduction permissible under Section 80M must be calculated with reference to the full amount of dividends received by Petitioner No. 1 from the domestic companies and not with reference to the dividends as computed in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The assessments of Petitioner No. 1 were actually completed on the basis of his claim and the view taken by this Court in Cloth Traders Case in regard to the construction of Section 80M.
The Revenue preferred appeals against such assessments and these appeals were pending at different stages at the time of filing the Writ Petition.
The Petitioner No. 1 was entitled to succeed in the appeals as well as in the original assessments which were pending before the different authorities, so long as the decision in Cloth Traders Case stood unaffected by any constitutionally valid legislative amendment.
However, with a view to overriding the decision in the Cloth Traders case with retrospective effect, Parliament enacted Section 80AA and since this section was deemed to have been introduced in the Income Tax Act, 1961 with effect from 1st April, 1968, and it provided that the deduction required to be allowed under Section 80M shall be computed not with reference to the gross amount of dividend received by the assessee from a domestic company but with reference to the dividend income as computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act, the claim of petitioner No. 1 for deduction on the basis of the full amount of dividend received by it from domestic companies was liable to be rejected and deduction could be allowed to Petitioner No. 1 only with reference to the dividend income computed in accordance with the provision of the Act.
The introduction of Section 80AA thus had the effect of enhancing the tax liability of Petitioner No. 1 and the petitioners filed a Writ Petition challenging the Constitutional validity of Section 80AA on the ground that it enhanced the tax burden with retrospective effect going back for a period of almost 12 years and consequently imposed an unreasonable restriction on the right of petitioner No. 1 to carry on its business in breach of Article 19 (1) (g) of the Constitution.
Dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD (By the Court) 1.
The deduction envisaged by sub section (1) of Section 80 is required to be made with reference to the income by way of dividends computed in accordance with the provisions of the Income Tax Act and not with reference to the full amount of dividend received by the assessee.
[802F, 809A] 2.
Section 80AA in its retrospective operation is merely declaratory of the law as it always was since Ist April, 1968 and no complaint can validly be made against it.
[807E, 809D] 782 Cloth Traders Ltd. vs Additional Commissioner of Income Tax, ; , over ruled and Cambey Electrical Supply Industrial Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, (1970) 113 84, approved.
(Per Chandrachud C.J., P.N. Bhagwati, D.P. Madon and M.P. Thakkar, JJ).
The Inquiry is not whether the view taken by the Bombay High Court in New Great Insurance Company 's case is correct.
It must be conceded that it has been held to be correct in the decision in Cloth Traders Case.
However another view in regard to the interpretation of Section 85A is possible.
It is not at all unreasonable to construe the words "income so included" as meaning the quantum of income by way of dividends included in the total income of the assessee.
These words in the context in which they occur have obviously reference to quantum of the income by way of dividends to which the average rate of income tax is to be applied.
That quantum is defined by these words and in order to determine it, the question is what is the income by way of dividends included in the total income and the answer can only be that is income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
It is not necessary to consider whether the construction placed on Section 85A by the Bombay High Court in New Great Insurance Company Case is correct or not, because interpretation of Section 85A is not concerned.
It is section 80M which has to be construed and this section, is materially different from Section 85A. Section 80M cannot be construed in the light of the interpretation placed on its predecessor section by the Bombay High Court particularly when Section 80M is admittedly worded differently from its predecessor section.
Section 80M must be construed on its own language and its true interpretation arrived at according to the plain natural meaning of the words used by the Legislature.
[795 D H] 2.
Section 80M is the new Section which corresponds to the repealed Section 85A and it provides for deduction in respect of certain categories of inter corporate dividends.
It is the interpretation of this section which constitutes the subject matter of controversy between the parties.
[796 D] 3.
What is the object behind grant of relief under Section 80M.
The main object of the relief under Section 80M is to avoid taxation once again in the hands of the receiving company of the amount which has already borne full tax in the hands of the paying company.
Now when an amount by way of dividend is received by the assessee from the paying company the full amount of such dividend would have suffered tax, in the assessment of the paying company in order to encourage inter company investments.
In order to encourage investments the Legislature intended that this amount should not bear tax once again in the hands of the assessee either its entirety or to a specified extent.
But the amount by way of dividend which would otherwise suffer tax in the hands of the assessee, would be the amount computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and not the full amount received from the paying company.
Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that in enacting Section 80M the Legislature intended to grant relief with reference to the amount of dividend computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and not with reference to the full amount of dividend received from the paying 783 company.
The Legislature could certainly be attributed the intention to prevent double taxation but not to provide an additional benefit which would go beyond what is required for saving the amount of dividend from taxation once again the hands of the assessee.
[799 A E] 4.
Section 80M sub section (1) opens with the words "where the gross total income of an assessee. . includes any income by way of dividends from a domestic company" and proceeds to say that in such a case, there shall be allowed in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction "from such income by way of dividends" of an amount equal to the whole of such income or 60% of such income as the case may be, depending on the nature of the domestic company from which the income by way of dividends is received.
The opening words describe the condition which must be fulfilled in order to attract the applicability of the provision contained in sub section (1) of Section 80M.
The condition is that the gross total income of the assessee must include income by way of dividends from a domestic company "Gross total income" is defined in Section 80B clause (v) to mean "total income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before making any deduction under Chapter VIA or under Section 280D".
Income by way of dividends from a domestic company included in the gross total income would therefore obviously be income computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act, that is after deducting interest on monies borrowed for earning such income.
If income by way of dividends from a domestic company computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act is included in the gross total income, or in other words, form part of the gross total income, the conditions specified in the opening part of sub section (1) of Section 80M would be fulfilled and the provision enacted in that sub section would be attracted.
[799G 800C] 5.
The words "such income by way of dividends" must have reference to the income by way of dividends mentioned earlier and that would be income by way of dividends from a domestic company which is included in the gross total income.
Consequently, in order to determine what is "such income by way of dividends", the question to be asked is what is the income by way of dividends from a domestic company included in the gross total income and that would obviously be the income by way of dividends computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
It is difficult to appreciate how, when interpreting the words "such income by way of dividends" a dichotomy can be made between the category of income and the quantum of the income by way of dividends so included.
[800H 801C] 6.
There is also another strong indication in the language of sub section (1) of Section 80M which clearly compels taking the view that the deduction envisaged by that provision is required to be made with reference to the income by way of dividends computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and not with reference to the full amount of dividend received by the assessee.
The indication was also unfortunately lost sight of by the Court in Cloth Traders case presumably because it was not brought to the attention of the Court.
The Court observed in Cloth Traders case that the whole of the income by way of dividends from a domestic company or 60% of such income as the same may be, would be deductible from the gross total income for 784 striving at the total income of the assessee.
This observation appears to have been made under some misapprehension, because what sub section (1) of Section 80M required is that the deduction of the whole or a specified percentage must be made from "such income by way of dividends" and not from the gross total income.
Now when in computing the total income of the assessee, a deduction has to be made from "such income by way of dividends" it is elementary that "such income by way of dividends" from which deduction has to be made must be part of gross total income.
It is difficult to see how the language of this part of sub section (1) of Section 80M can possibly fit in it if "such income by way of dividends" were interpreted to mean that full amount of dividend received by the assessee.
The full amount of dividend received by the assessee would not be included in the gross total income, what would be included would only be the amount of dividend as computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
If that be so it is difficult to appreciate how for the purpose of computing the total income from the gross total income any deduction should be required to be made from the full amount of the dividend.
The deduction required to be made for computing the total income from the gross total income can only be from the amount of dividend computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act which would be forming part of the gross total income.
Whatever might have been the interpretation placed on clause (iv) of sub section (1) of Section 99 and Section 85A the correctness of which is not in issue, so far as sub section ( ) of Section 80M is concerned, the deduction required to be allowed under that provision is liable to be calculated with reference to the amount of dividend computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and forming part of the gross total income and not with reference to the full amount of dividend received by the assessee.
[801G 802F] 7.
Structurally there is hardly any difference between Section 80E sub section (1) and Section 80M sub section (1) and the reasoning which appealed to the Court in the interpretation of sub section (1) of Section 80E in Cambay Electric Supply Industrial Company Ltd. vs C.I.T. must apply equally in the interpretation of sub section (1) of Section 80M. [803 B] 8.
Ordinarily this Court would be reluctant to overturn a decision given by a Bench of this Court, because it is essential that there should be continuity and consistency in judicial decisions, and law should be certain and definite.
It is almost as important that the law should be settled correctly.
But there may be circumstances where public interest demands that the previous decision be reviewed and reconsidered.
The doctrine of stare decisis should not deter the Court from overruling an earlier decision, if it is satisfied that such decision is manifestly wrong or proceeds upon a mistaken assumption in regard to the existence or continuance of a statutory provision or is contrary to another decision of the Court.
[805G 806A] 9.
There are over riding considerations which compel reconsideration and review of the decision in Cloth Traders Case.
In the first place, the decision in Cloth Traders case was rendered by this Court on 4th May, 1979 and immediately thereafter, with in a few months, Parliament introduced Section 80AA with retrospective effect from Ist April, 1968 with a view to over riding the interpretation placed on Section 80M in Cloth Traders case.
The decision 785 in Cloth Traders case did not therefore hold the field for a period of more than a few months and it could not be said that any assessee was misled into acting to its detriment on the basis of that decision.
There was no decision of this Court in regard to the interpretation of sub section (1) of Section 80M prior to the decision in Cloth Traders case and there was therefore no authoritative pronouncement of this Court on this question of interpretation on which an assessee could claim to rely for making its fiscal arrangements.
Another circumstance which makes is necessary to reconsider and review the decision in Cloth Traders Case, is the decision in Cambay Electric Supply Company case.
The decision in Cloth Traders case is inconsistent with that in Cambay Electric Supply Company 's case Both cannot stand together.
If one is correct, the other must logically be wrong and vice versa.
It is therefore necessary to resolve the conflict between these two decisions and harmonise the law and that necessitates an inquiry into the correctness of the decision in Cloth Traders Case, and having considered and reviewed the decision in Cloth Traders case come to the conclusion that the decision in Cloth Traders Case is erroneous and must be over turned.
[806C 807D] (Per A.N. Sen, J. concurring) The authority and jurisdiction of a larger Bench of this Court to override and over rule any decision of a smaller Bench cannot be questioned.
However, a decision of this Court on any fiscal legislation involving the question of financial benefit and liability should not normally be interfered with and should be interfered with only in very rare cases.
On the basis of the decision of this Court on any fiscal legislation and any matter involving financial arrangements and adjustments, parties are entitled to arrange their financial affairs and in fact they so arrange and adjust the financial affairs on the basis of the law laid down by this Court.
Unsettling a position settled by the decision of this Court may lead to the confusion and result in financial instability, causing serious prejudice not only to the parties concerned but also to the economic growth of the country as a whole.
[808 C E] 2.
If on interpretation of any provision of any fiscal legislation two views may be reasonably possible, a larger Bench of this Court may not interfere with a view taken by a smaller Bench by this Court mainly on the ground that the other view appears to the larger Bench to be the better view and may commend itself to the larger Bench.
If, however, a decision of the smaller Bench has necessarily to interfere with the decision, as this Court will not permit a wrong decision to operate as good law of the land.
[808 F]
