By a Notification dated November 19, 1949 issued under section 3(1) of the Bihar State Management of Estates and Tenures Act, 1949 (Bihar Act XXI of 1949), as duly certified by the President under clause (6) of Article 31 of the Constitution, the estate of the Prithwi Chand Lall Choudhary called "Raj Nazarganj" spread over the District of Purnea and some other districts in the State of Bihar as also in the State of West Bengal, was taken under the management of the Bihar State Government.
One J.P. Mukherjee who was the Additional Collector of Darbhanga was appointed as the Manager of the estate.
In the meanwhile, the Maharajadhiraja of Darbhanga Sir Kameshwar Singh filed a civil suit challenging the validity of the Act as his estate was also similarly notified under the said section.
The Patna High Court withdrew that Suit to its own file for being tried in its Extra ordinary Original Civil Jurisdiction and by its judgment dated June 5, 1950 reported as M D. Sir Kameshwar Singh V. State of Bihar ILR 29 Patna 790, declaring the Act to be ultra vires and wholly void, issued an injunction restraining the State Government from enforcing the Act.
Against that judgment the State of Bihar preferred an appeal to the Supreme Court.
However, on the basis of the judgment of the High Court, Prithwi Chand Lall Choudhary demanded on June 9, 1950 that he should be put back in possession of the estate whose management had been taken over from him.
On July 3, 1950 the then Collector by his letter informed Choudhary that the Government had decided to relinquish charge of the estates and tenures and that Choudhary should co operate in taking over charge by July 15, 1950.
On July 6, 1950 the Government cancelled the Notification issued under section 3(1) of the Act.
The charge of collection papers was handed over by the middle of July, 1950 to Choudhary.
The abstracts and synopsis of accounts were given on August 7, 1950.
About Rs. 1,46,000/had been collected on behalf of the estate during the Government 's management.
After the estate was thus handed over to him, Choudhary filed a suit on September 21, 1951 in the Court of the Subordinate Judge, Purnea, for damages of Rs. 2,00,000 for wrongful and illegal interference with his estates and tenures and for other consequential reliefs, 528 Broadly the grounds of the claim were (a) that due to gross negligence ., and wilful default the appellant herein, contravened the provisions of section 'S 3(1) in notifying and taking possession of part only of Choudhary 's interest in Estates and Tenures and in omitting to notify other parts of his Estates and Tenures on the first occasion when the Notification dated November 19, 1949 was issued the Government was unable to realise all the rents and other dues, (b) that due to wrong Notification and omission to notify all parts of his Estates and Tenures and also on account of amalgamated rentals maintained by the Respondent in respect of his estates and tenures he could not fully realies the balance share of unnotified estates and tenures, (c) that certain rents and decress had been allowed to become barred by time, (d) that on account of non payment of Agricultural Income Tax and consequent imposition of penalty which was no doubt reduced to Rs. 2,000 on appeal the Estate suffered a loss of Rs. 12,000 and, (e) that on account of issue of wrong collection certificates by Collector and his staff the respondent had suffered some loss which was yet to be ascertained.
It was alleged that the action of the appellant suffered from negligence, bad faith and malice and the appellant alongwith its Manager as tortfeasor was jointly and severally for all such losses suffered by him.
The appellant traversed all the material allegations in the plaint and the plea was one of bona fides carrying out of their duties under the Act.
The Trial Court which proceeded on the basis that the Act was unconstitutional, and the appellant was a trespasser on the respondents ' estate held: (1) that the cost of management incurred by the Collector over and above 12 1/2% of the gross collection was excessive, and therefore, the State should refund such excess amount; (2) that the mistake in not notifying all the shares held by Choudhary in Tauzis Nos. 7/8 and 30 at the first instance resulted in non collection of the dues and Choudhary thereby had suffered; (3) that the State being trespassers, Choudhary owed no duty to make available to them the separated Jamabandi to facilitate collection of dues in the said Tauzis, and therefore, the State should reimburse Choudhary the amount he would have been able to collect from those tauzis during the period of their management, and also to make good the loss caused on account of arrears or decreaes which had been allowed to become barred.
The Trial Court, accordingly, passed a preliminary decree and directed that a Commissioner should enquire into the above items.
Against the said preliminary decree the State, filed an appeal before the High Court.
At the instance of the State and on a reference by the Division Bench hearing the appeal, a Full Bench of the Court reconsidered the decision reported in ILR 29 Patna 790, by its judgment dated February 15, 1963 overruled the said decision, and declared that the Act was constitutional.
Thereafter the Division Bench finally heard the appeal and took the view that though it was open to the State to notify only a fraction of an estate under section 3(1) of the Act, yet, it was not absolved from the duty of taking appropriate steps for the preparation of suitable collection papers in respect of the notified shares in Tauzis No. 7/8 and 30.
The Division Bench held that the State was liable to compensate Choudhary for not preparing the collection papers in time; (i) that even though Choudhary had been told to file suits for rents in respect of unnotified share of the estate, the State were negligent in the matter of issuing certificates for recovery, some of which were later on struck off; (ii) that the material on 529 the record did not indicate that necessary steps were taken by the Collector with regard to pending suits and execution proceedings and there was every probability that loss had been suffered by Choudhary on account of the inaction or failure to continue pending proceedings which amounted to wilful default and gross negligence; (iii) that the State was liable to reimburse Choudhary to the extent of Rs. 2,000 levied as penalty for non payment of Agricultural Income Tax; (iv) in so far as the cost of management of Rs. 43,507 which was in the order of 30 per cent of the gross collection was concerned about a sum of Rs. 8,000 (=25% of the gross collection) had been incurred as cost of management in excess of what was authorised and that (Choudhary was entitled to it; and (v) that section 31 of the Act did not give protection in respect of loss which was caused by wilful default and gross negligence.
The appeal of the State and the cross objections of Choudhary regarding certain matters disallowed by the trial Court were, accordingly, dismissed.
Hence the State Appeal by certificate.
Allowing the appeal in part, the Court C ^ HELD 1.1 The Bihar State Management of Estates and Tenures Act, 1949 (Bihar Act XXI of 1949) was intended to bring about a reform in the land distribution system of Bihar for the general benefit of the community.
The taking over of the management and control over land was found to be necessary as a preliminary step towards the implementation of the Directive Principles of State Policy.
Therefore, section 31 of the Act provided that no suit or other legal proceeding would lie in any Court against the State Government or against any servant of the state Government or against any person acting under the orders of a servant of the State Government for or on account of or in respect of anything done or purporting to be done in good faith under the Act or in respect of any alleged neglect or omission to perform any duty devolving on the State Government or any of the officers subordinate to it or acting under the Act, or in respect of the exercise of or on failure to exercise any power conferred by the Act on the State Government or any officer subordinate to it and acting under the Act, except for the loss or the misapplication occasioned by the wilful default or gross negligence of any officer of the State Government.
Under section 4(22) of the Bihar and Orissa General Clauses Act, 1917, a thing shall be deemed to be done in 'good faith ' where it is in fact done honestly, whether it is done negligently or not.
[532E; 545C E] 1.2.
In the instant case, there was no proof of deliberate abuse of statutory power nor of usurpation of a power which the authorities knew that they did not possess.
It cannot be said that either the State Government or any of the officers acting under it in performance of their duties under the Act had not acted honestly either in issuing the Notification under section 3(1) of the Act, on November 19, 1949 by which only parts of Tauzis Nos. 7/8 and 30 had been notified or in not preparing separate collection statements before April 1950.
Further, the following facts, namely, (a) the respondent himself had acquired the said Tauzis in instalments; (b) as soon as the error was pointed out steps were taken by the Manager to get the unnotified share also notified and the Government issued a Notification accordingly within about four months; (c) on account of not handing over by the respondent even the consolidated collection statements by April 1950, the separate collection statements could not be got prepared by the Manager 530 By April 1950; (d) even according to the respondent himself if would have taken six months to prepare separate collection statements on the basis of the consolidated statements; and (e) unawareness of the State Government or any of its officers before hand that the respondent had maintained a consolidated statement of accounts on the date of issue of the first Notification in respect of a portion of Tauzis Nos. 718 and 30, constituted a good defence under section 31 of the Act against any claim based on any alleged neglect or omission since there was no proof of any wilful default or gross negligence on the part of the defendants.
[545F H; 546A B] 1.3.
In the instant case; (i) the claim for damages on all counts should fail except with regard to the claim for Rs. 8,000 which had been incurred as cost of management in excess of what was authorised by law.
With regard to the penalty of Rs. 2,000 imposed for non payment of the Agricultural Income Tax when once it was conceded that the first notification was not unauthorised one, the State could not be held liable for reimbursing the penalty of Rs. 2,000 to the respondent; (ii) It cannot be said that the Manager acted in excess of his powers vested under the Act of 1949 or mala fide.
Lack of bona fides cannot be attributed to him merely because some of the suits out of a large number of suits filed for recovery of the arrears due to the Estate, were dismissed on merits or on the ground that some of the persons sued were dead or not traceable.
In fact nearly, 7,000 certificate cases had to be filed in a short period and hurriedly on the basis of arrears list submitted by the respondent himself and by the middle of July 1950 the management of the state itself was relinquished.
Further if a certain share in a tauzi had not been notified on the first occasion it again cannot be said as having been done either mala fide or deliberately to harm the respondent.
The Manager therefore, could not be charged for wilful default or gross negligence in as much as in view of the definition of the expression 'tenure ' in section 2(k) of the, Act it was open to the government to notify even a fraction of a tenure under section 3(1) of the Act; (iii) Since the respondent himself failed to discharge his duty imposed the State cannot be made liable to any damages on the ground that the Manager had failed to get the collection papers prepared in respect of Tauzis Nos. 718 and 30 in time and thus caused loss to the respondent.
[546C; 544G; 542F G; 543A B]
