Labh Singh, respondent No.1 was the owner of certain agricultural lands in three villages situated in the district of Kapurthala, namely, village Karahal Nauabad, village Isherwa and village Brindpur measuring in all 32 8 standard acres.
Of them an extent of 7 4 standard acres of land situated in village Brindpur had been mortgaged with possession by him in favour of One Lachman Singh of village Khera Dona before the Pepsu Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1955 (Pepsu Act 13 of 1955) came into force.
The mortgage was subsisting when Chapter IV A was inserted by the (Second Amendment) Act, 1956 (Pepsu Act No.15 of 1956) by which sections 32 A to 32 N were introduced.
Clause (f) of section 2 of the Act defines the expression "land owner".
The explanation added to the said clause provided that in respect of land mortgaged with possession the mortgagee should be deemed to be the land owner.
The permissible limit for the purpose of the Act was fixed at 30 standard acres of land by section 3 thereof.
In view of the above, Labh Singh, being in possession of less than 30 standard acres, 7 4 standard acres being in possession of the mortgagee was treated as a small owner not liable to surrender any land as surplus land under the provisions of the Act.
But on April 1, 1959, Labh Singh got back the possession of 7 4 standard acres of land by redeeming the mortgage.
On redemption the total extent of land in his possession became 32 8 standard acres which was in excess of 30 standard acres which had been prescribed by the Act as the permissible limit.
On coming to know that Labh Singh had in his possession land in excess of the permissible limit, proceedings were started by the Revenue authorities to declare the surplus land in his hands 358 and to take possession of the surplus area.
The Collector directed Labh Singh to produce a list of Khasara Numbers to be surrendered as surplus land within a fortnight therefrom.
Aggrieved by the order of the Collector, Labh Singh preferred an appeal before the Commissioner of Jullandur Division.
That appeal was unsuccessful.
A revision petition filed before the Financial Commissioner, Punjab against that order also failed.
Labh Singh, thereafter, filed a writ petition before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana which was also dismissed.
In the Letters Patent Appeal filed before the Division Bench of the High Court by Labh Singh it was held (i) that the acquisition made by Labh Singh of 7 4 standard acres of land on redemption amounted to a transfer within the meaning of that expression in section 32 L of the Act and that being so by virtue of sub section 2 of that section the transfer by which Labh Singh had acquired interest in that land must be deemed to be null and void and therefore non existent; and (ii) the transfer being non existent there was no acquisition in the eye of law and consequently, the transfer had to be ignored and not to be taken into consideration.
Hence the State appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 Respondent No.1 Labh Singh was in possession of land in excess of the permissible limit after he redeemed the mortgage and he therefore became liable to surrender the surplus land, that is, 2 8 standard acres to the Government by virtue of section 32 A itself.
Even though there was no express machinery provided in the Act at the relevant time to deal with the cases of this type, the Court is not competent to refuse to give effect to the plain words of section 32 A. [365 G H, 366 A] 1.2.
The scheme of the Act is that no land owner or tenant can hold land in excess of the permissible limit and every such land owner or tenant holding land in excess of permissible limit is liable to surrender the surplus land whatever may be the time at which such surplus land is acquired and whatever may be the mode of acquisition.
Chapter IV A of the Act is intended to place a ceiling upon the holding of land for personal cultivation by a landowner or a tenant in excess of the permissible limit not merely on the date on which it came into force but even subsequently.
[363 G H, 364 A] Vidya Vati vs The State of Punjab & Ors. followed.
359 2.1 In the context in which the word "transfer" is used in section 32 L of the Act it cannot be construed of including within its scope the re transfer of land which takes place on redemption.
[364 H] 2.2 Even though the mortgagee is liable to re transfer the land in favour of the mortgagor on redemption of the mortgage such re transfer cannot be treated as equivalent to transfer contemplated under section 32 L of the Act.
When a mortgagor mortgages the land with possession he does not cease to be its owner.
The equity of redemption still vests in him and on redemption he gets back possession of the mortgaged land.
The present case came within the mischief of section 32 A of the Act, which was all pervasive.
[364 F G, 365 A]
