The prosecution alleged that the appellant had killed his wife by strangulation.
The marriage of the appellant and the deceased took place about a year before the date of occurrence.
After about six months of the marriage the relations between the two spouses started becoming strained.
The accused neglected the deceased, abused her, teased her, waxed her, and even beat her.
All these were reported to the relatives of both sides as result of which a panchayat had to be called to bring the two parties together which also was of no avail.
The Sessions Court after considering the evidence WAS of the opinion that the prosecution case was not proved beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly acquitted the appellant of the charges framed against him under Section 302 IPC.
The State filed an appeal before the High Court which reversed the aforesaid decision and came to the conclusion that the appellant had killed his wife by strangulation.
Dismissing this appellant 's Appeal to this Court ^ HELD: 1.
The view taken by the High Court is correct and there is no reason to interfere with the same.
The trial court has gone wrong, and has made a fundamentally wrong approach.
The 509 judgment of the trial court is not only legally erroneous but A absolutely perverse.
In view of the circumstances of the case and the admissions of the witnesses, the case against the accused has been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
This is not a case where two views are possible.
[516 G,D E] 2.
Circumstantial evidence must be complete and conclusive before an accused can be convicted thereon.
This, however, does not mean that there is any particular or special method of proof of circumstantial evidence.
One must, however, guard against the danger of not considering circumstantial evidence in its proper perspective, e.g. where there 18 a chain of circumstances linked up with one another, it is not possible for the court to truncate and break the chain of circumstances.
In other words, where a series of circumstances are dependent on one another they should be read as one integrated whole and not considered separately, otherwise the very concept of proof of circumstantial evidence would be defeated.
[510 G 511 A] 3.
Where circumstantial evidence consists of a chain of continuous circumstances linked up with one another, the court has to take the cumulative effect of the entire evidence before acquitting or convicting an accused.
1516 F] In the instant case, the Sessions Judge had committed an error.
Instead of taking all the circumstance .
together which are undoubtedly circumstantial and closely linked up with one another, he has completely misdirected himself by separately dealing with each circumstance thereby making a wrong approach while appreciating the circumstantial evidence produced in the case.
Some letters written by the deceased show the callous and cruel nature of the accused and his treatment.
He appears to have been completely indifferent.
The deceased prayed to her parents for taking her with them immediately.
Despite the conduct of the appellant, the parents in law of the deceased were very kind to her, but the appellant was made of such a stern nature that he would not listen to anybody.
The recovery of certain broken bangles and one pair of cufflinks show that during the course of strangulation, the deceased put up stiff resistance.
The medical evidence also supports that the deceased had died of manual strangulation.
A number of prosecution witnesses PWs 5,6,7,8 & 9 deposed that the appellant had been ill treating the deceased and their relations were extremely strained, and that the relatives of the two sides tried their best to bring harmony in the relations of the accused and the deceased.
Another circumstance 510 of great importance is that after the incident, the accused went to Muzaffar Nagar stayed in his sister 's house came back the same evening, stayed in a Hotel under a false and assumed name written in the hotel register in his own hand.
This shows the guilty conscience of the accused.
another intrinsic evidence which proves the case against the accused consists of two letters(Ext.
PW 12 A and B) written be the deceased to her parents wherein the had requested her father to take her away as her husband was ill treating her.
The statement of the S.I., PW 18 reveals that from the personal search of the accused, Rs.5.50 one ticket from Meerut to Delhi were recovered and that the banian of the accused had blood stains.
A,C D, 516 A B]
