Respondent No.2 a registered House Building Society with 32 members entered into an agreement with the Government of Punjab where under the Government agreed to advance a loan of Rs. 1,02,000 to its members under the lower income group housing scheme for the purpose of constructing residential houses in Dera Baba Nanak.
As per the written agreement the loan advance was payable in three instalments.
The first instalment of Rs. 20400 was to be paid by the Govt.
On the execution of the deed of agreement, the second instalment of Rs. 51000 to be paid on the completion of the houses to the plinth level and the last instalment of Rs. 30,600 on the completion of the house to the roof level.
The society on the other hand had to mortgage the sites together with the houses erected or to be erected thereon to the govt.
as security for the repayment of loan and the amount of loan was to be paid back in several instalments.
Pursuant to the agreement the Government issued a cheque for Rs. 71,400 towards the first and SECOND instalments.
The third instalment was not paid for failure to furnish the required certificate that the houses had reached the roof level.
The members of the society also failed to repay the loan in the situation, a notice was issued by the Collector of the District to the members of the society to deposit the overdue instalments of loan and to appear before the Deputy commissioner, Gurdaspur on August 24, 1964 to show cause why the entire amount should not be recovered from them by means of arrest and DETENTION.
The society challenged the notice by filing a writ petition in the Court.
Its stand was that in the absence of any such stipulation in the loan agreement the amount could not be recovered by arrest of the members of the 706 society in the first instance.
The writ petition remained pending for more than six years but no instalments had been paid by the members of the society to the government during that period.
The Writ Petition was allowed by the learned Single Judge by his judgment dated 17th March, 1971 holding that the government must resort to the contractual remedy which it reserved to itself while entering into the loan agreement.
The State preferred a letters patent appeal which was summarily dismissed.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: A bare reading of clause 4 of the agreement makes it evidently clear that the Government has first to proceed against the property xaf mortgaged and sell the property.
Only in case the entire amount could not be realised that the Government could proceed against the borrower personally.
The government is as much bound by the agreement as the borrower and, therefore, the Government has first to proceed against the mortgaged property.
In other words, the government must resort to the contractual remedy which it reserved to itself when entering into the loan agreement before resorting to clause (b) of section 67 of the Punjab Land Revenue Act.
[709 B C, 706 H, 710] Ram Narayan Agarwal etc.
vs State of U.P. & Ors.
explained and distinguished.
