M/s Sahney Steel and Press Works Ltd. is a public limited company having its registered office and factory at Hyderabad.
It is registered as a dealer under the Central Sales Tax Act, as well a under the Andhra Pradesh General Sale Tax Act.
It has branch offices at Amritsar, Bangalore, Bombay, Calcutta, Coimbatore and Delhi.
They are all registered as dealers under the Central Sales Tax Act and under the related State Sales Tax Acts.
The branches of the company are mainly engaged in effecting sales and looking after the sales promotion and liaison work.
The company manufactures (a) standard goods according to the company 's own designs and specifications, (b) non standard goods according to the designs and specifications supplied by customer.
In the course of its normal business, the registered office despatches both standard and non standard goods manufactured at the Hyderabad factory to the branches.
The branch offices situate at Bombay, Calcutta and Coimbatore receive orders from customers within and from outside the respective States for the supply of goods conforming to definite specifications and drawings.
Those branch offices then advise the registered office at Hyderabad to manufacture and despatch the good.
On receipt of such advice from the branch, the goods are manufactured at the Hyderabad factory and thereafter despatched by the registered office to the branches by way of transfer of stock.
While despatching the goods, sometimes intimation is also given by the registered office to the customer concerned about the despatch of the goods to the destination indicated by him.
Such goods are 781 booked to 'self ' and sent by lorries.
The goods received by the branches from time to time, whether standard goods or non standards goods, are entered in the stock accounts of the branches and are kept in stock by the branches for ultimate delivery to the customers.
On the goods reaching the branches, they are inspected by the customer and accepted by them where the customers are local parties.
Where delivery has to be effected to customers of other States, the goods are despatched to them by the branch.
The branches raise bills and receive the sales price.
The branches furnish 'F ' forms to the registered office under section 6 A of the Central Sales Tax Act in the case of stock transfers to the branches.
The sale of non standard goods was Assessed to State & sales Tax under the Sales Tax Acts of Maharashtra, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu.
The Commercial Tax Officer, Company Circle II, Hyderabad, however, expressed the view that the company was liable to Central & sales Tax on the turn over of non standard goods.
For the assessment year 1979 80 he made an assessment order dated May 4, 1981 assessing a turn over of Rs. 1,29,50,248.73 representing what the petitioners claimed to be stock transfers from the Hyderabad registered office to the branches outside the State of Andhra Pradesh.
By way of abundant caution the petitioners had prayed that in the event of their objection to the imposition of Central Sales Tax being overruled they should be allowed time to collect 'C ' forms from the various customers to whom the branches held effected sales and to submit them to the Commercial Tax Officer.
The Commercial Tax Officer, however, did not grant the company the further time it sought for that purpose.
The Commercial Tax Officer has also issued notices dated May 2, 1981 seeking to reopen the Central sales Tax Assessments already completed for the years 1977 78 and 1978 79.
In the original assessments for those years the Commercial Tax Officer had excluded the disputed transactions relating to transfers of non standard goods from the registered office to the branches.
Once the Writ Petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution praying for: (i) to quash the assessment order dated May 4, 1981 made under the Central Sales Tax Act for the assessment year 1979 80 and the consequent demand of tax in respect of the non standard goods; (ii) to restrain the Commercial Tax Officer from reopening the past assessments; (iii) alternatively, in the event of the transactions being held liable under the Central Sales Tax Act, to afford opportunity to the company to file 'C ' forms to enable it to avail of the concessional rate of tax envisaged under section 8(1) of the Central Sales Tax Act and (iv) further 782 alternatively to quash the assessments made under the local Sales Tax Acts for the assessment years 1978 79 onwards in so far as the assessments include the turn over of the aforesaid stock transfers transferred by the registered office to its branches.
Dismissing the petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 The sale transactions were inter state sales in as much as they satisfy the terms of clause (a) of section 3 of the Central Sales Tax Act.
[790 B] 1.2 It cannot be said that the Movement of the goods from Hyderabad to the branch office was only for the purpose of enabling the sale by the branch office and was not in the course of fulfillment of the contract of sale.
Even if the buyer places an order with the branch office and the branch office communicates the terms and specifications of the orders to the registered office and the branch office itself is concerned with the sales despatching, billing receiving of the sale price, the conclusion must be that the order placed by the buyer is an order placed with the Company, and for the purpose of fulfilling that order the manufactured goods commence their journey from the registered office within the State of Andhra Pradesh to the Branch office outside the State for delivery of the goods to the buyer.
Further, both the registered office and the branch office are offices of the same Company, and what in effect does take place is that the Company from its registered office in Hyderabad takes the goods to its branch office outside the State and arranges to deliver them to the buyer.
The registered office and branch office do not possess separate juridical personalities.
The question really is whether the movement of the goods from the registered office at Hyderabad is occasioned by the order placed by the buyer or is an incident of the contract.
The answer being in the affirmative, its movement from the very beginning from Hyderabad all the way until delivery is received by the buyer is an inter state movement.
[787 A D,F] 1.3 The fact that the goods were despatched by the branch office situated outside the State of Andhra Pradesh to the buyer and not by the registered office at Hyderabad makes no difference at all.
The manufacture of the goods at the Hyderabad factory and their movement thereafter from Hyderabad to the branch office outside the State was an incident of the contract entered into with the buyer, for it was intended that the same goods should be delivered by the branch office to the buyer.
There was no break 783 in the movement of the goods.
The branch office merely acted as a conduit through which the goods passed on their way to the buyer.
It would have been a different matter if the particular goods had been despatched by the registered office at Hyderabad to the branch office outside the State for sale in the open market and without reference to any order placed by the buyer.
In such a case if the goods are purchased from the branch office, it is not a sale under which the goods commenced their movement from Hyderabad.
It is a sale where the goods moved merely from the branch office to the buyer.
The movement of the goods from the registered office at Hyderabad to the branch office outside the State cannot be regarded as an incident of the sale made to the buyer.
[787 F H, 788 A C] English Electric Company of India Ltd. vs The Deputy Commercial Tax officer & Ors.; , ; Union of India and Another vs K.G. Khosla and Co. Ltd. and Others, [1979] 43 S.T.C. 457; Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. Ltd. vs Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes & Anr., [1970] 26 S.T.C. 354 =[1970] 3 S.C.R. 862; State of Bihar & Anr.
Tata Engineering Locomotive Co., Ltd. [1971; 27 S.T.C. 127 =[1971] 2 S.C.R. 849 and Balabhagas Hulaschand and another vs State of Orissa, [1976] 37 S.T.C. 207 referred to.
[The Court directed: (i) the Commercial Tax Officer to afford a reasonable opportunity to the Company to collect 'C ' Forms and furnish them to the assessing authority before making an assessment against the Company in respect of such transactions; (ii) the petitioner Company may make an application to the assessing authority for deleting the turnover of sales found to be inter State sales concerned for re opening the assessments made under the State Sales Tax Acts and (iii) if the application is made within two months from September 10, 1985, the said assessing authority should entertain the application, notwithstanding any period of limitation prescribed for such a proceedings and to dispose of the claim in accordance with law.]
