By virtue of Entry 36 of the First Schedule in the "footwear and parts thereof" in or on relation to the manufacture of which any process is ordinarily carried on with the aid of power, is chargeable to excise duty, the rate of duty being 10% ad valorem in respect of "footwear" and 15% ad valorem in respect of "parts of footwear".
By a Notification dated July 24, 1967, issued In exercise of the powers conferred by sub rule (1) of rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, the Central Government exempted, with effect from the 26th May, 1967, footwear falling under item No. 36 of the First Schedule to the , of which the value did not exceed Rs. 5 per pair from the whole of the duty of excise leviable thereon.
During the year 1967 and 1968, Bata Shoe Company was manufacturing certain items of footwear of which the wholesale price was Rs. 6.25 per pair.
The contention of the company that since the assessable value of such items of footwear calculated in terms of section 4 of the Act, as it stood at the relevant time was only Rs. 4.94 and thus less than Rs. 5 per pair were qualified for exemption under the Notification was negatived by the department on the ground that while computing the value of the articles for the purpose of judging the applicability of the exemption, the duty element of the cost structure could not be deducted from the wholesale price and on such calculation the value of such footwear would exceed Rs. 5 per pair.
Three Writ Petitions were, therefore, filed in the High Courts of Patna, Calcutta and the Punjab & Haryana, since the company had three manufacturing establishments attracting the jurisdictions of these Courts.
The Patna High Court allowed the writ petition accepting the contention of the company and granted certificate of appeal to the department.
The High Court of Calcutta 961 dismissed the petition and accepted the stand of the Department that the expression "value" occurring in the Notification dated July 24,1967 is not the deemed "value" calculated according to the provisions of section 4 of the Act, but is the real and actual "value" of the goods after the payment of the duty.
The High Court of Punjab & Haryana dismissed the petition in limini on the ground of laches.
Both these two High Courts, however, granted certificate of appeal to the company.
Hence the three appeals by certificates.
Allowing the appeals of the company and dismissing the State appeal, he Court, ^ HELD 1.1 While computing the "value" of the articles of footwear for the purposes of testing the availability of the exemption granted under the Notification dated July 24,1967 section 4 of the gets attracted.
Section 4 is comprehensive in its coverage and it lays down the procedure to be followed for determination of "value" of any article in every case where the article is chargeable with duty at a rate dependent on the value of the article.
[966H, 967A] 1.2 While the notification makes it clear that the effect of the Notification is to render the changeability or otherwise to duty of excise of footwear falling under item 36 of the First Schedule is made wholly dependent upon the "value" of the article of footwear; in case such "value" exceeds Rs. 5 per pair, duty will be chargeable at the rate of 10%.
whereas if the value does not exceed Rs.5 per pair, no duty will be chargeable on such items of footwear, that is the rate of duty will be nil.
Thus entry 36 read along with the Notification dated July 24, 1967 clearly shows that the changeability to duty in respect of any article of footwear is made dependent upon its value in tho sense that the chargeability to duty of excise will arise only if the "value" of the article does not exceed Rs. 5 per pair.
[966D E, 967A B] 1.3 Before determining the question of availability of the exemption under the Notification dated July 24, 1967, the first essential step, therefore, is to determine the "value" of the article in the manner prescribed in section 4 of the Act.
The fact that on such a computation the article may ultimately be found to be exempted from excise duty does not have any bearing on the question of applicability of section 4 of the Act for determining the ' 'value" for purpose of duty.
[967B D] 1.4 The expression 'I`or the purpose of duty" occurring in section 4 has a wide import.
For all purposes connected with the determination of chargeability and levy of duty the provisions of the section are to be applied for computation of the "value" of the article.
Under the Explanation to section 4, it is mandatory that in determining the price of an article both trade discount as well as the amount of duty calculated as payable on the wholesale cash price payable at the time of removal of the article based on the wholesale cash price referred to in clause (a) are to be deducted from such wholesale price.
[967D E] In the instant case, in as much as the value of the articles of footwear in 962 question calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 4 of the Act did note exceed Rs.5 per pair, the articles in question were exempted from the charge to duty of excise under the Notification dated July 24, 1967 and the company is entitled, forthwith, to a refund of the amounts of duty illegally realised by the Department.
[967G H] The Collector of Central Excise, Patna & Ors.
vs The Bata Shoe Company (P) Ltd. AIR Patna approved.
The Bata Shoe Company (P) Ltd. vs The Collector of Central Excise & Ors., Calcutta, AIR Calcutta : The Bata Shoe Company (P) Ltd. vs The Collector of Central Excise & Ors., AIR Pun jab & Haryana reversed.
