The appellant assessee manufactures scientific instruments and apparatus like Dumpy levellers, levelling staves prismatic compass, etc.
It entered into two separate collaboration agreements, one dated 15th March, 1961 and the other dated 31st March 1961 with M/s. Metrimpex Hungarian Trading Company, Budapest for undertaking the manufacture of microscopes and theodolites, under which the said collaborator, in consideration of payment of Rs.80,000 each (Rs. 1,60,000 under both the agreements together), agreed to supply to the assessee all the technical know how required for the manufacture of these instruments.
To enable the assessee to manufacture these instruments in India, the foreign collaborator inter alia agreed to render documentation service" by supplying to the assessee an uptodate and correct complete set each of the five types of documents (such as manufacturing drawings, processing documents, designs, charts, plans and other literature more specifically detailed in clause 3 of the agreements) and to render training and imparting of knowledge of the know how technique of manufacturing these instruments.
Pursuant to the agreements the appellant assessee made full Payment of Rs. 1,60,000 to the foreign collaborator and the latter rendered "documentation service" by supplying complete sets of all the documents including designs, drawings charts, plans and other literature as per clause 3.
The sum of Rs. 1,60,000 was debited by the assessee under the head "Library".
For the assessment year 1966 67 for which relevant accounting year ended on 30th September, 1965 the assessee claimed a sum of RS.
12,000 by way of deprecation on "Library".
The Income Tax 702 Officer held that the sum of Rs. 1,60,000 did not represent the value of books purchased by the assessee represented the price paid for acquiring the technical know how which amounted to capital expenditure but since no tangible or depreciable asset was brought into existence no depreciation allowance could be claimed.
On appeal preferred by the assessee, however, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner held that what the assessee had done was to make an outright purchase of certain specimen drawings, charts, plans, etc.
On special papers, that these documents when collected together constituted a book on which depreciation as in the case of plant and machinery, would, be at the appropriate rate be allowable and he directed the Income Tax Officer to allow the depreciation claimed.
In the further appeal preferred by the department the Tribunal took the view that clauses 2,3,4,5 and 10 of the agreements did not lend support to the stand taken by the assessee that payments (Rs. 80,000 each) had been made mainly for the supply of designs, drawings, charts, etc., that the services to be rendered by the foreign collaborator covered a wide field and that the supply of designs, drawings, charts, etc.
was incidental and only in furtherance of other services which the foreign collaborator was expected to render.
And that since the supply of designs, drawings, charts, etc. was only incidental and the payment of Rs. 1,60,000 could not entirely be held to represent the purchase price of those documents it was unnecessary for them to go into the question whether the said documents fell within the meaning of the expression 'books ' and whether depreciation was, therefore, admissible thereon.
The Tribunal however, held that the agreements showed that some of the services which the foreign collaborator was required to render to the assessee were on revenue account (as for example, the provision which required the foreign collaborator to depute their experts to correct any flaws or irregularities that might be encountered in the course of the production) and that therefore the payment of Rs. 1,60,000 was partly on capital account and partly on revenue account and that even if it were to hold that the part of the payment was allowable as revenue expenditure the allowance could not exceed Rs. 12,000, being the deduction allowed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
Thus, the Tribunal confirmed the deduction of Rs. 12,000 not as depreciation allowance but as revenue expenditure and in this manner it confirmed the order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
Both the assessee and the revenue sought a reference to the High Court.
On a consideration h of the terms and conditions of the two collaboration agreements the High Court took the view that the payment of Rs.1,60,000 did 703 not mainly represent the purchase price of the design , drawings, charts, etc.
that the rendering of "documentation service" was incidental, that no part of the expenditure was on revenue account but the whole of lt was of a capital nature bringing into existence an asset of enduring benefit to the assessee, but what was brought into existence was a non depreciable asset and, therefore, the assessee was not entitled to any relief in the case.
Following the aforesaid decision rendered by the High Court in relation to the assessment year 1966 67 the assessee denied similar relief claimed by it in the two subsequent assessment years, 1968 69 and 1969 70.
Hence the appeals by special leave of the Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD : 1.1 The expenditure incurred by the appellant as and by way of purchase price of drawings, designs, charts, plans, processing data and other literature etc.
comprised in "documentation service" specified in clause 3 of the Agreements, was of a capital nature as a result whereof a capital asset of technical know how was acquired by the assessee.
[713 B C] 1.2 From the relevant terms of the two agreements, it is clear, that the "documentation service" undertaken to be rendered by the foreign collaborator to the assessee was not incidental and that the payment of Rs. 1,60,000 could only be regarded as being mainly for and by way of purchase price of the drawings, designs, charts, plans and all the documents comprised in "documentation service" specified in clause 3 of the agreement .
[710 B C] 1.3 Reading Clauses 3 and 6(a) of the agreements together, it is clear, that the rendition of documentation services specified in Clause 3 was really the main service to be rendered by the foreign collaborator to the assessee and the Clause 6 (a) categorically states that the lumpsum payment of Rs. 80,000 (Rs. 1,60,000 under the two agreements) was for rendition of such service.
Clause 5(c) makes the position clear where it has been stated that the purchaser is to pay the value of the full documentation in question, namely Rs. 80,000 according to the stipulation of the present agreement.
" In fact the other service mentioned in Clauses 4 and 5 appear to be incidental as some of these were undertaken to be rendered as and when desired by the assessee and for which the assessee had agreed to bear and pay the expenses separately.
But the tenor of the agreements clearly shows that the various documents such as drawings, designs.
704 charts, plans, processing data and other literature included in documentation service, the supply whereof was undertaken by the foreign collaborator, more or less formed the tools by using which the business of manufacturing the instruments was to be done by the assessee and for acquiring such technical know how through these documents lumpsum payment was made.
[712 F H; 713 A C] 2.1 Plant would include any article or object fixed or movable, live or dead, used by businessman for carrying on his business and it is not necessarily confined to an apparatus which is used for mechanical operations or processes or is employed in mechanical or industrial business.
In order to qualify as plant the article must have some degree or durability.
[714 B C] Yarmouth vs France, ; Hinton vs Maden & Ireland Ltd., ; Jarrold vs John Good and Sons Limited, C.A.; Inland Revenue Commissioners vs Barclay, Curle & Co. Ltd., quoted with approval.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh vs Taj Mahal Hotel, referred to.
2.2 An Article to be treated as a "Plant" within the meaning of section 43(3) of the Act must answer in the affirmative the functional test, namely does article fulfil the function of a plant in the assessee 's trading activity? Ant is it a tool of his trade with which he carries on his business? [714 G H; 715 A] 2.3 Applying the functional test to the drawings, designs, charts, plans, processing data and other literature comprised in the "documentation service" as specified in clause 3 of the Agreement, these documents as constituting a book would fall within the definition of "Plant".
These documents regarded collectively will have to be treated also as a "book".
The purpose of rendering such documentation service by supplying these documents to the assessee was to enable it to undertake its trading activity of manufacturing the theodolites and microscopes therefore, these documents had a vital function to perform in the Manufacture of these instruments.
In fact it is with the aid of these complete and upto date sets of documents that the assessee was able to commence its manufacturing activity and these documents really formed the basis of the business of manufacturing the instruments in question.
It is true, by themselves these documents did not perform any mechanical operations or processes but that cannot militate against their 705 being a plant since they were in a sense the basic tools of the assessee 's trade having a fairly enduring utility, though owing to technological advances they might or would in course of time become obsolete.
Therefore, the capital asset acquired by the assessee falls within the definition of "Plant" and therefore a depreciable asset.
[715 B G] Commissioner of Income Tax, Gujarat vs Elecon Engineering Co. Ltd., approved.
