The appellant plaintiff purchased a plot of land.
The respondent defendant accepted the plaintiff as owner on a rent of Rs. 1325 per annum for a period of five years, under a registered rent note.
It was further stipulated therein that the tenant was to pay the municipal tax in respect of the rented land to the plaintiff, that on the expiry of the period of five years the tenant shall remove the constructions thereon at his own expense, and hand over the premises in the condition it was let out and that the premises shall not be let out to anyone else.
The plaintiff called upon the defendant to remove the construction erected on the land, and the vacate the premises and hand over possession.
As the defendant failed, a suit for eviction was filed, on a number of grounds one of which was that the premises had not been used by the defendant for a period of more than six months prior to the date of the suit without reasonable caused and, therefore the defendant was liable to eviction under section 13(1) (k) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that the notice of termination was not valid and that the plaintiff had failed to prove bona fide requirement, and that as defendant No. 2 was admitted as a sub tenant many years before the execution of the rent note by the plaintiff, the plaintiff was not entitled to recover possession on the ground of illegal sub letting.
The plaintiff took up the matter in appeal and the Assistant Judge allowed the appeal partly, holding that the notice of termination was a valid one, that the plaintiff did not 718 require the suit premises reasonably and bona fide for occupation for himself and that the suit premises had not been w ed by the defendant continuously for a period of six months immediately preceding the date of suit without any reasonable cause.
The respondent tenant took up the matter in revision before the High Court, which reversed the finding of the Ist appellate court on the question of user by the defendant, holding that the construction of the super structure on the land itself was a user and, therefore, the courts below had committed a manifest error in holding that the land in question had not been w ed for more than six months prior to the institution of the suit.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant landlord that the tenant was liable to be evicted under s.13(1)(k) of the Act inasmuch as the premises have not been used for the purpose for which they were let out for a continuous period of six months immediately preceding the date of suit without reasonable cause, and that the tenant would be liable for eviction even if he did not use the premises and kept it locked.
On behalf of the respondent tenant it was contended, that the purpose of letting cannot be assumed, and that it has got to be alleged and proved.
The landlord plaintiff could seek eviction under 8. 13()(k) of the Act only when he proves the purpose for which the premises have been let out and that the same has not been w ed for the purpose for which it was let out.
It was further contended that if the landlord had specifically taken the plea of non user of the premises for the purpose for which it was let out, he would have been able to prove the reasonable caw e for not doing 80 but in the absence of such a plea the defendant tenant had been seriously prejudiced, and that sec.
12 and 13 of the Act are the only two sections which give protection to the tenant and unless the conditions in the two sections are satisfied the tenant cannot be evicted .
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD : 1.
The judgment of the High Court is set aside and the plaintiff 's suit stands decreed.
The High Court has gone wrong in holding that the construction of super structure on the land in dispute was itself a user.
The super structures had already been built before the defendant took the land from the plaintiff under rent note, exhibit 61.
As regards sub tenancy, it has 719 been found by the Courts below to have been created long before A the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947 came into force.
There was therefore no question of the eviction of the subtenant as the sub tenancy was not illegal.
[726 B; 725 G 726 A] 2.
The scheme of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates (Control) Act, 1947 as it appears from the preamble is to consolidate the law relating to the control of rents and repairs of certain premises, of rates of hotels and lodging houses and of evictions.
The control had to be brought in because of the scarcity of accommodation in the cities.
If this was the preamble of the Act it cannot be accepted that a tenant may take a premises on rent and keep it locked for years together without using it in the absence of a reasonable cause.
The intendment of the legislature could be carried out only when the premises is used and not kept vacant for years together.
[724 H 725 B] 3.
Neither the purpose of letting is indicated in the rent note (Ex.61) nor has it been proved by evidence.
A perusal of the rent note indicates that, there is no specific mention of the purpose for which the premises was rented out to the defendant.
The defendant had taken the premises from the predecessor in interest of the plaintiff and had made certain super structures on the land in question.
There is, however, material on the record to show that the premises had been let out to the defendant for the purpose of business.
Indeed, the premises had been taken in the name of a firm carrying on tobacco business.
The defendant admitted in his deposition that he had shifted his business to Baroda.
He had not used any portion of the land for any purpose for the last three or four years and the plaintiff has produced necessary registers from the Municipality and the Central Excise Department to show the same.
In the reply given by the counsel for the defendant to the notice, of termination given by the plaintiff, it is admitted that the property was taken on rent by the tenant in his capacity as a manager and owner of the registered firm Vora Manilal Chaganlal & Co., carrying in business in Nadiad.
In this situation it cannot be argued that the plaintiff has not been able to establish the purpose for which the premises had been let out to the defendant.
[723 E H] 4.
The stipulation in the rent deed to the effect that; 'even if we use or do not use or keep the said property closed we the tenants are bound to pay the rent as stated above ' only talks of the liability of the defendant to pay the rent even if he does not use the property and keeps it closed.
This, however, does not 720 mean that the defendant can keep the premises closed without using lt for years together before the suit.
This could never have been the intention of the law makers especially in these days of scarcity of accommodation in towns.
If the stipulation made in the rent note is construed to mean that the defendant tenant could keep the premises closed without incurring the liability of eviction, as it sought to be contended for the respondent, it would amount to allowing the parties contracting out of law.
[724 D E] In the instant case, on the own showing of the defendant respondent, the premises had been taken for the purpose of tobacco business and that business had been stopped for a period of 4 to 5 years before the institution of the suit as the business had expanded and the defendant had shifted to Baroda.
Therefore, it can be safely presumed that the land is not being used for the purpose for which it has been proved to have been let out.
[725 F]
