A Complaint was filed by the Special Railway Magistrate against the appellants, Balbir Singh and Ram Shankar, members of Delhi Police Force, alleging that the Search Memos which were signed by the sub Inspector Balbir Singh did not bear any signature of the witness Ram Shankar at the time when the said Search memos were in the custody of the Court and that they were interpolated subsequently by getting the same signed by the accused, Ram Shankar.
The appellants contended before the Trial Court that the aforesaid complaint was not maintainable since prior sanction as required by section 197(3) Cr.
P.C. was not obtained by the complainant to prosecute them.
The trial court rejected the contention and the High Court confirmed the same in appeal by the appellants.
The High Court, however, held that the Notification No. F.10/77/78 HP II dated 7th April 1980 issued by the Lt. Governor directing that the provisions of sub s.(2) of section 197 "shall apply to serving police officials of all ranks of Delhi Police Force" charged with the maintenance of public order, was bad in law as the Lt. Governor had no authority to issue the said Notification under sub s.(3) of section 197 Cr.
Allowing Criminal Appeal No. 845/85 partly and dismissing the other appeal, ^ HELD: 1(i) The Judgment and order of the High Court declaring the impugned notification dated 7th April 1980 issued by the Lt. Governor of Delhi to be ultra vires is set aside and the learned Magistrate is directed to proceed with the case in accordance with law.
[817 F] (ii) By virtue of the Notification No. S.O.183(E) dated 20th March 1974, the President empowered the Administrator of Union Territories, i.e. Lt. Governor of Delhi to exercise the 813 powers and functions of the State Government as provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure except the powers and functions provided in sections 8 and 477 of the said Act.
The Notification dated 7th April 1980 issued by the Lt. Governor was made in exercise of powers conferred upon him under sub section (3) of Sec. 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure read with the Government of India Notification dated March 20, 1974 mentioned before.
Therefore, the Notification is not ultra vires the Constitution.
[815 D E] 2.
Reading the two notifications together, it is crystal clear that to start a proceeding against the member of all ranks of Delhi Police Officials in a Criminal Court, previous sanction of the Lt. Governor is imperative, provided the offence alleged to have been committed by such members of the Delhi Police Force has been committed while acting or purporting to act in discharge of their official duty.
[815 F] In the instant case, the previous sanction of the Lt. Governor as provided in Section 197 (3) Criminal Procedure Code was, not at all necessary for initiating the proceedings against the two appellants, since the act of tampering of the Search Memos by them cannot be said to have been done in discharge of their official duties inasmuch as the said Search Memos were in the custody of the Court.
[817 E F] Matajog Dobey vs H.C. Bhari, ; ; Pukhraj vs State of Rajasthan & Anr., ; ; Bhagwan prasad Srivastava vs N.P.Misra, [1971] 1 S.C.R. 317 and Darshan Kumar vs Sushil Malhotra & Ors. 1980 Crl.
L.J. 154 relied upon.
Bhikhaji Vaghaji vs L.K. Barot and Ors., 1982 Cr.
L.J. 2014 approved.
