The plaintiff appellant instituted a suit against the respondent on the ground that its inventions entitled "Phytotoxic Compositions" and "Grass Selective Herbicide Compositions" duly patented containing the active ingredient "Butachlor" was infringed by the defendant respondent marketing "Delchor 50" a formulation of "Butachlor" which was alleged to be covered by the plaintiff 's Patent No. 125381.
In the written statement, the defendant respondent claimed that the patents were liable to be revoked under s.64(1)(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), and (m) of the .
The suit was decreed by the trial Court, but was dismissed by the appellate court.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD : 1(i) Under section 61(1)(d), a patent may be revoked on the ground that the subject of any claim of the complete specification is not an invention within the meaning of the Act.
Under sec.
64(e), a patent may be revoked if the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is not new, having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India before the date of the claim, etc.
Under sec.
64(1)(f), a patent may be revoked if the invention so far as claimed in any claim of the complete specification is obvious or does not involve any inventive step having regard to what was publicly known or publicly used in India or what was published in India before the priority date of the claim.
[128 G H; 129 A] 121 1(ii) To satisfy the requirement of being publicly known as used in clauses (e) and (f) of sec.
64(1), it is not necessary, that it should be widely used to the knowledge of the consumer public.
It is sufficient if it is known to the persons who are engaged in the pursuit of the knowledge of the patented product or process either as men of science or men of commerce or consumers.
[129 D E] 2.
Butachlor which was the common name for CP 53619 was discovered, even prior to 1968 as a Herbicide possessing the property of non toxic effect on rice.
The formula for the Herbicide was published in the report of the International Rice Research Institute for the year 1968 and its common name Butachlor was also mentioned in the report of the International Rice Research Institute for the year 1969.
No one patented the invention Butachlor and it was the property of the population of the world.
Before Butachlor or for that matter any Herbicide could be used for killing weeds, it had to be converted into an emulsion by dissolving it in a suitable solvent and by mixing the solution with an emulsifying agent.
Emulsification is a well known process and is no one 's discovery.
Neither Butachlor nor the process of Emulsification was capable of being claimed by the plaintiffs as their exclusive property.
[128 C E] In the instant case, the solvent and the emulsifier were admittedly not secrets and they were ordinary market products.
From the beginning to the end, there was no secret and there was no invention by the plaintiffs.
The ingredients, the active ingredients the solvent and the emulsifier, were known; the process was known, the product was known and the use was known.
The plaintiffs were merely camouflaging a substance whose discovery was known throughout the world and trying to enfold it in their specification relating to Patent Number 125381.
The patent is, therefore, liable to be revoked.
[129 F G; 130 A]
