Until the academic session 1978 79, the Post Graduate Medical course in the State of Orissa was envisaged as a course of three years duration which period included an appointment for one year on the Resident House Staff.
Admission to the three year course was made through an Entrance Examination, and after completing the Resident House Staff appointment, there was no further examination for admission to the Post Graduate course.
The scheme was changed with effect from the session 1978 79 and the Resident House Staff course was delinked from the Post Graduate course.
Accordingly, separate competitive examinations were prescribed for recruitment to the Resident House Staff and the Post Graduate course.
A candidate appearing in the entrance examination for Post Graduate course should have passed the final M.B.B.S. examination, satisfactorily completed the internship, acquired full registration and in addition should have completed the Resident House Staff term in a subject during one year.
The petitioner/medical graduates from the State of Orissa filed writ petitions in Supreme Court challenging the new scheme, under which it became necessary for the candidates seeking provisional admission to a Post Graduate course to appear again at an examination for such admission after completing the Resident House Staff appointment.
They contended that under the original scheme they were entitled to take the Entrance Examination for recruitment to the Resident House Staff at any recognised institution in the country, even though it lay outside the State of Orissa and on completing that course they were entitled without more to admission to a Post Graduate Medical course in a Medical College in Orissa.
Some of the petitioners had already taken the examination for recruitment to the Resident House Staff in a Medical College in Orissa and successfully completed that course and they also objected to the requirement envisaged by the new scheme.
Disposing of the Writ Petitions, the Court, 811 ^ HELD: 1.
It is consistent with reason and justice that those petitioners before the Supreme Court who were either pursuant to the relief granted by the A High Court or in compliance with interim order made by the Supreme Court, granted admission to a Post Graduate Medical course and have since completed that course and after having appeared in the examination for the academic year 1981 82 been declared successful, should not be disturbed and should be allowed the benefit of the success at the examination.
Therefore, these admissions are affirmed.
[815 D E] 2.
The provisional admission of some of the petitioners to a Post Graduate course by tho Medical Colleges in Orissa in compliance with the interim orders of this Court made on different dates, should be regarded as an admission of final validity entitling them to its consequential benefits, since they have completed the Post Graduate Course.
[815 F G] 3.
There are writ petitions in which this Court directed the provisional admission of the petitioners but they could not be admitted because of the non availablity of seats and in some of the writ petitions no order for provisional admission of the petitioners has been made by the Supreme Court.
They are disposed of as follows: Since the scheme respecting admission to the Post Graduate Medical course has been modified again and the present position, enunciated in the prospectus for the year 1982 83 is that medical graduates who have appeared and been selected at the examination for recruitment to the Resident House Staff are entitled automatically, on successfully completing that term of appointment, to admission to the Post Graduate course, and no Entrance Examination specifically for such examination is now contemplated, this Court directs that those petitioners who have successfully completed the term of one year as Resident House Staff in the medical Colleges of Orissa will be entitled without having to appear at any further Entrance Examination to admission to the relevant Post Graduate course.
However, those petitioners who have completed the term as Resident House Staff in approved Medical institutions in India other than the Medical Colleges in Orissa should be permitted to appear at the Entrance Examination prescribed for appointment to the Resident House Staff, and that if they are successful in the said Entrance Examination, they will be entitled to admission to the relevant Post Graduate course for the next following session without being obliged to work on the Resident House Staff in the Medical Colleges in Orissa.
This arrangement entitling these petitioners to admission to a Post Graduate course without having to fill a Resident House Staff appointment will obtain only if they appear for the entrance examination for appointment as Resident House Staff in the same subject in which they claim to have already served as Resident House Staff earlier.
If, however and it will be open to them to do so they appear at the entrance examination in a different subject, and are successful therein they shall be obliged to serve for the stipulated term in a Resident House Staff appointment in relation to that subject before being entitled, of the completion of that term, to admission in the corresponding Post Graduate course.
[816A; 819 C E; 817 A D] 812
