Prior to the Assessment Year 1961 62 the appellant f1rm was a partnership concern consisting of two partners, each having 50% share in the profits and losses of the firm and it was granted registration.
Both the partners met with an accident on 19.10.1958 in which they suffered serious injuries and became invalid.
On 1.4.1960 a fresh Deed of Partnership was executed by virtue of which the two original partners retained 25% share each while the four new incoming partners were given 12.1/2% share each.
Prior to April 1,1960 two of the new incoming partners were already working as employees in the original firm.
The fresh Partnership Deed, inter alia, provided that the partnership was at will determinable by one month 's notice in writing.
For the Assessment Year 1961 62 an application duly signed by all the partners seeking registration of the firm under section 26A of the Income Tax Act 1922 on the strength of the fresh Partnership Deed was made on 15th September 1960 annexing therewith the original Partnership Deed.
The four new incoming partners were examined by the Income Tax Officer and their statements were recorded, which, the ITO felt, clearly suggested that they were not real partners but dummies brought in to avoid the higher tax incidence.
After considering the Partnership Deed, the statement of the four new incoming partners and the fact that profits had not been shown to have been distributed in the books and no entries made in the year of account, the ITO rejected the application and refused registration.
The view taken by the Income Tax Officer was confirmed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and by the Tribunal.
165 The Tribunal, however, was of the view that four new incoming partners were benmidars of the two original partners.
On Reference made to the High Court, the High Court felt that the first question referred to it did not bring into focus the real issue and, therefore, recast the same.
The High Court upholding the refusal of registration held: (1) that no genuine partnership had come into existence and that the finding of the lower authorities in that behalf was based on ample material on record; (2) that the assessee is not entitled to the registration under s.26A of the Income Tax Act, 1922 read with Rule 6 of the Income Tax Rules, 1922; and (3) that the mere fact that the four new incoming partners were found to be benamidars of the two original partners could not be a proper ground for refusing registration.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended: (i) that refusal to grant registration to the extent that it was based on the ground that no valid partnership in law had come into existence was unsustainable; (ii) that there was no evidence to justify the finding on the genuineness of the appellant firm, and (iii) that the High Court having held that registration could not be refused merely on the ground that some of the partners were benamidars, registration ought to have been granted.
On behalf of the Revenue it was contended: (1) that even if a valid partnership in law came into existence by executing the Deed registration could be refused on the ground that factually no genuine firm had come into existence; (2) that it is open to the High Court to reframe or recast a question formulated by the Tribunal before answering it so as to bring out a real issue between the parties; (3) that the High Court had rightly affirmed the view of the Tribunal that the appellant firm had not genuinely come into existence; (4) that though under the 1922 Act no provision similar to the Explanation to Sec.185 of 1961 Act obtained and the fact that some members were benamidars of others in a firm could be no bar to the grant of registration, if the taxing authorities were to record an adverse finding on the factual genuineness of the firm registration could be refused; and (5) that so far as the actual division or distribution of profits, the lower authorities were justified in not relying on loose sheets indicating the working of the firm and the assessee cannot be allowed to fill the lacuna by producing books for the following year.
Dismissing the Appeal, 166 ^ HELD: 1.The concept of a firm being valid in law is distinct from the factual genuineness and for the purpose of granting registration both aspects are relevant and must be present and one without the other will be insufficient.
[l73 G] 2.
Even if a firm brought into existence by executing an instrument of partnership deed is shown to possess all the legal attributes it would be open to the taxing authority to refuse registration if it were satisfied that no genuine firm has been constituted.
Moreover, some of the provisions contained in such instrument may not militate against the firm 's validity in law but these can be a pointer against its factual genuineness.
[173 G H; 174 A] 3.
Clause 5 of the Partnership Deed in the instant case, vests the control and management of the partnership business in the original two partners and denies to the four new incoming partners any right in the management of the affairs or the accounts of the partnership business, may not show lack of the element of mutual agency but has a vital bearing on the factual genuineness of the firm and read along with Clauses 3,6,7 and 8 would go to show that the four new incoming partners were no real partners but were dummies thus throwing doubt on the genuineness of the firm.
Moreover, the facts that the four new incoming partners were very close relatives of the two original partners and that two of them were working as employees in the erstwhile firm whose service as such were continued in the relevant year on existing remuneration with such increments as the two original partners may agree to give cannot be lost sight of.
In addition, the statements of the four new incoming partners that were recorded in November 1965 clearly show that they had signed the instrument mechanically without knowing or reading, much less after understanding the implications thereof.
[174 A D] 4.
In the instant case, the profit and loss account statement prepared on loose sheet did not contain any distribution of profits and or allocation thereof to each one of the new partners.
[175 E] 5.
Production of account books in this Court has deprived the taxing authorities an opportunity to make their comments thereon.
Apart from this aspect the question would be whether even such entries were genuine entries intended to be acted upon or mere paper entries making a show of allocation 167 of the share of profits due to each one of these four new incoming partners and this would require further investigation into relevant facts.
This aspect throws considerable doubt on the point whether or not entries were intended to be acted upon.
[175 G H; 176 B] 6.
In the instant case, there was sufficient material on record on the basis of which the taxing authorities as well as the Tribunal could record an adverse finding on the genuineness of the firm against the assessee and registration was rightly refused.
[176 C]
