The Indian Economic Service Rules, 1961 and the Indian Statistical Service Rules, 1961 were notified on November 1, 1961.
These Services were constituted with effect from that date by encadering numerous posts carrying economic and statistical functions in various ministries of the Government of India.
Both the Services have Grade I, Grade II, Grade III and Grade IV posts and Officers of Grade I to Grade IV are classified as Class I Officers.
The authorised permanent strength of each of the Services is to be fixed by the Controlling Authority, constituted under Rule 6, in accordance with the Rules.
Under Rule 7, the Union Public Service Commission was required to constitute a Selection Committee to determine the suitability of departmental candidates for appointment to the different grades and to prepare an order of preference for each grade for the initial constitution of both the Services.
On receipt of the Committee ' 8 report, the Commission was required to forward its recommendations to the Government.
The departmental candidates who were not absorbed at the initial constitution of the Service were given the opportunity to apply for future vacancies.
Future maintenance of the two Services is governed by Rule 8. 212 After the initial constitution of the two Services was completed it was found that a number of posts carrying economic/statistical functions could not be considered for inclusion in the officers ' Grades.
Further as the process of formation of the two Services was prolonged for a number of years and the need for appointing more officers in various Departments during that long period also arose gradually, several posts carrying economic/statistical functions were created.
Although Rule 8 provided that not less than 75 per cent of the vacancies in Grade IV should be filled up by direct recruitment through an open competitive examination to be held be the Union Public Service Commission in the manner prescribed in Schedule II to the Rules and lt further provided that not more than 25 per cent posts of the vacancies in that Grade should be filled by selection from among officers serving in the offices under the Government in Economic/ Statistical posts recognized for that purpose by the Controlling Authority, no direct recruitment we resorted to till about the year 1968.
In the meanwhile, a large number of persons in the feeder posts were appointed to the posts in Grade IV from time to time from the year 1962 onwards although the orders promoting them stated that they had been promoted only temporarily.
Undisputedly, all those promotees have been holding those posts continuously till now without being reverted to the feeder posts from which they had been promoted.
Some have been retried from those posts.
Thus the prescribed quota of appointment from the two different sources was not maintained right from the commencement of the constitution of the Services.
After completion of the initial constitution of the two services under Rule 7, Rule 7A was added and subsequently amended.
Rule 7A made special provision regarding certain departmental candidates who were to be absorbed in the two Services.
Between the years 1964 to 1984 in all there were 435 vacancies for direct recruitment in the Indian Economic Service out of which only 342 posts were filled up by direct recruitment.
Out of 93 remaining unfilled posts most of them were held all along by persons promoted from the feeder posts.
In the Indian Statistical Service as against a total of 303 vacancies meant for direct recruits between the years 1964 to 1984 only 275 direct recruits were appointed.
The remaining 213 unfilled posts were held by the & departmental candidates.
It was alleged that many of the departmental candidates had been allowed to hold posts including Grade IV of the two Services purely on ad hoc and ex gratia basis.
Earlier certain persons holding posts in Grade IV of these two services had filed Writ Petition under Article 32 seeking direction/order to the Union of India to confirm and regularise the petitioners in the posts held by them as and from the dates when they had become due for confirmation or regularisation in accordance with the Indian Economic Services Rules 1961 or the Indian Statistical Service Rules 1961 and to consider them for all future promotions when due on the basis of such seniority.
This Court on February 1 1984 directed the Union of India to fill up, within four weeks, the vacancies available to the departmental candidates under Rule 8 (1)(a)(ii) with effect from the date from which the petitioners become entitled to be promoted on regular basis, that their seniority will be determined according to Rules and that rotation system will not apply under the existing Rules.
On May 1, 1984, after expiry of the extended time, the respondent Union of India filed two sets of seniority lists in respect of the two services, namely, (i) lists based on the principle of rotation, and (11) lists based on Rule 9C of the Rules.
Since the lists were to the disadvantage of the departmental prouotees, the Court while declining to endorse either of the two seniority lists directed the respondent Union to implement the order dated February l, 1984 on or before 30th November, 1984.
In the meanwhile the petitioners filed a petition for initiating contempt proceedings against the respondent Union of India which was resisted by the respondents Certain direct recruits also intervened and wanted to be heard before disposal of the contempt application.
Opportunity was given to all the parties to make their submissions.
Disposing of the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
Having regard to the facts of the case and the events that have followed the order passed by this Court on February 1, 1984, no action for contempt against the Union Government or any of its officers for not obeying the orders of this Court would be taken.
[221 B C] 214 2.
The Union Government is directed to treat all persons who have been promoted to several posts in Grade (n ) in Indian Economic Service and Indian Statistical Service contrary to the Rules till now as having been regularly appointed to those posts in Grade (IV) under Rule 8(1) (a) (ii) and assign them seniority in the cadre with effect from the dates from which they are continuously officiating in those posts.
Even those promotees who have been selected in 1970, 1982 and 1984, shall be assigned seniority with effect from the date on which they commenced to officiate continuously in the posts prior to their selection.
For purposes of seniority the dates of their selection shall be ignored.
The direct recruits shall be given seniority with effect from the date on which their names were recommended by the Commission for appointment to such grade or posts as provided in clause (a) of Rule 9 C. A seniority list of all promotees and direct recruits shall be prepared on the above basis treating the promotees as full members of the Service with effect from the dates from which they are continuously officiating in the posts.
This direction shall be applicable only to officers who have been promoted till now, which means that rotation system will not be applicable under the Rules, as they exist now.
All appointments shall be made hereafter in accordance with the Rules, and the seniority of all the officers to be appointed hereafter shall be governed by Rule 9 C. [237 D H: 238 A] 3.
If as a result of the preparation of the seniority list as aforesaid any officer is likely to be reverted, such officer shall not be reverted.
He shall be continued in the higher post which he is now holding by creating a supernumerary post to accommodate him.
Further promotion shall be given to him when it becomes due as per the new seniority list to be prepared.
There shall be a review of all the promotions made so far from Grade (IV) to higher posts in the light of the new seniority list.
[238 B D] P.S. Mahal & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; followed.
When an officer has worked for a long period for nearly 15 to 20 years in a post and had never been reverted it cannot be held that the officer 's continuous officiation 215 was a mere temporary or local or stop gap arrangement even though the order of appointment may state so.
In such circumstances the entire period of officiation has to be counted for seniority.
Any other view would be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) because the temporary service in the post in question is not for a short period intended to meet some emergent or unforseen circumstances.
[236 C E] In the circumstances of the instant case, clause (b) of rule 9 C of the Rules which deals with the question of seniority of promotees becomes irrelevant as regards promotees who have been holding the posts from a long time.
[236 E] 5.
It is permissible for the Government to recruit persons from different sources to constitute a service.
It is also open to it to prescribe a quota for each source.
Rules of recruitment framed on the above lines are perfectly legitimate and quite consistent with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
When the Rules of recruitment prescribe recruitment from different sources in accordance with the specified quota the Government is bound to appoint persons to the Service concerned in accordance with the Rules.
me seniority of persons recruited from different sources will have to be regulated accordingly.
[230 C E] In the instant case, the Government had made violent departure from the Rules of recruitment by deliberately allowing those who were appointed contrary to Rules to hold the posts continuously over a period of long time.
[230 E F] 6.
The petitioners were not promoted by following the actual procedure prescribed under rule 8(1)(a)(ii) but the fact remains that they have been working in posts included in Grade IV from the date on which they were appointed to these posts.
The appointments are made in the name of the President by the competent authority.
They are being paid all along the salary and allowances payable to incumbents of such posts.
They have not been asked to go back to the posts from which they were promoted at any time since the dates of their appointment.
me orders of promotion issued in some cases show that they are promoted in the direct line of their promotion.
It was expressly admitted that the petitioners have been allowed to hold posts included in Grade IV of the said 216 Services, though on an ad hoc basis.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioners are not holding the posts in Grade IV of the two Services.
Neither the Government has issued orders of reversion to their former posts nor has anybody so far questioned the right of the petitioners to continue in the posts which they are now holding.
It would be unjust to hold at this distance of time that the petitioners are not holding the posts in Grade IV.
However, it is not the case that whenever a person is appointed in a post without following the Rules prescribed for appointment to that post, he should be treated as a person regularly appointed to that post.
Such a person may be reverted from that post.
[231 B H; 232 A] In the instant case, where persons have been allowed to function in higher posts for 15 to 20 years with due deliberation it would be certainly unjust to hold that they have no sort of claim to such posts and could be reverted unceremoniously or treated as persons not belonging to the Service at all, particularly where the Government is endowed with the power to relax the Rules to avoid unjust results.
The Government has also not expressed its unwillingness to continue them in the said posts.
The other contesting respondents have also not urged that the petitioners should be sent out of the said posts.
There is no impediment even under the Rules to treat the petitioners and others who are similarly situated as persons duly appointed to the posts in Grade IV because of the enabling provision contained in Rule 16.
[232 B E] 7.
If there is enormous departure from the Rules of recruitment in making appointments over several years, it should be presumed that the excess appointment by promotion had been made in relaxation of the Rules when power to relax the Rules is available.
[233 C D] A.Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors.
[1983] 2 S.C.R. 936; O.P. Singla & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; ; G.S. Lamba & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; ; D.B. Nim, I.P.S. vs Union of India followed.
S.B. Patwardhan & Ors.
vs State of Maharastra 217 State of Bihar & Ors.
; ; Baleshwar Das Ors.
vs State of U.P. 7 Ors. etc.
[1981] 1 S.C.R. 449; P.S. Mahal & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1984] 3 S.C.R. 847; Pran Krishna Goswami & Ors.
vs State of West Bengal Ors.
[1985] Supp.
S.C.C. 221; D.K. Mitra & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
[1985] Supp.
S.C.C. 243 referred to.
Karam Pal Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
; distinguished.
