Interpretation of statutes Provision of Constitution sought to be interpreted or a statute whose constitutional validity is sought to be questioned Interpretation that will promote march & Progress towards a Socialistic Democratic State To be given.
Section 15 of the Punjab Pre emption Act, 1913 as applicable in the State of Haryana, incorporates the right of pre emption based on consanguinity.
The petitioners challenged this right of pre emption based on consanguinity under article 32 of the Constitution on the ground that it offends articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent State that the classification in favour of the persons mentioned in section 15 has been made on reasonable basis in the interests of the public: (1) to preserve integrity of village community; (11) to avoid fragmentation of holdings; (111) to implement the agnatic theory of succession; (iv) to promote public and private decency; (v) to facilitate tenants to acquire ownership rights; (vi) to reduce litigation consequent to introduction of an outsider on family property or jointly owned property.
Allowing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1(1) There is no justification for the classification contained in section 15 of the Punjab Perception Act of the kinsfolk entitled to pre emption.
The right of pre emption based on consanguinity is a relic of the feudal past.
It is totally inconsistent with modern ideas.
The reasons which justified its recognition quarter of a century 400 ago, namely, the preservation of the integrity of rural society, the unity of family life and the agnatic theory of succession are today irrelevant.
It is difficult to uphold the classification on the basis of unity and integrity of either the village community or the family or on the basis of the agnatic theory of succession which 18 again in a way connected with the integrity of the family.
The list of kinsfolk mentioned as entitled to preemption is intrinsically defective and self contradictory.
There is, therefore, no reasonable classification and clauses 'First ', 'Secondly ' and 'Thirdly ' of 8. 15(1)(a), 'First ', 'Secondly ', and 'Thirdly ' of 8. 15(1)(b), clauses 'First ', 'Secondly ' and 'Thirdly ' of 8. 15(1)(c) and the whole of section 15(2) are, therefore, declared ultravires the Constitution.
[419 E H] 1.2 Clause 'fourthly ' of 8. 15(1)(a), clauses 'fourthly and fifthly ' of 8.
15(1)(b) and clause 'fourthly ' of 8.
15(1) (c) are valid and do not infringe either article 14 or 15 of the Constitution.
[416 H; 417 A] 2.1 Whether it is the Constitution that is expounded or the constitutional validity of a statute that is considered, a cardinal rule 18 to look to the Preamble to the Constitution as the guiding light and to the Directive Principles of State Policy as the Book of interpretation.
The Preamble embodies and expresses the hopes and aspirations of the people.
The Directive Principles set out proximate goals.
At the time of examining statutes against the Constitution, it is through these glasses that the court must look, 'distant vision ' or 'near vision '.
The Constitution being sui generis, where constitutional issues are under consideration, narrow interpretative rules which may have relevance when legislative enactments are interpreted may be misplaced.
[411 D F] 2.2 In 1977 the 42nd amendment proclaimed India as a Socialist Republic.
The word 'socialist ' was introduced into the Preamble to the Constitution.
The implication of the introduction of the word 'socialist ' which has now become the centre of the hopes and aspirations of the people a beacon to guide and inspire all that is enshrined in the articles of the Constitution is clearly to set up a "vibrant throbbing socialist welfare society" in the place of a "Feudal exploited society.
When the Court considers the question whether a 401 statute offends Article 14 of the Constitution it must consider whether a classification that the legislature may have made is consistent with the socialist goals set out in the Preamble and the Directive Principles enumerated in Part IV of the Constitution.
A classification which is not in tune with the Constitution is per se unreasonable and cannot be Permitted.
[411 G H: 412 A C] 3.1 The right of pre emption based on consanguinity is antiquated and feudal in origin and in character.
The right is very much like another right of feudal origin and character which subsisted here and there in India until recently, particularly amongst the princely families, namely, the right of succession by primogeniture.
It is a well known characteristic of feudalism that the control of the most important productive resource, land, should continue in the hands of the same social and family group.
The right of preemption based on consanguinity is a consequence flowing out of this characteristic.
It is entirely inconsistent with our Constitutional scheme.
Since the Forty Second Amendment, India is a socialist republic in which feudalism can obviously have no place and must go.
[404 G H; 405 A 8] 3.2 Avoidance of fragmentation of holdings, promotion of private and public decency and reduction of litigation do not seem to have any relevance to the right of pre emption, vested in the kinsfolk of the vendor.
me real question is whether a classification in favour of kinsfolk of the vendor can be considered reasonable so as to justify a right of pre emption in their favour for the purpose of preserving the integrity of the village community or implementing the agnatic theory of succession or preserving the unity and integrity of the family.
The classification cannot be considered reasonable in the circumstances prevailing today whatever justification there might have been for the classification in 1960 when the legislature amended 8. 15 of the Punjab Pre emption Act.
A scrutiny of the list of persons in whose favour the right of preemption is vested under section 15 reveals certain glaring facts which appear to detract from the theory of preservation of the integrity of the family and the theory of agnatic right of succession.
Neither the father nor the mother figures in the list though the father 's brother does.
The son 's daughter and the daughter 's son do.
The sister and sister`s son are 402 excluded though the brother and the brother 's son are included.
Thus relatives of the same degree are excluded either because they are women or because they are related through women.
It is not as if women and those related through women are altogether excluded because the daughter and daughter 's son are included.
If the daughter is to be treated on a par with the son 's son it does not appear logical why the father 's son (brother) should be included and not the father 's daughter (sister).
There are but a few of the intrinsic contradictions that appear in the list of relatives mentioned in s.15 as entitled to the right of pre emption.
[417 G H; 418 A B; H; 419 A C] 3.3 There has been a green and a white revolution in Haryana.
This State is also in the process of an industrial revolution.
Industries have sprung up through out the State and the population has been in a state of constant flux ant movement.
The traditional integrity of the village and the family have now become old wives ' tales.
Tribal loyalties have disappeared and family tries have weakened.
Such is the effect of the march of history and the consequence of industrialisation, mechanisation of agriculture, development of marketing and trade, allurement of professions and office, employment opportunity else where and so on.
The processes of history cannot be reversed and the court cannot hark back to the traditional rural family oriented society.
Quite apart from the break up of the integrity of village life and family life, lt is to be noticed that the property in respect of which the right of pre emption is to be exercised is property of which the vendor or the vendors, as the case may be, have rights of full ownership and their kinsfolk have no present right whatsoever.
[418 C F] 3.4 The right of pre emption is not to be confused with the right to question the alienation of ancestral immovable property which the male lineal descendants of the vendor have under the Punjab Custom (Power to Contest) Act 1920.
The right of preemption is now entirely a statutory right and dissociated from custom or personal law.[418 G] 4.1 In Bhau Ram vs Baijnath Singh 1962 (Suppl.) 3 S.C.R. 724, the right of pre emption given to co share was held to be a reasonable restriction on the right to hold, acquire or dispose of property conferred by article 19(1)(f) of 403 the Constitution.
What has been said there to uphold the right of pre emption granted to a co sharer as a reasonable restriction on the right to property applies with the same force to justify the classification of co sharers as a class by themselves for the purpose of vesting in them the right of pre emption.
[416 D E] 4.2 The right of pre emption vested in a tenant can also be easily sustained.
There can be no denying that the movement of all land reform legislation has been towards enabling the l tiller of the soil to obtain proprietary right in the soil so that he may not be disturbed from possession of the land and deprived of his livelihood by a superior proprietor.
The right of preemption in favour of a tenant granted by the Act is only another instance of a legislation aimed at protecting the tenant.
There can be no doubt that tenants form a distinct class by themselves and the right of pre emption granted in their favour is reasonable and in the public interest.[416 G H] Bhau Ram vs B. Baijnath Singh, [1962] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 724 and Sant Ram vs Labh Singh A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 314 referred to.
Ram Sarup vs Munshi Ors. ; explained.
