Recruitment to the Delhi Judicial Services was governed by the Delhi Judicial Service Rules 1970.
Rule 13 thereof provided that after the initial recruitment, recruitments shall be made on the basis of a competitive examination to be held by the High Court.
Rule 14 prescribed the minimum qualification for a candidate to be eligible to appear at the competitive examination viz. (a) citizen of India, (b) a person practising as an advocate or qualified to be admitted as an advocate; and (c) not more than 32 years of age.
Rule 15 provided that the syllabus for the examination and the fee payable shall be as detailed in the Appendix to the Rules.
The examination was to consist of five written papers and a viva voce test.
Clause (b) of the Appendix dealt with viva voce, and provided that: "Only such candidates will be called for viva voce who have obtained 50% in each written paper and 60% in the aggregate except in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes in whose case the qualifying marks will be 40% in each written paper and 50% in the aggregate '.
The marks obtained in the viva voce was to be added to the marks obtained in the written papers and the candidates, rank depended on the aggregate of both.
Rule 16 provided that after the written test the High Court was to arrange the names of candidates in order of merit and the names to be sent to the Selection Committee.
Rules 17 and 18 provided that the Selection Committee shall call for the viva voce test only such 368 candidates who qualified in the written test, and after the viva voce test the Selection Committee was to prepare a list of candidates in order of merit and to forward the same to the Administrator.
The Registrar of the Delhi High Court through a notification called for application from eligible persons for filing the posts in the Delhi Judicial Service.
A large number of candidates who were eligible applied in response thereto.
The examination in the written papers were held and after the answer books were valued, the names of 27 candidates who were eligible for the viva voce test under the Rules were published on the Notice Board.
Theses candidates were admitted to the viva voce test by the Selection Committee.
Before the final list of the candidates was published by the Selection Committee as required by Rule 18, the petitioners in the Writ Petition came to know that the names of certain candidates whose names had not been included in the above list of 27 qualified candidates were included in the final list by the Selection Committee and that the names of certain candidates who had been interviewed by the Selection Committee had been omitted from the said final list.
The petitioners in that writ petition question the validity of the procedure adopted by the High Court and the Selection Committee in the preparation of the final list of successful candidates and contended that it was not open to the High Court to include in the list prepared under Rule 16 names of the candidates who had not secured the minimum marks prescribed for eligibility to appear in the viva voce test and that it was not open to the Selection Committee or the High Court to omit the names of certain candidates who had appeared at the viva voce test from the final list.
The writ petitions were contested and opposed by the High Court, by contending that the petitioners had no right to maintain the writ petitions and that the High Court had treated all candidates equally.
It was further contended that the results of the written examination were placed before the Full court for approval, and that the Full Court approved the initial list of 27 candidates who qualified at the written test.
However, as a few candidates who had secured very high marks were kept out of the zone of consideration for final selection by reason of having secured one or two marks below the aggregate marks prescribed, moderation of two marks in each paper to every candidate was done, and on the basis of this moderation and as a result of 369 revaluation of one answer book of one candidate, a second list was prepared showing the names of 8 candidates who also qualified for the viva voce test.
On the question: (1) whether the High Court had the power to add two marks to the marks obtaining in each paper by way of moderation, and (2) whether the High Court had power to eliminate the names of the candidates who have secured less than the 60% marks in the aggregate after the viva voce test.
Allowing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.(a) The list prepared by the High Court after adding the moderation marks is liable to be struck down.
[382 D] (b) Rule 16 of the Rules merely laid down that after the written examination the High Court shall arrange the names in order of merit of candidates who had obtained the qualifying marks and these names shall be sent to the Selection Committee.
The High Court had therefore no power to include the names of candidates who had not initially secured the minimum qualifying marks in the written papers by resorting to the devise of moderation, particularly when there was no complaint either about the question papers or about the mode of valuation.
Exercise of such power of moderation is likely to create a feeling of distrust in the process of public appointments which is intended to be fair and impartial.
It may also result in the violation of the principle of equality and may lead to arbitrariness.
[382 B C] (c) The mandatory character of clause (6) in the Appendix to the Rules provides that only such candidates will be called for viva voce who have obtained 50% marks in the written paper and 60% in the aggregate except in the case of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Tribes in whose case the qualifying marks will be 40% in each written paper and 50% in the aggregate.
Addition of any was by way of moderation to the marks obtained in any written paper or to the aggregate of the marks, in order to make a candidate eligible to appear in the viva voce test would indirectly amount to an amendment of clause (6) of the Appendix.
[381 B C] 2.(a) There is no power reserved under Rule 18 of the Rules for the High Court to fix its own minimum marks in order to include candidates in the final list.
[382 G] 370 (b) No fresh disqualification or bar may be created by the High Court or the Selection Committee merely on the basis of the marks obtained at the examination, because clause (6) of the Appendix itself has laid down the minimum marks which a candidate should obtain in the written papers or in the aggregate in order to qualify himself to become member of the Judicial Service.
The prescription of the minimum of 600 marks in the aggregate by the Selection Committee as an additional requirement which the candidate has to satisfy amounts to an amendment of what is prescribed by clause (6) of the Appendix.
[383 B C] In the instant case, the decision that a candidate should have secured minimum of 600 marks in order to be included in the final select list is not even taken by the High Court but by the Selection Committee.
[383 D] (c) The exclusion of the names of certain candidates who have not secured 600 marks in the aggregate from the list prepared under Rules 18 of the Rules is not legal.
The list is quashed and it is directed that a fresh list shall be prepared in order of merit on the basis of the aggregate of the marks obtained by the candidates at the written examination and at the viva voce test without taking into consideration the moderation marks added by the High Court, and without reference to the decision of the Selection Committee that candidates who had obtained less than 600 marks in the aggregate should not be included in that list.
The appointing authority is directed to treat the final list so preared as the list forwarded to it under Rule 18 of the Rules.
[382 F 383B]
