In the State of Uttar Pradesh there are two sets of service rules (i) The U.P. Cooperative Societies Employees Service Regulations 1975 framed by the U.P. Cooperative Institutional Authority constituted by the State Government through a Notification dated March 4, 1978 as an authority for the recruitment, training and disciplinary control of the employees of the Apex Level Societies Central or Primary Societies and; (2) the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Employees ' Service Rules 1976 framed by the cane commissioner by virtue of the power vested under section 122(1) of the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act which provided that they shall apply to all the employees of the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Ltd. While the proviso to Regulation 17 restricts the power of the appointing authority in extending the period of probation beyond the period of one year and in case of an employee appointed against a regular vacancy beyond two years, Rule 5 of the Federation Service Rules 1976 does not place any such restriction on the appointing authority 's power to extend the period of probation and in the absence of a confirmation order, the employee shall continue to be a probation for indefinite period.
Again while the Regulations framed by the Institutional Service Board require approval of the State 79 Government under sub section 2 of section 122 of the Act, the Rules do not provide for an approval.
Section 2(a 4) which defines "Apex Level Societies" specifies the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Ltd. as an Apex Level Society.
The appellant joined service in Kisan Sahkari Chini Mills Ltd. Bisalpur District Pilibhit, a Sugar Factory run and managed by the U.P. Cooperative Mills Federation.
While working as an Office Superintendent, he was selected for promotion to the post of commercial officer and by an order dated 29.8.80 appointed on probation for a period of one year which was extended by another order dated 2.10.81 till 4.9.82.
No further order either extending the period of probationary period or confirming him on the post was issued and while so continuing he was reverted, by an order dated 2.9.83, to the post of office Superintendent.
The appellant challenged the validity of the reversion order before the High Court of U.P. (Lucknow Bench) on the sole ground that on the expiry of the probationary period he stood confirmed and he could not be reverted treating him on probation.
The High Court held that on the expiry of the probationary period, the appellant could not be deemed to be confirmed as there was no rule prohibiting the extension of the probationary period.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1 Since the appellant 's services were regulated by the U.P. Cooperative Societies Employees Service Regulations, 1975 under which his services could not be extended beyond the maximum period of two years, he stood confirmed by implication on the expiry of maximum probationary period and thereafter, he could not be reverted to a lower post treating him on probation.
The order of reversion is illegal.
[87D E] 1.2 Reading Regulations 17 and 18 together it is clear that an employee appointed against a regular vacancy cannot be placed on probation for a period more than two years and if during the period of probation the appointing authority is of the opinion that the employee has not made use of opportunity afforded to him he may discharge him from service or revert him to his substantive post but he has no power to extend the period of probation beyond the period of two years.
Regulation 18 stipulates confirmation of an employee by an express order on the completion of the probationary period.
The regulations do not expressly lay down as to what would be the status of an employee on the 80 expiry of maximum period of probation where no order of confirmation is issued and the employee is allowed to continue in service.
Since Regulation 17 does not permit continuation of an employee on probation for a period more than two years the necessary result would follow that after the expiry of two years probationary period, the employee stands confirmed by implication.
This is implicit in the scheme of Regulation 17 and 18.
[82D H] State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh ; applied.
1.3 It is well settled that where appointment on promotion is made on probation for a specific period and the employee is allowed to continue in the post after expiry of the probationary period without any specific order of confirmation he would be deemd to continue on probation provided the Rules do not provide contrary to it.
In that sense, if Rule 5 of the U.P. Cooperative Federation Service Rules, 1976 were to apply, the appellant, no doubt could not acquire the status of a confirmed employee in the post of commercial officer.
But the scheme of sections 121 and 122 of the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1965 postulates that primacy has to be given to Regulations framed by the Authority under section 122 of the Act and if there are two sets of rules regulating the conditions of service of employees of Cooperative Societies the Regulations framed under section 122 and approved by the State Government shall prevail.
In this view, the provisions of the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Service Rules do not override Service Regulations 1975 which is further evidenced by Government 's Notification dated 6.8.1977.
Since the Institutional Service was conferred power to frame regulations regulating the conditions of service of the employees of Apex Level Societies, the regulations framed by the Board alone will apply to the employees of the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Ltd. so long as such a power has not been withdrawn.
Further, constituting the commissioner and Secretary of the Cane Development Department as the competent authority for framing regulations for the recruitment, training and disciplinary control of the employees of the U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Ltd. is of no consequence to the applicability of 1975 Regulations.
[84D E; 86D E; 85F; 86G]
