The appellant land lady is the owner of, a single storeyed house, at Vasant Vihar, New Delhi.
It was constructed in the year 1973.
The premises was let out to an official of the government after obtaining necessary permission under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act for a period of one year.
The tenant vacated the premises after six or seven months and thereafter the premises were let out to the respondent on April 15, 1974, after obtaining permission again under section 21.
The respondent vacated the premises on 27.2.
1977 after settling account in respect of the rent.
The premises were again let out by the appellant to the respondent on March 11, 1977 after obtaining permission under section 21 of the Act for a period of three years.
After the expiry of the said period the respondent again vacated the premises and thereafter once again at his request the appellant let out the premises for a limited period of two years after obtaining the permission under section 21.
The two years period expired on April 21, 1982 but the respondent did not hand over possession of the premises to the appellant, forcing her to move the Rent Controller for an order directing delivery of possession of the premises.
In the Execution Application, the respondent filed his objection on October 20, 1982 alleging that the permission under section 21 of the Act was obtained by fraud practised on the Rent Controller.
On January 21, 1384 the First Additional Rent Controller, Delhi upheld the objection filed by the respondent and dismissed the execu 19 tion application.
In appeal, the Rent Control Tribunal held: (i) that the A allegation of the respondent that he had already entered into possession of the premises before permission was granted under section 21 of the Act in 1374 was false, and even if it be assumed that he had done so there was nothing to prevent him from surrendering the tenancy; and (ii) that the respondent cannot be considered to be a tenant in possession without interruption ever since 197.1 and that it was only the tenancy pursuant to the last permission that he continued.
Basing on a statement made by the appellant regarding the transfer of her son to Delhi and her omission to mention in her application about the additional fact of unsuitability of climate of Bangalore and her grandson 's illness, the Tribunal, however, held that the appellant had practised fraud on the Rent Controller and dismissed the appeal.
The second appeal by the appellant was dismissed summarily by the High Court.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: l. Ordinarily, the Supreme Court declines to interfere with findings of fact and refuses to entertain special leave petitions questioning such findings under Article 136 of the Constitution.
However, this is a case, where the entire approach of the statutory authorities has been vitiated by a gross misconstruction of the facts and circumstances of the case, ignoring material evidence of the record, and arriving at inferences which fly in the face of reason and the law, all resulting in grave injustice , calling for necessary interference.
[23 D F] The evidence in this case, does not make out that any fraud was practised on the Rent Controller when permission was granted in 1980 under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act.
The changing facts of social existence do not permit the application of unimaginative perspectives and inflexible assumptions.
The mutating kaleidoscope of human life portrays a different reality.
It is this fundamental error into which the Rent Control Tribunal has fallen and because of that it has unwittingly fallen further into the error of misconstruing the significance of the statement made by the appellant.
[24 C D] 2.
It is perfectly possible for the owner of a premises, on looking to the immediate future, to find that for certain reasons he is unable to occupy the premises forthwith himself but that he may do so later in the not every distant future.
It is not always that a man can plan his life ahead with any degree of definiteness.
Prevailing uncertainty in the 20 circumstances surrounding him may not permit clear sighted vision into the future.
The circumstances may justify his envisioning his need for the premises two or three years later, and therefore, applying for permission under section 21 of the Act to let out the premises accordingly.
And yet, thereafter, on the expiry of that period he may find that the circumstances have changed and his use of the premises has now to be postponed by another few years.
In cases such as this the mere fact that the owner has let out the premises after obtaining permission under section 21 of the Act for a limited period, and thereafter on the expiry of that period has found it necessary to obtain permission to let out the premises again for another limited period cannot necessarily lead to the inference that from the very beginning the premises were available for letting out indefinitely.
[2G H; 24A C]
