The petitioner was at one time the Ruler of an erstwhile princely State which ceded to the Dominion Government in 1948.
A Jagirdar, who was the owner of a half share in a Jagir of villages contained in that princely State, became entitled to compensation for the trees standing thereon under the provisions of the Bombay Merged Territories and Areas (Jagirs Abolition) Act, 1953.
Upon an application filed by the Jagirdar, the Jagir Abolition Officer awarded Rs.18,258 as compensation for all the trees standing on the jagir and directed that half of it was payable to the Jagirdar and that the other half would go to the former Ruler.
In appeal, the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal determined the total value of all the trees at Rs.68,039, of which half was payable to the Jagirdar.
In a writ petition the High Court held on July 23, 1975 that the total market value of the trees was Rs.1,70,540 and the Jagirdar would be entitled to the half share with interest thereon from August 1, 1954.
The petitioner never made any application for compensation on the abolition of the jagir and was not a party to the proceedings before the Jagir Abolition Officer and the Gujarat Revenue Tribunal.
During the pendency of the appeal by special leave by the State in this Court the application made by the petitioner to be impleaded as a respondent was allowed.
That appeal was disposed of in view of the decision in State of Gujarat & Ors.
vs Gujarat Revenue Tribunal & Anr. 100 ; The petitioner, thereafter, unsuccessfully persisted with the State authorities for payment to him of the half share in the compensation and ultimately filed the present Miscellaneous Petition claiming a sum of Rs.4,80,487.10.
It was contended for the State that the mere fact of being impleaded as a respondent in this Court did not entitle the petitioner to any part of the compensation awarded by the High Court, that there was no adjudication that the other half share belonged to the petitioner, and that since the jagir now stood vested in the State of Gujarat, the half share passed into the ownership of the State.
Dismissing the Miscellaneous Petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The order impleading the petitioner as a respondent in the appeal did not amount to adjudication on the question whether he was the owner of the other half share of the compensation.
His presence in the array of respondents could not vest any right in him to any part of the compensation, for the special leave petition was filed by the State against the order of the High Court in a writ petition preferred by the Jagirdar, to which the petitioner was not a party.
There was no adjudication by High Court on any claim of the petitioner.
The entire controversy before it was between the Jagirdar and the State.
[105B D] 2.
When the valuation of the Jagirdar 's half share was determined by the High Court, the valuation of the other half share stood automatically determined, but there was nothing in that order determining the ownership of the other half share.
[105A B] 3.
The order disposing of the appeal did not confer any right on the petitioner in respect of the compensation payable on the abolition of the jagir.
If that appeal had been allowed in terms of the relief sought by the State, it would have resulted in a reduction of the quantum of compensation awarded to the Jagirdar and had it been dismissed, the quantum of compensation determined by the High Court would have stood affirmed.
[105D E] 4.
The petitioner will have to establish his title to a half share of the compensation in some other proceedings.
[105G]
