The appellant who was initially working as an Assistant Teacher started teaching Hindi in the Intermediate classes upon the institution being upgraded though he was not qualified to be appointed as a Lecturer in Hindi.
As he did not possess the requisite qualification of B.A. in Sanakrit, he applied for an exemption under section 16E, though originially refused was however sanctioned by an order of the Board dated 23.7.1963.
While fixing the inter se seniority, his appointment date was taken as 23.7.1963 and respondents 5 and 6 were treated as Seniors as they joined on 19.12.62 and 1.7.63 respectively.
The appellant challanged it by moving a writ petition in the Allahabad High Court with a prayer that the exemption related back to his initial appointment.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition and hence the appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The Language of section 16E of the Uttar Pradesh Intermediate Education Act does not admit of the construction that the exemption granted by the Board must relate back to the date of making the application seeking exemption.
Section 16E could be construed as enabling the Board to exercise the power to grant exemption prospectively after considering the report and taking into account the relevant circumstances which would by the very nature of things be with prospective effect and not with retropsective effect.
Otherwise, it would be to hold that any unqualified person can be appointd even without the minimum qualifications subject to post facto expemption being granted.
Till the exemption is granted the person is not qualified to be appointed.
107 In other words he would be lacking in the basic qualification for being appointed.
This deficiency cannot be made good with retroactive exemption unless the provision itself expressly or by necessary implication contemplates such a course of action.
Section 16E does not satisfy this test.
Thus it would appear that retrospective exemption could not have been granted and in point of fact was not granted in the present case.
Even otherwise, it is not sufficient to show that retrospective exemption could have been granted.
[111 B F] Further though the appellant was working as a lecturer, it was not under any authority of law for there is no provision which empowers the college to allow any unqualified person to teach or to appoint him as such in anticipation of his disqualification being removed in future.
Till the exemption was granted appellant was not even a teacher in the eye of law though he was allowed to teach by the indulgence of the college authorities.
The disqualification was removed only on July 23, 1963 when the Board granted the exemption.
[111H; 112A B] 2.
An employee must belong to the same stream before he can claim seniority vis a vis others.
One who belongs to the stream of lawfully and regularly appointed employees does not have to contend with those who never belonged to that stream, they having been appointed in an irregular manner.
Those who have been irregularly appointed belong to a different stream, and cannot claim seniority vis a vis those who have been regularly and properly appointed, till their appointments became regular or are regularised by the appointing authority as a result of which their stream joins the regular stream.
At that point of confluence with the regular stream, from the point of time they join the stream by virtue of the regularisation, they can claim seniority vis a vis those who join the same stream later.
The late comers to the regular stream cannot steal a march over the early arrivals in the regular queue.
[112C E] 3.
In matters of seniority the Court does not exercise jurisdiction akin to appellate jurisdiction against the determination by the competent authority, so long as the competent authority has acted bonafide and acted on principles of fairness and fairplay.
In a matter where there is no rule or regulation governing the situation or where there is one, but is not violated, the Court will not overturn the determination unless it would be unfair not to do so.
[112E F] 108
