A dispute regarding bonus payable to the workmen respondents of the two companies appellants for the year 1971 72 was referred to conciliation under section 12(1) of the .
The workmen contended before the Conciliation officer that they were entitled to bonus equivalent to three months ' basic wages as on 31st March, 1972 as customary bonus or in any event as bonus payable under the provisions of the Act.
The appellant companies, on the other hand, argued that the workmen were entitled to only minimum bonus as provided under the Act.
The said dispute was ultimately settled before the Conciliation officer on the terms: (a) that each eligible work man will be paid an amount equal to three months ' basic wages as on 31.3.1970; and (b) that the demand of the Union for bonus this year will be referred to a Tribunal for adjudication.
Accordingly, the Government referred the dispute for adjudication to the ninth Industrial Tribunal of West Bengal.
After a detailed discussion of the evidence produced before the Tribunal, it found (i) that the workmen had failed to make out the claim of customary bonus or that they were entitled to maximum bonus of 20 per cent as provided under the Act; and (ii) that there was no available surplus during the year in question and that only the minimum bonus was payable under the provisions of the Act.
However, after having recorded the aforesaid findings, it proceeded to hold that it was legally open to it to substitute for the agreement entered into between the 185 parties before the Conciliation officer a new contract and pass an award on that basis, if such a step would be conducive to industrial peace.
On this basis the Tribunal, held that there would not be material alteration in the financial liability of the companies in case the agreement was modified by substituting for the words "that the workmen will be paid the amount equal to three months ' basic wages as on 31.3.1970" by the words "an amount equal to basic wages as on 31.3.1372" and accordingly it passed an award in those terms.
In appeal to the Supreme Court, the appellants companies challenged the legality of this award.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The impugned award passed by the Ninth Industrial Tribunal is not legally sustainable and has to be set aside.
The rights of the workmen for payment of bonus for the year in question will be governed by the terms of the agreement entered into before the Conciliation officer on October 9, 1972.
[190F] 2.
The rights and liabilities of the parties regarding profit bonus are governed by the provisions of the payment of Bonus Act, 1965 which are exhaustive on the subject and the adjudication had to be conducted by the Tribunal strictly in accordance with those provisions.
[189C D] In the instant case, the Tribunal has categorically found that there was no "available surplus" in respect of the two companies for the year in question on a computation made under section 5 of the Act.
The settlement entered into before the Conciliation officer constituted an agreement under section 34(3) of the Act and but for the said agree ment, the liability of the appellants under the provisions of the Act would have been only to pay minimum bonus under section 10 of the Act.
[189E F] Sanghi Jeevraj Chewar Chand and Ors.
vs Secretary Madras Chillies, Grains Kirana Merchants Workers ' Union and Anr., [ ; and Mumbai Kamgar Sabha.
Bombay vs M/s Abdulbhai Faizullabhai & Ors., [ ; referred to.
It is certainly open to an Industrial Court in an appropriate case to impose new obligations on the parties before it or modify contracts in the interest of industrial peace or give awards which may have the effect 186 of extending the agreement or making new one, but this power is conditioned by the subject matter with which it is dealing and also by the existing industrial law and it would not be open to it while dealing with a particular matter before it to overlook the industrial law relating to that matter as laid down by the legislature. " [190B D] The New Maneck Chowk Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd. Ahmedabad and others vs The Textile Labour Association, Ahmedabad, ; relied upon.
In the instant case, in view of the finding recorded by the Tribunal that the result of the working of the companies during the concerned year was a loss and there was no available surplus, the Tribunal could not have legally proceeded to make an award directing payment of bonus at any rate higher than the minimum bonus specified hl section 10 of the Act.
Therefore, the impugned award made by the Tribunal is clearly inconsistent with the provisions of the Payment of Bonus Act which contemplate the imposition of an obligation for payment of only the minimum bonus where the employer has no allocable surplus in the concerned accounting year.
However, inasmuch as the appellant companies had entered into the settlement before the Conciliation Officer agreeing to pay bonus at a rate higher than the minimum bonus, the said settlement would constitute an agreement under section 34 of the Act and the terms of the settlement will govern the liability for bonus for the year in question.
[190D E]
