One N. Kanti Lal had 28% share in a partnership firm.
The Partnership Deed, by cl.
(10) provided that the firm shall not stand dissolved on death of any of the partners and the partner dying shall have no right whatever in the goodwill of the firm.
On his death, the respondent accountable person filed necessary return under the without including the value of the share of the deceased in the goodwill of the firm.
The Assistant Controller of Estate Duty, however, held that the share of the deceased in the goodwill of the firm was liable to be included in the principal value of his property and added the same to the value of the interest which the deceased had in the partnership assets.
The Appellate Controller of Estate Duty confirmed the aforesaid order in appeal.
The accountable person preferred appeal before the Appellate Tribunal contending: (1) that the deceased had no interest in the assets of the firm and hence his share in the goodwill did not pass at all; (2) that in view of cl.
(10) of the Partnership Deed the share of the deceased partner in the goodwill did not pass and as such was not liable to the charge of estate duty; and (3) that when a partnership was a going concern, there could not be any separate valuation of the goodwill which went with the running business.
The Tribunal rejected all the contentions and held that in spite of cl.
(10) of the partnership agreement, the value of the goodwill to the extent of the share of the deceased passed on his death and it was liable to be charged to estate duty.
46 On reference by the Tribunal, the High Court held: (i) that the interest of the deceased in the firm was property within the meaning of the provisions of the ; and (ii) that the value of the interest of the deceased in the partnership firm would not include the goodwill of the partnership firm.
This Court, on the question: 'Whether the value of the interest of the deceased in a partnership firm would include the goodwill of the partnership firm and liable to estate duty ', allowing the Appeal of the Revenue, ^ HELD: 1.
In a partnership there is a community of interest in which all the partners take in the property of the firm.
But that does not mean that during the subsistence of the partnership a particular partner has any proprietary interest in the assets of the firm.
Every partner of the firm has a right to get his share of profits till the firm subsists, and he has also a right to see that all the assets of the partnership are applied to and used for the purpose of the partnership business.
All these rights of a partner show that he has got a marketable interest in all the capital assets of the firm including the goodwill asset even during the subsistence of the partnership.
This interest is 'property ' within the meaning of section 2(15) of the .
[53 D F] 2.
The goodwill of the firm is an asset in which the dying partner has a share.
It passes on the death of the dying partner and the beneficiary of such passing would be one who by virtue of the partnership agreement would be entitled to the value of that asset.
The fact that such interest might devolve not on the legal representatives but on a different group or category of persons or that from the goodwill the legal representatives might be excluded, would not make any difference for the purpose of assessment of estate duty.
The entirety of the interest of the deceased partner that would pass, which necessarily included goodwill, would be includible in the estate.
The valuation of such entire interest has to be determined as provided under section 36 of the read with Rule 7(2) of the Estate Duty Rules, 1953.
[61 E G] 3.
The share of the deceased in the partnership did not evaporate or disappear.
It went together with the other assets and should be valued in the manner contemplated under Rule 7(c) of the Estate Duty Rules.
The goodwill of the firm after the death of the dying partner does not get diminished or extinguished.
Whoever has the benefit of that firm has the benefit of the value of that goodwill.
Therefore, if by any 47 arrangement, for instance, clause (10) of the partnership agreement in the instant case, heirs do not get any share in the good will, the surviving partners who will have the benefit of the partnership will certainly have that benefit.
Therefore, as a result of the death of the dying partner, there is cesser of interest as well as accrual or arising of benefit of the said cesser.
B D] 4.
Difficulties in making apportionment do not make a taxable item non taxable.[58 C] Perpetual Executors and Trustees Association of Australia Ltd. vs Commissioner of Taxes, = 25 I.T.R. (ED) 47, Attorney General vs Boden and Another, 1912 (I) K.B. 539, Addanki Narayanappa & Anr.
vs Bhashara Krishnappa and 13 ors.
, A.I.R. 1966 S.C. 1330=[1966] 3 SCR 400, Commission of Income tax, Madras vs Best and Co. (Private) Ltd., 60 I.T.R.11 and Khushal Khemgar Shah vs Mrs. Khorshed Banu; , relied upon.
Controller of Estate Duty, Madras vs Ibrahim Gulam Hussain Currimbhoy, , State vs Prem Nath, , Controller of Estate Duty, Bombay City I vs Fakirchand Fatchchand Sachdev, , Controller of Estate Duty vs Kanta Devi Taneja, and Controller of Estate Duty, West Bengal vs Annaraj Mehta and Deoraj Mehta, , approved.
Attorney General of Ceylon vs AR.
Arunachalam Chettiar and Others, E.D., Alladi Kuppuswami vs Controller of Estate Duty, Madras, and Smt.
Surumbayi Ammal vs
Controller of Estate Duty, Madras, , distinguished.
Controller of Estate Duty vs Smt.
Ram Sumarni Devi, and P. Abdul Sattar vs Controller of Estate Duty, , overruled.
