The appellant is carrying on the business of bulk supply of milk and milk products for the last twenty years.
He has a plant for pasteurization at Pune.
On July 16, 1985 the officer in charge of the Military Farms respondent No. 2, issued tender notice for the supply of pure fresh buffalo and cow milk.
The appellant being eligible and already on the approved list of the respondent authority, submitted a tender offering fresh buffalo milk of the specified fat content and gravity giving a rate of R.S. 421 per 100 litres.
The General Manager, Government Milk Scheme, Pune respondent No. 4, also submitted a tender for the supply of pasteurized milk, an item not contemplated by the tender notice, at Rs.400 per 100 litres.
Tenders were opened on August 23, 1985 and the appellant was found the lowest bidder.
The Military officer concerned submitted a report to the higher authority stating that the appellant was not only the lowest 'bidder but also that the purchase of milk from him would be profitable, while the purchase of milk from respondent No. 4 would result in serious loss to the extent of rupees ten lakhs or so.
But all the same, the respondent authority accepted the higher bid of respondent No. 4, in preference to the lower bid of the appellant contrary to the terms of the notice inviting tender.
Feeling aggrieved by the rejection of his tender, the appellant challenged the order by filing a writ petition in the High Court which was dismissed in limine.
In this appeal by special leave on behalf of the appellant it was 64 contended that even in the matter of contracts, the Government has to act fairly and justly and the failure of the Government to do so gives a right to the citizen to approach the court for justice, that the authority concerned in rejecting his tender had acted contrary to the principles of law, unfairly, arbitrarily and discriminately, that the tender submitted by respondent No. 4 was not in consonance with the tender notice and it should have been ignored, and that if the authority wished to alter the conditions of the tender notice it was obligatory and mandatory for it to call him for negotiation.
It was further contended that the 10 per cent price preference given to respondent No. 4 contrary to the terms of the tender notice was illegal and discriminatory.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that respondent No. 4 being the Government agency was rightly awarded the contract as per the policy of the Government of India laid down in notification dated August 13, 1385.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The Government may enter into a contract with any person but in so doing the State or its instrumentalities cannot act arbitrarily.
It is open to the State to adopt a policy different from the one in question, but once the authority or the State Government chooses to invite tenders then it must abide by the result of the tender.
[75 C D; 77 D E] 2.
The High Court was not justified in dismissing the writ petition in limine by saying that the question relates to the contractual obligation and the policy decision cannot be termed as unfair or arbitrary.
[77 E] There was no question of any policy decision in the instant case.
The notification dated August 13, 1985 laying down the policy came in after July 16, 1985 when respondent No. 2 issued tender notice.
The instrumentalities of the State having invited tenders for the supply of fresh buffalo and cow milk, these were to be adjudged on their intrinsic merits in accordance with the terms and conditions of the tender notice.
The contract for the supply of milk was to be given to the lowest bidder under the terms of the tender notice and the appellant being the lowest bidder, it should have been granted to him.
The authority acted capriciously in accepting a bid which was much higher and to the detriment of the State.
[75 B D; 77 D F] 3.
Where the tender form submitted by any party is not in con 65 formity with the conditions of the tender notice the same should not be A accepted.
So also, where the original terms of the tender notice are changed the parties should be given an opportunity to submit their tenders in conformity with the changed terms.
[72 C E] 4.
The authority acted arbitrarily in allowing 10 per cent price preference to respondent No. 4.
The terms and conditions of the tender had been incorporated in the tender notice itself and that did not indicate any such price preference to government undertakings.
The only concession available to Central/State Government or to the purely government concerns was under para 13 of the notice, that is, that they need not pay tender form fee and earnest money.
No other concession or benefit was contemplated under the terms of the tender notice.
[73 A C ] Ramana Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport Authority of India & Ors., ; ; V. Punnan Thomas vs State of Kerala, AIR 1969 Kerala 81; C.K. Achuthan vs State of Kerala [1359] Suppl.
1 SCR 787; Viklad Coal Merchants, Patiala etc.
vs Union of India & Ors.
AIR 1984 SC 95; and Madhya Pradesh Ration Vikreta Sangh Society SCR 750, referred to.
