The respondent assessee is a public limited company carrying on the business of manufacturing and selling sugar.
During the assessment years 1956 57 and 1957 58 the company also held shares in the Premier Sugar Mills and Distillery Co. Ltd., Mardan, West Pakistan.
The Pakistan company also carried on the business of manufacturing and selling sugar.
The assessee company earned dividend income of Rs.2,30,832 and Rs.3,30,868 from the holdings in the respective previous years relevant to the assessment years aforesaid, while it incurred a business loss of Rs.20,30,006 and Rs.9,11,728 respectively from its business in India.
The assessee claimed that the entire loss sustained by it in India in each year should be carried forward and set off against its business profits in India in future years in as much as the dividend income derived by it from the Pakistan company was not liable to tax in India by virtue of the Agreement for the Avoidance of Double Taxation between India and Pakistan.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the said contention and determined the total loss in the relevant assessment years by making certain adjustments.
The appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal failed.
However, in the reference made at the instance of the assessee the Delhi High Court answered the questions relating to the Pakistan dividend in favour of the assessee and against the revenue.
Hence the appeals by certificate.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, 151 ^ HELD: 1.1 The dividend income received from the Pakistan company is deductible in arriving at the total world loss of the assessee under sub section (1) of section 24 of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.
[160F G] 1.2 Under sub section (1) of section 24 of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 an assessee who has sustained a loss of profits or gains in any year under any of the heads mentioned in section 6 is entitled to have the amount of the loss set off against his income, profits or gains under any other head in that year.
The income, profits or gains against which the loss is set off must be such income, profits or gains as is assessable under the Indian Income Tax Act.
The statute does not contemplate a setting off of loss against income which is not assessable at all under the Act.
[157A C] 1.3 For the purposes of the assessment under the Indian Income Tax Act, the income of the assessee must be determined in the ordinary way under the Indian law.
Having regard to the relevant entry 8 of the Schedule to the Agreement for the Avoidance of Double Taxation between the two Dominions of India and Pakistan, the Dominion of India is not entitled to charge the dividend income at all.
Article IV of the Agreement makes it clear that each Dominion is entitled to make assessments in the ordinary way under its own laws.
The process of determining the assessable income of the assessee is not affected by the Agreement.
What the Agreement does is to give relief against double taxations.
[156F G; 157D E] Ramesh R. Saraiya vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City 1 referred to.
1.4 The agreement for the Avoidance of Double Taxation functions in a different plane altogether.
It enjoys no role in the application of the Indian law for the purpose of determining the total income of an assessee and the tax liability consequent upon such assessment.
On the contrary, the provisions of the Agreement clearly envisage that full effect must be given to the operation of the tax law of each Dominion.
All that the Agreement does is to permit a Dominion to retain the tax recovered by it pursuant to an assessment under its law to the extent that an abatement is not allowed under the provisions of the Agreement.
Article IV specifically provides that each Dominion shall make assessment in the ordinary way under its own laws.
Such assessment includes the determination of the consequential tax liability.
Thereafter, the Agreement takes over and the Dominion must allow an abatement in the degree mentioned in Article IV.
Clause (b) of Article VI permits the 152 Dominion to make a demand without allowing the abatement if the tax payable on the total income in the other Dominion is not known, but the collection of the tax has to be held in abeyance for a period of one year at least to the extent of the estimated abatement.
If the assessee produces the certificate of assessment in the other Dominion within the period of one year or any longer period allowed by the Income Tax officer, the uncollected portion of the demand has to be adjusted against the abatement allowable under the Agreement.
But if no such certificate is produced, the abatement ceases to be operative and the outstanding demand can be collected forthwith.
Clause (a) of Article VII makes absolutely clear that nothing in the Agreement can be considered as modifying or incorporating in any manner the provisions of the relevant tax laws in force in either Dominion.
Therefore, the Agreement cannot be construed as modifying or superseding in any manner the provisions of the Indian law in that regard.
[158F H;159A D] 1.5 So long as it does not constitute the subject of exemption under any of the provisions (Sections 14 to 16) of the Indian Income Tax Act, the dividend income, in as much as it is taxable under the Indian Income Tax Act by virtue of sub clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub section I of section 4, must be brought into the net of income for assessment under the Indian law.
[159G H; 160A ] 1.6 Merely because the assessee fails to claim the benefit of a set off cannot relieve the Income tax officer of his duty to apply section 24 in an appropriate case for the purpose of determining the true figure of the assessee 's taxable income and the consequential tax liability.
How ever in the instant case a perusal of the assessment orders for two years shows clearly that the assessee did claim a set off of the Pakistan dividend against the losses of the Indian business.
[160D E]
