The appellant company in Civil Appeal No.642 of 1974 was doing the business as ship chandler.
It imported the goods from foreign countries and after receipt of the goods, kept them in a bonded warehouse under the relevant provisions of the .
The ware house was under dual control of the Customs Department and the importers like the appellant so that it could not be opened by one without the presence of the other.
On receipt of order from the Captain of the Ship requiring ship stores, the appellant supplied the goods on board after observing certain formalities imposed by the , the rules and regulations made thereunder.
For the Assessment year 1964 65 a question arose whether Rs.3,51,438.08 which was the taxable turnover, determined by the assessing authority, was subject to the tax under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959.
The appellant objected to the assessment on such turnover on the ground that the goods relating to such turnover were imported from abroad, stored in the customs ware house and were not brought to the country across the customs frontiers.
The Sales Tax Officer assessed the turnover and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner confirmed the assessment on the basis that sales were effected 237 within the State of Tamil Nadu.
However, the Tribunal, in appeal by the appellant, held that the sales did not take place within the State of Tamil Nadu since the import of goods in question had not become complete and as the goods were sold to the foreign going vessels, the sales in question could not be deemed to be within the State of Madras.
On revision, the High Court relying on the decision of the Supreme Court in the State of Madras vs Davar and Co., 24 STC 481, held that the sales took place in the State of Madras and assessment to tax was valid.
The facts in all the other connected appeals, writ petitions and the special leave petitions being identical, a similar question of law also arose in them.
In appeal to the Supreme Court by the appellant/petitioners, it was contended on their behalf: (i) that the property in the goods, did not pass in the territory of Tamil Nadu and the sales were therefore, in the course of export because goods were to be on board the ship and were exported outside the country and could not be consumed before they reached the high seas; (ii) that the sale of goods took place in the territorial water of India and not within the State of Tamil Nadu; (iii) that the legislative competence of the State of Tamil Nadu as regards levying of the sales tax was confined to the territories of the State as specified in item No. 7 of the First Schedule to the Constitution.
That legislative competence did not extend to any territorial waters simply because these were abutting the land mass of the State of Tamil Nadu; (iv) that the Sovereignty over the limits of territorial waters extended and always extended to the entire territorial waters of India.
The limits and extent of the said territorial waters had not been altered by any notification of the Central Government.
The territorial waters extended to a distance of 12 nautical miles from the sea shore adjacent to the land mass of the State; and (v) that there was no definition at all of "Customs Frontiers" in the .
The definition inserted in the Act in section 2(ab) by the Amending Act 103 of 1976 must be read as declaratory or explanatory and no questions of prospective operations would arise.
On the other hand, it was argued on behalf of the respondent State that the appellant 's godowns and bonded ware houses were within the State of Tamil Nadu.
When orders were received, the appellants/petitioners supplied the required quantity from the stock either in the godown or in the bonded ware houses and delivered these or set these apart in fulfilment of the orders placed by the concerned officer of the foreign bond ship and that at that time only appropriation was made towards the contract of sale and such appropriation took place within the State of Tamil Nadu.
It was, therefore, on such ap 238 propriation that the sale took place; and (ii) that it was not correct to say that the transactions of sale were completed only when the masters of the vessels acknowledged delivery of the goods on board the vessels.
Dismissing the Appeals and the Petitions, ^ Held: 1.1 The concept of export in Article 286(1)(b) of the Constitution postulates the existence of two termini as those between which the goods were intended to move or between which they were intended to be transported and not a mere movement of goods out of the country without any intention of their being landed in specie in some foreign port.
Goods might be consumed within the meaning of the Explanation to Article 286(1) (a) either by destruction or by way of use depending on the nature of the goods.
Therefore, the sales were not sales "in the course of export" within the meaning of Article 286(1) (b) and were not exempt under that Article but they fell within the Explanation to Article 286(1) (a).
[247C D; G] 1.2 Mere movement of goods out of the country following a sale would not render the sale, one in the course of export within Article 286(1) (b) of the Constitution of India.
Before a sale can be said to be a sale in the course of export, the existence of two termini between which the goods are intended to move or to be transported is necessary.
[249F G] In the instant case the appropriation of goods took place in the State of Tamil Nadu when the goods were segregated in the bonded ware house to be delivered to the foreign going vessels.
Therefore, under sub section
(2), sub cl.
(a) and (b) of section 4 of the , the sale of goods in question shall be deemed to have taken place inside the State because the contract of sale of ascertained goods was made within the territory of Tamil Nadu and furthermore in case of unascertained goods approrpriation had taken palce in that State in terms of cl.
(b) of sub section
(2) of section 4 of the .
There is no question of sale taking place in course of export or import under section 5.
From that point of view, the amendment introduced by Act 103 of 1976 by incorporating in cl.
(ab) of section 2 of the does not affect the position.
It was not a case of export as there was no destination for the goods to a foreign country.
The sale was for the purpose of consumption on board the ship.
It was not as if only on delivery on board, the vessel that the sale took place.
The mere fact that shipping bill was prepared for sending it for custom formalities which were designed to effectively control smuggling activities could not 239 determine the nature of the transaction for the purpose of sales tax nor does the circumstances that delivery was to the captain on board the ship within the territorial waters make it a sale outside the State of Tamil Nadu.[252E H; 247A B] Burmah Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Co. of India Ltd., and Anr.
vs Commercial Tax Officer & Ors., 11 STC 764; Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs Caltex India Ltd., Madras, 13 STC 163; The State of Madras vs Davar & Co., 24 STC 481; Fairmacs Trading Co. vs The State of Tamil Nadu, 41 STC 157; Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. Bombay vs S.R. Sarkar & Ors., 11 STC 655; and The State of Kerala & Ors.
vs The Cochin Coal Co., Ltd., 12 STC 1 relied upon.
Fairmacs Trading Co. vs The State of Tamil Nadu, 41 STC 157 and Fairmacs Trading Co. vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, 36 STC 260 approved.
Customs barrier does not set a terminal limit to the territory of the State for sales tax purposes.
Sale, therefore, beyond the customs barrier is still a sale within the State.
The amendment introduced in s.2 by the Act 103 of 1976 does not affect the position because the custom station is within the State of Tamil Nadu.
[253A B] 4.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, it is not necessary to express any opinion on the arguments whether introduction of cl.(ab) of s.2 of the by Act 103 of 1976 is prospective or not.
[253C D] Deputy Commissioner of Commercial Taxes vs Caltx India Ltd., Madras, 13 STC 163; Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd. Bombay vs S.R. Sarkar & Ors., 11 STC 655; Furby vs Hoey [1947] 1 All England Report 236; The Central Bank of India vs Their Workmen ; ; and Chanan Singh & Anr.
vs Jai Kaur; , at 804 807 referred to.
Kent Justices Ex Parte LYE & Ors., [1967] 1 All England Report 560 at 564 65 held inapplicable.
