The three respondents accused were charged with offences which fell within the scope of section 52 of the of 1950.
The ordinary criminal court and the Court Martial both had concurrent jurisdiction to try the said offences.
They were tried by the Judge presiding over the Fourth Addl.
Special Court, Calcutta.
The learned Trial Judge, while convicting one of the respondents and acquitting the remaining two, failed to follow the procedure prescribed by the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules, 1952 framed under Section 549(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898.
The High Court, in appeal, took the view that the learned Judge presiding over the Special Court had acted without jurisdiction in taking cognizance of the case and proceeding with the trial of three Army officers resulting in the conviction of one of them, and the acquittal of the remaining two and quashed the proceedings.
Dismissing the appeals, by the State, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in allowing the appeal of the officer who was convicted and dismissing the appeal of the State calling into question the acquittal of the remaining two.
However, the acquittal rendered by the High Court is on the ground of lack of jurisdiction on 114 the part of the learned Special Judge who tried the case in the Special Court and not on merits.
The expression 'acquitted ' has been employed by the High Court though it was sufficient to say no more than this, 'that the order of conviction and sentence was without jurisdiction and was therefore being quashed '.
In the eye of law, it is not an acquittal since it is not on merits.
It is, therefore, for the competent authority to decide whether or not to subject the accused to a fresh trial after following the procedure prescribed by the Rules.
[125D F] 2.1 In order to avoid any conflict of jurisdiction between the criminal court and the court martial in regard to offenders who are charged with having committed offences which fall under the purview of Section 52 of the , Section 549(1) of Cr.
P.C. provides that Central Government may make Rules consistent with Cr.
P.C. and the .
In pursuance of this provision contained in Section 549(1), Cr.
P.C., the Central Government has framed Rules known as Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules 1952.
[117H; 118A B] 2.2 Rule 3 of the Rules requires that when a person subject to military, Naval or Air Force law is brought before a Magistrate on accusation of an offence for which he is liable to be tried by Court Martial also, the magistrate shall not proceed with the case unless he is requested to do so by the appropriate military authority.
A combined reading of rules 3 and 4 shows that in case the Magistrate is of the opinion that he should proceed with the case without there being any such request from the appropriate military authority, the concerned Magistrate is enjoined to give notice to the commanding officer in this behalf.
Till the expiry of seven days from the service of such notice on the commanding officer, the Magistrate is prohibited from making any order of conviction or acquittal or framing any charges or committing the accused.
Therefore, the ordinary criminal court would have no jurisdiction to take cognizance of the case and to try the accused in a matter where the procedure prescribed by the Rules has not been complied with.
The initial lack of jurisdiction to take cognizance and try the case would, of logical necessity, vitiate the trial and the order of conviction and sentence would be liable to be quashed as a result thereof.
[118B F] In the instant case, admittedly the procedure prescribed by the Rules was not followed.
Under the circumstances it is futile to contend that the Army authorities had voluntarily abandoned their option to try the accused person in the court martial.
There is no substance in the plea and it has been rightly repelled by the High Court.[123D E] 115 Delhi Police Establishment, New Delhi vs Lt. Col. S.K. Loraiya.
[1973] (1)SCR 1010 relied upon.
Major E.G. Barsay vs The State of Bombay ; referred.
3.1 Section 13 of the West Bengal Criminal Law Amendment (Special Courts) Act, 1949 in terms accords recognition to the applicability of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 enacted by the Parliament except and save some of the sections, namely, sections 6,7,8,9 and 10 thereof which, as provided in Section 13, shall not apply and shall be never deemed to have applied to West Bengal.
It is implicit in Section 13 of the West Bengal Act that the Central Act, namely, Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 is applicable to the State of West Bengal except and save the aforesaid five sections.
There can be no doubt or debate about this position having regard to the fact that criminal law is a subject which falls under the concurrent list and the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 enacted by the Parliament is applicable subject to inconsistency, if any, between the said Act and the West Bengal Act.
Moreover, the West Bengal Act does not contain any provision pertaining to personnel governed by the .
It is altogether silent in regard to the matter pertaining to the procedure to be followed in regard to Army personnel from the perspective of Section 549 Cr.
P.C. and the rules framed under the authority thereof.
There is thus no conflict between the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 and the West Bengal Act in so far as this matter is concerned.
Such being the position the provision contained in Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 with a special eye on the procedure to be followed in Section 8(3A) and Section 11 of the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act of 1952 will operate in this sphere without any let or hindrance.
And inasmuch as Section 8(3A) in terms provides that the provision of Section 549 Cr.
P.C. shall so for as may be applied to the proceeding before the Special Judge and that for the purposes of that provision a Special Judge shall be deemed to be a Magistrate, the said provisions remain fully alive and unaffected by the West Bengal Act.
[124C H; 125A]
