The Kerala Agricultural Income Tax Act, 1950 provides for the levy of tax on agricultural income in the State of Kerala.
Section 5 details the deductions to be made in computing the agricultural income.
Clauses (e), (g), (h) and (i) refer to interest paid by the assessee in different kinds of cases.
The interest in all these cases, has to be deducted from the agricultural income of a person before the levy is imposed.
The respondents assessees claimed a deduction of Rs.33,747.09 from their agricultural income under section 5 of the Kerala Agricultural Income Tax Act 1950 towards interest on a loan of Rs.4 lakhs taken from a creditor.
The deduction was allowed.
However, in the next accounting period relating to the assessment year 1964 65, the said creditor waived payment of the interest of Rs.33,747,09 and accordingly the amount was credited to the revenue accounts of the respondents assessees.
The Assessing Authority brought the amount to tax.
But, the Tribunal as well as the High Court took the view that the case was not one of an actual or constructive receipt or any receipt at all but only one of remission and a remission could not give rise to a credit item in the accounts of the assessees and that what had been given by the creditor in favour of the assessees or returned to them could not constitute the income of the assessees.
Dismissing the appeal of the Revenue, ^ HELD: (1) The view taken by the High Court is right.
The remis 162 sion cannot be considered as amounting to the receipt of agricultural income.
What was allowed to be deducted from the total agricultural income of the assesses was interest pursuant to section 5 of the Act.
It was a deduction made permissible by the Act.
To be regarded as taxable in the hands of the assessee, the amount which was the subject of remission must be capable of being described as agricultural income.
[164F G] In the instant case, what was returned to the assessees has nothing to do with the activities of the assessees; it does not arise from business nor does it arise from agricultural operations when the assessee is an agriculturist.
[164G H] Commissioner of Income tax, Mysore vs Lakshmamma,[1964] , approved.
Mohsin Rehman Penkar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City,[1948] , referred to.
(2) In order to eliminate such a controversy in cases falling under the Indian Income tax Act, 1922, sub s.(2A) was added in section 10 of that Act, whereby a receipt such as this was expressly made liable to tax by legal fiction as profits and gains of business, profession or vocation.
Sub.s.(2A) of s.10 of the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922 has been replaced by an even wider provision as sub section
(1) of section 41 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
No provision of that nature finds place in the Kerala Agricultural Income Tax Act.
[165A B;D]
