Section 279 of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act specifies the modes for the recovery of an arrear of land revenue.
Rule 281 of the Rules framed under the Act, authorises the Collector to sell the attached immovable property of a defaulter by auction, and provides for confirmation of the sale by an order of the Commissioner.
Rule 285 M requires the Collector to grant the purchaser a certificate that he has purchased the property and provides that such certificate shall be deemed to be a valid transfer of such property.
A certain amount was payable by the assessee to the State on account of arrears of cane cess which was recoverable as arrears of land revenue.
In proceedings for its recovery the Collector attached the assesse 's mills and put them to auction sale on November 10, 1955.
The entire amount of purchase money had been paid on December 8, 1955.
However, the requisite sale certificate under r. 285 M could not be issued till July 4, 1956 on account of the objections raised by the assessee.
In assessment proceedings for the assessment year 1957 58, the 199 Income tax officer called upon the assessee to explain why the excess amount which he had received on sale of the buildings, machinery and plant over the difference between the original and the written down value should not be subjected to tax under cl.
(vii) of sub section
(2) of section 10 and under section 12B of the Indian Income tax Act, 1922.
The assessee contended (i) that an auction sale being a compulsory sale was not a sale within the meaning of cl.
(vii) of sub section
(2) of section 10; and (ii) that the sale having been completed prior to March 31, 1956, it did not attract the provisions of section 12B relating to capital gains, which became effective from April 1, 1956 only.
The Income tax officer rejected the aforesaid contentions and computed the profits under section 10 (2) (vii) at Rs.10,07,000 and the capital gains under section 12B at R.S. 10, 23, 210.
The matter ultimately went before the High Court which decided in favour of the Revenue.
In the assessee 's appeal to this Court it was contended (i) that cl.
(vii) of sub section
(2) of section 10 of the Income tax Act, 1922 had no application because an auction sale was not a voluntary sale; and (ii) that the sale must be regarded as having taken place on November 10, 1985 when the auction was held and not on July 4, 1956 when the sale certificate was issued, for the property should be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when it was sold and not from the time when the sale became absolute and that being so, section 12B did not extend to the sale.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
The sale of the properties of the assessee falls within the scope of cl.
(vii) of sub section
(2) of section 10 of the Indian Income tax Act, 1322.
it cannot be said that the element of consent essential to the character of a sale was absent altogether from the transaction.
The levy of cane cess was imposed under a statute in respect of an activity carried on voluntarily by the assessee.
When entering upon and carrying out that activity the assessee was fully conscious that he did so subject to the provisions of the statute, and that in the event of default of payment of cane cess it was exposing itself to recovery proceedings as arrears of land revenue.
The assessee was also aware that recovery could be affected by an auction sale of its property.
The assessee thereby agreed to be bound by the structural framework imposed by the statute around the activity.
and, therefore, agreed to an auction sale of its properties in the event of its failure to pay the cane cess.
[205C ; 204G H; 205A C] Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation Ltd. vs Commissioner of 200 Income tax, West Bengal, ; Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd. vs State of Madras, ; ; and R.B. Lachman Das Mohanlal & Sons vs Commissioner of Income tax, U.P., , referred to 2.
The date on which the sale certificate was issued should be the date on which the sale must be regarded as having taken place.
It is only when the property is transferred that it can be deemed to nave vested in the purchaser.
Rule 285 M of the U.P. Zanmindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, is explicit in its terms.
When the sale certificate itself operates as effecting the transfer of the property, no question arises of relating the transfer back to the date of auction.
[205E; 260A B] The procedure incorporated in the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, and the Rules made under it, specifically exclude the operation of section 65 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 341 of that Act applies the Code only so far it is consistent with the provisions of the Act and not in derogation of it.
[206B C]
