The appellants are a partnership firm carrying on business as dealers in shrimps, prawns and lobsters and other sea food products.
They are registered as a dealer both under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 and the .
The appellants in the course of their business purchase shrimps, prawns and lobsters locally for the purpose of complying with orders for export and they cut the heads and tails of the shrimps prawns and lobsters purchased by them, peel, devein and clean them and after freezing and packing them in cartons, they export them to foreign buyers outside India under prior contracts of sale.
The appellants filed their statement of monthly turnover for the month of April 1982 before the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Mangalore and claimed total exemption from tax in respect of the purchase turn over of shirmps, prawns and lobsters under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957.
The Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes rejected the said claim by his two assessment orders and issued two notices of demand for Rs.52,610.71 and Rs.44,237.88 respectively against the appellants.
The appellants, thereupon, filed a writ petition in the High Court of Karnataka challenging all the said orders and notices of demand and sought appropriate direction, order or writ restraining the respondents from imposing or collecting purchase tax on purchase turn over of shrimps, prawns and lobsters under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957.
The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court, but having regard to the importance of the question 368 involved a certificate under Article 133 of the Constitution was granted by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: 1.1.
In order to attract the applicability of sub section (3) of section 5 of the , it is necessary that the goods which are purchased by an assessee for the purpose of com plying with the agreement or order for or in relation to export, must be the same goods which are exported out of the territory of India.
The words "those goods" in sub section (3) are clearly referable to "any goods" mentioned in the preceding part of the sub section and, therefore, the goods purchased by the assessee and the goods exported by him must be the same.
If by reason of any processing to which the goods may be subjected after purchase, they change their identity so that commercially they can no longer be regarded as the original goods, but instead become a new and different kind of goods and then they are exported, the purchases of original goods made by the assessee cannot be said to be purchases in the course of export.
1.2 The test which has to be applied for the purpose of determining whether a commodity subjected to processing retains its original character and identity is as to whether the processed commodity is regarded in the trade by those who deal in it as distinct in identity from the original commodity or it is regarded, commercially and in the trade, the same as the original commodity.
It is not every processing that brings about change in the character and identity of a commodity.
The nature and extent of processing may vary from one case to another and indeed there may be several stages of processing and perhaps different kinds of processing at each stage.
With each process suffered, the original commodity experiences change.
But it is only when the change or a series of changes take the commodity to the point where commercially it can no longer be regarded as the original commodity but instead is recognised as a new and distinct commodity that it can be said that a new commodity, distinct from the original. has come into being.
Sales Tax Board vs PIO Food Packers ; applied. 1.3 The shrimps, prawns and lobsters purchased by the appellants did not lose their original character and identity when they were subjected to processing for the purpose of export.
so far as commercial parlance or popular usage is concerned, they remained the same goods.
369 The dealer and the consumer regarded both as shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
The only difference is that processed shrimps, prawns and lobsters are ready for the table while raw shrimps, prawns and lobsters are not but still both are in commercial parlance, shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
The fact that they undergo a certain degree of processing or frozen for the purpose of preservation and transfer to other places including far off countries in the world makes no difference in character or identity as the original shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
Hence, the purchases of raw shrimps, prawns and lobsters by the appellants must be held to be purchases in the course of export and hence exempt from liability to tax under the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 as amended.
[377A B] East Taxes Motor Freight Lines vs Frozen Food Express (100) L.Ed. 917 quoted with approval.
1.4 Entry 13a of the Third Schedule to the Karnataka Act also makes it clear that even processed or frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters are known commercially and in the trade as shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
When the State Legislature excluded processed or frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters from the ambit and coverage of Entry 13a, its object obviously was that the last purchases of processed or frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters in the State should not be exigible to State Sales Tax under Entry 13a.
The State Legislature was not at all concerned with the question as to whether processed or frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters are commercially the same commodity as raw shrimps, prawns and lobsters or are a different commodity.
Merely because the State Legislature made a distinction between the two for the purpose of determining exigibility to State Sales Tax, it cannot be said that in commercial parlance or according to popular sense, processed or frozen shrimps, prawns and lobsters are recognised as different commodity distinct from raw shrimps, prawns and lobsters.
Further the question whether raw shrimps, prawns and lobsters after suffering processing retain their original character or identity or become a new commodity has to be determined not on the basis of a distinction made by the State Legislature for the purpose of exigibility to State Sales Tax because even where the commodity is the same in the eyes of the persons dealing in it the State Legislature may make a classification for determining liability to sales tax.
