During the pendency of the appeal by the State against an arbitrator 's award made on July 29, 1955 enhancing the original amount of compensation the Government deposited the extra amount, which the assessee was permitted to withdraw on May 9, 1956 on furnishing security.
During the assessment proceedings for the relevant assessment year the Income tax Officer brought that amount to tax as the assessee 's business income.
The Appellate Tribunal, however, accepted the assessee 's contention that the amount could not be said to have accrued to the assessee as its income during the relevant previous year, and therefore, was not liable to tax in the particular assessment year.
The High Court answered the question referred in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
Dismissing the appeal of the Revenue, this Court, ^ HELD: It is only on the final determination of the amount of compensation that the right to such income in the nature of compensation arises or accrues and till then there is no liability in praesenti in respect of the additional amount of compensation claimed by the owner of the land.
[396G] There is a clear distinction between cases where the right to receive payment is in dispute and it is not a question of merely quantifying the amount to be received, and cases where the right to receive payment is admitted and the quantification only of the amount payable is left to be determined in accordance with settled or accepted principles.
[396H;397A B] 391 In the instant case, although the award was made by the arbitrator on July 29, 1955 enhancing the amount of compensation payable to the assessee, the entire amount was in dispute in the appeal filed by the Goverment.
There was no absolute right to receive the amount at that stage, for if the appeal had been allowed in its entirety the right to payment of the enhanced compensation would have fallen altogether.
The sum, therefore, could not be said to have accrued or arisen during the relevant assessment year.
[393G; 394A B] E.D. Sassoon & Company Ltd. and others vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay City, , Commissioner of Incometax vs Jai Parkash Om Parkash Co. Ltd., , Pope The King Match Factory vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Khan Bahadur Ahmed Alladin & Sons vs Commissioner of Income tax, , Topandas Kundanmal vs Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat, , Harish Chandra Raj Singh vs The Deputy Land Acquisition Officer & Anr., [1962] 1 SCR 676 and Additional Commissioner of Income tax, Gujarat, vs New Jehangir Vakil Mills Co. Ltd., , referred to.
Kedarnath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax (Central), Calcutta, , distinguished.
