The deceased was the Karta of a Hindu undivided family.
He had two sons.
He gave his first son in adoption to his divided paternal uncle.
He was joint with his second son throughout his life.
He took out a personal accident insurance policy with the Insurance Company and effected a nomination in favour of his first son.
During the currency of the policy, the deceased died following the crash of the airliner in which he had travelled, and the Insurance Company paid the nominee a sum of Rs.2 lakhs, the benefit stipulated under the terms of the policy.
At the time of his death, the deceased had other properties and interests.
one was his interest as an undivided copartner in his joint family which consisted of himself and his second son.
In the assessment proceedings under the , the accountable persons urged before the Deputy Controller of Estate Duty: (i) that the amount of Rs.2 lakhs could not be aggregated with the rest of the properties, but must be brought to charge independently as a separate estate in itself, because the deceased had no interest at all in the insurance money, and (ii) that the adoption in 1931 was on the basis that notwithstanding adoption into another family, the adoptee must continue to retain his interest in the properties belonging to the family of his birth and, therefore, he was entitled, as on the date of the de 316 ceased 's death, to an equal interest in the deceased 's family properties, so that the quantum of the deceased 's coparcenary interest was not one half but only one third of the total value of the family properties.
A "Muri" (deed of adoption) that was executed was produced in this regard.
The Deputy Controller rejected these contentions and held: (i) that the personal accident insurance money of Rs.2 lakhs paid by the Insurance Company should be charged to estate duty and it had to be aggregated with the rest of the properties passing on the deceased 's death; (ii) that the insurance money of Rs.2 lakhs was property which the deceased was competent to dispose of by will; (iii) that the deceased did have an interest in the insurance money; (iv) that the deceased 's interest in the coparcenary property, which had to be included in the dutiable estate, extended to one half share of the joint properties on the basis that the deceased and his second son were alone entitled as coparceners to the said properties; (v) that the document produced in support of the plea of adoption was not genuine and even otherwise it had no legal effect on the continued rights of the adopted son in the family of his birth subsequent to his adoption.
He, therefore, included in the dutiable estate, one half of the joint family properties as being the measure of the deceased 's coparcenary interest.
The accountable persons appealed against the above assessment to the Central Board of Revenue.
The Board held: (i) that the insurance money of Rs.2 lakhs was chargeable to estate duty under section 6; (ii) that the deceased had interest in the insurance money; (iii) that the deceased did have the power of disposition over the insurance money both by the exercise of power of nomination under the policy and also independently by the exercise of any testamentary power; (iv) that the Hindu law of adoption makes the adopted son lose his property interests in the family of his birth and that the "dwyamanushyana" form of adoption had become obsolete in Madras, and no such custom was prevailing in the Nattukottai Chettiar community, under which the adopted son never loses his property rights in the family of his birth and, therefore, upheld the assessment of one half of the value of the whole of the joint family property as the measure of the deceased 's dutiable interest.
On reference, the High Court held that as the deceased was competent to dispose of the monies payable under the accident policy, the sum of Rs.2 lakhs was includible in the principal value of the estate but the same was not liable to be aggregated with the other properties and 317 had to be assessed as an estate by itself and that the type of adoption pleaded by the accountable person was recognised by the custom of the Nattukottai Chettiar community, the terms of the 'muri ' formed part of the adoption and the adoption could not be considered de hors the agreement and hence the deceased had only one third share in the joint family properties at the time of his death.
R In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the accountable persons it was contended: (i) that it was a condition precedent for the attraction of the duty that (a) the estate holder must have had possessed or enjoyed a property or an interest in property; (b) the interest in a property might be either vested or contingent; (c) but that interest should be with regard to either an immovable property or a movable property which was capable of being ascertained during the lifetime or at the time of the death of the estate holder; (d) a contingent interest could fall within the purview of the Act only if the interest of a tangible nature and was capable of being ascertained (ii) that there had to be a passing of property or interest as contemplated by section 2(16).
There has also to be a change in the beneficial possession and enjoyment of property of the interest in that property; (iii) that an accident insurance policy could not be construed as a movable property unlike a life insurance policy or an annuity since a person who possessed it could not also be said to have a contingent interest because there was every possibility of the accident policy getting extinguished or rendered worthless during his lifetime; (iv) that in the case of a life insurance policy, there is always a tangible continuing interest only that the value of that interest might be subjected to a change at the time of passing of the property; (v) that it was not necessary that during the lifetime of the deceased the property in question should have 'attained ' the full value e.g. 'Annuity '.
Only a future interest that crystalised after the death of the estate holder; (vi) that since the benefit in accident policy could only accrue after the death of the estate holder, it became property for the first time after the demise of the estate holder.
Allowing the appeal by the accountable persons and dismissing the appeal of the Revenue, the Court, G ^ HELD: 1.1.
Under the personal accident insurance policy in question the insurance money became property only on happening of a specified contingency.
That property arose on the death of the deceased during the subsistence of the accident policy.
The property is the sum of Rs.2 lakhs which became receivable by the nominee or the legal rep 318 resentative of the deceased because of the death of the deceased in the air accident during the subsistence of the policy.
That right to the sum arose because (a) the deceased died; (b) in air accident; (c) during the subsistence of the policy.
The property came into being on that contingency after death.
No property can, therefore, be deemed to pass on the R death of the deceased.
[342D F] 1.2 During the lifetime of the deceased, an interest was vested totally and irretrievably in the hands of the beneficiary or the legatee or the nominee.
The death did not cause property to change hands.
The fact that a person can nominate a beneficiary will not tantamount to a disposition of the property.
[342F G] 1.3 Whether a particular custom prevails in a particular community or not is a matter of evidence.
[343C] 2.1 Section 5 of the provides that there shall be levied and paid upon the principal value ascertained in the manner provided of all properties which passes on the death of a person.
Three factors are important: (1) there must be passing (2) of such property and (3) such passing on must be on the death of a person.
[326F] 2.2 Section 3(1)(a), (b) & (c) provides for certain situations in which a person is deemed competent to dispose of property.
Section 6 deals with property within disposing capacity and provides that property which the deceased was at the time of his death competent to dispose of shall be deemed to pass on his death.
[327A B] 3.1 It was a condition precedent for the application of the Act that the estate holder must have possessed or enjoyed the property or interest in property, the interest in property might be either vested or contingent but interest should be that with regard to which either immovable property or movable which was capable of being ascertained during the lifetime or at the time of the death of the estate holder.
The property vested or contingent must be one which was capable of being ascertained.
Even if these tests were satisfied then there has to be a passing of that property or interest as contemplated under section 2(16) of the Act.
Even if a person might have power to dispose of a property or interest in property, he cannot or his estate cannot be brought within the purview of the Act solely because of that factor.
In order for an estate to be liable to estate duty, the power of disposition must be with regard to a property capable of being ascertainable during the lifetime 319 of the deceased or at the time of his death.
There had to be a change in A the beneficial possession and enjoyment of the property or the interest in that property.
In other words, the property or interest which is liable to estate duty has to pass through the estate of the deceased.
[340B E] 3.2 Though the deceased might have a right of disposition as and when the property would be available in case the contingency happens, namely, the death of the deceased in an accident, but that right is different from the right to the money accruing or arising because of the death due to accident.
[340E F] 3.3 An accident insurance policy cannot be construed as a movable property unlike a life insurance policy or an annuity because as laid down in section 2(15) of the Act it is not only necessary for the person to have property or interest in property but that interest must be in regard to a movable property and his interest should also be capable of being ascertainable during his lifetime or at the time of his death in that f movable property.
Secondly, an accident insurance policy could not be construed as a property or an interest in property since a person who possessed it cannot also be said to have a contingent interest because there was every possibility of the accident policy getting extinguished or rendered worthless during his lifetime; on the other hand, in the case of a life insurance policy, there was always a tangible continuing interest only that the value of that interest might be subjected to change at the time of passing of the property.
[340H; 341A C] 3.4 A contingent interest which did not get crystalised during the lifetime of the deceased but which interest would, with certainty, accrue after the demise of the estate holder will be caught by section 6 of the Act.
The accident policy could only accrue after the death of the estate holder.
It became property for the first time after the demise of the estate holder.
There was no element of property during the lifetime of the estate holder.
[341C D] 3.5 The interest in an accident insurance policy did not pass through the estate of the deceased as in the case of a life insurance policy or annuity and in the instant case, the interest directly went to the beneficiaries in the case of death by accident of the estate holder.
[341E] 3.6 In the instant case, the property is really born on the death of the deceased in an accident.
The sum of Rs.2 lakhs was non existent before the death.
There might have been some right of disposition in 320 respect of the property which might accrue on the death of the deceased.
That right is different from the right to the movable property of Rs.2 lakhs that is taking place.
[340F G] Attorney General vs Quixley, 1929 All England Reports Reprint 636 and Controller of Estate Duty vs A.T. Sohani, New Delhi, , distinguished.
Controller of Estate Duty vs Kasturi Lal Jain, and Controller of Estate Duty, Patiala vs Smt.
Motia Rani Malhotra, I.T.R. 42, approved.
Bharatkumar Manilal Dalal vs Controller of Estate Duty, Gujarat, , over ruled.
Westminster Bank Ltd. vs Inland Revenue Commissioners = 16 I.T.R. (ED) 3, Smit.
Amy F. Anti vs Assistant Controller of Estate Duty, Bombay , P. Indrasena Reddy & Pingle Madhusudhan Reddy vs Controller of Estate Duty, , Shri H. Anraj etc.
vs Government of Tamil Nadu etc. , Smt.
Sarabati Devi & Anr.
vs Smt.
Usha Devi, 1984(1) SCR 992 and Public Trustee vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, [1960] A.C.398, referred to.
