The assessee Company, carrying on business of selling timber in India and abroad, entered into contracts in the nature of forest leases with the Government of Burma, under which it was authorised to fell teak trees, convert them into logs, and remove them after payment of royalty.
These leases, which were made first in the year 1862, had been continuously renewed from time to time.
Clause 27 of the agreement authorised the assessee company even after the expiry of the lease period of 15 years to remove the logs in respect whereof extraction had been completed, upon payment of royalty during the next three years.
At the relevant time the assessee company was the owner of fifteen such forest leases.
The last of these leases commenced on Ist January 1926 and 31st December, 1940 was the due date of expiry.
However, before the expiry of the period, the Second World War started and the Government of Burma extended them until such time as it became possible to resume forest operations.
After formation of the Union of Burma, the ownership of the forest leases of the assessee company was taken over by the Government of Burma in 1948 49; a third of the total teak area on June 1, 1948 and the rest on or about June 10, 1949.
In terms of an agreement dated 10th June, 1949 between the parties the assessee made over to the Burmese Government its residuary rights under the forest leases together with the non duty paid logs, wherever found, and also all the assets viz. buildings, dwelling houses, etc.
pertaining to the forest leases and received 28,847 tons of teak logs in substitution of non duty paid logs, 2,946 tons against depreciable assets and stores and 12,067 tons against livestock.
The logs so received by the assessee com 270 pany were sold off by it from time to time in the accounting years 1949, 1950, 1951 and 1952.
The Income tax Officer sought to bring these sale proceeds to tax by allocating them amongst the various assessment years.
The questions that arose were: (i) whether the realisation in respect of substituted logs was exempt from tax as being a receipt of capital nature, and (ii) whether the sale proceeds in respect of logs received in lieu of depreciable assets, stores and livestock were liable to tax under the Act or were altogether free from liability.
The Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal held against the assessee.
The High Court, however, answered the questions in favour of the assessee.
In these appeals by certificate under section 66A(2) of the Income tax Act, 1922 it was contended for the Revenue that the contracts entered into by the assessee company for obtaining its stock in trade in timber were trading contracts, that under cl. 27 of the agreements the assessee had no interest in land as such, it had only a right to collect and take away logs, its stock in trade, and it could not fell any fresh trees, that 28,847 tons of logs received by the assessee under the agreement were in substitution of the logs that it had already cut and had not been able to remove from the forests, merely as a recompense for its rights in the stock in trade, and that the excess realisation in respect of logs received against depreciable assets, stores and livestock were profits and liable to tax under section 10(2)(vii) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
For the assessee respondent it was contended that the forest leases constituted the income producing capital assets of the company in which it had invested large funds in building dams, canals, roads, railways, buildings etc., that the forest leases were not ordinary commercial contracts made in the course of carrying on their trade or for the disposal of their products, these related to the whole structure of the assessee 's profit making apparatus, that the consideration for the logs received was the surrender of the residuary rights under the forest leases and acquisition of assets of the business under the take over agreement, that the assessee was prevented from carrying on business upon the nationalisation of forest resources and acquisition of residuary rights and assets pertaining to the forest leases.
It was further submitted that the compensation paid to the assessee was the sterilisation of the company 's business and thus a capital receipt, not subject to tax.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, 271 ^ HELD: 1.1.
The forest leases constituted capital assets of the assessee.
The payments made for cancellation or sterilization of the rights under these leases were, therefore, capital receipts and not liable to tax.
[290E] 1.2.
Whether in a particular case payments were capital receipts or not depends upon the facts and circumstances of the case.
The basic principles are: if there was any capital asset and if there was any payment made for acuisition of that capital asset, such payment would amount to a capital payment in the hands of the payee.
Secondly, if any payment was made for sterilization of the very source of profit making apparatus of the assessee, or a capital asset, then that would also amount to a capital receipt in the hands of the recipient.
If on the other hand, the leases were merely stock in trade and payments were made for taking over the stock in trade then no question of capital receipt comes.
The sum would represent payments of revenue nature or trading receipts.
Compensation received for immobilisation, sterilization, destruction or loss, total or partial, of a capital asset would, therefore, be capital receipt.
If a sum represented profit in a new form then that would be income but where the agreement related to the structure of assessee 's profit making apparatus and affected the conduct of business, the sums received for cancellation or variation of such agreement would be capital receipt.
[286H; 287A D] In the instant case, the forest leases affected the very structure of the operation of the assessee.
The compensation received for the cancellation of assessee Company 's activities could not be regarded as an income receipt, nor the legal character of the payment misjudged by the magnitude of the payment.
[289A; 290C D] Glenboig Union Fireclay Co. Ltd. vs The Commissioner of Inland Revenue, 12 Tax Cases 427; Senairam Doongarmall vs Commissioner of Income tax, Assam, at 406; Commissioner of Income tax, U.P. vs Gangadhar Baijnath, ; Commissioner of Income tax, Poona vs Manna Ramji and Co., ; Van Den Berghs Ltd. vs Clark (H.M. Inspector of Taxes), case): British Insulated & Helsby Cables Ltd. vs Atherton, ; Hood Barrs vs Commissioners of Inland Revenue (No.2), 37 Tax Cases 188; Commissioner of Income tax, Hyderabad Deccan vs Vazir Sultan & Sons, , referred to.
For levy of a balancing charge under section 10(2)(vii) of the Income tax Act, 1922 it was absolutely necessary that the depreciable 272 assets should have been sold at a price agreed to between the parties.
The agreement under which the assessee company received logs by way of compensation in lieu of depreciable assets did not involve any transaction of sale between it and the Union of Burma.
The assessee company never paid any money by way of a price in respect of assets delivered to it by the Government.
Therefore, the sale proceeds of these logs could not be brought to tax against the assessee company under the second proviso to section 10(2)(vii) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
[29 ID F] Commissioner of Income tax vs Motors & General Stores (P) Ltd., , referred to.
The logs delivered to the assessee company in respect of the depreciable assets, stores and livestock came into possession of the assessee in consequence of the agreement against surrender of all outstanding or residuary rights of the assessee to the Government.
The arrangement was in consequence of nationalisation of forest operations.
The fact is that the assessee company did not mix up these logs with any of the stock in trade held by it in its ordinary course of business.
The sale proceeds of these logs could not, therefore, be held to have been received by the assessee company on revenue account.
Consequently, the excess realisation received over the cost incurred in getting delivery of these logs was not liable to tax under the Act.
[29 IG H; 292A C] 4.
Nothing was paid by the Government to the assessee company in connection with 1/3rd area of the forest leases taken over from the assessee company.
The assessee company had filed a suit in connection with the timber logs and stores taken over by the Government and succeeded in obtaining a decree.
The sum awarded in the decree in lieu of the rights which the assessee company had under cl. 27 of the agreement could not, therefore, be taxed.
[292F G] 5.
Normally in trade, there are two types of capital, one circulating and the other fixed.
Fixed capital is what the owner turns to profit by keeping it in his own possession, circulating capital is what he makes profit of by parting with it and letting it change hands.
What is capital assets in the hands of one person may be trading assets in the hands of the other.
The determining factor is the nature of the trade in which the asset was employed.
[287A C]
