The petitioner was initially appointed as an Assistant Teacher in a school run by the respondent society, subsequently promoted as Supervisor and thereafter was working as Principal till reversion by a Resolution of the Managing Committee of the respondent society.
The petitioner challenged the Resolution of reversion by filing a suit, which was dismissed.
The Appellate Court allowed the appeal holding that the order of reversion was illegal and bad and further held that the petitioner was entitled to have all the benefits and emoluments as Principal.
During the pendency of the second appeal, opposite party No. 1 commenced a departmental enquiry against the petitioner, under cl.
77.3 of Secondary School Code, which related to mistakes in accounting in matters pertaining to the society and not relating to the school and the Enquiry Committee recommended the termination of the petitioner 's services.
The petitioner filed an appeal to the Deputy Director of Education, who held that the order terminating service was disproportionate to the findings recorded by the Enquiry Committee and directed that the petitioner 's service should not be terminated till the decision of the suit.
This order was challenged by the management before the Director of Education.
The joint Director of Education allowed the appeal and upheld the recommendations made by the Enquiry Committee regarding the termination of service.
The writ petition filed by the petitioner challenging the impugned order was rejected by merely recording the order, 'rejected '.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed a suit, and during its pendency the 459 management again commenced an enquiry, which was completed without any compliance of the principles of natural justice, and the Enquiry Committee recommended termination of the services of the petitioner from the post of Assistant Teacher.
In appeal, the Deputy Director of Education, without giving any hearing to the petitioner sent a letter informing him that under instructions from the Director of Education, the decision of termination of service on the basis of the first enquiry held against him being upheld by the Director of Education it was not necessary to entertain his appeal against the decision of the subsequent enquiry and, therefore, the appeal was filed.
On a representation made by the petitioner, the Government forwarded the appeal to the School Tribunal, which was dismissed.
The writ petition of the petitioner was also rejected.
The petitioner appealed to this Court by way of Special Leave Petition.
Allowing the appeal, the court, ^ HELD: 1.
The Judgment and Order passed on 8.6.1984 in Writ Petition No. 4063 of 1984 is set aside, and the Court below directed to dispose of the said writ petition in accordance with law after hearing the parties and by passing a speaking order as expeditiously as possible preferably within a period of four months.
[467B C] 2.
Fair play and justice demands that justice must not only be done but must seems to have been done.
[465F G] Mahabir Prasad vs State of M.P., AIR 1970 (SC) 1302 at 1304, Madhya Pradesh Industries Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , Mahabir Jute Mills vs Shibbon Lal, ; at 2060, Siemen Engineering & Manufacturing Co. vs Union of India, AIR 1976 (SC) 785, Bachhan Singh vs State of Punjab, AIR 1980 (SC) 1355 at 1358 paras 18 & 19 and Rangnath vs Daulat Rao and Others, ; at 690 para 7, followed.
It is a cardinal principle of the rule of law which governs our policy that the Court including writ Court is required to record reasons while disposing of a writ petition.
This is imperative for the fair and 460 equitable adminstration of justice.
The recording of reasons in deciding cases or applications affecting rights of parties is a mandatory requirement to be fulfilled in consonance with the principles of natural justice.[465B D] 4.
It is no answer that for the purpose of expeditious disposal of cases a laconic order like 'dismissed ' or 'rejected ' will be made without passing a reasoned order or a speaking order.
[465D E] 5.
The order must in a nutshell record the relevant reasons which were taken into consideration by the Court in coming to its final conclusions and in disposing of the petition or the cause by making the order, thereby enabling both the parties seeking justice as well as the superior Court where an appeal lies to know the mind of the Court as well as the reasons for its finding on questions of law and facts in deciding the said petition or cause.
[465E F]
