An application by the respondent for permission to build a cinema on a site within the City of Bombay was rejected by the Commissioner of Police, Bombay.
The respondent applied for reconsideration of his application and the Commissioner, acting on the advice of the Cinema Advisory Committee, granted the application on the 16th July, 1947, though he indicated in an affidavit flied later that but for this advice he would have refused the application again.
Subse quently, under instructions from Government the Commissioner sent the following communication to the respondent: "I am directed by Government to inform you that the permission to erect a cinema at the above site granted to you under the office letter dated 16th July, 1947, is hereby canceled.
" The respondent applied to the High Court of Bombay for an order under section 45 of the Specific Relief Act directing the Commissioner of Police, Bombay, to withdraw the cancellation and to grant permission for the erection of the cinema, and the High Court directed the Commissioner of Police "to withdraw the order of cancellation passed by him." The Commissioner of Police appealed to the Supreme Court.
Held, (i) that there was nothing in the letter dated 16th July, 1947, to indicate that the decision was not that of the Commissioner himself given in the bona fide exercise of the discretion vested in him.
The sanction was not conse quently invalid merely because the Commissioner decided to accept the advice of the Cinema Advisory Committee even though without that advice he would not have granted the permission.
(ii) There was no valid cancellation of the license because (a), the order of cancellation communicated to the respondent 'was one made by the Government of Bombay and not by the Commissioner on his own authority;he acted in the matter only as a transmitting agent; (b), under the rules framed under 136 section 22 (1) (f), (1) (g) and (n) of the City of Bombay Police Act 1902 the Government of Bombay had no power to cancel of license once issued.
The only person vested with authority to grant or refuse a license for the erection of a building to be used for purposes of public amusement is the Commissioner of Police.
(iii) The relief sought by the respondent of an injunction to direct the Commissioner of Police to grant permission for the erection of a cinema could not be granted because he had already granted permission and there was no valid order of cancellation.
(iv) The other relief asking for an injunction directing the commissioner to withdraw the cancellation also could not be granted because Rule 250 vests the Commissioner with an absolute discretion in the matter.
(v) Though there was no specific provision of law compel ling the Commissioner to exercise the discretion vested in him under Rule 250, inasmuch as the enabling power vested by Rule 250 was vested in the Commissioner for the welfare of the public at large it was coupled with a duty to exercise it when the circumstances so demanded.
The Commissioner could consequently be ordered under section 45 of the Specific Relief Act to exercise his discretion and decide whether the licence should or should not be cancelled.
(vi) The words "any law" in section 45 do not mean statutory law alone but embrace all kinds of law whether referable to a statutory provision or otherwise.
Therefore the perform ance of duties under the rules can be compelled under the provi sions of section 45.
(vii) There was no other specific and adequate legal remedy open to the respondent within the meaning of section 45 for though the respondent could have ignored the so called order of cancellation , he could only have done so.
at his peril as it purported to emanate from the State Government and was served by a public officer.
The remedy of injunction was not a proper and adequate remedy in the circumstances of the present case.
(viii) The petition was not incompetent under section 46 of the Specific Relief Act as there had been a demand of justice and a denial thereof within the meaning of the section in the circumstances of the case.
(ix) Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statu tory authority cannot be construed in the light of explana tions subsequently given by the officer making the order of what he meant or of what was in his mind, or what he intend ed to do.
As such orders are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect the acting and conduct of those to whom they are addressed ' they must be construed objec tively with reference to the language used in the order itself.
137 Julius vs Lord Bishop of Oxford (5 App.
Cas, 214), Alcock, Ashdown & Co vs Chief Revenue Authority (50 I .A. 227) referred to.
