The petitioner filed the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution for release of children below the age of 16 years detained in jails within different States of the country, production of complete information of children in jails and existence of juvenile Courts, homes and schools in the country.
The petitioner also asked for a direction to the State Legal Aid Boards to appoint duty counsel to ensure availability of legal protection for children as and when they are involved in criminal cases.
The Supreme Court while directing the State Legal Aid and Advice Board in each State or any other Legal Aid organisation existing in the State concerned, to send two lawyers to each jail within the State once a week for the purpose of providing legal assistance to children below the age of 16 years who are confined in the jails, called for information from the District Judges about the children below the age of 16 years detained in various jails.
However several District Judges did not comply with the direction within the time granted.
While showing concern and surprise that a direction given by the apex Court has not been properly carried out by the District Judges who are an effective instrumentality in the hierarchy of the judicial system, the Court, 444 ^ HELD: (1) Every defaulting District Judge who had not submit ted his report shall unfailingly comply with the direction and furnish the report by August 31, 1986 through his High Court, and the Registrar of every High Court shall ensure that compliance of the present direction is made.
It is surprising that the High Courts have remained aloof and indifferent and have never endeavored to ensure submission of the reports by the District Judges within the time indicated in the order of this Court.
[447G H] (2)(I) Enough the Children 's Acts are on the statute book, in some States the Act has not been brought into force.
This piece of legislation is for the fulfilment of a constitutional obligation and is a beneficial statute.
There is hardly any justification for not enforcing the statute.
Ordinarily it is a matter for the State Government to decide as to when a particular statute should be brought into force but in the present setting, it is appropriate that without delay every State should ensure that the Act is brought into force and administered in accordance with the provisions contained therein.
[448B E] (2)(II) Such of the States where the Act exists but has not been brought into force should indicate by filing a proper affidavit as to why the Act is not being brought into force in case the Act is still not in force.
[448E] (3)(I) The safeguards which are provided in Jail Manuals prevalent in different States should be strictly complied with and the prisoners should have the full benefit of the provisions contained in the Manual.
It is also the obligation of the High Court to ensure that all persons in judicial custody within its jurisdiction are assured of acceptable living conditions.
[448F; 449A] (3)(II) Every District and Session Judge should visit the district jail at least once in two months, and in the course of his visit, he should take particular care about child prisoners, both convicts and under trials and as and when he sees any infraction in regard to the children in the prison he should draw the attention of the Administration as also of his High Court.
[448G H]
