Pursuant to section 88 of the , the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 continued as the law in force on and from Nov. 1, 1966 even in those territories which now comprise the State of Haryana.
The Punjab Act was repealed by the enactment of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act 1973 which came into effect from May 5, 1973.
Some Provisions of the Haryana Act came into force from an earlier date, among being them the definition of 'dealer ' set forth in section 2(c) of that Act which operated retrospectively with effect from Sept. 7, 1955.
The appellant, Government Medical Store Depot, Karnal, set up by the Central Government, used to purchase medical stores and hospital equipment and supplied them only to Government hospitals, Government institutions, health centres, dispensaries and primary health clinics located in northern India on a 'no profit no loss ' basis.
On August 21, 1968, the Excise and Taxation officer Karnal, after giving an opportunity to the appellant, held that the appellant was a dealer under the Punjab Act and proceeded to make assessment orders for the years 1364 65 and 1365 66, and also passed penalty orders for each year.
He also initiated assessment proceedings for the years 1966 67 to 1968 69.
The appellant 's writ petitions in the High Court challenging the aforesaid assessment proceedings were dismissed.
Allowing the appeals by the appellant, ^ HELD: l.(i) The existence or absence of a profit motive is irrelevant when identifying a 'dealer ' under the Haryana Act.
No such 451 statement of immateriality is contained in the definition of the word 'dealer ' under the Punjab Act as applied to the State of Haryana.
The definition of the word 'dealer ' in the Haryana Act has been framed only for the purpose of the provisions of that Act.
The opening words of the definition under section 2 make it clear that the expressions defined by that section are the expressions as used in the Haryana Act.
Wherever the word 'dealer ' is used in the Haryana Act, one must turn to the definition contained in section 2(c) of that Act.
Now, except for a few specified provisions, the Haryana General Sales Tax Act came into force on May 5, 1973.
Section 6, its charging provisions, commenced to operate from that date.
Section 6(1) of the Haryana Act declares that the first year of which the turnover is liable to tax under that Act is the year "Immediately preceding the commencement of this Act.
" It is obvious that section 6 does not govern the assessment years which are the subject of these appeals.
Therefore, it is immaterial as to whether the definition of the word 'dealer ' under the Haryana Act has to be read retrospectively with effect from Sept. 7, 1955.
Section 2(c) relates to the word 'dealer ' contained in the provisions of the Haryana Act, and the charging provision of the Haryana Act did not operate during the assessment years with which these appeals are concerned.
These appeals will be governed by the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, and it is section 2(d) of that Act which must be looked to for ascertaining the definition of the word 'dealer ' in that Act.
[455H; 456A D] 1(ii) The definition of the word 'dealer ' under section 2(d) of the Punjab Act does not treat the existence of the profit motive in the business as an immaterial factor and the burden is on the revenue to show that the transactions carried on by the appellant were carried on with a profit motive.
The assessment proceedings which are the subject of these appeals are therefore quashed.
Having regard to the lapse of time, it is not right to remand the cases for fresh assessment proceedings.
[457D E] 2.
Section 65 of the Haryana General Sales Tax Act repealed the Punjab General Sales Tax Act.
Section 65 contains a proviso that such repeal will not affect the previous operation of the repealed Act or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred thereunder.
The liability incurred by a dealer in respect of the years under consideration in these appeals is a liability incurred under the charging provision, section 4 of the Punjab General Sales Tax.
To ascertain who such dealer is one must read the definition of the word 'dealer ' in the Punjab General Sales Tax Act.
No reference is permissible for that purpose to the definition in the Haryana General Sales Tax Act.
No doubt the further language in the proviso to section 65 of the Haryana 452 General Sales Tax Act provides that anything done or any action taken in respect of the liability incurred under the Punjab General Tax Act will be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by or under the provisions of the Haryana Act as if that Act was in force on the date on which such thing was done or action taken.
This merely refers to the provisions enacted for the purpose of enforcing the liability and realising the tax, and does not affect the position that the charge is under section 4 of the Punjab General Sales Tax Act, and that to appreciate who the 'dealer ' mentioned therein is, one must turn to section 2(d) of the Punjab Act.
[456E H; 457A] Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Saidapet, Madras vs Enfield India Ltd. Co operative Canteen, [1968] 21 STC 317 and Government Medical Store Depot, Gauhati vs The Supdt. of Taxes.
Gauhati & Ors., ; , referred to.
