Respondents I and 2 filed a suit against the petitioners/defendants claiming damages of Rs.1000 crores from the petitioners for causing loss to movable and immovable properties of the various Gurdwaras being administered and managed by respondent No. 1 under the provisions of the Punjab Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925 during the period from June to September 84.
They also sought mandatory injunction directing the petitioners and their principal functionaries to tender unqualified apology before the Sikh Sangat for causing mental, sentimental, social and spiritual setback and also for causing deep sense of injury to the honour and self respect of Sikhs who are law abiding citizens.
Besides, an application to sue as indigent persons under order 33, Rule l and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure was filed.
It was alleged in the plaint that on 3rd June, 1984 the Martyrdom day of Shri Guru Arjun Devji, when a large number of devotees came to the Golden Temple complex at Amritsar to commemorate the said occasion the various units of the Armed Forces under the employment of the petitioners as well as Police units under the employment of petitioners and the Government of Punjab with malice launched an attack in the Golden temple complex by resort to indiscriminate and barbaric firing.
The defence of the petitioners was that it was an Act of State necessary for the security and integrity of the State and that the action taken was an exercise of sovereign power in respect of sovereign acts.
The petitioners in view of the extra ordinary situation prevailing in the State of Punjab in general and in Amritsar in particular moved the present transfer petition under section 25 of the Code of Civil Procedure, aver 473 ring that it is not possible to have a fair trial of the case in Amritsar or other parts of Punjab since the suit is an unusual one and tiled at a critical time in Punjab.
The question is whether the ends of justice requires the transfer of the suit from the State of Punjab to any other State.
Allowing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The power of the Supreme Court to transfer a suit or proceeding from one State to another State is a power which should be used with circumspection and caution but if the ends of justice so demand in an appropriate case, the Court should not hesitate to act.
One of the highest principles in the administration of law is that justice should not only to be done but should be seen to be done.
[476D E;C] 2.
In this case, in view of the nature of allegations regarding some of the respondents who have been added.
strong feelings are likely to be roused in some section of community.
In such an atmosphere to meet the ends of justice it would be desirable to have the case transferred to a calmer and quieter atmosphere.
Justice would be done in such a way.
To contend that no extra ordinary atmosphere exist in Punjab would be to contend for an unreality.
The suit is also unusual and sensitive and the time is critical.
Therefore, the Supreme Court should act by transfering the case outside the State of Punjab to meet the ends of justice.
That is an absolute imperative in this case.
[476D F] G.X. Francis & ors.
vs Banke Bihari Singh & Anr., AIR 1958 SC 309; Hazara Singh Gill vs The State of Punjab, [1964] (4) SCR l; and State of Assam vs Atul Vohra, Transfer Petition No. 21/80 referred to.
(The Court directed the case to be transferred to Delhi High Court to be tried by a learned Single Judge on the original side.) [477D]
