The Calcutta City Civil Court Act empowered the State Government to establish a civil court to be called the City Civil Court and under section 5(2) thereof the local limits and the jurisdiction of the City Civil Court was to be the city of Calcutta.
Section 5(2) as it stands now fixed the jurisdiction of the City Civil Court at Rupees one lakh and excluded the High Court 's jurisdiction up to that limit.
The appellant moved the Calcutta High Court for a declaration that the Act was ultra vires the jurisdiction of the State Legislature and contended that Parliament alone had the legislative competence to make law affecting the jurisdiction of the High Court.
The learned Single Judge and also the Division Bench negatived the appellant 's plea and held that the Act was intra vires the Constitution.
Hence the appeal by certificate.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Entries 1 and 2 of List II of the Government of India Act, 1935 (now Entry llA of List III of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution) authorised law making on subject of administration of justice, constitution and organisation of courts and jurisdiction and powers thereof excepting in regard to the Supreme Court.
The Calcutta City Civil Court Act received the Presidential assent and was therefore, competent to bring about a change in the prevailing position obtaining 548 under the Letters Patent of the Calcutta High Court.[551E G] 2.
In Narotham Das 's case, the Supreme Court took the view namely, "administration of justice" authorised making of law conferring on, or talking away from, courts, jurisdiction to entertain cases.
Inasmuch as the provisions of the Bombay City Civil Court Act, 1948 considered in Narotham Das 's case and the provisions of the Calcutta Act, are in pari materia, the High Court correctly held that the Act was intra vires the Constitution.
The decision of the Constitution Bench in Narotham Das 's case is clear and binding precedent under Article 141 of the Constitution, against the appellant 's stand.
[551E F;H] State of Bombay vs Narothamdas Jethabhai & Anr., ; , followed.
Amarendra Nath Roy Chowdhury vs Bikash Chandra Ghose & Anr., , approved.
