On 12th July, 1986 this Court issued various directions in regard to the physically and mentally retarded children as also abandoned or destitute children who are lodged in various jails in the country for 'safe custody '.
Giving further directions, HELD: 1.
The right to speedy trial is a fundamental right implicit in article 21 of the Constitution.
If an accused is not tried speedily and his case remains pending before the Magistrate or the Sessions Court for an unreasonable length of time, it is clear that his fundamental right to speedy trial would be violated unless, of course, the trial is held up on account of some interim order passed by a superior court or the accused is responsible for the delay in the trial of the case.
The consequence of violation of the fundamental right to speedy trial would be that the prosecution itself would be liable to be quashed on the ground that it is in breach of the fundamental right.
[566E G] Hussainara Khatoon & Ors.
vs Home Secretary, State of Bihar, [ , relied upon 2.
Every State Government must take necessary measures for the 563 purpose of setting up adequate number of courts, appointing requisite number of Judges and providing them the necessary facilities.
It is also necessary to set up an Institute or Academy for training of judicial officers so that their efficiency may be improved and they may be able to regulate and control the flow of cases in their respective courts.
[567B C] 3.
So far as a child accused of an offence punishable with imprisonment of not more than 7 years is concerned, a period of 3 months from the date of filing of the complaint or lodging of the First Information Report is the maximum time permissible for investigation and a period of 6 months from the filing of the charge sheet as a reasonable period within which the trial of the child must be completed.
If that is not done, the prosecution against the child would be liable to be quashed.
Every State Government shall give effect to this principle or norm in so far as any future cases are concerned.
[567E F] 4.
So far as concerns pending cases relating to offences punishable with imprisonment of not more than 7 years, it is directed that every State Government shall complete the investigation within a period of 3 months from today if the investigation has not already resulted in filing of chargesheet and if a chargesheet has been filed, the trial shall be completed within a period of 6 months from today and if it is not, the prosecution shall be quashed.
[567F G] 5.
The State Governments must set up necessary remand homes and observation homes where children accused of an offence can be lodged pending investigation and trial.
On no account should the children be kept in jail and if a State Government has not got sufficient accommodation in its remand homes or observation homes, the children should be released on bail instead of being subjected to incarceration in jail.
[565D E] 6.
Instead of each State having its own Children 's Act different in procedure and content from the Children 's Act in other States, the Central Government should initiate Parliamentary Legislation on the subject, so that there is complete uniformity in regard to the various provisions relating to children in the entire territory of the country.
The Children 's Act which may be enacted by Parliament should contain not only provisions for investigation and trial of offences against children below the age of 16 years but should also contain mandatory provisions for ensuring social, economic and psychological rehabilitation of the children who are either accused of offences or are abandoned or destitute or lost.
[568A G] 564
