For direct recruitment to the Rajasthan Administrative Service and allied services of the Government of Rajasthan by a competitive examination to be held in 1983, the Rajasthan Public Service Commission prescribed that the candidate should have attained the age of 21 years on January 1, 1984 and should not have attained the age of 28 years i.e. On the Ist day of January next following the last date fixed for receipt of application.
F The appellant was allowed to appear in the written examination, but later on he was intimated by the Commission that his candidature was rejected on the ground that he had attained the age of 28 years on January 1, 1984 and was therefore ineligible for consideration.
The writ petition filed by the appellant under article 226 was allowed by a Single Judge holding that if the date of birth of the appellant was January 2, 1956 he would complete the age of 28 years only at the end of the day of January 1, 1984 and therefore he could not be said to have attained the age of 28 years on that date.
666 on appeal by the respondents, a Division Bench reversed the Judgment of the Single Judge.
In appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellant it was con tended: (i) that the Division Bench erronously introduced the legal concept of the age of majority as laid down in section 4 of the for the purpose of interpreting r. 11 B of the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services (Direct Recruitment by Competitive Examination) Rules 1962 and (ii) that as commonly understood, a person attains a particular age after he had completed a given number of years and there is no reason why the words of r. 11 B "must have attained the age of 21 years and must not have attained the age of 28 years" should not be understood in the ordinary sense.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
In the absence of any express provision, while calculating a person 's age, the day of his birth must be counted as a whole day and he attains the specified age on the day preceding, the anniversary of his birthday.
One of the well accepted rules for computation of time is that fractions of a day will be omitted in computing a period of time in years or months in the sense that a fraction of a day will be treated as a full day.
A legal day commences at 12 O 'clock midnight and continues until the same hour the following night.
This principle is in conformity with section 4 of the Indian Majority Act 1875.[671F G] G. Vatsala Rani, P. M. C. Kini v .
Selection Committee for Admission to Medical Colleges, Bangalore Medical College, Bangalore 2, AIR , Rex
Scoffin, LR [1930] l KB 741 & Shurey, Savory F. vs Shurey, I,R , approved.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, 3rd edn.
37, para 178 at 100, relied upon.
The object and intent in making r. llB of the Rajasthan State & Subordinate Services (Direct Recruitment by Competitive Examination) Rules, 1962 was to prescribe the age limits upon which the eligibility of a candidate for direct recruitment to the Rajasthan Admmistrative Service and other allied services is governed.
The expression "must not have attained the age of 28 years on the first day of January next following the last day fixed for receipt of application" in r. llB has to be interpreted by applying the aforesaid principle and not on the basis 667 adopted by UPSC while interpreting r. 4 of the Indian Administrative A Services (Appointment by Competitive Examination) Regulations, 1955 framed by the Central Government in pursuance or r. 7 of the IAS (Recruitment) Rules 1954.
[670A B] 3.
The last day fixed for receipt of application in this case, was January 1, 1983.
First day of January next following that day would be January 1, 1984.
the appellant having been born on January 2, 1956, he had not attained the age of 28 years but also completed the same at 12 o 'clock on the midnight of January 1, 1984.
On the next day i.e. On January 2, 1984, the appellant would be one day more than 28 years.
The Division Bench of the High Court was, therefore, right in holding that the appellant was disqualified for direct recruitment of the Rajasthan Administrative Service in the examination held by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission in 1983.
[673C D] The Court emphasised the need for a provision like the proviso to r. 4 of the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Competitive Examination) Regulations 1955 conferring the power of relaxation on the State Government under certain conditions without which a deserving candidate would be rendered ineligible for appointment and advised the Government to consider the question of relaxing the upper age limit in the case of the appellant in order to mitigate the hardship, if otherwise permissible, because he exceeded the upper age limit just by one day.
[673E F]
