The petitioner, Minerva Mills Ltd. a textile undertaking had been running at a loss and had to be closed down.
The Central Government ordered an investigation into the affairs of the petitioner company under section 15 of the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act 1931.
Thereafter, the State Government of Mysore sanctioned the guarantee to enable the petitioner company to raise a loan of Rs.20 lacs from the State Bank of India.
After the investigation was made, the Central Government passed an order under section 18A of the IDR Act taking over the management of the undertaking of the Company on the ground that the Central Government was of opinion that the undertaking was being managed in a manner highly detrimental to public interest.
During the pendency of the management of the undertaking by the National Textile Corporation, the Sick Textile Undertakings ordinance of 1974 was promulgated, and it was replaced later on by the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act 1974.
719 The petitioners including the company unsuccessfully challenged before the High Court under article 227, the order dated October 18, 1371, passed by the Central Government under section 18A of the Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act as also the Nationalisation Act.
Their appeals were also summarily dismissed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
R The petitioner.
Minerva Mills Ltd. and some of its creditors challenged before the Supreme Court under article 32 of the Constitution, the legality of the aforesaid order as also the constitutional validity of Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act 1974.
Dismissing the writ petitions, ^ HELD: 1.1 The investigation that was made under section 15 of the Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act and the consequent findings of the Government on the basis of which the management of the undertaking of the Company was taken over under section 18A of the Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act, was that the affairs of the under taking of the Company were being managed in a manner highly detrimental to public interest.
The undertaking had been running at a loss and had to be closed down on January 2, 1970.
This miserable condition of the undertaking might be due to the mismanagement of its affairs.
[723E F] 1.2 The Government might have thought of assisting the Company to raise a loan of Rs.20 lacs, but that fact or the fact that such proposal for assistance was made for special reasons as provided in the second proviso to section 4 of the Mysore State Aid to Industries Act, 1953 is not, sufficient to uphold the contention of the petitioners that there was no basis or foundation for the order under section 18A. [723F G] 1.3 The legislature had decided that the undertaking of the Company was a sick textile undertaking by including the same in the First Schedule to the Nationalisation Act.
There can be no doubt that the legislative judgment should be looked upon with respect and it requires very strong grounds to set it at naught.
In the instant case, there is no existence of any such ground.
[724B C] 2.
The petitioner company was given a hearing by the Investigation Committee and, therefore, it got ample opportunities to make representations against the proposed take over.
It is difficult to lay down that non supply of a copy of the report of investigation under section 15 of the 720 Industrial (Development and Regulation) Act will always occasion a failure of natural justice.
Whether in a particular case there has been failure of natural justice or not will depend on the facts and circumstances of that case.
[725A B] In the instant case also, the petitioners were not in the least prejudiced for the non supply to them of a copy of the report.
Moreover, they never asked for a copy of the report.
They did not also move against the order under section 18A before the undertaking was nationalised under the Nationalisation Act.
It shows that the petitioners were not aggrieved by the said order under section 18A for they could not be as they had not the required minimum resources for running the mill.
[725F H] 3.1 The Nationalisation Act has been enacted to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clause (b) of article 39 of the Constitution.
Indeed a declaration in that regard has been made in section 39 of the Nationalisation Act.
[728C D] 3.2 The Nationalisation Act gives effect to the policy of the State towards securing the ownership and control of the material resources of the community, which are so distributed as best to subserve the common good.
In the circumstances, as the Nationalisation Act comes under the protective umbrella of Article 31C, the petitioners are not entitled to challenge the constitutional validity thereof on the ground of violation of the provisions of articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution.
[728G H] 4.
Only constitutional amendments made on or after April 24, 1973 by which Acts or Regulations were included in the Ninth Schedule can be challenged on the ground that they damage the basic or essential features of the Constitution or its basic structure.
But if any of such Acts and Regulations is saved by article 31A or by article 31C as it stood prior to the amendment of the Constitution by the Forty second Amendment, such challenge on the ground that the constitutional amendment damages or destroy a basic or essential feature of the Constitution or its basic structure as reflected in article 14 or article 19, will become otiose.
[728A C] 5.
Under section 4(1) of the Nationalisation Act, the sick textile under taking shall be deemed to include all properties, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, etc., in the owner ship, possession, power or control of the owner of the sick textile under taking.
The question whether the vacant land has been in use, is not, relevant for the purpose of section 4(1).
In view of the said provision, it is 721 difficult to accept the contention of the petitioners that the vacant land is not a part of the undertaking.
[732 D E] In the instant case, the whole of the said 17.52 acres of land including 4.37 acres thereof.
is situate within the mill compound.
The Court cannot accept the contention of the petitioners that as the land is Lying vacant since the take over it does not form part of the undertaking.
[732 C D]
