Shrimad Vallabhacharyaji was the founder of Pushti Margi Sampradaya.
Goswami Madhavraiji was a direct lineal descendant of the founder.
He came over to Junagad in Saurashtra from Amreli district of Gujarat in the year 1776 with his own deity on the invitation of the Muslim Nawab.
Impressed by his attainments the Nawab made grants of property both for residence as also cultivation.
On the property gifted for residential purpose Madhavraiji raised a Haveli.
It housed the deity in the ground floor and in the first floor thereof Goswami Madhavraiji and after him his descendants and members of their families have been living generation after generation.
The Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 was extended to Saurashtra area of Gujarat State in the year 1961.
The appellant.
the widow of Maharajshree Purshottamlalji, a lineal descendant of the founder, who had been in charge of the management of the Haveli and its assets, both moveable and immoveable, ever since the demise of her husband in 1955, made an application to the Assistant Charity Commissioner under section 18 of the Act in October, 1961 contending that the Haveli and its properties did not constitute a public trust.
The Assistant Charity Commissioner and the Charity Commissioner found that the institution was 706 a public trust and that all the forty items of property belonged to the trust.
In appeal by the appellant, the High Court held that (i) the Haveli Mandir was a public trust within the meaning of section 2(13) read with section 2(17) of the Act; (ii) the moveable and immoveable properties which were thirty eight in number belonged to the trust; (iii) the appellant was the trustee of the temple and its properties, and the succession to the trusteeship was by inheritance without the sanction of the State, and (iv) Guruseva and Charanseva Bhets offered by the devotees of Vallabha cult formed part of the public trust, on the view that once Brahma Sambadha is established, the Guru as also every devotee in the cult loses his individuality and his very existence (apart from the physical) merges with the Lord.
In the appeal to this Court intervention by devotees was permitted mainly on the ground that the High Court had dealt with and relied upon religious custom and practice of the Pushti Margi cult and the treatment given by the High Court was wrong.
It was contended for the appellants that the bhets to the Guru were offerings to him as distinct from offerings to the deity and in consideration of the feature that the Vallabha Sampradayin Guru enjoyed a special position, these offerings must be held to be his and not that of the deity.
Allowing the appeal in part and dismissing the connected appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Pushti Margi Vaishnavas following the Vallabha Cult are Hindus and the Hindu Law of religious endowments is applicable to p their havelies.
lt was, therefore, not necessary in the instant case, to scan their religious philosophy to decide the issue.
[711E] 2.
The High Court was right in holding that the Haveli and the listed thirty eight items of property constituted a public trust under the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950 and that succession to trusteeship was by inheritance without sanction of the State.
In reaching that conclusion the Court has scrutinised the evidence, both documentary and oral, keeping the proper perspective in view, appropriately utilised the five way test formulated by this Court and the other features relevant in determining the character of a Hindu temple, and taken note of the position that Goswami Maharaj enjoyed among the devotees as their spiritual leader.
In a dispute of this type, a single or a few features 707 would not provide the conclusive basis for the decision to be arrived at.
A The entire material has to be scanned and the ultimate decision has to rest on the sum total view.
[715A B; 714F G] Tilkayat Shri Govindlalji Maharaj vs The State of Rajasthan and others, 119641 1 SCR 561; Goswami Shri Mahalaxmi Vahuji vs Rannchhoddas Kalidas and Ors., ; ; and Tagore Law Lectures on Hindu Law of Religious and Charitable Trusts by Dr. B. K. Mukherjea, refereed to.
3.1 The proceeds of the Guruseva and Pradeshseva do not constitute part of the public trust.
[716G] 3.2 Vallabha and his descendants enjoyed a special position in the community of devotees.
They have been leading collective and congregational prayers within the Haveli and acting as the religious preceptor of the devotees.
It is customary for a devotee to make offerings at the feet of the Maharaj when he meets him in the Haveli or during his visits to areas coming within the territorial limits of the Haveli.
[715D E] 3.3 There is a distinction between an offering made before the deity or put into the Golak and that put at the feet of the Guru.
In the earlier case, it is clearly a gift to the deity while in the latter, in the absence of anything more, it would be one to the Guru, for what is laid at the feet of the Guru is intended to be an offering to him and not to the deity.
[716E] 3.4 The doctrine of Brahma Sambadha is not applicable to the instant case, for nothing has been shown from the record to justify the conclusion that the Guru is only a conduit pipe between the devotee at one end and the Lord on the other so as to lead to an inference that whatever is offered at the feet of the Guru belongs to the Lord.
The preceptor has his position and if he is not a conduit pipe in the sense stated, what is laid at his feet out of reverance by the devotee must belong to him.
In view thereof the finding of the High Court on this issue cannot, therefore .
be sustained .
[7l6B C] Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt. ; , referred to.
