The Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act was enacted in 1973.
Section 19 designates the authorities of the University among whom are the Executive Council, the Academic Council & the Admissions Committee.
By section 28(3) the Admissions Committee is required to lay down the principles or norms governing the policy of admissions to various courses of studies in the University.
Section 13(6) of the Act enables the Vice Chancellor to take such action as he may deem fit if any matter is of an urgent nature requiring immediate action and the same cannot easily be dealt with by an officer or authority or other Body of the University empowered by or under the Act to deal with it.
For some time after the enactment of the Uttar Pradesh State Universities Act most of the University Bodies were not constituted though an Administrative Committee had been appointed by the Government.
As there was no Executive Council and since it was not possible to call a meeting of the Administrative Committee, the Vice Chancellor in the year 1973 proceeded to act under section 13(6) of the Act to constitute an Admissions Committee consisting of the Vice Chancellor, all the Heads of the Departments, the Dean, students welfare, the University Proctor and the Registrar.
The Admissions Committee at its meeting held on May 6, 1986 resolved to introduce an Entrance Test for admission to the Degree courses in Arts, Science and Commerce and adopted a detailed scheme for that purpose.
Pursyant to the Resolution of the Admissions Committee, an entrance test was held and the results were tabulated but not yet published.
Meanwhile the respondents students filed a writ petition 688 in the High Court challenging the introduction of the Entrance Test on the ground that the aforesaid Resolution had no authority in law.
l he High Court upheld the contention of the respondents and quashed the Resolution.
Allowing the appeal by the appellant University, ^ HELD: 1.1 The resolution of the Admissions Committee dated May 6, 1986 is not tainted by any illegality.
The resolution was that of the Admissions Committee, whether properly constituted or not, and not that of the Vice Chancellor and there was, therefore, no question of the Vice Chancellor taking recourse to the provisions of section 13(6) of the Act.
Therefore, the judgment of the High Court is set aside and the University is directed to forthwith announce the names of the candidates selected for admission to the various courses.
However, it is open to the Academic Council to take such action as it may think fit in regard to the future years.
[696F G] 1.2 The very order constituting the Admissions Committee re cites that it bad become necessary for the Vice Chancellor to have re course to section 13(6) as there was no Executive Council in existence and as It was not possible to call the Administrative Committee.
Those were good enough reasons for the action of the Vice Chancellor and no one can be permitted to question the constitution of the Admissions Committee at this stage after the Committee as constituted in 1973 had been functioning for over a dozen years.
Since notice of the meeting was given to all the members and if some of them, for their own reasons refrained from attending the meeting, their failure to attend the meeting cannot invalidate the deliberations of the Committee.
[693G H;694A;F] 2.1 Section 28(4) of the Act which enables the Admissions Committee to issue directions to constituent colleges, affiliated or associated colleges in the matter of criteria or methods of admission also indicates that the principles or norms governing the policy of admission to various courses of studies in the University must necessarily include the criteria or methods of admission.
The expression "the principles or norms governing the policy of admission to various courses of studies in the Universty" in section 28(3) should not be interpreted in so narrow a fashion as to exclude the prescription of an Enterance Test.
Therefore, it empowers the Admissions Committee to provide for an enterance test for admission to the University degree courses.
[695B B] 2.2 There is no conflict between section 28 and the other sections nor 689 are there dual authorities under the Act.
Sections 45, 51 and 52 of the A Act have to be construed harmoniously so as to eliminate any conflict and without rendering any provision of the Act or any authority created by the Act, superfluous.
The scheme of the Act in regard to admissions to the degree courses of the University, therefore, appears to be like this; the Admissions Committee prescribes the principles or norms governing the policy of admission to the various courses of study.
This is subject to the superintendance of the Academic Council.
The Academic Council may exercise its powers of superintendence, among other ways, by proposing an ordinance which may have the effect of reversing or modifying the action of the Admissions Committee.
Thereafter the Executive Council may make an ordinance if it so thinks fit.
Once an ordinance is made, it will not naturally be open to any of the University bodies, including the Admissions Committee to act contrary to it.
This appears to be the scheme of the Act in so far as it relates to admissions.
It follows that the Admissions Committee has the power to prescribe an Entrance Test.
The Academic Council has the power to over rule the decision of the Admissions Committee in exercise of its power of superintendance.
The Executive Council as such has no power to over rule the decision of the Admissions Committee except by making an ordinance on a proposal made by the Academic Council.
[695D H: 696A D] 3.
There is no statutory requirement that any action taken by the Admissions Committee under section 28 is not to be effected until the Academic Council is provided with an opportunity to exercise its power of superintendance is up to the Academic Council to exercise its power of superintendanee.
If as is clauied the Vice Chancellor does not take the initiative to call a meeting of the Academic Council, the members of the Academic Council desiring to call a meeting of the Academic Council are free to take recourse to the provisions of the Act, the ordinances and the statutes to requisition a meeting.
[696E F]
