The respondents purchased certain quantity of palm kernel fatty acid on high seas basis from a firm which had imported it on the strength of an additional licence issued to it pursuant to the order of this Court dated 18th April 1985 in C.A. No. 1423 of 1981 Union of India vs Rajnikant Brothers.
The Customs authorities refused to permit clearance of the goods on the ground that they were canalised items and could not be imported even under such additional licences.
The respondents filed a petition under article 226 challenging the action of the Customs authorities.
A Single Judge of the High Court permitted the clearance of the goods, which order was affirmed by the Division Bench.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant Union of India it was contended that the direction given by the High Court was contrary to the directions given by this Court in Raj Prakash 's and Indo Afghan Chamber 's cases.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended: (1) that the holders of the additional licences would be entitled to import items permissible to export houses under the additional licence category as per para 176 of the Import Policy for 1378 73; (2) that in any event under Item 1 of Appendix 6 (import of items under open General Licence) of the Import Policy 1985 88, raw materials, components and consumables (non iron and steel items) other than those included in the Appendices 2, 3 Part A, 5 and 8 will be permissible by the actual user 772 (industrial); and (3) that the respondents were actual users (industrial) because these were used by them for their production.
Allowing the appeal of the Union of India, ^ HELD: 1.
A diamond exporter can import the items he was entitled to import under the Import Policy 1978 79 provided they are importable also under the Import Policy ruling at the time of import.
They are items which are open to import by an Export House holding an Additional Licence for sale to eligible Actual Users (Industrial).
These are items which could be directly imported, for example, the items enumerated in Part 2 of List 8 of Appendix Vl of the Import Policy 1985 88.
These are items which are not `canalised '.
[776 F H] 2.
`Canalised ' items are those items which are ordinarily open to import only through a public sector agency.
Now although generally they are importable through a public sector agency only, it is permissible for the Import Policy to provide an exception to that rule, and to declare that an importer may import a canalised item directly.
[776 H; 777 A] 3.
Paragraph 75(1) of the Import Policy 1985 88 entitles a Trading House holding an Additional Licence to directly import canalised items in Appendix V Part A to the extent laid down in that Policy.
There is nothing to prevent an Import Policy from providing in the future that an Export House holding an Additional Licence can directly import certain canalised items also.
In that event an Export House holding an Additional Licence will be entitled to import items open ordinarily to direct import (non canalised items) as well as items directly importable although on the canalised list.
It is in that sense that the Court could have intended to define the entitlement of a diamond exporter.
He would be entitled to import items "whether canalised or not", if the Import Policy prevailing at the time of import permitted him to import items falling under each category.
The Court would not know whether in the future certain canalised items could be imported directly by an Export House holding an Additional Licence.
The possibility of a policy being framed in the future enabling an Export House holding an Additional Licence to directly import items which are 'non canalised ' and also items which are 'canalised ' cannot be ruled out.
It is in this light that the Court can be said to have used the words "whether canalised or otherwise" in its order dated 18th April, 1985.
[777 B E] Raj Prakash Chemical 's case, and Indo Afghan Chamber of Commerce 's case; , , followed.
773 4.
Only such items could be imported by diamond exporters under the Additional Licences granted to them as could have been imported under the Import Policy 1978 79, the period during which the diamond exporters had applied for Export House Certificates and had been wrongfully refused, and were also importable under the Import Policy prevailing at the time of import which is the present case was the Import Policy 1985 88.
These were the items which were not specifically banned under the prevalent Import Policy.
That is the construction.
The items had to pass through two tests.
These should have been importable under the Import Policy 1978 79.
These should have been importable under the Import Policy 1985 88 in terms of the order dated 18th April, 1985.
[777 G H; 778 A B] 5.
In respect of Palm Kernel Fatty Acid which is a canalised item listed as item 9 (v) in Appendix V Part of the Import Policy 1985 88, there is no provision in that Policy which permits the import of such item by an Export House holding an Additional Licence.
[779 B C] 6.
As importation of canalised items directly by holders of additional licences are banned, it should not be construed to have been permitted by virtue of the order of this Court and the items sought to be imported do not come within List 8 of Part 2 of Appendix 6 of the Import Policy of 1985 88 against additional Licences.
The goods in question which were sought for by the respondents fall under item 9 Part of Appendix 5 which is the canalised item and such cannot be allowed to be imported against additional licence granted pursuant to the order of this Court dated 18th April, 1385.
[779 D F] 7.
The goods were purchased by the respondents only on 27th June, 1986 after they were aware of the judgment of this Court in Raj Prakash 's case as well as Indo Afghan Chambers of Commerce 's case.
No question of any restitution of rights arises.
[779 F] 8.
The acid in question comes within specific prohibition of Item 9 in Part B Appendix 5 being fatty acid and acid oil which were importable only by the State Trading Corporation of India under open General Licence on the basis of foreign exchange released by the Government in its favour.
The actual importation was not by the respondents but by somebody else.
[780 A B]
