The property of the appellants continued to remain under requisition by virtue of the several amendments made to the and the compensation payable in respect of it was required to be revised for a period of 5 years from 7.3.75 to 6.3.1980.
As there was no agreement between the parties on the question of compensation payable for the said period, the said question was referred to an arbitrator under section 8 of the Requisitioning Act to determine the compensation payable.
The arbitrator by his award fixed the compensation payable for the property at Rs.21,000 per month as against the claim of Rs.77,270 per month made by the appellants.
Aggrieved by the decision of the arbitrator the appellants filed an appeal before the High Court of Madras under s.11 of the Requisitioning Act.
The Registry of the High Court raised an objection regarding the amount of court fee paid on the memorandum of appeal.
The matter was placed before the Division Bench of the High Court and it held that the appellants were liable to pay court fee on the memorandum of appeal under section 51 of the Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act 1955 (for short, the Act) ad valorem on the amount of compensation which was in dispute in the appeal.
In appeal to this Court, the appellants contended that the amount 755 of court fee payable on a memorandum of appeal filed under section 11 of the Requisitioning Act should not be computed in accordance with section 51 of the Act as a fixed court fee was payable under the residuary provision, that is, article 3 (iii) (A) (1) (a) of Schedule II of the Act.
In support of this contention the appellants raised two points; (i) that since there is no transfer of title to the property which is requisitioned from its owner to the Government, the said transaction is not an acquisition and hence those provisions of the Requisitioning Act under which the property is requisitioned do not constitute a law providing for acquisition of property and therefore, section 51 of the Act would not be applicable because it relates only to appeals filed against an order relating to compensation under any Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of land; and (ii) that the award made by the arbitrator under section 8 of the Requisitioning Act not being an 'order ' as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, the appellants cannot be called upon to pay court fee in accordance with section 51 of the Act since section 51 refers to court fee payable on a memorandum of appeal against an 'order '.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The appeal before the High Court filed under section 11 of the Requisitioning Act falls squarely under section 51 of the Act.
Therefore, the court fee has to be paid on ad valorem basis as provided in article 1 of Schedule I to the Act.
It follows that the residuary Article, that is, article 3(iii) (A) (1) (a) of Schedule II to the Act is not attracted.
[769E F] 2(i) Section 3 of the Act states that in the Act 'unless the context otherwise requires ' the words and expressions defined in that section shall carry the meaning given to them in various clauses in that section.
It is relevant to note that in section 51 of the Act which arises for consideration the word 'order ' does not appear in isolation.
The section states that the fee payable under the Act on a memorandum of appeal against an order relating to compensation in any Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of property for public purposes shall be computed on the difference between the amount awarded and the amount claimed by the appellants.
The 'order ' referred to in section Sl of the Act need not be an 'order ' of a civil court as defined in section 2(14) of the Code of Civil Procedure but should be an 'order ' relating to compensation under any Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of property for public purposes.
[768G H; 769A C] 2(ii) There is no doubt that the award passed by the Arbitrator 756 under the Requisitioning Act is a formal expression of a decision made by a competent authority which is binding on the parties and it relates to compensation payable under an Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of property for the public purposes.
Therefore, even though the expression 'order ' simpliciter has to be understood in the sense in which that expression is defined in section 2 (14) of the Code of Civil Procedure, the word 'order ' found in section 51 of the Act bas to be read differently having regard to the words which qualify that expression in that section, namely, 'relating to compensation under any Act for the time being in force for the acquisition of properties '.
The said order need not be an order of a civil court only.
It can be of any statutory authority.
But it must determine compensation for a property acquired under a law of acquisition of property for public purpose.
In the instant case, the award made under section 8 of the Requisitioning Act satisfies these tests.
[769C E] Sahadu Gangaram Bhagade vs Spl.
Deputy Collector, Ahmedanagar & Anr., ; , relied upon.
Y. Venkanna Choudhary vs Government of India, by Military Estates officer, Madras & Anr., AIR 1976 Madras 41, Laxshminarayana Rao & Ors.
vs Revenue Divisional officer, Kakinada & Ors., A.I.R. 1968 Andhra Pradesh 348, M. Ramachandran & Ors.
vs State of Madras represented by the Collector, Coimbatore, 87 Law Weekly Madras 791, Balakrishnan Nambiyar & Ors.
vs Kanakathidathil Madhavan & Ors., & Ghouse Saheb vs Sharifa Bi & Ors., A.l.
R. 1977 Karnataka 181, approved.
Hirji Virji Jangbari vs Government of Bombay, A.I.R. 1945, Bombay 348, Kanwar Jagat Bahadur Singh vs The Punjab State, Crown 's case, A.l.
R. 1957 Punjab 32 Crown vs Chandrabhanlal and Ors., AIR. 1957 Nagpur 8 and Mangal Sen vs Union of Indian A.l.R., 1970 Delhi 44, disapproved.
3(i) The expression 'acquisition ' is not defined in the Act.
Sections 3 to 6 of the Requisitioning Act deal with the powers of the Government in respect of requisitioning of property and section 7 of that Act confers power on the Government to acquire a property which has been requisitioned.
Whenever a property is requisitioned by the competent authority it is entitled to call upon the owner or any other person who may be in possession of the property to surrender possession thereof to the Government.
Section 5 of the Requisitioning Act provides that all properties requisitioned under section 3 shall be used 757 for such purposes as may be mentioned in the notice of requisition.
Such requisitioned property may be released from requisitioning under section 6.
The title to property requisitioned under the Requisition Act continues to rest with the owner, the Government being entitled to only the possession of such property.
[761 B E] 3(ii) Not only is a right to possession a right of property, but where the subject of proprietary rights is a tangible thing, it is the most characteristic and essential of those rights.
Possession, it is said, is nine points in law.
An owner without possession has only a mere shell while the person in possession enjoys the property in many ways.
In this situation, it is difficult to say that there cannot be deprivation of property without deprivation of title also.
Deprivation of possession for an indefinite period is acquisition of property during that period though the title may continue to rest with the owner.
That is why the requisitioning law also had to satisfy article 19(1) (f) and article 31 of the Constitution when they were in the Constitution.
[764B D] 3(iii) The Supreme Court has treated both requisitioning of property and acquisition of property as meaning the acquisition of property in the large sense and there is no reason to depart from the views expressed by the two Constitution Benches of this Court in the State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose and Ors,. ; and Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs The Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. and Ors.
, ; The Minister of State for the Army vs Dalziel, ; , referred to.
