The petitioners accused were arrested by the Security Police Patrol Party in the State of Bihar while attempting to cross Indo Nepal border.
One of them was identified Simranjit Singh Mann a dismissed Police Officer who had gone underground after an order of detention under the National Security Act was passed against him.
As a result of 803 the search, currency notes and a number of documents and other articles were seized from the petitioners.
It is alleged that one of the accused also offered a bribe to the police officers.
The police registered a first information report and commenced investigation.
A chargesheet was filed on 11th December, 1985 before judicial Magistrate First Class against the five accused petitioners for offences under sections 121 A, 123, 124 A, 153A, 165 A, 505 and 120 B of the Indian Penal Code.
However, before the chargesheet was filed, the accused petitioner, Simranjit Singh Mann was served with an order of detention under the National Security Act and sent to Bhagalpur jail.
The other four accused were also detained under the National Security Act at Bhagalpur.
All the petitioners moved the Judicial Magistrate for bail in the aforesaid criminal case claiming to be released under proviso (a) of section 167(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
They were granted bail but, they could not be released because of their detention under the National Security Act.
While so, the surety for all the five accused filed a petition requesting the Magistrate to discharge him from suretyship as he did not want to continue to be the surety of the accused persons.
The Magistrate discharged the surety from suretyship and issued formal warrants of arrest under section 444(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
At this stage, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana made an order quashing the detention of Simranjit Singh Mann.
The Magistrate took cognizance of the case under sections 121A, 123, 124A, 153A, 165A and 120B of the Indian Penal Code on December 18, 1985.
Thereafter the investigating Officer filed a petition requesting expeditious trial as the case was one of special importance.
All the petitioners except Simranjit Singh Mann filed fresh bail bonds.
The said bail bonds were rejected on December 20, 1985 as the surety could not name either the accused persons or their fathers.
The accused moved another petition for recalling the order dated December 20, 1985 and accepting the same person as surety.
This petition was rejected on the ground that the earlier order could not be reviewed.
The High Court also rejected the bail applications of these accused persons.
The case was thereafter, transferred to the Special Judge (Vigilance) North Bihar, Patna.
The accused Simranjit Singh Mann moved an application before the Special Judge offering cash security and asking for bail but it was rejected on the ground that the High Court had alread rejected the application of the other four accused.
The case was later transferred to the Court of Special Judge, Bhagalpur and was 804 finally adjourned to August 8, 1986 for arguments on the question of charges to be framed and on the question of jurisdiction.
At this stage, the Special Public Prosecutor filed a petition stating that the offences under section 165 and sections 165A read with section 34 were not committed in the course of the same transaction as the offences under sections 124 A etc., and therefore it was necessary that the offences under sections 165 and 165A read with section 34 should be tried separately from the offences under secs.
124A etc.
The accused also filed a petition to the same effect.
The Special Judge allowed the aforesaid petition holding that the offences were not committed in the course of the same transaction and therefore the trial for the offences under sections 165 and 165A read with section 34 should be separated from the other offences.
It was further held that he was not competent to try the accused for the offences under secs.
121A, 124A etc.
as the case had not been committed to the court of Sessions by the Trial Magistrate and directed that in regard to those offences the record be sent back to the District and Sessions Judge, Purnea for proceeding further in accordance with law.
Alleging that the Special Public Prosecutor had never been instructed to file such a petition before the Special Judge, the respondent State of Bihar filed a writ petition in the High Court and obtained a stay of further proceedings before the Special Judge.
The accused petitioners filed special leave petitions and writ petitions before the Supreme Court against the rejection of their bail applications and for quashing the proceedings before the Special Judge.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners (a) that the fundamental right of the petitioners under article 21 of the Constitution had been frustrated by the tactics of the State whose only object was to somehow keep the petitioners in prison; (b) that there was no material whatever to substantiate the offences of waging war etc.
and that the proceedings deserved to be quashed on that ground also; (c) that the proceedings before the Special Judge, Purnea were without jurisdiction both for the reason that he was not competent to try the offences under section 121A and section 124A etc.
and also for the reason that he came to be seised of the case at the instance of the Executive Government, who had no authority to transfer the case from the court of the Special Judge, Patna to the Court of the Special Judge, Purnea, since the rule of law would be defeated if the Executive Government were to be permitted to have cases decided by Judges of their choice; (d) that the High Court and the Special Judge were wrong in not permitting the accused to offer fresh sureties or cash security; (e) that the High Court and the Special 805 Judge were wrong in holding that the order of the Magistrate directing them to be released on bail under section 167(2) had come to an end by the passage of time, particularly after cognizance had been taken of the case; (f) that there was no material whatsoever to warrant the framing of charges for any of the offences mentioned in the charge sheet other than sec.
165A; (g) that in the case of the accused persons other than Simranjit Singh Mann, there was nothing whatever to connect them with the offences under sections 121A and 124A. On behalf of the respondent State it was argued that the order for release on bail stood extinguished on the remand of the accused to custody under section 309(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Dismissing the petitions, ^ HELD: 1.1 The delay in the investigation and in the trial of the case is not so unfair as to warrant quashing the proceedings on the ground of infringement of the right of the accused to a speedy trial, a part of their fundamental right under article 21 of the Constitution.
Having regard to the entirety of the circumstances, the long lapse of time since the original order for bail was made, the consequent change in circumstances and situation, and the directions that were now given for the expeditious disposal of the case, there would be no justification for exercising the court 's discretion to interfere under article 136 of the Constitution at this stage.
[818G H; 827A B] 1.2 The High Court is directed to dispose of the criminal revision petition before it as expeditiously as possible preferably within three or four weeks.
Whatever be its outcome the High Court should also direct the Special Judge or other Judge who may have to try the case, or the cases as the case may be, to try the cases expeditiously setting a near date for the trial and to proceed with the trial from day to day.
[820D ] 2.
The right to a speedy trial is one of the dimensions of the fundamental right to life and liberty guaranteed by article 21 of the Constitution.
The question whether this right has been infringed is ultimately a question of fairness in the administration of criminal justice even as "acting fairly" is of the essence of the principles of natural justice.
A "fair and reasonable procedure" is what is contemplated by the expression "procedure established by law" in article 21.[815F G] Hussainara Khatoon (I) vs State of Bihar, [1979] 3 SCR 169, Kadra Pehadiya (I) vs State of Bihar, AIR 1981 SC 939, Kadra Pehdiya(II) vs State of Bihar, AIR 1982 SC 1167, State of Maharashtra 806 vs Champa Lal Punjaji Shah; , and Menaka Gandhi 's case followed.
Strunk vs United States, 56, Barkar vs Wingo; , and Boll vs Director of Public Prosecutions, Jamaica, [1985] (II) All ER 585, referred to.
3.1 The question whether there was any material whatsoever to warrant the framing of charges for any of the offences mentioned in the charge sheet other than sec.
165A is not a matter to be investigated by the Supreme Court in a petition under article 32 of the Constitution.
This Court cannot convert itself into the court of a Magistrate or a Special Judge to consider whether there is evidence or not justifying the framing of charges.
[819A B] 3.2 The questions relating to the jurisdiction of the Special Judge to try the accused for the offences under secs.
121, 121A, etc.
and the link between the offences under secs.
165A and 165A read with sec.
34 on the one hand and the offences under secs.
121 and 121A etc.
on the other are questions which are awaiting the decision of the High Court.
These questions are left to be decided by the High Court.
[819C] 4.
There was no evil design in the creation of a Special Judge 's court for Purnea Division at Bhagalpur under the Criminal Law Amendment Act and the designation of a Judge to preside over that court.
All that has, in fact happened is that a Special Judge 's court was created for Purnea Division under section 6 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act and Shri Bindeshwari Prasad Verma, Additional District Judge West Champaran, who was under orders of transfer as Additional District Judge Bhagalpur was designated as the Special Judge.
The case Jogbani P.S. No. 110/84, was mentioned within brackets as that was apparently the only case awaiting trial in Purnea Division under the Criminal Law Amendment Act.
The Special Judge 's court was created for Purnea Division as it was thought that it would be more convenient for the accused and also in the interests of security if the case was tried at Bhagalpur where the accused were imprisoned rather than to have the trial of the case at Patna to which place the accused would have to be taken from Bhagalpur for every hearing.
[819E ] 5.
The authorship of seditious material alone is not the gist of any of the offences.
Distribution or circulation of seditious material may also be sufficient on the facts and circumstances of a case.
To act as a courier is sometimes enough in a case of conspiracy.
It is also not 807 necessary that a person should be a participant in a conspiracy from start to finish.
Conspirators may appear and disappear from stage to stage in the course of a conspiracy.
[820B C] In the instant case, whether such evidence as may now be available in the record to justify the framing of charges is a matter for the trial court and not for the Supreme Court.[820C] 6.1 The effect of the proviso to section 167(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, is to entitle an accused person to be released on bail if the investigating agency fails to complete the investigation within 60 days.
A person released on bail under the proviso to section 167(2) for the default of the investigating agency is statutorily deemed to be released under the provisions of Chapter 33 of the Code for the purposes of that Chapter.
That is provided by the proviso to section 167(2) itself.
This means, first, the provisions relating to bonds and sureties are attracted.
Section 441 provides for the execution of bonds, with or without sureties, by persons ordered to be released on bail.
One of the provisions relating to bonds is section 445 which enables the court to accept the deposit of a sum of money in lieu of execution of a bond by the person required to execute it with or without sureties.
If the bond is executed (or the deposit of cash is accepted), the court admitting an accused person to bail is required by section 442(1) to issue an order of release to the officer in charge of the jail in which such accused person is incarcerated.
Sections 441 and 442 are in the nature of provisions for the execution of orders for the release on bail of accused persons.
[821D G] 6.2 There is no limit of time within which the bond may be executed after the order for release on bail is made.
Very often accused persons find it difficult to furnish bail soon after the making of an order for release on bail.
This frequently happens because of the poverty of the accused persons.
It also happens frequently that for various reasons the sureties produced on behalf of accused persons may not be acceptable to the court and fresh sureties will have to be produced in such an event.
The accused persons are not to be deprived of the benefit of the order for release on bail in their favour because of their inability to furnish bail straight away.
[821G H; 822A] 6.3 Orders for release on bail are effective until an order is made under section 437(5) or section 439(2).
These two provisions enable the Magistrate who has released an accused on bail or the court of Session or the High Court to direct the arrest of the person released on bail and to commit him to custody.
The two provisions deal with what is known as cancella 808 tion of bail.
Since release on bail under the proviso to section 167(2) is deemed to be release on bail under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII, an order for release under the proviso to section 167(2) is also subject to the provisions of section 437(3) and 439(2) and may be extinguished by an order under either of these provisions.
[822A C] 6.4 The order for release on bail is not extinguished and is not to be defeated by the discharge of the surety and the inability of the accused to straight away produce a fresh surety.
The accused person may yet take advantage of the order for release on bail by producing a fresh, acceptable surety.
[822E F] 6.5 Section 309(2) merely enables the court to "remand the accused if in custody".
It does not empower the court to remand the accused if he is on bail.
It does not enable the court to "cancel bail" as it were.
That can only be done under section 437(5) and section 439(2).
When an accused person is granted bail, whether under the proviso to section 167(2) or under the provision of Chapter XXXIII the only way the bail may be cancelled is to proceed under section 437(5) or section 439(2).
[822F H] 7.1 An order for release on bail made under the proviso to section 167(2) is not defeated by lapse of time, the filing of the chargesheet or by remand to custody under section 309(2).
The order for release on bail may however be cancelled under section 437(5) or section 439(2).
Generally the grounds for cancellation of bail, broadly, are interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of administration of justice, or evasion or attempt to evade the course of justice, or abuse of the liberty granted to him.
[826B C] 7.2 Where bail has been granted under the proviso to section 167(2) for the default of the prosecution is not completing the investigation in sixty days, after the defect is cured by the filing of a chargesheet, the prosecution may seek to have the bail cancelled on the ground that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the accused has committed a non bailable offence and that it is necessary to arrest him and commit him to custody.
In the last mentioned case, one would expect very strong grounds indeed.
[826D E] In the instant case, the High Court and following the High Court, the Special Judge have held that the order for release on bail came to an end with the passage of time on the filing of the chargesheet.
That is not a correct view.
The order for release on bail was not an order on merits but was, what one may call an order on default, an order that could be 809 rectified for special reasons after the defect was cured.
The order was made long ago but for one reason or the other, the accused failed to take advantage of the order for several months.
Probably for that reason, the prosecuting agency did not move in the matter and seems to have proceeded on the assumption that the order had lapsed with the filing of the chargesheet.
Having regard to the entirety of circumstances the Court did not exercise its discretion under article 136 of the Constitution.
[826F H] Natabar Parida vs State of Orissa, ; , Bashir vs State of Haryana, ; and Talab Hazi Hussain vs Mondkar, ; , referred to.
