A provisional liquidator was appointed in respect of two textile undertakings of the petitioner company since they had gone into huge loss and had to be closed sometime in May 1972.
As the textile undertakings of the petitioner company were 'sick textile undertakings ' within the meaning of sub clause (i) of section 2(d) of the Sick Textiles Undertakings (Taking over of Management) Act 1972 (for short, Take over Act) and have also been specified in the First Schedule to the Take over Act, they vested in the Central Government as 'sick textile undertakings ' by virtue of section 4(1) of the Take over Act.
The petitioner company challenged before the Supreme Court the taking over of the management of the aforesaid two textile mills under the Take over Act and also the constitutional validity of the Take over Act and the Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act 1974 on the grounds (a) that the Company should have been given an opportunity of being heard before the management of its undertakings was taken over as 'sick textiles undertakings ' and if such an opportunity had been given, the company could have shown that its undertakings were not sick undertakings; (b) that the legislature, having itself decided the question whether an undertaking is sick textile undertaking or not without giving any opportunity to the owner of such undertaking to make a representation, has damaged the basic structure of the Constitution 938 namely separation of power between the legislature, the executive and the judicially; and (c) that the Nationalisa tion Act is consititutionally invalid on the ground of inadequacy of compensation.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD 1.1 In the First Schedule to the Take over Act, the undertakings of the company have been specified as sick textile undertakings.
In other words, the Legislature has itself decided the undertakings of the Company to be sick textile undertakings.
Indeed, in the First Schedule all the sick textile undertakings have been specified.
Thus, it is apparent that the Legislature has not left it to the Executive to decide whether a particular textile undertaking is a sick textile undertaking or not.
If under the Take over Act the question whether a textile undertaking is a sick textile undertaking or not had been directed to be decided by the executive authorities, the owner of such undertaking could claim an opportunity of being heard.
But when an undertaking has been specified in the First Schedule to the Take over Act as a sick textile undertaking, the question of giving an opportunity to the owner of the undertaking does not at all arise.
[942C F] 1.2 In including the sick textile undertakings in the First Schedule, the Legislature has not acted arbitrarily, for it has also laid down the criteria or tests for such inclusion.
If any undertaking which has been so specified in the First Schedule does not satisfy the tests under section 2(d) of the Take over Act, the owner of it is entitled to challenge such inclusion or take over in a court of law, although such challenge has to be founded on a strong ground.
Thus, there is no finality or conclusiveness in the legislative determination of an undertaking as a sick textile undertaking.
Such determination is neither judicial nor quasi judicial.
Therefore, the question of damaging or altering the basic structure of the Constitution namely, separation of powers among the Legislature, the Executive and the Judiciary, does not at all arise.
So also the question of the validity of the constitutional amendments by which the Take over Act and the Nationalisation Act have been included in the Ninth Schedule on the ground that by such amendments the basic structure of the Constitution is damaged, as contended on behalf of the petitioners, does not arise.
[943F H; 944A B] 2.
The Nationalisation Act gives effect to the policy of the State towards securing the ownership and control of the material resources of the community which are so distributed as best to subserve the common 939 good, as contained in article 39(b) of the Constitution.
It falls within the provision of article 31C of the Constitution before it was amended by the Constitution (Forty Second Amendment) Act, 1976.
Even assuming that the Nationalisation Act violates the provision of article 31, no challenge to its validity can be made on that ground.
[944E G] Minerva Mills Ltd. & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., Writ Petition Nos.
356 361 of 1977, decided on September 9, 1986, relied upon.
In the instant case, the compensation that has been awarded to the Company is neither inadequate nor illusory.
It is not in dispute that the paid up share capital of the Company was Rs.60 lakhs and it paid dividend from 1965 to 1970.
It will not be unreasonable to presume that in specifying the compensation, the Legislature has taken these facts into consideration.
There is, therefore no substance in the contention of the petitioners that the compensation specified in First Schedule to the Nationalisation Act in respect of the undertakings of the Company is illusory.
[944G H; 945A]
