The appellant instituted a suit for recovery of possession of the disputed land after demolition of the unauthorised constructions made thereon by the respondent alleging that he became owner of the land on the basis of a registered sale deed, that he started to build a compound wall over and around his land after his purchase, that taking undue advantage of his temporary absence the respondent wrongfully encroached and trespassed along the whole northern length of the land and hurriedly raised a low mud wall and extended his khaprail thatch over it.
In his written statement the respondent denied that the appellant was owner of the land and claimed that the wall and khaprail belonged to him as they have been existing at their present site since time immemorial, that he had been regularly and openly enjoying the land and that under section 142 of the Limitation Act he became the absolute owner of the land in question on the basis of adverse possession and he has a right of easement in the form of flowing of water from the tiled roof.
The Additional Munsif dismissed the suit holding that the appellant was the owner of the property and that he had failed to prove the case of trespass and encroachment.
The appeal filed by the appellant was allowed by the Additional Civil Judge holding that the respondent has failed to prove that the wall in dispute and the khaprail existed for the last more than 12 years before the suit, that even if respondent 's wall and khaprail are old ones he is not entitled to maintain them after the same was allotted in the deed of partition dt. 3.3.58, and that the appellant is entitled to posses 1030 sion after demolition of the construction of the portion found encroached by respondent.
The second appeal filed by the respondent was dismissed by the High Court and the judgment and decree of the lower Appellate Court were affirmed.
The respondent filed a review application alleging that the partition deed dt.
17th March, 1963 was not in fact a deed of partition but merely an agreement between the parties to partition the property and there was no actual partition by metes and bounds and that the respondent continued to remain co owner and co sharer of the property in suit.
The High Court allowed the review application and held that the mere allotment of shares by the said deed of partition did not amount to partition by metes and bounds, set aside the judgment and decree of the lower Appellate Court and dismissed the suit.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant it was contended that the land in dispute was allotted to the vendor in accordance with the deed of partition (Ext. 3/1) and shown in map (Ext. 3/2) effected between the parties on 17.3.58 and this has been mentioned in the sale:deed (Ext. 1) and, therefore, the judgment and decree of the High Court is not in accordance with law and should be set aside.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
There is no pleading regarding the partition of the property No. 164 nor there is any pleading to the effect that the disputed mud wall with the khaprail on it was ever in possession of appellant 's vendor before the sale of the land in question in favour of the appellant.
[1034H; 1035A B] 2.
On a consideration of the evidence on record it is established that the alleged encroachment by construction of kuchha wall and khaprail over it is not a recent construction as alleged to have been made in May 1961.
On the other hand it is crystal clear from the evidence of PW 1 and DW 1 that the disputed wall with khaprail existed there on the disputed site for a long time i.e., 28 years before and the wall and the khaprail have been affected by salt, as deposed by these two witnesses.
The Court Amin 's report 57C also shows the said walls and khaprail to be 25 30 years old in its present condition.
The High Court rightly came to the finding that though the partition deed was 1031 executed by the parties yet there was no partition by metes and bounds.
Moreover, there is no whisper in the plaint about the partition of the property in question between the co sharers by metes and bounds nor there is any averment that the suit property fell to share of appellant 's vendor and he was ever in possession of the disputed property since the date of partition till the date of sale to the appellant.
The appellant has singularly faild to prove the case as pleaded in the plaint.
[1037C E] 3.
Without considering the deposition of Respondent No. 1 as well as the report of the Amin 57C the Additional Civil Judge wrongly held that the respondent failed to prove that the wall in dispute and the khaprail existed for the last more than 12 years before the suit.
The Civil Judge further held on surmises as "may be that the wall and khaprail have not been raised on May 1961 as is the plaintiff 's case, but they are recent constructions.
" This decision of the lower Appellate Court is wholly incorrect being contrary to the evidence on record.
[1037A B]
