Respondent Nos.
5 to 7 were joint owners of the suit land.
They sold it to respondent nos.
1 to 4 on 25.10.71.
The petitioners, sous and nephews of the vendors, instituted a suit before the sub Judge, Palwal for possession of the suit land on payment of the sale consideration on the ground that they were entitled to the right of the pre emption in respect of the suit land either under clause "First", or Secondly, of section I5(1)(a) or under clause 'First ' or 'Second ly ' of section 15(1)(b) of the Punjab Pre emption Act 1913 as in force in the SLate of Haryana.
The Sub Judge decreed the suit for possession.
The appeal of Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 against the aforesaid order having been dismissed by the District Judge, they filed a second appeal before the High Court.
During the pendency of the second appeal, the Supreme Court delivered its judgment in Atam Prakash vs State of Haryana & Ors., ; The High Court allowed the second appeal and dismissed the suit since the provisions under which the petitioners claimed the fight of pre emption had been declared void by the Supreme Court in Atam Pra kash 's case.
Being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the petitioners in the special leave petition contended that since the suit land belonged to the joint family and it had not been sold by all the sharers, they were entitled to claim the right of pre emption under dause 'Fourtidy ' of s.15(1)(b) of the Act because they happened to be the non alienating co sharers.
Dismissing the petition, HELD: The expression 'other co sharers ' in clause 'Fourthly ' of section 15(1)(b) of the Act refers to only those co sharers who do not fall 69 under clause 'First ' or 'Secondly ' or 'Thirdly ' of s.15(1)(b) of the Act.
Since the petitioners admittedly fail either under clause 'First ' or under clause 'Secondly ' of section 15(1)(b) of the Act, they are clearly outside the scope of clause 'Fourthly '.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot claim the right of pre emption under clause 'Fourthly '.
[71D E]
