The petitinner company in W.P. No. 1685 of 1979 is manufacturing electrical goods for M/s. Bajaj Electricals Limited, the buyers.
As per agreement the goods are not at all sold .in the open market by the petitioner company.
After the manufactured goods are accepted by the buyers, the petitioner company applies the label of the brand name of the buyers, namely, 'BajaJ ' on the manufactured goods.
The right to sell these goods with the aforesaid brand name is solely and exclusively that of the buyers having regard to the fact that they alone are owners of the brand name.
Counsel for the petitioner in this writ petition con tended that the market value of the goods manufactured by the petitioner should be assessed at the price at which the goods are agreed to be sold under the agreement between the manufacturer and the buyers.
On the other hand, it was argued by counsel in behalf of the respondent Union of India that the excise duty must be levied an the basis of market value fetched by the sale of these goods by the buyers to their wholesalers.
Similar question of law arose in the other writ petitions.
Allowing the writ petitions, this Cart, HELD: 1.1.
Excise duty is payable on the market value ' fetched by the goods, in the wholesale market at the factory gate manufactured by the manufacturers.
It cannot he as sessed on the hams of the market value obtained by the buyers who also add to the value of the manufactured goods the value of their own property in the goodwill of the 'Brand name '.
[84F] 1.2.
Where a manufacturer who manufacture and sells his goods under his own brand name or under a bland name which he has acquired in use, the sale price fetched by sales effected by him under 83 such bland name in wholesale, will be the basis for computa tion of excise duty payable by him.
So also nothing said herein will come to the rescue of a brand name owner who himself is the manufacturer of goods or to sales effected favour of 'related ' persons as defined by the Central Ex cises and Salt Act, 1944.
[85A B] Union of India vs Cibatul Ltd., , Joint Secretary to the Government of India vs Food Speciali ties Ltd., 'and M/s. R.O. Industries vs Union of India & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 1496 of 1977 decided on 3.4.86, relied upon.
In the instant case, the price fetched by the goods manufactured by the petitioner company is the price Of*the electrical goods sans the brand name.
And that should be the market value for the purposes of assessing the excise duty payable by the petitioner company which manufactures the excisable goods.
The enhancement in the value the goods by reason of the application of the brand name is because of the augmentation attributable to the value of the goodwill of the brand name which does not belong to the manufacturer and which added market value does not accrue to the peti tioner company or go into its coffers.
It accrues to the buyers to whom the brand name belongs and to whom the fruits of the goodwill belong.
[89D E]
