One Mauji Ram Gupta was the owner of a house consisting of ground floor and first floor.
When the vacancy in the first floor arose, the landlord applied for release of the premises section 16 of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972.
Respondent No. 4, the Additional District Magistrate, rejected the claim of the landlord and allotted the first floor to the appellant.
Thereafter, Respondent No. 1 pur chased the disputed house on 18.7.77 and occupied the ground floor.
The aforesaid order of allotment was set aside on 18.8.77 by the District Judge with a direction to respondent No. 4 to reconsider the applications made for allotment of the premises in accordance with law.
Respondent No. 4 reconsidered the applica tions and by his order dated 4.1.78, again allotted the premises to the appellant after rejecting the claims of other applicants.
However, in a review petition filed by re spondent No. landlord, Respondent No. 4 set aside the aforesaid order of allotment by his order dated 14.12.81 on the ground that since the premises in dispute was a part of the landlord 's building which he was occupying, it was mandatory under section 17(2) of the Act that notice should have been issued to the landlord and since no notice had been issued to the landlord, the order was vitiated.
Aggrieved by the order of Respondent No. 4 the appellant filed a revision application before the District Judge.
The District Judge set aside the order dated 14.12.81 passed by Respondent No. 4 but the same was restored by the High Court in a writ petition filed by respondent No. 1.
The High Court also directed respondent No. 4 to consider the 127 applications for allotment after giving notice to the landlord respondent No. 1.
Dismissing the appeal to this Court, HELD: 1.
The allotment order dated 4.1.78 issued in appellant 's favour was rendered illegal for the non compliance of the mandato ry provisions of sec.
17(2) of the Act.
In that view even if there was any procedural defect in entertaining the review application, it would not be proper and desirable to inter fere with the order of the Addl.
District Magistrate, more so, when the High Court has already upheld that order.
[I35C] 2.1 When a building or a part of a build ing falls vacant or is likely to fall vacant, the District Magistrate under section 16(1) of the Act has jurisdiction to issue allotment order requiring the landlord to let the building or part thereof to the person specified in the order.
The landlord may apply to the District Magistrate for release of the whole or any part of such building under section 16(i)(b) of the Act.
If the release application is allowed, the landlord is permitted to occupy the build ing or part thereof as the case may be.
But if release application is dismissed the District Magistrate is empowered to issue allotment order in favour of an applicant, and in pursu ance thereof the allottee is entitled to take possession.
[131G H] 2.2.
Before applications for allotment are considered by the District Magistrate, it is mandatory for him to serve notice of the vacancy on the landlord informing him the date on which the allotment is to be considered as prescribed by Rule 9 of the U.P. Urban Build ings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Evic tion) Rules, 1972.
The object and purpose of the notice to the landlord regarding the date fixed for allotment proceedings is to enable him to file his objections, if any, to the allotment proceedings or to make application for release of the premises as contemplated by section 16(1)(a) of the Act or to nominate a tenant of his choice if he himself is in occupation of a portion of the building.
An allotment order made without giving notice to the land lord as required by Rule 9(3) would be ren dered illegal.
[131H 132A, C D] 2.3.
Section 17(2) of the Act lays down that where a part of a building is in occupa tion of landlord for a residential purpose, the allotment of any other part thereof under section 16(1)(a) shah be made in favour of a person nominated by the landlord.
This provision safeguards interest of the landlord to have a tenant of his choice if he is 128 occupying a portion of the building.
The legislature enacted sec.
17(2) with a view to ensure peaceful living to a landlord and for that purpose, it permitted the landlord to have a tenant of his choice.
The landlord 's valuable right cannot be taken away by the District Magistrate while exercising his powers of allotment under sec.16(1)(a) of the Act.
[132H 133B] In the instant case, no notice of the allotment proceedings was issued to G.L. Pahwa, respondent No. I, although the appel lant as well as the Addl.
District Magistrate both knew that G.L. pahwa had stepped in the shoes of landlord and that he was occupying ground floor of the building.
The allotment order was made in appellant 's favour on 4.1.78, but the landlord, though residing in a part of the building was denied opportunity of nominating a tenant of his choice as contem plated by sec.
17(2) of the Act.
In these circumstances there can be no doubt that the order of the Addl.
District Magistrate allot ing the premises to the appellant was com pletely without jurisdiction and against the plain terms 0/sec.
17(2) of the Act.
[133G 134A] Yoginder Tiwari vs District Judge, Gorakhpur and Ors., & Babu Singh Chau han vs Rajkumar Jain & Ors., ; , relied upon.
