Madhya Pradesh Excise Act, 1915 regulates the manufac ture, sale and possession of intoxicating liquor in the State of Madhya Pradesh.
2 Section 14 deals with the establishment or licensing of distilleries and warehouses.
The State Government has, in exercise of the power conferre under section 62, made sever al sets of Rules.
Rule II of the Rules of General Applica tion made inter alia under sub section 2(h) of section 62 lays down "five years" as the maximum period for which wholesale licences for the manufacture supply and sale of liquor could be granted Rule XXII provides for the manner in which licences for the manufacture or sale of intoxicants shall be disposed.
There were at all material times in the State of Madhya Pradesh nine distilleries for the manufacture of spirit which were established long hack by the State Government under a licence issued by the Excise Commissioner.
These nine distilleries were located at Gwalior, Ujjain, Dhar Badwaha, Chhatisgarh, Bhopal, Seoni, Nowgaon (owned by private individuals always) and Ratlure (owned by the Gov ernment).
So far as the first seven distilleries are con cerned, the land and buildings in which they were housed belonged to the State Government and originally the plant and machinery also belonged to the State Government but in course of time successive holders of the D 2 licences in respect of these distilleries replaced the plant and machin ery.
The practice followed by the Excise Department in regard to the working of these distilleries was to invite tenders for the wholesale supply of country liquor from these distilleries and the tenderers were requested to quote their rates for the wholesale supply of country liquor to the State Government.
Normally the lowest tenders were accepted but at times the State Government used to accept even higher tenders taking various relevant factors into account.
The State of Madhya Pradesh was divided in several areas and a particular area was attached to each distillery for the wholesale supply of country liquor in that area.
The person whose tender was accepted for any particular distill ery was given a D 2 licence for working the distillery and also a D 1 licence for wholesale supply of country liquor manufactured in that distillery to retail vendors in the area attached to the distillery.
These licences in Forms D 1 and D 2 were ordinarily issued for a period of five years.
Respondent Nos.
5 to 11 in the writ petition of Nandial Jaiswal were the holders of D 1 and D 2 licences in respect of these distilleries for the period ending 31st March, 1986.
There were two districts, however, which were not attached to any distillery, namely, Jabalpur and Betul and so far as these two districts were concerned, a licence in Form D 1(s) to make wholesale supply of country liquor to retail vendors in these two districts was being given and for the period ending 31st March, 1986 it was issued in favour of Sagar Aggarwal.
The country liquor required by Sagar Agarwal for supply to retail vendors in Jabalpur and Betul Dis 3 tricts was being obtained by him from the Ratlam Alcohol Plant at the rate of Rs.1.80 per proof litre but, the supply of country liquor from Ratlam Alcohol Plant was wholly inadequate and Sagar Agarwal was constrained to purchase country liquor from other sources at higher price in order to fulfil his commitment under D 1 (s) licence.
Since the land and buildings in which the distilleries were housed belonged to the State Government the holder of D 2 licence in respect of any particular distillery had to pay rent for the land and buildings to the State Government at a rate agreed upon from time to time.
So far as the plant and machinery of the distillery was concerned, originally it was installed by the State Government at its own cost but in course of time it had to be replaced and such replacement was allowed to be made by the holder of the D 2 licence for the time being.
It was however a condition of D 2 licence that on the expiry of the period of licence, if fresh D 2 licence was not issued in favour of the existing licence holder, he would be bound to transfer the plant and machin ery in favour of the new licence holder at a price to be determined by a Valuation Committee.
Therefore, during the period of D 2 licence, the plant and machinery belonged to the licence holder for the time being.
The licence holder was bound to manufacture country liquor in the distillery for which he was given D 2 licence and on the strength of D 2 licence supply country liquor so manufactured to retail vendors in the area attached to the distillery at the rate quoted in the tender and accepted by the State Government.
The bottling and sealing charges were also fixed by the State Government from time to time and they were payable to the licence holder by the retail vendors.
The total capacity of all the nine distilleries were only 203 lakhs proof litres but even this capacity of pro duction was not realised and the actual production fell short of this capacity.
The result was short supply on many occasions leading to loss of licence fee as well as excise duty by the State Government.
The State Government in order to meet the requirement of the consuming public had actually to purchase liquor from other States as a higher price.
Moreover, the consumption of liquor was growing from year to year and it was estimated that by the year 1991, the total consumption of country liquor would be likely to be in the neighbourhood of 482.36 lakhs of proof litres and by the turn of the century it was expected to be in the neighbourhood of 1696.80 lakhs proof litres.
The existing nine distilleries were inadequate to meet this growing demand for country liquor.
Further more the buildings in which these distil 4 leries were housed has become old and were in a state of disrepair and it was not easy for the State Government to maintain them in good condition without incurring heavy expenditure every year.
The plant and machinery were also old and antiquated and it was necessary to instal new and modern plant and machinery having increased capacity to manufacture country liquor.
Moreover, of seems that though the time of construction, these distilleries were away from the city or town, what had happened was that with the growth of population and haphazard and unplanned urban development, these distilleries had now come to be in the heart of the city or own and they created health hazards and pollution problems.
There was a demand from all sections of the public living in surrounding area to move the distilleries away in order to avoid water and environmental pollution.
It was in these circumstances, when the mind of the State Government was already exercised in respect of these matters that an application was made by M.P. Distillers ' Association in July 1983 for transferring these distilleries to private owner ship.
The members of the M.P. Distillers ' Association who were old distillers holding D 2 licence in respect of these distilleries offered to invest their own funds in the con struction of new buildings and installation of latest plant and machinery with capacity to produce more country liquor in conformity with the standards laid down by M.P. Eradica tion of Pollution Board for Removal of Polluted water by constructing lagoons, etc., provided they were assured D 1 licence for the area attached to their respective distiller ies.
This application of M.P. Distilleries Association was examined by the State Government at different levels, cabi net sub committees, special committee headed by Shri Vijaya vargi, spot inspections.
The Cabinet, sub committee invited representatives of the M.P. Distilleries Association, heard them before taking filial decision in the matter.
Finance department 'S objections and suggestions were taken note of.
At the cabinet meeting held an 30th December 1984, the policy decision was taken to privitise liquor distilleries.
Pursuant to the policy decision dated 30th December, 1984 a Letter of Intent dated 1st February 1985 was issued by the State Government in favour of each of respondent Nos. 5 to 11 for grant of D 2 licence for the construction of a distillery at a new site for the purpose of manufacturing country liquor with effect from 1st April 1986 in lieu of the existing distillery in respect of which such respondent held D 2 and D 1 licences for the period ending 31st March 1986.
The Letter of Intent set out various conditions sub ject to which D 2 licence was to be granted in favour of each of respondent Nos. 5 to 11 in W.P. No. 3718/85 before 5 the High Court.
The licencee to whom the Letter of Intent was issued was required under cl. 2 of the Letter of Intent to construct the distillery on the land approved by the State Government and the M.P. Pollution Board.
It was pro vided by cl. 12 of the Letter of Intent that the licensee shall make proper arrangements for treatment of effluents discharge under a scheme duly approved by the M.P. Pollution Board and that any direction issued by the excise Commission in this regard shall be binding on the licensee.
Clause 14 of the Letter of Intent stipulated that the licensee shall he bound to complete construction of distillery and instal lation of plant and machinery as required by the Excise Commissioner well before 1st April 1986.
The Letter of Intent was followed by a Deed of Agreement dated 2nd February 1985 executed by and between the Governor of Madhya Pradesh acting through the Excise Commissioner and each of respondent Nos. 5 to 11.
The Deed of Agreement recited that the Letter of Intent has been issued by the State Government for grant of D 2 licence for construction of distillery for manufacture of spirit with effect from 1st April 1986.
1 of the Deed of Agreement provided that the licensee shall he bound to take land on lease for a period of 30 years from the State Government, but this clause is not material because ultimately none of respondent Nos. 5 to 11 took land on lease from the State Government and each of them purchased his own land, the site of course being ap proved by the State Government.
Pursuant to the Letter of Intent and the Deed of Agree ment each of respondent Nos. 5 to 11 selected with the approval of the State Government the new site at which the distillery should be located, purchased land at such new site, started constructing buildings for housing the dis tillery and placed orders for purchase of plant and machin ery to be installed in the distillery.
This policy decision was challenged by Nandial Jaiswal by filing W.P. No. 3718/85, by Sagar Agarwal by filing his W.P. No. 335/86 and by a firm called M/s Doongaji & Co. during the course of the arguments in the two writ peti tions.
All the three writ petitions were disposed of by a common judgment delivered by a Division Bench of the High, Court consisting of Acting Chief Justice J.S. Verma and Justice B.M. Lal.
Both the learned Judges, by separate judgments, substantially set aside the policy decision dated 30th December, 1984.
Since the decision of the High Court for all practical purposes sent against the respondents, they preferred Civil Appeals No. 1622 to 1639 of 1986 before the Supreme Court by special leave.
M/s Doongaji & Co. and Nand Lal 6 Jaiswal also, to the limited extent that they are not suc ceed, filed special leave petitions Nos.6206 and 7440 of 1986.
Allowing CA Nos. 1622 to 1639/86 and dismissing the special leave petitions, the Court, HELD: I. I On a plain reading of Rule XXII that a li cence for manufacture or sale of country liquor may be disposed of in any one of four different modes, viz., ten der, auction fixed licence fee or such other manner as the State Government may by general or special order direct.
These four different modes are alternative to one another and anyone of them may be resorted to for the purpose of disposing of a licence.
It is not necessary that the mode of disposal by tender must first be resorted to and if that cannot be acted upon, then only the mode of disposal by auction and falling that and not otherwise, the third mode of disposal by fixed licence fee and only in the event of it not being possible to adopt the first three modes of dispos al, the last mode namely, "such other manner as the State Government may by general or special order direct" should be adopted.
This is plain and incontrovertible.
[17B D] 1.2 On a plain grammatical construction of Rule XXII, it is obvious that the Collector or an Officer authorised by him in that behalf can choose anyone of the four modes set out in that Rule.
There is nothing in the language of Rule XXII to justify the interpretation that an earlier mode of disposal set out in the Rule excludes a latter mode or that reasons must be specified where a latter mode is adopted in preference to an earlier one.
The language of Rule XXII in fact militates against such construction.
It is impossible to subscribe to the proposition that it is only when an earlier mode is not possible to be adopted for reasons to be specified, that a latter one can be followed.
The Collector or an Officer authorised by him can adopt anyone of the four modes of disposal of licence set out in Rule XXII, but, of course, whichever mode be adopted, the equality clause of the Constitution should not be violated in its application.
[17F H] 1.3 It is also clear from Rules III, IV and V that there are two purposes for which a licence in Form D 2 for con struction and working of a distillery may be granted.
It may be granted as an adjunct to the licence in Form D 1 under Rule IV or it may be granted as an independent licence under Rule V irrespective whether the grantee holds a licence under Rule V irrespective whether the grantee holds a li cence in Form D 1 or not.
There are also two types of li cences for wholesale 7 supply of country liquor to retail vendors, namely, licence in Form D 1 and licence in Form D 1 (s).
The licence in Form D 1 in clause 5 clearly contemplated that the holder of such licence must also have a licence in Form D 2.
No one can have a licence in Form D 2.
He must have a distillery in which he distils country spirit in order that he should be able to make wholesale supply of country liquor to retail vendors.
If for any reason he is unable to obtain licence in Form D 2 for working a distiller, no licence in Form D 1 can be given to him and if he has such licence, it would become ineffective.
It is for this reason that when a person is granted a licence in Form D 1 by the Excise Commission under Rule III, he is also simultaneously granted a licence in Form D 2 under Rule IV and the period of both the licences is co terminus.
But, though a person cannot be granted a licence in Form D 1 unless he also obtains licence in Form D 2 the converse does not hold true.
A licence in Form D 2 can be granted to a person under Rule V even though he does not hold a licence in Form D 1.
Where a person is granted a licence in Form D 2 for working a distillery under Rule V, without having a licence in Form D 1 for wholesale supply of country liquor to retail vendors, he cannot make wholesale supply of country liquor manufactured by him to retail vendors but he can supply such country liquor to a person holding licence in Form D 1(s) or he can manufacture recti fied spirit, denatured spirit or foreign liquor as contem plated in condition 3 of the licence in Form D 2.
It is not necessary that a person a licence in Form D 2 must also simultaneously have a.licence in Form D 1.
[18A F] 2.
It is undoubtedly true that the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub Committee which were accepted by the Cabinet in the policy decision dated 30th December 1984 provided that in the beginning, D 2 licence shall be granted for a period of 5 years and thereafter there shall be a provision for its renewal and for this purpose, necessary amendment in the M.P. Excise Act, 1915 or the Rules made under the Act shall be made.
But, in fact no such amendment in the Act or the Rules was made by the State Government and when the Letter of Intent was issued and the Deed of Agreement was executed and even thereafter, the provisions of the Act remained unamended and Rule II of the Rules of General Application also continued to stand in its unamended form.
It is obvious that without an amendment of Rule II of the Rules of General Application the maximum period for which D 2 licence could be granted to respondent Nos.
5 11 was only 5 years and there could be no provision for automatic renewal thereafter from year to year.
It is therefore clear that whatever might have been the original intention.
it was not effectuated by carrying out necessary amendment in the provi 8 sions of the Act or in Rule II of the Rules of General Application and the ultimate decision of the State Govern ment was to grant D 2 licence for a limited period of 5 years.
The provision of renewal every year was to operate within the span of 5 years itself and every year, the li cence would be renewable on payment of licence fee of Rs.5,000 and due fulfilment of the conditions of the licence and the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
It is not possible to spell out from clause that the licence was to be granted for an initial period of 5 years and thereafter it was liable to be renewed from year to year.
The so called concession made on behalf of the State Government and re spondent Nos. 5 to 11 was, therefore, really not a conces sion at all but it was a stand taken in recognition of the correct position in regard to the grant of D 2 licence.
The High Court, was in the circumstances, right in holding the grant of D 2 licence to respondent Nos.
5 11 was for a maximum period of 5 years and it did not operate to create monopoly in their favour for an indefinite period of time.
[37A H] 3.1 The High Court was not at all justified in splitting the policy decision dated 30th December 1984 into two parts and in striking down the second part, while sustaining the first.
The policy decision dated 30th December 1984 was a single integrated decision arrived at by the State Govern ment taking a holistic view of all the aspects involved in the decision and it is difficult to appreciate how the High Court could sustaining one part of the policy and strike down the other.
Either the policy as a whole could be sus tained or as a whole, it could be declared to be invalid, but certainly one part could not be sustained, whatever be the ground and the other pronounced invalid.
That would be making a new policy for the State Government which it was not competent for the High Court to do.
Once the High Court came to the conclusion that on account of delay or laches in the filing of the writ petitions or the creation of third party rights in the meanwhile, the Court would not interfere with one part of the policy decision, the court could not interfere with the second part of the policy decision as well.
The consequence of sustaining one part of the policy decision and striking down the other would not only be to create a new policy for the State Government but it would also cause considerable hardship and injustice to the licen sees and also result in public mischief and inconvenience detrimental to the interest of the State.
Since the peti tioners were guilty of enormous delay in filing the writ petitions and in the intervening period, the rights of respondents Nos.
5 11 were created in that they spent con siderable amount of time, energy and resources and incurred huge expenditure in setting up the new distilleries, sus taining one part of the policy decision while striking down the other would amount to 9 creating a new policy for the State Government and would also entail considerable hardship and inconvenience to respondent Nos.
5 11 and would also be detrimental to the interest of the State.
[48H, 45F 46D] 4.
The policy decision dated 30th December 1984 can be given effect to without any new Rules being made by the State Government.
There is nothing in the policy deci sion dated 30th December 1984 which is contrary to time Rules made under the Act.
It is true that D 2 licence in its existing form does not contemplate construction of a distillery and that the Rules do not seem to have prescribed the form for a licence for constructing a distillery.
But, merely because the form of a licence for constructing a distillery is not prescribed by the Rules, it does not mean that such licence cannot be granted by the Excise Authoriti es.
If the form of a licence is prescribed, then, of course, such form has to be followed, but if no form is prescribed, the only consequence is that the licence to be granted by the Excise Authorities need not conform to any particu lar form.
Section 14 (c) of the Act clearly provides that the Excise Commissioner may license the construction and working of a distillery and there was, therefore nothing contrary to the Act or the Rules in the Excise Commissioner issuing Letter of Intent in favour of each of res pondent Nos. 5 11 granting licence for construction of a new distillery.
Rule XXII permits any one of four modes of disposal of licence to be adopted by the Excise Authorities and it does not prescribe that the fourth mode denoted by the words "such other manner as the State Government may by general or special order direct" can be resorted to only if the first three modes fail.
Here in the present case, the policy decision dated 30th December 1984 provided that respondent Nos. 5 11 who were the existing contractors, should be granted licence to construct new distilleries and D 1 and D 2 licences should be given to them for a period of five years.
for manufacturing liquor in such new distil leries and making wholesale supply of it to retail vendors in the areas attached to those distilleries.
This manner of disposal of licences was clearly covered by the fourth mode of disposal set out in Rule XXII.
[50B F] State of Orissa & Ors.
vs Harinarayan Jaiswal & Ors., ; ; L.G. Chaudhari vs Secretary, L.S.G. Deptt.
of Bihar & Ors., AIR 1980 SC 383, referred to.
Supreme Court cannot permit any new plea as in this case, that non obtaining a licence under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, disentitles setting up distilleries.
The foundation for this contention should have been laid in the writ petitions and the necessary facts should have been pleaded in support of it.
No such plea having 10 been raised and no such facts having been pleades in the writ petitions, the court cannot allow this contention to he raised.
Moreover, it is clear from section 11 read with the definitions of "factory" and "industrial undertaking" con tained in sub sections (c) and (d) of s.3 of this Act that licence from the Central Government for setting up new distilleries would be necessary only if 50 or more workers were petitions.
There is nothing to show that 30 or more workers were going to he employed in the new distilleries.
In fact old distilleries were also working without any licence from the Central Government, presumably because less than 50 workers were employed in such distilleries.
[52E G] 6.
It is well settled that the power of the High Court to issue an appropriate writ under article 226 of the Constitu tion is discretionary and the High Court in the exercise of its discretion does not ordinarily assist the tardy and the indolent or the acquiescent and the lethargic.
If there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in filing a writ petition and such delay is not satisfactory explained, the High Court may decline to intervene and grant relief in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction.
The evolution of this rule of laches or delay is premised upon a number of fac tors.
The High Court does not ordinarily permit a belated resort to the extra ordinary remedy under the writ jurisdic tion became it is likely to cause confusion and public inconvenience and brings in its train new injustices.
The lights of third parties my intervene and if the writ juris diction is exercised on a writ petition filed after unrea sonable delay, it may have the effect of inflicting not only hardship and inconvenience but also injustice on third parties.
When the writ jurisdiction of the High Court is invoked, unexplained delay coupled with the creation of third party rights in the meanwhile is an important factor which always weighs with the High Court in deciding whether or not to exercise such jurisdiction.
However, this rule of laches or delay is not a rigid rule which can be cast in a straight jacket formula, for there may he cases where de spite delay and creation of third party rights the High Court may still in the exercise of its discretion interfere and grant relief to the petitioner.
But such cases where the demand of justice is so compelling that the High Court would he inclined to interfere inspire of delay or creation of third party rights would by their very nature he few and far between.
Ultimately, it would he a matter within the discre tion of the Court.
Ex hypothese every discretion must he exercised fairly and justly so as to promote justice and not to defeat it.
[41H 42C, F G] Here, the petitioners were guilty of enormous delay in filing the writ petitions inasmuch as during the intervening period the rights of third parties had intervened and re spondent Nos.
5 11 acting on the 11 basis of the policy decision dated 30th December, 1984, had incurred to expenditure towards setting up the distilleries.
If the policy decision dated 30th December 1984 were now be set aside at the instance of the petitioners it would work immense hardship on the seven licensees and cause grave injustice to them, since enormous amount of time, money and energy spent by them in setting up the distilleries would be totally wasted.
[41F G, 45B] Ramanna Daygram Shetty vs International Airport Authori ty of India & Ors., ; ; Ashok Kumar Mishra & Anr.
vs Collector Raipur & Ors., ; , referred to.
There is no fundamental right in a citizen to carry on trade or business in liquor.
The State under its regula tory power has the power to prohibit absolutely every form of activity in relation to intoxicants its manufacture, storage, export, import, sale and possession.
No one can claim as against the State the right to carry on trade or business in liquor and the State cannot be compelled to part with its exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing and selling liquor.
But when the State decided to grant such right or privilege to others the State cannot escape the rigour of article 14.
It cannot set arbitrarily or at its sweet will.
It must comply with the equality clause while granting the exclusive right or privilege of manufacturing or selling liquor.
It is, therefore, not possible to uphold the conten tion of the State Government and respondent Nos. 5 11 that article 14 can have not application in a case where the licence to manufacture or sell liquor is being granted by the State Government.
The State cannot ride roughshod over the re quirement of that Article.
[53G 54B] 7.2 But while considering the applicability of article 14 in such a case, the court must bear in mind, that having regard to the nature of the trade or business the court would be slow to interfere with the policy laid down by the State Government for grant of licences for manufacture and sale of liquor.
The Court would in view of the inherently pernicious nature of the commodity allow a large measure of latitude to the State Government in determining its policy of regulating manufacture and trade in liquor.
Moreover, the grant of licences for manufacture and sale of liquor would essentially be a matter of economic policy where the court would hesitate to intervene and strike down that the State Government has done, unless it appears to be plaintly arbi trary, irrational or mala fide.
In complex economic matters every decision is necessarily empiric and it is based on experimentation or what one may call "trial and error meth od" and therefore, .its validity 12 cannot be vested on any rigid a "priori" considerations or on the application of any straight jacket formula.
The Court must while adjudging the constitutional validity of an executive decision relating to economic matters grant a certain measure of freedom or "play in the joints" to the executive.
[54C 55C] 7.3 It is clear from c1.2 of the policy decision that the State Government envisaged the possibility of other liquor contractors making similar applications for licences to construct new distilleries and to manufacture and supply liquor from such new distilleries and hence provided that if any such applications are made, they should be disposed of by the Excise Department on merits on the basis of the principles "recommended by the sub committee", that is on the basis of the same principles on which the licences were decided to be granted to the existing contractors.
If any liquor contractor makes an application for a licence to construct a new distillery on the same terms on which li cences are granted to the existing contractor his applica tion would have to be considered on merits by the Excise Authorities and the Excise Authorities may, if they find the proposal suitable, grant to such liquor contractor licence to construct a new distillery along with D 2 licence on the same basis.
The Excise Authorities may, in such event, either (i) direct such liquor contractor to manufacture ractified spirit, denatured spirit or foreign liquor in the new distillery for the remaining period of the D 1 and D 2 licences of the existing contractors and thereafter consider him along with other liquor contractors for grant of D 1 and D 2 licences in respect of the new distillery or (ii) reduce and/or alter the area of supply of any of the existing contractors and grant D 1 license to such liquor contractor in respect of the carved out area.
If the Cabinet decision dated 30th December 1984 while granting licences to the existing contractors leave it open to other liquor contracts to.come in and apply for similar licences, it cannot be said that article 14 is violated.
[56C G] 7.4 When the State Government is granting licence for putting up a new industry, it is not at all necessary that it should advertise and invite offers for putting up such industry.
The State Government is entitled to negotiate with those who have come up with an offer to set up such indus try.
[60C] Har Shankar & Ors. etc.
vs Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner & Ors., ; ; R.K. Garg etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc. , referred to.
Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddv vs State of J & K, ; , followed.
13 Metropolis Theatre Company vs State of Chicago, 57 Lawyers Edition 730, quoted with approval.
Judges should not use strong and carping language while criticising the conduct of parties or their witnesses.
They must act with sobriety, moderation and restraint.
They must have the humility to recognise that they are not infal lible and any harsh and disparaging strictures passed by them against any party may be mistaken and unjustified and if so, they may do considerable harm and mischief and result in injustice.
Here, in the present case, the observations made and strictures passed by B.M. Lal J. were totally unjustified and unwarranted and they ought not to have been made.
[66G H] In the instant case, the words used in paras 1,9, 17 to 19 and 34 of Lal J. 's judgment are undoubtedly strong and highly disparaging remarks attributing mala fides, corrup tion and underheard dealing of the State Government which are not justified by the record.
