The appellant Corporation sought to assess the land and buildings of the respondent club to genera1 tax under section 202 of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955.
The re spondent claimed exemption on the ground that occupation and user of the property for running horse races and training the horses etc.
constituted occupation and user of the property for a 'charitable purpose ' within the meaning of section 202(1)(b), which was refused.
The respondent approached the High Court and succeeded.
Partly allowing the appeal by the Corporation, HELD: 1.
For determining whether exemption under section 202(1) (b) of the Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act, 1955, was available, the test to apply is to seek answer to the question: to what use is the property put or for what pur pose is the property pat and to ascertain whether such occupation or user is for 'charitable purpose '.
[197F] 2.
The expression 'charitable ' in the context of section 202(1)(b) means a benevolent activity calculated to benefit the poor or, the deprived.
Horse racing is surely not such a benevolent activity, however charitable a view is taken.
It must be the very activity which is carried on the property which must be charitable and not the application of the income of such activity.
[197H 198A] 3.
The High Court has completely failed to realize that the 'occupation ' of the land and buildings or the 'user ' must be for 'charitable purpose ' and that it is altogether irrelevant as to the manner in which the income of the club is utilised.
Section 202(1)(b) makes no reference to the question as regards the employment of the income of the club or the purpose for which the income is so employed.
Exemp tion is granted 196 only in respect of buildings which are 'solely ' and exclu sively used for charitable purpose.
[198B] 4.
In the instant case, the user of the premises for the Race Course Club will not constitute occupation or user for a 'charitable purpose ' within the meaning of section 202(1)(b) and of Race Course Club will not be entitled to claim exemp tion from levy of the general tax.
[198F] 5.
The High Court has rightly taken a view adverse to the appellant as regards the levy for the assessment year 1966 67, on an appreciation of evidence and there is no warrant to disturb the said finding.
There is also no reason to interfere with the valuation of the property as made by the Small Causes Court and confirmed by the High Court.
[198G H] 6.
The order passed by the High Court in so far as it is held that the property is exempt from levy of general tax under section 202(1)(b) is set aside.
The appellant would be entitled to levy general tax from 1967 68 onwards in accord ance with law.
[199B]
