The appellant was in the service of the respondent but sub sequently he was discharged on the plea that he had become surplus 4443 to the requirement of the respondent.
The Industrial Tribu nal found that the respondent had been guilty of unfair labour practice and victimisation and held that the order of discharge was illegal and that he should be reinstated, with arrears of salary and allowances from the date of discharge.
The respondent having failed to implement the award, the appellant filed an application under section 2o(2) of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, for computation of the money value of the benefit of reinstate ment.
The Industrial Tribunal assessed the value of rein statement at the sum of Rs. 1,000 by adopting the measure of damages as laid down under section 95 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Under the bye laws framed by the respondent the services of an employee could be terminated on giving one month 's notice.
Held, that the monetary value of the benefit of reinstate ment is to be computed not on the basis of a breach of the contract of employment nor on the basis of a tort alleged to have been committed by the employer by reason of the non implementation of the direction for reinstatement contained in the award.
The computation has to be made by the Indus trial Tribunal having regard to all the.circumstances of the case, such a?, the terms and conditions of employment, the tenure of service, the possibility of termination of the employment at the instance of either party, the possibility of retrenchment by the employer or resignation or retirement by the employee and even of the employer himself ceasing to exist, or of the employee being awarded various benefits including reinstatement under the terms of future awards by Industrial Tribunals in the event of industrial disputes arising between the parties in the future.
The observations of Greer L. J. in Salt vs Power Plant Co., Ltd. , 325, relied on.
In the instant case, having regard to the bye laws, the appellant would have been entitled to only one month 's salary in lieu of notice, as and by way of compensation for non implementation of the direction for reinstatement, but this right could not be availed of by the respondent in view of the finding of the Tribunal that he was guilty of unfair labour practice and victimisation, and a correct estimate of the value of the benefit of reinstatement had to be made bearing in mind all the relevant factors.
