The respondents were charged with offences punishable under section 120B, 489A, 489C and s420 read with sections 511 and 34 IPC for forging and counterfeiting American dollar notes of 20 dollar denomination, by printing 2000 such notes.
Re spondents 1 and 2 were further alleged to have been in possession of 148 forged currency notes knowing the same to be forged, with intent to use these forged notes as genuine.
The accused respondents contended before the Sessions Court that a charge under section 489A and 489C of the IPC could be lawfully levelled only in the case of counterfeiting of 'Indian ' currency notes and not in the case of counterfeit ing of 'foreign ' currency notes.
The Sessions Court upheld the aforesaid contention and discharged the accused respond ents.
The High Court also confirmed the aforesaid order of discharge.
Allowing the appeal by appellant State and remanding the case to the trial court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was wrong in holding that sections 489A to 489E are not applicable to currency notes other than Indian currency notes and that counterfeiting of or possess ing of counterfeit dollar bills or dollar notes is not an offence under the Indian Law.
Therefore, the judgment and order of discharge rendered by the High Court are reversed and set aside.
The matter will now go back to the trial court for proceeding further in accordance with law.
[325 F 326 C] 2.1 An analysis of section 489A reveals that: (i) counterfeiting 'any ' currency 318 note or bank note is an offence; (ii)knowingly performing any part of the process of counterfeiting any currency note or bank note is also an offence; and (iii) the prohibition against counterfeiting or performing such process applies to currency notes as also to bank notes as defined by the explanation to section 489A.
And inasmuch as the aforesaid ex pression interalia means any engagement for the payment of money to the bearer issued by or under the authority of any State or Sovereign power provided it is intended to be used as equivalent to or substitute for money the prohibition also extends to counterfeiting etc.
of currency notes of any other sovereign power.
[321 D G] 2.2 The expression 'currency note ' under section 489A is large enough in its amplitude to cover the currency notes of 'any ' country.
When the legislature does not speak of cur rency notes of India the court interpreting the relevant provision of law cannot substitute the expression 'Indian currency note ' in place of the expression 'currency note '.
When the expression 'currency note ' is interpreted to mean only 'Indian currency note; the width of the expression is being narrowed down or cut down.
[322 A C] 2.3 The court can merely interpret the section, it cannot re write, recast or redesign the section.
In inter preting the provision the exercise undertaken by the court is to make explicit the intention of the legislature which enacted the legislature.
It is not for the court to reframe the legislation for the very good reason that the powers to 'legislate ' have not been conferred on the court.
When the court shrinks the content of the expression 'currency note ', to make it referable to only 'Indian currency note ', it is defeating the intention of the legislature partly inasmuch as the court makes it lawful to counterfeit notes other than Indian currency notes.
The manifest purpose of the provision is that the citizens should be protected from being deceived or cheated.
The citizens deal with and transact business with each other through the medium of currency.
It is incon ceivable why the legislature should be anxious to protect citizens from being deceived or cheated only in respect of Indian currency notes and not in respect of currency notes issued by other sovereign powers.
[322 B 322 F] 2.4 To read the expression 'any currency note ' to mean and refer only to 'Indian currency note 'is to misread the expression by doing violence both to the letter and spirit thereof unmindful of the fact that the former expression in its plentitude covers the currency notes issued by any and every country of the world whereas the latter is applicable to only one of the countries in the world.
[325 D] 3.
The expression 'bank note ' employed in sections 489A to 489E of IPC takes within its sweep an engagement for the payment of money issued by or under 319 the authority of any State or Sovereign power as is evident from the analysis of section 489A.
It would therefore cover a dollar bill or dollar note as well.
A dollar bill issued by the Soveriegn Government of United States of America would ipsofacto be covered by the expression 'banknote '.
And as revealed by the analysis made earlier, the prohibition would apply to the counterfeiting of a Bank note or being in possession of a counterfeit Bank note as well.
It would, therefore, in any case, be an offence tO counterfeit a dollar bill or to be in possession of a counterfeit dollar bill.
[323 C D] 4.
The definition contained in section 2 of the Indian Paper Currency Act is only for the purpose of that particular Act and it cannot be imported into section 489A to 489E of the Indian Penal Code.
[325 E]
