The appellant who was residing at House No. 546 situated at Dhantoli area at Nagpur was evicted from the said prem ises on the ground of bona fide requirement of its landlord.
Therefore he became an "evicted person" within the meaning of section 2(2) of the Central Province and Berar Letting of House and Rent Control Order, 1949.
Being a Government employee he applied to the House Allotment Officer that he may be allotted House No. 406/1 under clause 24A of the said Control Order simultaneously indicating that he was an "evicted person" also.
The premises came to his occupation on the orders passed by the House Allotment Officer in 1960.
The appellant retired from service on 1.5.1978.
On 10.9.1979 one Vijay Mude, one of the respondents, moved an application before the House Allotment Officer for vacating the appel lant from the premises on the ground that he has retired.
The said application under clause 25 of the Rent Control Order was contested by the appellant that it was not ap plicable as he was an "evicted person" under clause 2(2) of the Control Order.
Having lust before all courts, the appel lant came by way of special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 On the scheme of the different clauses it was only when a person was granted an allotment as a government servant, then and then only can clause 25 be invoked for his eviction.
In other cases, the clause 13 will be relevant.
The summary procedure of clause 25 could only be available in case of recovery of possession given to a person as a government servant on his retirement.
Indeed the provisions are peculiar.
Even if a government servant goes on earned leave or is transferred even then he becomes disentitled to remain in possession of the premises in question and would be liable to be evicted by virtue of clause 25 of the said Rent Control Order.
Being drastic in nature, therefore, one who seeks allotee 's eviction has to establish that the allotment to the person whose eviction is sought was made in the capacity 403 contemplated under clause 25.
Clauses 23, 24A and 25 of the Rent Control Order deal with three independent categories of persons and the summary procedure on proper construction of clause 25 was applicable only where allotment is given to a tenant as a tenant.
Clause 25 would not operate, if a Gov ernment servant happened to be an evictee and an allotment is made in that capacity.
In the instant case, on a con struction of the various documents and the evidence adduced in this appeal under these proceedings, it is clear that allotment was given to the appellant as an evictee who happened to be at the relevant time a government servant.
Therefore, on his retirement from the government service, he did not cease to be an evictee and did not come within the mischief of clause 25 of the said Control Order.
[408G 409 A 409H 410B] 1.2 Even if allotment is made to a person who is both an evictee as well as a government servant then if one of the grounds of the order namely, that he was a government serv ant ceases to exist on retirement, the other reason operates i.e. he was an evictee and still continues to be an evictee then the allotment would continue.
In this case even if it be held that it cannot be conclusively determined that the order of allotment was made in favour of the appellant only on the ground that the appellant was an evictee but it was made also on the ground that the appellant was a government servant, and after his retirement the other ground namely the allottee still being an evictee remained valid it can be sustained.
[410 C, F] State of Maharashtra & Anr.
B.K. Takkamore & Ors., ; , applied.
