The Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965, by section 13(3) provides that a landlord 's petition for eviction of his tenant from a premises on the ground of bona fide personal need, has to be disposed of by the Rent Control Court.
Section 18(1)(b) makes provision of an appeal to the Appellate Authority against the order of the Rent Control Court.
Sub s.(5) of section 18, stipulates that the decision of the appellate authority and subject to such decision, an order of the Rent Controller 'shall be final ' and 'shall not be liable to be called in question in any court of law ', except as provided in section 20.
By section 20, a revision is provided where the appellate authority is Subordinate Judge to the District Judge and in other cases, that is to say, where the appellate authority is District Judge, to the High Court.
The respondent landlord filed an eviction petition against the appellant 's husband tenant on the ground of bona fide personal need.
The Rent Controller passed an order dismissing the petition.
The order was confirmed in appeal filed by the respondent before the Appellate Authority.
Thereafter, the respondent preferred a revision petition before the District Judge.
That petition having been dis missed, he moved the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
During the pendency of the second revision, the appellant 's husband died and she was brought on record as the legal representative.
The High Court set aside all the orders of the courts below and ordered eviction of the appellant.
486 In appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant that the High Court had exceeded its jurisdiction in setting aside the judgments and orders of the courts below, since no revision lies to the High Court against the order of the District Judge in view of section 18(5) read with s.20 of the Act which has completely ousted the High Court 's jurisdiction to interfere section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: (1) The High Court had no jurisdiction to inter fere in the matter section 115 of C.P.C. Therefore, the judg ment and order of the High Court are set aside.
The ambits of revisional powers are well settled and need not be restated.
It is inconceivable to have two revisions.
The scheme of the Kerala Buildings (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1965 does not warrant such a conclusion.
[492 D] 2(ii) Sub section
(5) of section 18 of the Act says that subject to the decision of the appellate authority, the decision of the Rent Controller shall be final an,] could only be ques tioned in the manner provided in section 20 and in no other manner.
The expression 'shall be final ' in the Act means what it says.
The intention of the legislature in enacting the said Act is clear and manifest from section 18(5) and the scheme of the Act, that is to say, to regulate the leasing of buildings and to control the rent of such buildings and to provide a tier of courts by themselves for eviction of the rented premises.
This is writ large in the different provisions of the Act.
[492 G] 2(iii) When section 18(5) of the Act specifically states that "shall not be liable to be called in question in any Court of law" except in the manner provided under section 20, it cannot be said that the High Court which is a court of law and which is a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure could revise again an order on again after revision under section 20 of the Act.
That would mean there would be a trial by four courts, that would be repugnant to the scheme manifest in the different sections of the Act in question.
Public policy or public interest demands curtailment of law 's delay and justice demands finality within quick dis posal of case.
The language of the provisions of section 18(5) read with section 20 inhibits further revision.
The courts must so construe.
[494 G 495 A] Kydd y. Watch Committee of City of Liverpool, (1908) Appeal Cases 327 at 331 332; South Asia Industries Private Ltd. vs S.B. Sarup Singh and 487 Others, & Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, [1980]3 SCR 32, relied upon.
Ouseph Vareed vs Mary, , over ruled.
Maung Ba Thaw and Another Insolvents vs Ma Pin, AIR 1934 P.C. 81, distinguished.
Kurien vs Chacko, , approved.
In the instant case, the appeal lay from Rent Control Court to the appellant authority who was the Subordinate Judge and therefore the revision lay to the District Judge.
After the dismissal of the revision by the District Judge from the appellate decision of the Subordinate Judge who confirmed the order of the Rent Controller, the respondent landlord chose again to go before the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
But, he could not have a second revision to the High Court, since the jurisdiction of the High Court section 115 of the C.P.C. was excluded by the Act.
[491 H 492 B, D]
