The Union of India Respondent No. 1, had to recover certain arrears of taxes from the assessee company Respond ent No. 2.
The assessee company informed the Union of India that the tax dues recoverable from it be recovered from the amount which was owed by the appellant company to it.
The debt due by the appellant company to the assessee company was shown to the credit of assessee company in the accounts of the appellant company.
The appellant company acknowl edged and admitted its liability to the assesseecompany and promised the Union of India to pay the amount of tax dues against the debt due by it to the assessee company.
Notices under section 46(2) and section 46(5A) of the Income Tax Act were issued to the appellant company for the recovery of the said amount.
The Union of India filed a suit seeking a decree against the appellant company and four other defendants.
The appel lant company set up a false theory that the assessee company itself was liable to pay the appellantcom pany and, therefore, it was not liable to pay tax dues of the assessee company.
The trial court decreed the suit holding that the Union of India was entitled to a money decree against the appel lant company.
The appeal preferred by the appellant company was dismissed by the High Court.
In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the appellant company it was contended that a suit as filed by the respondent and the decree granted by the trial court was not permissible in law because proceedings for appointment of 363 receiver can only be contemplated in execution proceedings of a decree against the original debtor.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court has rightly maintained the decree by coming to the conclusion that the amount of com mission earned by the assesseecompany was admittedly with the appellant.
It was withheld by the appellant under the pretext that it had a counter claim against the assessee Under section 46(2) of the Income Tax Act, a prohibitory order attaching the said money of the assessee company was issued and the machinery under S.46(5A) of the Act was no longer effective as the appellant set up a counter claim against the assessee and there was no option for the Union of India but to obtain adjudication from the civil court.
[365H 366B] 2.
No money decree could be passed against the appel lant company except for the money lying in the deposits with them for the assessee company and it is for that pur pose that the decree for appointment of receiver was made so that the amount be recovered and paid to the plaintiff Union of India.
[366C D]
