As far back as 1972, the Uttar Pradesh Government by G.O. No. 43/90/66 Apptt. 4 dated July 18, 1972 announced "for the physically handicapped persons, the reservation in all the services under the Government shall be 2%".
AH the Government Departments were directed to follow the policy for reservation in services accordingly.
Later, by G.O. No. 7/4/1971 Personnel 2 dated May 20, 1978 the Government of Uttar Pradesh while affirming the "reservation of 2% posts for the ' appointment of disabled persons in all the services under the Government", defined who a physically handicapped person was.
Pursuant to a letter from the Public Service Commission there was a proposal not to reserve any post for disabled persons in the Provincial Civil Service.
This proposal, however, did not result in the issuance of any G.O. by the Government.
But the Public Service Commission was informed by the Government by their letter dated 1.3.1979 that none of the categories of disabled persure was suitable for appointment to the U.P. Civil Service (Execu tive Branch) and no reservation for disabled persons might be made in the Provincial Civil (Executive Branch) Service.
In 1981 the Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh addressed all the Secretaries to the Government, Head of Department and Commissioners in Uttar Pradesh pointing out that though a provision for reservation of 2% posts was made for physically handicapped persons by G.O. No. 43/90/66 dated July 18, 1972 in the services under the State Govern ment, appointments had not been made of handicapped persons in accordance with the reservation.
The necessity of making appointments of physically handicapped persons to the re served posts was impressed upon all the Secretaries, Heads of Departments and Commissioners and it was particularly brought to their attention that 1981 had been declared as "the International Year for 575 the physically Handicapped Persons '.
It was also directed that vacancies should be carried forward and efforts should be made to ensure that the maximum number of physically handicapped persons were appointed.
The appellant, a disabled person who was successful at the combined State Services Examination held in 1982 by the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission was offered the post of Manager Marketing and Economic Survey instead of a post in the Provincial Civil Service (Executive) Branch on the ground that the reservation of 2% to the disabled persons had been revoked by the Government letter dated 1.3.1979.
The Writ Petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the Allahabad High Court.
Hence the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court.
Held: A perusal of the letter dated 1.3.1979 indicates that it was confined to "recruitment on the basis of Com bined State Services Examination, 1978".
It was not intended to be an amendment of G.O. No. 43/90/66 dated July 18, 1972 or G.O. No. 7/4/1971 dated May 20, 1978.
It was not intended to depart from general rule of reservation of 2% posts in favour of disabled persons in the case of the Provincial Civil Service (Executive Branch).
Further in the face of the communication in 1981 by the Chief Secretary drawing atten tion of all departments to the G.O. 1972, it is now futile for the Government to contend that the appellant cannot be appointed to the Provincial Civil Service (Executive Branch).
Having announced very rightly their determination to rehabilitate physically handicapped persons, by reserving posts for them in all the services of the Government, the Government cannot now create needless hurdles.
[577C H]
