The respondent was appointed as a Workshop Mechanic.
He was promoted to the post of Workshop InstrUctor on 7.8.1959 in the pay scale of Rs.100 120.
The pay scales were revised w.e.f.
1.1.1961.
Diploma holders were given the pay scale of Rs. 150 320, and Certificate holders Rs. 150 250 in the cadre of Workshop Instructor.
The respondent, a Certificate holder, was given the pay scale of Rs. 150 250.
The pay scales were again revised in 1964 and Workshop Instructors with second class Diploma or equivalent qualifications with 10 years experience were given the pay scale of Rs.260 500, but the respondent did not get this scale in spite of re peated representations made to the State Government.
The respondent filed a Writ Petition alleging discrimi nation.
The High Court allowed the petition holding: (1) that for recruitment to the post of Workshop Instructor no distinction is made between the holders of a Certificate and holders of a Diploma, (2) that at the time when the respond ent was recruited there was no difference in the pay scales prescribed for holders of Diploma and holders of Certifi cate, and the basis for recruitment was that Diploma holder and Certificate holder both were entitled to be appointed to the same post in the same pay scale, and (3) that by subse quent revision of pay scale different pay scales could not be enforced for the same post merely on the basis of a holder of a Certificate or a Diploma because as an Instruc tor the person will perform the same duties and will do the same work in spite of the fact that he may be a Certificate holder or a Diploma holder, and directed that the respondent be placed in the pay scale not lower than that of the Diplo ma holders.
580 In appeal to this Court on behalf of the Appellant State it was contended: (1) that the different pay scales on the basis of difference in educational qualifications could he justified and will mount to reasonable classification and will not he hit by Article 14 of the Constitution, (2) that a Diploma is a higher qualification than a Certificate and (3) that the view taken by the High Court is not correct.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
Neither there is any curriculum on record nor any other material to draw the inference that Diploma is a higher qualification than a Certificate.
At the time when respondent was recruited there was only one cadre and a Diploma holder or a Certificate holder both were entitled to he recruited as an Instructor on the same pay scale.
This circumstance indicates that the two were considered to he alike.
[582E F] 2.
There is no material on record to indicate that when the pay scales were revised and subsequently they were further revised it was done on the basis of some material indicating that the Diploma became a better qualification than the Certificate holder.
It was because of this the High Court did not go into the general question as to whether on the basis of educational qualifications different pay scales can or could not be prescribed and in the absence of any material it will not he possible for this Court to go into that question.
[582F H] 3.
On the facts of the present case it could.
not he said that the High Court committed any error.
[583A B]
