The proviso to sub s.(6) of s.82 of the Punjab Reorgani sation Act, 1966 mandates that the conditions of service applicable to any person referred to in sub s.(1) or sub s.(2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Rule 6(b) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964, as it stood at the relevant time, provided that in case of appointment by promotion from Class II Service no person shall be appointed unless he has completed in that Class of Service for a period of ten years from the commencement of these ,Rules, six years service and after that period eight years service.
The Governor of Haryana by a notification dated 22nd June, 1984 amended the above Rules by inserting the words 'in addition to the qualifications prescribed in clause (a) ' after the words "eight years service" in cl(b) of r.6 with retrospective effect from July 10, 1964 thereby making a degree in Engineering essential for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer in Class I service.
Rule 3(c) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II P.W.D. 585 (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1941 had enjoined that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he possessed one of the University degrees or other qualifications prescribed.
The proviso to r.5 however, laid down that that rule may be relaxed by Government on the recommendations of the Chief Engineers in order to admit the promotion of a member of the Overseers Engineering Service of outstanding merit who may not possess the qualifications specified in rule 3.
The petitioners, who are Engineering Diploma holders, were appointed to Class 11I Overseers Engineering Service (Irrigation Branch) in the erstwhile State of Punjab in the year 1953, 1949 and 1952 respectively.
In due course they were promoted as Sub Divisional Officers in Class II service and were eligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer in Class I service under the unamended rule 6(b) having more than eight years ' service in Class II service.
In A.S. Parmar vs State of Haryana, [1984] 2 SCR 476 this Court interpreting the unamended rule 6(b) had held that a degree in Engineering was not an essential qualification for promotion of Class II Officers to the cadre of Executive Engineer in Class I service.
But just before they were about to be promoted the State of Haryana issued the impugned notification rendering them inelligible.
Aggrieved by the said notification they filed these writ petitions under Art.32 of the Constitution.
It was contended for them that the impugned notification purporting to amend r.6(b) of Class I Rules with retrospective effect was ultra vires the State Government being contrary to the proviso to s.82(6) of the , that the unamended r.6(b) had conferred a vested right of promotion on them which could not be taken away by retrospective amendment under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution, that a retrospective amendment taking away eligibility for promotion from a back date ranging over 20 years and thereby rendering invalid the promotions already made was constitu tionally impermissible, and that the action of the Govern ment in making such retrospective amendment to nullify the decision in Parmar 's case was wholly arbitrary, irrational and mala fide and thus violative of articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
For the respondents it was contended that the proviso to section 82(6) was not attracted to the facts of the case since on the appointed day, that is, November 1, 1966 the petitioners were not members of Class II Service.
They were then Super visors belonging to Class 111 Service, and, therefore, were not governed by the unamended r.6(b).
It was further con tended that under r.3(c) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class II 586 P.W.D. (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1941 a degree in Engineer ing was essential till the 1970 Rules brought about a change.
Inasmuch as none of the petitioners had the requi site qualifications, they could not become members of Class II Service.
It wag strenuously contended that the decision in A.S. Parmar vs State of Haryana was incorrect.
Allowing the writ petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The impugned notification dated June 22, 1984 issued by the State Government of Haryana purporting to amend r.6(b) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Rules 1964, with retrospective effect from July 10, 1964 is declared ultra vires the State Government being contrary to s.82(6) of the .
[602EF, S97CD] 1.2 The proviso to s.82(6) of the is in the nature of a fetter on the power of the Gover nor under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution not to alter the conditions of service applicable to members of civil services affected by the reorganisation of the State to their disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central Government.
[593E, 597B] In the Instant case, the State Government never moved the Central Government seeking its prior approval to the proposed amendment of r.6(b) of the said Class I Rules.
There was no Chief Secretaries Conference as was held prior to the reorganisation of the States under the States Reor ganisation Act, 1956.
Nor was there any communication issued by the Central Government conveying its previous approval of the changes in the service conditions which the States of Punjab and Haryana might make in terms of the proviso to s.82(6) of the .
The amend ment, therefore, must be struck down.
[596E,G, 597C] Mohammad Bhakar vs
Y. Krishan Reddy, ; Mohammdd Shujat Ali & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; and A.S. Parmar vs State of Haryana, [1984] 2 SCR 476, referred to.
I The decision in Parmar 's case is not open to ques tion.
What was of the essence for purposes of promotion of Sub Divisional Officers who were members of Class II Service to the post of Executive Engineer under r.6(b) of the Class I Rules was not a degree in Engineering, but eight years ' experience in Class II Service.
[597G, 598CD] 587 2.2 The petitioners like other members of Class II Service who are diploma holders and satisfy the eligibility test of eight years ' service in that Class were, therefore, eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer in Class I service without having a degree in Engineering.
[594B] A.S. Parmar vs State of Haryana, [1984] 2 SCR 476, referred to.
The requirement of a degree in Engineering which was an essential educational qualification for purposes of direct recruitment of Assistant Executive Engineers in Class I Service under r.6(a) of the Class I Rules could not be projected for promotion of Sub,Divisional Officers belonging to Class II Service to the posts of Executive Engineers in Class I. Service under r.6(b) as they form two distinct sources from which appointments to the posts of Executive Engineers could be made.
[598B] 4.
The proviso to r.5 of the 1941 Rules conferred power on the State Government to relax the requirement of r.3(c) on the recommendation of the Chief Engineer in order to admit the promotion of a member of the Overseen Engineering Service (Irrigation Branch), Punjab if he was an officer of outstanding merit although he did not possess the qualifica tion prescribed in r.3(c), i.e. a degree in Engineering.
Presumably, the petitioners were officers off outstanding merit as they were promoted as Offg.
Sub,Divisional Officers in Class II Service in January 1964, July 1966 and November 1969.
[597H 598A, 596A] 5.
It cannot be said that on the appointed day i.e. on November, 1, 1966 the petitioners were Overseers belonging to the Class III Service and were therefore not governed by unamended r.6(b).
Two of them had already been promoted as (Mfg. SUb,Divisional Officers prior to the appointed day, i.e. in January 1964 and July 1966 and were, therefore, governed by the unamended r.6(b).
The third petitioner was also promoted to that post subsequently in November 1969.
Upon such promotion to the post of Offg.
Sub Divisional Officers they had not only the legitimate expectation that they would in due course be considered for confirmation but also had the right on such confirmation to be considered for promotion.
It is also not quite accurate to say that the petitioners were not shown as belonging to the Class 11 Service.
A bare look at the notification dated October 27, 1985 would show that the petitioners figure at Sr.
Nos. 246, 254 and 369.
[596B D] 6.
The power to frame rules to regulate the conditions of service 588 under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution carries with it the power to amend or alter the rules with a retro spective effect.
This rule is, however, subject to a well recognised principle that the benefits acquired under the existing rules cannot be taken away by an amendment with retrospective effect.
Therefore, unless it is specifically provided in the rules, the employees who were already pro moted before the amendment of the rules, cannot be reverted and their promotions cannot be recalled.
In other words, such rules laying down qualifications for promotion made with retrospective effect must necessarily satisfy the tests of articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
They do not, in the instant case.
[599B F] B.S. Vadhera vs Union of India, ; , Raj Kumar vs Union of India, ; K. Nagaraj & Ors.
vs State of A.P. & Anr.
, ; ; State of J & K vs Triloki Nath Khosla & Ors., ; ; State of Mysore vs
M.N. Krishna Murtv & Ors., ; ; B.S. Yadav & Ors., vs State of liaryana & Ors.; , ; State of Gujarat & Anr.
vs Ramanlal Keshavlal Soni & Ors., ; and Ex Captain K.C. Arora & Anr.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
