The common question of law for determination in these two appeals was whether the word 'individual ' in section 16(3) of the 'Indian Income tax Act, 1922, as amended by Act IV of 1937, includes a female and whether the income of minor sons from a partnership, to the benefits of which they were admitted, was liable to be included in computing the total income of the mother who was a member of the partnership.
Held, (Per Bhagwati and Kapur jj.
, section K. Das J. dissenting) that the question must be answered in the negative.
The word 'individual ' occurring in section 16(3) of the Indian Income tax Act, as amended by Act IV Of 1937, means only a male and does not include a female.
Shrimati Chanda Devi vs The Commissioner of Income tax, and Musta Quima Begum, In re, , disapproved.
Where the Legislature uses ambiguous language in enacting a statute, as it has undoubtedly done in the instant case, recourse must necessarily be had, for a clarification of such ambiguity, to the pre existing state of the law in order to see what defect or mischief therein was being sought to be remedied, the remedy that was prescribed by the statute and the reason for it.
Bengal Immunity Company Limited vs The State of Bihar, , Thomson vs Lord Clanmorris, and Eastman Photographic Materials Company vs Comptroller General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks, , relied on.
A reference to the Income Tax Enquiry Report, 1936, and the Statement of objects and reasons that led to the passing of the Indian Income tax (Amendment) Act IV of 1937 makes it clear beyond doubt that the mischief the Legislature was seeking to remedy was one that resulted from a husband entering into a 2 nominal partnership with his wife or a father admitting his minor children to the benefits of a partnership, and the possibility of a mother doing so was not even thought of.
Per section K. Das J.
There is no ambiguity in section 16(3) of the Indian Income Tax Act, as amended by Act IV Of 1937, and, read in the context of the other provisions of the Act and construed as a whole, it clearly indicates that the Legislature used the word 'individual ' in that sub section in its ordinary connotation to mean both a male and a female person.
Even if, on the assumption that there is ambiguity in the phraseology used in the sub section, reference is made to the Income Tax Enquiry Report, 1936, and the Statement of objects and reasons of the Amending Act IV of 1937 for the limited purpose for which it is permissible to do so, they disclose nothing concerning the policy adopted by the Legislature or the object the, statute was intended to accomplish that makes any other meaning inevitable.
The recommendations made by the Report were not fully accepted by the Legislature and it cannot be a reliable guide and the use of the word 'parent ' in the Statement clearly shows that the mischief envisaged was not confined to the father alone.
