Section 10 of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 empowers the Government in public interest to make an exemp tion or reduction in rates either prospectively or retro spectively in respect of any tax payable under the Act.
The State Government with a view to boost industrialisa tion, by an order dated 11th April, 1979 offered incentive to Small Scale industries, to be set up thereafter, in form of exemption from sales tax and purchase tax for a period of five years from the date of commencement of production.
By a second order dated 29th September, 1980, published in the Gazette on 21st October, 1980 purported to be made under section 10 of the Act, the Government withdrew the exemption relat ing to purchase tax and confined the exemption from sales tax to the limit specified.
The appellants who set up their industries after April 11, 1979, including those who did it after 21st October, 1980, claimed benefit of exemption from purchase tax and sales tax in terms of the first order.
They pleaded the rule of estoppel against the State Government in making the second order.
The High Court in dismissing their Writ Peti tions proceeded on the footing that the first order was not made in exercise of statutory power while the second order was issued under I0 of the Act.
Allowing the appeals by Special Leave, the Court, HELD: I. Where the authority making an order has power conferred upon it by statute to that effect, such an order if made without 655 indicating the section under which it is made, it would be deemed to have been made under the enabling provision.
In the instant case, therefore, both the orders are covered by section 10, though in the earlier order there was no reference to the statutory provision.
[658G H] 2.
The appellants who in response to the first order dated April 11, 1979 set up their industries prior to 21st October, 1980 would be entitled to exemption extended and/or promised under that order.
Such exemption would continue for the full period of five years from the date they started production.
New industries set up after 21st October, 1980 would not be entitled to that benefit as they had noticed of the curtailment in the exemption before they came to set up their industries.
They would be entitled to exemption from sales tax only to the limit specified in the second order.
[659G 600A] 3.
If in response to an order made by the Government and in consideration of the concession made available therein the promoters of any small scale concern set up their indus tries within the State, they would certainly be entitled to plead the rule of estoppel in their favour when the State purports to act differently.
In the facts of the present case, however, the plea of estoppel is unanswerable.
[659B. F] Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. vs State of U.P. ; , Bakul Cashew Co. vs Sales Tax Officer, Quilon, [1986] 2 SCC 365, referred to.
