The assessee company while carrying on business as a Contractor entered into a contract with the Railway Administration, inter alia, for the execution of earth work required for the construction of a new railway yard.
For this purpose, the assessee purchased two pieces of land at a total cost of Rs.68,241.
Soon after the work was over, the assessee sold both lands for a sum of Rs.23,000, thereby sustaining a loss of Rs.45,241.
The assessee treated this as the value of the excavated earth, and apportioned the amount in its accounts in assessment years 1965 66, 1966 67 and 1967 68.
The claim of the assessee to a deduction of Rs.30,045 for the assessment year 1966 67 was disallowed by the Income tax Officer on the ground that it represented a capital loss.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the first appeal of the assessee.
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal allowed the second appeal of the assessee on the ground that the land formed a wasting asset and by constant digging of the earth the land had become unserviceable.
In the Reference, on the question whether the loss of Rs.30,045 claimed by the assessee is a capital loss or a revenue loss, the High Court held that the loss of the said amount claimed by the assessee was a capital loss and, therefore, the assessee was not entitled to a deduction.
Dismissing the appeal of the assessee company to this Court, ^ HELD: The assessee was full proprietor of the two pieces of land and for an indefinite period.
The reason for acquiring the land was no doubt to provide a ready supply of earth to the work site nearby, but there was nothing to prevent the assessee from continuing as owner of 220 the land even after the railway contract had been executed and putting it to any other use.
The land was treated by the assessee as its fixed asset.
In all the circumstances of the case, the two pieces of land must be regarded as capital assets, and the loss claimed by the assessee must be regarded as a capital loss.[222B D] M.A. Jabbar vs Commissioner of Income tax, Andhra Pradesh, , 497 8 distinguished.
