Article 371 D was introduced in the Constitution by the Constitution (Thirty Second Amendment) Act 1973, which came into force with effect from 1st July, 1974, and pursuant to c1.(3) thereof the President of India made an order on 19th May, 1975 constituting a, Administrative Tribunal for the State of Andhra Pradesh with jurisdiction to deal with service matters specified in that order.
In these petitions under article 32, the petitioners chal lenged the validity of ds.
(3) & (5) of article 371 D. However, challenge to cl.
(3) was not pressed and arguments confined only to cl.
Allowing the Petitions, HELD: (1) Clause (5) of article 371 D of the Constitution along with the Proviso is declared to he unconstiutional and void.
The Government of India is directed to ensure that the necessary amendment is carried out in the Presidential Order dated 19th May, 1975 so as 880 to bring it in conformity with the law laid down by this Court in the instant case.
The Orders made by the State Government in exercise of the power conferred under the Proviso to cl.
(5) of article 371 D shall be quashed and set aside.
[890G H] (2) Clause (5) of article 371 D provides that the order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of the case shall become effective upon its confirmation by the State Government or on the expiry of three months from the date on which the order is made, whichever is earlier.
This clause by itself could not be regarded as in any way rendering the Administrative Tribunal less efficacious than the High Court because it would not be an extra ordinary or unusual provi sion to lay down a period of time during which an order made by a Tribunal may not be given effect to, enabling the State Government either to make arrangements for implementing the order of the Tribunal or to prefer an appeal against it, but what really introduces an infirmity in cl.
(5) is the provi sion enacted in the Proviso, which says that the State Government may by special order made in writing for reasons to be specified therein, modify or annual ally order of the Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case, the order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect.
[887D G] (3) Invariably the State Government would be a party in every service dispute brought before the Administrative Tribunal and the effect of the Proviso is that the State Government which is a party to the proceeding before the Administrative Tribunal and which contests the claim of the public servant who comes before the Administrative Tribunal seeking redress of his grievance against the State Govern ment would have the ultimate authority to uphold or reject the determination of the Administrative Tribunal.
It would be open to the State Government, after it has lost before the Administrative Tribunal, to set at naught the decision given by the Administrative Tribunal against it.
Such a provision is, to say the least, shocking and is clearly subversive of the principles of justice.
A party to the litigation cannot be given the power to over ride the decision given by the Tribunal.
It would be violating the basic concept of justice and make a mockery of the entire adjudicative process.
Not only is the power conferred on the State Government to modify or annul the decision of the Administrative Tribunal starting and wholly repugnant to the notion of justice but it is also a power which can be abused or misused.
[888B E] (4) In the last about three years this power has been exercised by the State Government in large number of cases and even interim orders 881 made by the Administrative Tribunal have been set at naught though no such power is conferred on the State Government.
It is only an order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of the case which can be modified or annulled by the State Government and not an interim order made by the Administrative Tribunal.
The record shows that this limita tion has been completely brushed aside and the State Govern ment has behaved in a most extravagant manner in modifying or annulling orders made by the Administrative Tribunal which were found inconvenient.
Even the Parliament debates show that the bill envisaged exercise of this power in most exceptional cases.
However, this power has been indiscrimi nately used by the State Government.
[888E H] (5) It is a basic principle of the rule of law that the exercise of power by the executive or any other authority must not only be conditioned by the Constitution but must also be in accordance with law and the power of judicial review is conferred by the Constitution with a view to ensuring that the law is observed and there is compliance with the requirement of law on the part of the executive and other authorities.
It is through the power of judicial review conferred on an independent institutional authority such as the High Court that the rule of law is maintained and every organ of the State is kept within the limits of the law.
If the exercise of the power of judicial review can be set at naught by the State Government by over riding the decision given against it, it would sound the death knell the rule of law.
The rule of law would be meaningless as it would be open to the State Government to defy the law and yet to get away with it.
The Proviso to c1.(5) of article 37 1 D is, therefore, violative of the basic structure doc trine.
[889B E] (6) Clause (3) of article 371 D empowers the President by order to provide for the setting up of the Administrative Tribunal and vesting in it the jurisdiction of the High Court in respect of the specified service matters.
This constitutional amendment authorising exclusion of the juris diction of the High Court and the vesting of such Jurisdic tion in the Administrative Tribunal postulates for its validity that the Administrative Tribunal must be as effec tive an institutional mechanism or authority for judicial review as the High Court.
If the Administrative Tribunal is less effective and efficacious than the High Court in the matter of judicial review in respect of the specified serv ice matters, the constitutional amendment would fail foul of the basic structure doctrine.
Undisputedly the provision enacted in the Proviso to cl.
(5)of article 371 D deprives the Administrative Tribunal of its effectiveness and efficacy because it enables the State Government which is a party to the litigation before the Administrative Tribunal to over ride its decision.
The 882 power of judicial review vested in the High Court under articles 226 and 227 does not suffer from any such infirmity because whatever the High Court decides is binding on the State Government, abject only to a right of appeal to a Court of superior jurisdiction and the State Government cannot, for any reason, set at naught the decision of the High Court.
But the power of judicial review conferred on the Administrative Tribunal is, by reason of the Proviso to Cl.
(5) of article 371 D, subject to the veto of the State Government and it is not at all effective or efficacious because the State Government can defeat its exercise by just passing an order modifying or nullifying the decision of the Administrative Tribunal.
The Proviso to Cl.
(5) has the effect of emasculating the striking power of the Administra tive Tribunal and the State Government can make the decision of the Administrative Tribunal impotent and sterile.
There fore, the Proviso to Cl.
(5) renders the Administrative Tribunal a much less effective and efficacious institutional mechanism or authority for judicial review than the High court in respect of the specified service matters.
The conclusion is that the Proviso to Cl.
(5) of article 371 D by which power has been conferred on the State Government to modify or annul the final order of the Administrative Tribu nal is violative of the basic structure doctrine and it is only by striking down that provision that cls.
(3) to (8) of article 371 D can be sustained.
[889E H; 890A E] (7) Therefore, the Proviso to Cl.
(5) of article 371 D is unconstitutional as being ultra vires the amending power of Parliament and if the Proviso goes, the main part of cl.
(5) must also fall alongwith it, since it is closely inter related with the proviso and cannot have any rationale for its existence apart from the Proviso.
The main part of cl.
(5) of Article 371 D would, therefore, also have to be declared unconstitutional and void.
[890E F] (8) If any constitutional amendment made by Parliament takes away from the High Court the power of judicial review in any particular area and vests it in any other institu tional mechanism or authority, it would not be violative of the basic structure doctrine, so long as the essential condition is fulfilled that the alternative institutional mechanism or authority set up by the parliamentary amendment is no less effective than the High Court.
[887A B] (9) Parliament was, therefore, competent by enacting cl.
(3) of article 371 D to provide for setting up an Administra tive Tribunal and excluding the jurisdiction of the High Court in regard to the matters coming within the jurisdic tion of the Administrative Tribunal, so long 883 as the Administrative Tribunal was not less effective or efficacious than the High Court in so far as the power of judicial review is concerned.
[887B D] S.P. Sampath Kumar vs Union of India and Ors., ; , followed and Narasimha Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; and Director of Industries and Commerce vs V.V. Reddy, ; , referred to.
(R.S Pathak C J, Ranganath Misra vs Khalid, G.L. Oza and M.M. Dutt, JJ.) 5th May, 1987 Disposing of the review Petitions, HELD: 1.
The operation of the judgment and order dated December 20, 1986 shall extend to those cases only which were considered by this Court.
[891A B] 2.
The cases in which Petitions were filed directly will now stand remanded to the Administrative Tribunal for judi cial consideration in accordance with the observations of this Court in the judgment of December 20, 1986.
[89lB C] 3.
This direction will also cover those writ petitions which were transferred from the High Court to this Court.
They shall stand transferred to the Administrative Tribunal and be considered similarly.
[891C D] 4.
Those cases in which the State Government modified or superseded the orders of the Administrative Tribunal shall be treated as concluded by the relative orders of the Admin istrative Tribunal as they stood before the said orders were interfered with by the State Government.
[891D E]
