The petitioner appellant carrying on the business of exporting frozen meat of buffaloes, sheep and goat, sought to establish an abattoir, meat processing plant and a cold storage in a riots prone area near Bombay.
The site was situated on the bank of a river whose water is used for purposes of drinking and washing, besides religious usage, by the inhabitants of the surrounding villages.
The Sarpanch of the Group Gram Panchayat granted no objection certifi cate.
The District Collector granted permission to use the land for non agricultural purposes for the said plant under s.44 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 on April 5, 1982.
At this stage the villagers raised objections to the setting up of the plant and made a representation to the Revenue Minister alleging that construction of the abattoir and discharge of effluent from the abattoir into the river would pollute the river water which was used for drinking purposes.
The Government issued a show cause notice to the appellants on October 7, 1983 under s.2S7 of the Code for ,cancellation of the order of the District Collector.
The Minister heard the revision and by his order dated November 25, 1983 set aside the order of the District Collector.
Aggrieved by the said order the appellants fried a petition in the High Court under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing the decision of the Government cancelling the permission.
The High Court upheld the order of the Government but directed it to pay compensation for the cost incurred in setting up the project up to October 7, 1983, being the date when show cause notice was issued.
893 The petitioners appealed to this Court by special leave against upholding of the impugned order while the State preferred the appeal ' by special leave against the direction for payment of the compensation.
Dismissing the cross appeals this Court confirmed the judgment of the High Court upholding the order of the Gover ment.
It also held the appellants entitled to compensation in lieu of costs incurred on the project and interest on the compensation amount for the period subsequent to October, 7, 1983.
Pronouncing the reasons, the Court, HELD: The High Court has examined the scope of ss.44 and 257 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 in detail and after considering all the facts and circumstances came to the conclusion that the Government had the power to revise even suo moto orders passed by the Collector and found that the grounds on the basis of which the Government acted existed and, therefore, the action on the part of the Gov ernment was bona fide and in public interest, although it did not act diligently, but still in public interest the High Court maintained the order passed by the Government with the direction to compensate the persons concerned.
The view taken by the High Court appears to he correct.
There is no reason to interfere with it.
[879D F]
