In order that the lands belonging to a Trust for an institution for public religious worship should be entitled to exemption from the operation of Sections 32 to 32R of the Tenancy Act, 1948, two conditions namely (i) that the Trust must be registered or deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950; and (ii) that the entire income of the lands belonging to a Trust for an institution for public religious worship must be appropriated for the purposes of such a Trust who added under the proviso to section 36B(1)(b) of the Act.
The challenge to the constitu tional validity of the same was negatived by the Bombay High Court.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: Sub section 1(b) of section 88B of the Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948 does not offend against Article 26 of the Constitution by reason of the introduction of conditions (1) and (ii) in the proviso to that sub section.
[869G H] Both conditions (i) and (ii) do not in any way detract from the exemption granted under sub section i(b) of section 88B of the Act.
Condition (i) merely introduces a require ment that the Trust must be registered or deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 and this requirement is introduced in order to ensure that the Trust is really and truly a trust which falls within the language of subsection 1(b) of section 88B, namely, that it is genu inely a trust for an institution for public religious wor ship.
If the Trust is registered or deemed to be registered under the Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950, that would afford incontrovertible proof of the fact that it is a trust for a charitable 868 or religious purpose.
Condition (ii) requires that the entire income of the lands belonging to a Trust for an institution for public religious worship must be appropriat ed for the purposes of such Trust.
If lands belonging to a trust for an institution for public religious worship are to be eligible for exemption under sub section t(b) of section 88B, it would be quite legitimate for the legislature to insist that the entire income of such lands must be appro priated for the purposes of such Trust.
That would ensure that the trust is a genuine Trust for public religious worship and is not merely a facade for carrying out some other purposes.
[869C F]
