While the Central Government as well as the Parliament has the power to make laws under Entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule for the purpose of "coordination and deter mination of standards in institutions for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions", the State Government by virtue of the executive powers vested under Article 162 of the Constitution has also the power to make laws under Entry 25 of the Concurrent List III of the Seventh Schedule in respect of "Education, including techni cal education, medical education and universities, subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical training of labour".
In accordance with the provisions of section 33 of the , the Medical Council with the previous sanction of the Central Government made the Regulations laying down the standards of proficiency to be obtained and the practical training to be undertaken in medical institutions for grant of recognised medical quali fication.
The said Regulations lay down the criteria for selection of candidates for post graduate training and one such criteria is "students of post graduate training should be selected strictly on merit judged on the basis of academ ic record in the undergraduate course".
While inviting applications by its notice dated 15.10.82 for admission to the various post graduate courses in degree and diploma in the 662 different specialities the State Government issued an order dated 15.12.82, para 6 of which was to the effect that "No candidate shall he eligible for admission to post graduate degree or diploma course, who has obtained less than 55% and 52% marks respectively for the two courses (Degree and Diploma) in merit calculated in accordance with para 2 of the said notice.
" Some of the candidates who were denied admission on the ground that they have obtained less than the prescribed percentage of marks have approached the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution and some others have come by way of special leave having lost their writ petitions before the Allahabad High Court.
The only question that arose was the competency of the State Government to prescribe the minimum marks obtained in MBBS for admission to post graduate courses and whether such an order is in conflict with the power of the Central Legis lature to make laws in respect of matters specified in Entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule.
Dismissing the appeals and the petitions, the Court, HELD: I.1.
The State Government order dated 15.12.82 has not in any way contravened or encroached upon the power of the Central Legislature to make laws or the Central Government to make orders in regard to matters provided in Entry 66 of List 1 of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution There is no conflict between the Regulations and also the order in question.
The State Government by laying down the eligibility qualification namely the obtaining of certain minimum marks in the MBBS examination 'by the candidates has not in any way encroached upon the Regulations made under the nor does it infringe the central power provided in the Entry_ 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
The order merely provides an additional eligibility, qualification [672C F] 1.2 The State Government can in exercise of its execu tive power under Article 162 of the Constitution make an order relating to matters referred to in Entry 25 of the Concurrent List in the absence of any law made by the State Legislature The impugned order made by the State Government pursuant to its executive powers laying dawn the eligibility qualification for the candidates to he considered on merits for admission to the post graduate courses in Medical Col leges in the State, is valid and it cannot he assailed on the ground that it is beyond the 663 competence of the State Government to make such order pro vided it does not encroach upon or infringe the power of the Central Government as well as the Parliament provided in Entry 66 of List I. The impugned order dated 15.12.82 lays down the criteria or eligibility qualification i.e. obtain ing 55% of marks by candidates seeking admission in the post graduate degree course and obtaining of 52% marks by candi dates seeking admission to post graduate diploma course for being considered for selection.
The order in question merely specifies a further eligibility qualification for being considered for selection for admission to the post graduate courses (degree and diploma) in the medical colleges in the State in accordance with the criteria laid down by the Indian Medical Council.
This does not in any way encroach upon the Regulations that have been framed under the provi sions of section 33 of the .
On the other hand in order to promote and further the determi nation of standards in institutions for higher education, the State Government who runs these colleges provide an additional eligibility qualification, under its own right.
[669E G; 670D H] 1.3 In the instant case the number of seats for admis sion to various post graduate courses both degree and diplo ma in Medical Colleges is limited and a large number of candidates undoubtedly apply for admission to these courses of study.
In such circumstances the impugned order laying down the qualification for a candidate to he eligible for being considered for selection for admission to the said courses on the basis of the merit as specified by Regula tions made under the , cannot be said to he in conflict with the said Regulations or in any way repugnant to the said Regulations.
It does not in any way encroach upon the standards prescribed by the said Regulations.
On the other hand by laying down a further qualification of eligibility it promotes and furthers the standard in an institution.
[671D E] State of A.P. & Ors.
vs Lavu Narendranath & Ors.
; , ; R. Chitralekha and Anr.
vs State.of Mysore Madras & Ors., ; , referred to.
