The State of Bihar adopted a practice of repromulgating the ordinances on a massive scale from time to time without their provisions being enacted into acts of the legislature.
The practice was that, after the session of the State Legis lature was prorogued, the same ordinances which had ceased to operate were repromulgated containing substantially the same provisions almost in a routine manner.
The petitioners challenged the validity of this practice and in particular they challenged the constitutional validity of three differ ent ordinances issued by the Governor of Bihar, namely, (1) Bihar Forest Produce (Regulation of Trade) Third Ordinance 1983; (ii) The Bihar Intermediate Education Council Third Ordinance 1983; and (iii) The Bihar Bricks Supply (Control) Third Ordinance 1983, since these Ordinances also suffered the same process of repromulgation from time to time.
Petitioner No. 1, a Professor of Economics in Gokhale Institute of Politics and Economics, Pune carried out thor ough and detailed research in the matter of repromulgation of Ordinances by the Governor of Bihar from time to time and filed the present writ petition as he was interested in the preservation and promotion of constitutional functioning of the administration in the country.
Petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 4 were affected by the provisions of the aforesaid Ordi nances mentioned at serial No. (i) (ii) and (iii) respec tively.
The provisions of two out of the aforesaid three Ordinances were enacted into acts of the legislature during the pendency of the writ petitions and the third Ordinance, namely, the Bihar Intermediate Education Council Third Ordinance, 1983 is still in operation though a bill incorpo rating the provision of this Ordinance is pending considera tion before the State Legislature and it has been referred to the Select Committee.
799 Counsel for the Respondent State opposed the writ petitions contending: (i) that the petitioners have no locus standi to maintain the writ petitions, since out of the three Ordinances, two of them had already lapsed and their provisions were enacted into Acts of the Legislature and so far as the third Ordinance, namely, the Bihar Intermediate Education Council Third Ordinance 1983 is concerned, a legislative proposal has already been introduced for enact ing its provisions into an Act; (ii) that the petitioners are not entitled to challenge the practice of repromulgating ordinances from time to time since they are mainly outsiders who have no legal interest to challenge the validity of this practice; (iii) that the question raised before the Court is academic in nature and should not be adjudicated upon by it; and (iv) that the Court is not entitled to examine whether the conditions precedent for the exercise of power of the Governor under article 213 existed or not for the purpose of determining the validity of an Ordinance.
Allowing the writ petitions, HELD: (1) The Bihar Intermediate Education Council Ordinance 1983 which is still in operation is struck down as unconstitutional and void.
The Governor cannot assume legis lative function in excess of the strictly defined limits set out in the Constitution because otherwise he would be usurp ing a function which does not belong to him.
[818F G] In the instant case, the executive in Bihar has almost taken over the role of the Legislature in making laws not for a limited period but for years together in disregard of the constitutional limitations.
This is clearly contrary to the constitutional scheme and it must be held to be improper and invalid.
It is hoped and trusted that such practice shall not be continued in the future and that whenever an Ordinance is made and the Government wishes to continue the provisions of the Ordinance in force after the assembling of the Legislature, a Bill will be brought before the Legisla ture for enacting those provisions into an Act.
There must not be Ordinance Raj in the country.
[818D F] 2(1) The rule of law constitutes the core of the Con stitution of India and it is the essence of the rule of law that the exercise of the power by the State whether it be the Legislature or the Executive or any other authority should be within the constitutional limitations and if any practice is adopted by the Executive which is in flagrant and systematic violation of its constitutional limitations, petitioner No. 1 as a member of the public would have suffi cient interest to challenge such practice by filing a writ petition and it would be the constitutional duty 800 of the Supreme Court to entertain the writ petition and adjudicate upon the validity of such practice.
[805C E] 2(2) The Bihar Intermediate Education Council Third Ordinance 1983 is still in force and it cannot therefore be said to be academic to examine the challenge to its consti tutional validity.
Moreover, the question raised in these writ petitions is of highest constitutional importance as it does affect the power of the Governor to re promulgate Ordinances and it is in public interest that the Executive should know what are the limitations on the power of the Governor in the matter of re promulgation of ordinances.
If this question is not decided on merits, the correct position in regard to the constitutional limitations on the power of the Governor to re promulgate ordinances will remain unde termined.
[805F H] S.P. Gupta & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, [1982] 2 SCR 365, referred to.
3(1) The power conferred on the Governor to issue Ordi nances is in the nature of an emergency power which is vested in the Governor for taking immediate action where such action may become necessary at a time when the Legisla ture is not in session.
[815C D] 3(2) The primary law making authority under the Consti tution is the Legislature and not the Executive but it is possible that when the Legislature is not in session, cir cumstances may arise which render it necessary to take immediate action and in such a case in order that public interest may not suffer by reason of the inability of the Legislature to make law to deal with the emergent situation, the Governor is vested with the power to promulgate ordi nances.
But every ordinance promulgated by the Governor must be placed before the Legislature and it would cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature or if before the expiration of that period a resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legis lative Assembly and agreed to by the legislative Council, if any.
The object of this provision is that since the power conferred on the Governor to issue Ordinances is an emergent power exercisable when the Legislature is not in session, an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor to deal with situation which requires immediate action and which cannot wait until the legislature reassembles, must necessarily have a limited life.
[815D G] 3(3) The power to promulgate an Ordinance is essentially a power to be used to meet an extraordinary situation and it cannot be 801 allowed to be "perverted to serve political ends".
It is contrary to all democratic norms that the Executive should have the power to make a law, but in order to meet an emer gent situation, this power is conferred on the Governor and an Ordinance issued by the Governor in exercise of this power must, therefore, of necessity be limited in point of time.
That is why it is provided that the Ordinance shall cease to operate on the expiration of six weeks from the date of assembling of the Legislature.
The Constitution makers expected that if the provisions of the Ordinance are to be continued in force, six weeks time should be suffi cient for the Legislature to pass the necessary Act.
But if within this time the Legislature does not pass such an Act, the Ordinance must come to an end.
[816A C] 3(4) The Executive cannot by taking resort to an emer gency power exercisable by it only when the Legislature is not in session, take over the law making function of the Legislature.
That would be clearly subverting the democratic process which lies at the core of our constitutional scheme, for then the people would be governed not by the laws made by the legislature as provided in the Constitution but by laws made by the Executive.
The Government cannot by pass the Legislature and without enacting the provisions of the Ordinance in an Act of the Legislature, repromulgate the ordinance as soon as the Legislature is prorogued.
[816E F] 3(5) A constitutional authority cannot do indirectly what it is not permitted to do directly.
If there is a constitutional provision inhibiting the constitutional authority from doing an act, such provision cannot be al lowed to be defeated by adoption of any subterfuge.
That would be clearly a fraud on the constitutional provision.
[816H; 817A B] 4.
When the constitutional provision stipulates that an Ordinance promulgated by the Governor to meet an emergent situation shall cease to be in operation at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature and the Government if it wishes the provisions of the Ordinance to be continued in force beyond the period of six weeks has to go before the Legislature which is the constitutional au thority entrusted with the law making function, it would most certainly be a colourable exercise of power for the Government to ignore the Legislature and to repromulgate the Ordinance and thus to continue to regulate the life and liberty of the citizens through Ordinance made by the Execu tive.
Such a stratagem would be repugnant to the constitu tional scheme, as it would enable the Executive to trans gress its constitutional limitation in the matter of law making in an emergent situation and to covertly and indi 802 rectly arrogate to itself the law making function of the Legislation.
[ 817D G] 5.
The court cannot examine the question of satisfaction of the Governor in issuing an Ordinance, but the question in the present case does not raise any controversy in regard to the satisfaction of the Governor.
The only question is whether the Governor has power to repromulgate the same Ordinance successively without bringing it before the Legis lature.
That clearly the Governor cannot do.
[818B C] Bharat Singh vs Empire, AIR 1931 PC 111; Rajaram Bahadur Kamlesh Narain Singh vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; Laxmidhar Misra vs Rangalal & Ors., AIR 1950 PC 59 and R.C. Cooper vs Union of India, ; , inap plicable.
