Section 321 Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 empowers a Public Prosecutor incharge of a case to withdraw with the consent of the court from the prosecution of any person in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried, at any time before the judgment is pronounced.
Respondent No.1 Ex Chief Minister of Orissa, was alleged to have misappropriated a huge sum, said to have been col lected by District Congress Committees from various compa nies for publication of their advertisements in party 's souvenirs before the 1971 General Elections.
A case was registered by the Vigilance Department against her and a charge sheet submitted.
The Addl.
Chief Judicial Magistrate framed charges under ss.406,467,471 and 120 of the IPC.
After the 1980 General Election, the State Government took a policy decision to withdraw cases against political leaders who were subjected to victimisation.
The Special Public Prosecutor on being satisfied that the charge of criminal breach of trust would fail against respondent No.1 filed a petition under s.321 Cr.
P.C. and sought the permis sion of the court in public interest for withdrawal of the case, when the case was posted for consideration of charge.
After making an objective assessment of the merits of the application and being satisfied that the withdrawal of the prosecution would in no way affect any public interest or improve any public confidence the Addl.
Chief Judicial Magistrate granted consent to withdraw from the prosecution.
The appellant 's revision petition having been dismissed by the High Court he appealed by special leave to this Court.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, 692 HELD: Per Oza, J. (Bhagwati C.J.I. and Oza, J.) I. Once a charge has been framed against the accused on the basis that there was ground for presuming that he had committed the offence charged against him, the Public Prose cutor cannot make an application for withdrawal from the prosecution and the Magistrate cannot give his consent to such withdrawal on the ground that there was insufficient or no evidence to sustain the prosecution.
[698H 699B] 2.
The charge of criminal breach of trust framed against respondent No. 1, however, was totally groundless.
There was nothing on record to indicate that the entrustment of funds to her was for the specific purpose of being utilised only for the purpose of publication of advertisements in the souvenirs.
It was not the case of the prosecution that any of these amounts were handed over by any of the companies to her.
The entrustment of these amounts, if at all, was to the souvenir committee of the All India Congress Committee and respondent No. 1 could not be charged for utilising any of these amounts for the purpose other than that for which it was entrusted to her.
The charge against her, therefore, could not he sustained.
[699E G] Instead of permitting the prosecution to he withdrawn under s.321 the charge framed against respondent No. 1 is quashed under s.239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
[699H 700A] Per Venkataramiah, J. I.I. Consent can he given under s.321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for withdrawal from the prosecution of a case at any time before the judgment is pronounced.
The framing of the charge cannot be an impediment to give con sent to such withdrawal.
In the instant case, the Public Prosecutor had applied his mind to the case before applying for withdrawal and the Chief Judicial Magistrate had not committed any error in giving his consent to such withdrawal.
The order was, therefore, fully justified.
The decision in State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, , interpreting s.494 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 and the decision in R.K. Jain vs State through Special Police Establishment & Ors., ; , interpreting s.321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 do not call for any reconsideration.[694C E] 693 Per Khalid, J. I. Order of withdrawal passed by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate is upheld.
[695D] 2.
Consent can be given under s.321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for withdrawal from the prosecution of a case, not only when the charge is not framed but even after the charge is framed and at any time before the judgment.
[694H 695A] 3.
Section 239 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 is not attracted to the facts of the case for the propriety of the charge framed was not at issue.
[695B, C] Sheo Nandan Paswan vs State of Bihar, Criminal Appeal No. 241 of 1983 decided on 20th December 1986, applied.
State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, and R.K. Jain vs State, ; , referred to.
Per Natarajan, J. 1.
The consent given by the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate to the Special Public Prosecutor for withdrawal of the prosecution suffers from no error of law, patent or latent.
[701G] 2.
There is no material in the case to show that the Special Public Prosecutor was influenced by any improper motives for filing the application for withdrawal of the prosecution or that he had acted against his will at the behest of anyone else.
The Additional Chief Judicial Magis trate had bestowed judicial consideration over the matter and had thereafter passed a reasoned order.
Not only he but also the High Court had found after a careful scrutiny of relevant factors and circumstances, that the application for withdrawal of the prosecution made by the Special Public Prosecutor fully satisfied the tests laid down by the Su preme Court inasmuch as the Public Prosecutor had not exer cised his executive function improperly and also had not attempted to interfere with the normal course of justice for illegitimate reasons or purposes.
[700D E, 701.E F] State of Bihar vs Ram Naresh Pandey, and R.K. Jain vs State, ; , referred to.
