The tenanted premises was let out to the appellant for running a Dal and Oil Mill.
The respondents purchased the building and a year later filed a suit for eviction, inter alia, alleging that the appellant had made material altera tions in the tenanted premises without their consent causing substantial damages to it.
The disputed construction includ ed a partition wall in a hall converting the same into two portions and tin sheds shown by letters ABHG and CDGH.
The trial Court decreed the suit holding that the parti tion wail in the hail did not constitute mateial alteration and that the tin shed marked by letters ABHG had been con structed with the consent of the erstwhile landlords but the tin shed marked with letters CDGH had been constructed subsequently without respondents ' consent, which materially altered the accommodation.
On appeal, the Additional Civil Judge found that none of the constructions constituted material alterations.
But on second appeal, the High Court held that the tin shed indicated by letters CDGH as well as the partition wall made in the hail converting the same into two rooms, consti tuted material alteration as contemplated by s.14(c) of the U.P. Cantonment Rent Control Act, 1952, justifying the eviction of the tenant.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: (1) The order of the High Court is set aside and the Judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court are restored.
[978A] 969 (2) The U.P. Cantonment Rent Control Act, 1952 does not permit a landlord to file suit for eviction of a tenant without obtaining permission of the District Magistrate but if the tenant, without the landlord 's permission made or permitted to make construction which in the opinion of the Court has materially altered the accommodation or which is likely to diminish its value substantially, the landlord is free to file suit for tenant 's eviction without obtaining permission of the District Magistrate.
[973B C] (3) Necessary facts which should be established by the landlord for obtaining a decree against the tenant under the said provision are that (i) the tenant has made construc tion; (ii) such constructions have been made without the consent of the landlord; and (iii) constructions, so made have materially altered the accommodation.
These three conditions are cumulative in nature, each one of them is necessary to be established before a decree for eviction can be passed against the tenant.
[973D F] (4) The Act does not define either the word 'materially ' or the word 'altered '.
The expression 'materially altered ' means "a substantial change in the character form and the structure of the building without destroying its identity".
It means that the nature and the character of change or alteration of the building must be of essential and substan tial nature.
[973F; 974A B] Concise Oxford Dictionary; Words and Phrases (Permanent Edition) and Babu Manmohan Das Shah & Ors.
vs Bishun Das, ; , referred to.
(5) In determining the question the Court must address itself to the nature, character of the constructions and the extent to which the changes in the front and structure of the accommodation are made having regard to the purpose for which the accommodation may have been let out to the tenant.
[974D E] (6) The material alterations contemplate change of substantial nature affecting the form and character of the building.
Many a time tenants make minor constructions and alterations for the convenient use of the tenanted accommo dation.
The Legislature does not provide for their eviction, for such alterations.
[974E F] (7) Construction of a Chabutra, Almirah, opening of a window or closing a verandah by temporary structure or replacing of a damaged 970 roof which may be leaking or placing partition in a room or making similar minor alterations for the convenient use of the accommodation do not materially alter the building as in spite of such constructions the front and structure of the building may remain unaffected.
It is not possible to give exhaustive list of constructions which do not constitute material alterations, as the determination of this question would depend an the facts of each case.
[974F; 975A] S.B. Mathur vs K.P. Gupta, , Dr. J.G. Gupta vs Bodh Mal, [1969] Allahabad Law Jour nal 477, Sita Ram Sharan and Anr.
vs Johri Mal & Anr., & Baldev Das vs Ram Khila wan, [1979] Allahabad Law Reports 44, referred to.
(8) The findings regarding constructions would be find ing of fact, but the question whether the constructions materially alter the accommodation is a mixed question of fact and law, which should be determined on the application of the correct principles.
[975D E] (9) The nature of constructions, whether they 'are permanent or temporary, is a relevant consideration in determining the question of 'material alteration '.
A perma nent construction tends to make changes in the accommodation on a permanent basis, while a temporary construction is on temporary basis which do not ordinarily affect the form or structure of the buildings, as it can easily be removed without causing any damage to the building.
[977C E] Babu Manmohan Das Shah & Ors.
vs Bishun Das, ; , explained.
10(i) In the instant case, the findings recorded by the trial Court and the relevant evidence clearly show that the partition wall did not actually partition the hall convert ing the same permanently into two rooms.
The partition wall was made without digging any foundation of the floor of the room nor it touched the ceiling, instead it was a temporary wail Of 6 feet height converting the big hall into two portions for its convenient use, it could be removed at any time without causing any damage to the building.
The parti tion wail did not make any structural change of substantial character either in the form or structure of the accommoda tion.
[975G; 976A] 10(ii) The wail which had been constructed for the tin shed was kuchha, made of bricks and mud and the bamboo tatters were used for 971 enclosing it.
The findings recorded by the First Appellate Court and the Commissioner 's report make it evident that the tin shed was constructed on an open land, it was temporary in nature and it could be removed without causing any damage to the building.
One portion of the tin shed was already in existence on the open land adjacent to the accommodation, the appellant merely extended that in shed which did not make any substantial change either in the form or structure of the building.
There is no material on record to sustain the findings of the High Court that the appellant had con structed pucca walls on three sides of the tin shed; instead the Commissioner 's report is contrary to it [976F; 977A] (11) The Single Judge placing reliance on the observa tion of the Full Bench decision in Sita Ram 's case (supra) held that the disputed construction even though temporary in nature, which could be removed without causing any damage to accommodation, would fall within the mischief of material alterations.
The High Court committed error in interfering with the findings of the First Appellate Court.
[977G; 978A]
