The assessee, in CA 1546 of 1974, M/s British India Corporation Ltd. claimed capital Reserve, Stocks and Stores Reserves, Bad and doubtful debts Reserves, Obsolescence reserve, Loans and Insurance reserve, investment reserve and forfeited moneys reserves as "standard deduction" as defined in section 2(a) of the in the computation of its profits under the relevant Income Tax Act.
The claim having been disallowed, the question has been referred to this Court by the Tribunal.
In Civil Appeal No. 1599/74 the Saran Engineering Company Ltd. claimed similar deductions in respect of capital reserve, Rehabilitation Reserve, Stores Reserve forfeited moneys Reserve and Bad and doubtful debts reserve.
The Income Tax Officer rejected the claim.
On appeal the Appellate Assistant Commissioner allowed the claim in part.
The Tribunal however allowed the assessee 's claim in full in further appeal while rejecting the Revenue 's appeal against A.A.C 's order.
At the instance of the Revenue, the Tribunal referred the matter to the High Court.
The High Court answered the reference partly in favour of the Revenue by negativing the claim as to forfeited moneys reserve and 399 restricting the quantum of amount allowed by the AAC regarding capital reserve, as the assessee did not seek a reference against it.
Hence the appeal by Revenue by Special Leave.
In the Special Leave Petition No. SLP (C) 4815A/77 the High Court 's rejection order of the revenue 's request under section 256(2) for calling for a case against the Tribunal 's findings regarding the Gratuity Reserve, Reserve for Sepcial Survey, Reserve for contingencies, fleet Replacement reserve, Reserve for exempted Profits under section 84 of the Income Tax Act, Reserve for Investment depreciation and Dividend Equalisation Reserve but allowing only in relation to the Reserve for special Survey come to be considered.
Allowing the two civil appeals in part and dismissing the Special Leave Petition, the Court ^ HELD: 1.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, except the obsolescence Reserve and the forfeited moneys reserve, all the Reserves, namely, capital Reserve, Stocks and Stores Reserve, Bad and doubtful debts reserves, Loans and Insurance Reserve, Investment reserve, and rehabilitation reserve are to be included in the computation of capital according to the provisions in the Second Schedule to the . 2.
Where the liability has actually arisen or anticipated legitimately by the assessee though the quantum of the liability has not been determined, to meet such present liability cannot be treated as "reserve".
A fund, however, created for payment of a liability which had not already arisen or fallen due but orly a provision with regard to the sum that might become liable to be paid is "other reserve within the meaning of rule (1) of second schedule and should be taken into account in computing the capital of the company for the purpose of the Companies (Profit) Surtax Act, 1964.
Except the item relating to Reserve for special survey, it is not necessary to call for any statement of the case in respect of other items in SLP (C) 4815A/77.
[406G H; 407A] Commissioner of Income Tax, Kanpur vs The Elgin Mills Ltd., Kanpur, [1986] 3 SCR P. 408, followed.
