In Andhra Pradesh, Sales tax is levied under the author ity of sections 5 and 5A of the A.P. General Sales Tax Act, 1957 on the 'turnover ' of a dealer.
The expression 'turn over ' has been defined in section 2(s) inter alia to include the total amount set out in the bill of sale or the total amount charged as consideration for the sale or purchase of goods whether such sales includes any other sum charged by the dealer whatever be the description, name or object thereof.
Whether or not sales tax collected by the dealers from the buyers would fall under the inclusive part of aforesaid definition is the question raised in these ap peals.
It has arisen in the context of two categories of cases, namely: (i) wherein the sales tax has been separately set out in the bill of sale and is collected by the seller at the time of sale immediately after or at the time of delivery of the goods.
(ii) wherein the sales tax is not mentioned in the bill at all but simultaneously collected with the delivery of the goods separately under debit notes whereby the exact amount of sales tax due is collected from the purchaser by the seller but the said amount is kept in the suspense account.
The submissions urged by the appellants before the High Court in their Writ Petitions were: 1.
That where the amount is collected specifically as 'tax ', it cannot be deemed to be a part of the consideration for the sale of 946 the goods and as such it cannot form part of the turnover within the meaning of section 2(s) of the Act.
Inasmuch as the Act does not prohibit the dealer to pass on the sales tax component of the sale price to the purchaser, the dealer should he deemed to he an agent, of the Government for collecting the sales tax amount.
The High Court repulsed the plea of the assessees that the amount of sales tax so collected from the buyers was not includible in the turnover for the purposes of computing the sales tax liability of the assessees.
The concerned asses sees have approached the Supreme Court by way of the present group of appeals by Special Leave.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The sales tax component of the sale price charged by the vendor to the vendee is not collected by him as an agent of the Revenue (State Government).
[ 953D E] 1.2 Some of the salient features of the A.P. General Sales Tax, 1957 are: (1 ) There is no provision in the Act which imposes a legal obligation on the vendor of the goods to recover sales tax on the goods sold to the vendee.
For instance the vendor is not prohibited from selling the goods withont recovering the sales tax from the vendee.
The seller may not charge or recover the sales tax from the buyer.
He will not he violat ing any provision of the Act or incurring any penal conse quence by doing so.
In other words the collection of the sales tax from the buyer is a matter of his choice.
He may or may not do so.
If he does not do so he does not expose himself to any penal consequence or legal liability.
(2) There is no legal obligation imposed by the Act on the buyer of the goods to pay sales tax at the time of the purchase of the goods.
If the vendor does not insist on such payment and if the buyer does not pay the tax he does not violate any provision of the law or incur any legal liabili ty.
(3) There is no provision in the Act which casts any legal duty on the vendor to mention in the bill or the voucher issued to the buyer that sales tax has been recov ered from the buyer.
Nor 947 is then any obligation on him to show that sales tax is included in the price charged or to specify the amount of sales tax separately in the bill or voucher.
(4) Nothing in the Act requires the dealer to set apart the amount recovered from the vendee by way of sales tax.
He is neither bound to keep a separate account of the amount so recovered nor to keep it in a separate cash box.
He can treat it as his own money, keep it in his own cash box, and use it as flit were his own property.
If the amount is stolen or is misappropriated by his employee it is he who loses his own money and it is not the Revenue which has to bear the loss.
(5) His liability to pay sales tax is analogous to his liability to pay the Municipal taxes or the Income tax etc.
The liability is to pay from his own property and not from any property earmarked for that purpose from out of the collection of tax made from the buyers.
(6) The dealer is no doubt required to deposit along with sines tax return periodically the amount of tax due on the sales effected by him.
But that is merely a convenient mode of discharging his liability at the intervals as enjoined by the Act.
It is neither linked nor dependent on recovery if any made by him from the buyer (which he may or may not make).
(7) The dealer is not paid any remuneration or reward for collecting the sales tax.
If he was acting as an Agent, the State would he obliged to pay him some remuneration or reward, for, the State cannot oblige him to work as its agent gratis.
It would amount to forced labour if it were otherwise.
[951C H; 952A D] The aforesaid factors, viewed cumulatively, make it evident that a dealer who sells the goods does not act as an agent for the State in collecting the sales tax from the persons to whom he sells the goods.
If he was acting as an Agent he would be required to take reasonable care of the sale proceeds as a bailee.
He would also he required to set apart the same without intermingling with his own money, for, he cannot use the monies belonging to the State for his own private purposes.
If the intention of the legislature was to make him an agent, the legislature would have imposed penal liability on the vendor if he were not to collect the taxes.
He would he obliged to maintain separate accounts of the collection made by him as also to treat the collections as the collec 948 tions made by the agent on behalf of the principal.
[952D F] 2.1 The sales tax component included in the sale price is includable in making the aggregate for the purpose of the 'turnover ' within the meaning of section 2(s), even though it is recovered as a tax from the purchaser and not as the price of the goods charged to the vendee.
[953F] 2.2 Recovery of tax from the purchasers is not under a statutory obligation, in the instant case.
Even if therefore the bill or the voucher issued to the purchaser indicates the amount of sales tax separately what is collected by the vendor from the vendee is not tax but is merely a part of the sale price charged by the vendor to the vendee.
So far as the statute is concerned it does not cast any obligation on the purchaser of the goods to pay any tax and therefore what is collected by the vendor from the vendee by way of consideration for passing the property in the goods to the vendee is the price charged by him and not tax collected by him from the purchaser.
The amount of money which goes from the pocket of the vendee to the pocket of the vendor as a condition or consideration for passing of the property in the goods is thus the sale price and not the tax.
It is the amount, but for the payment of which, the vendor would not transmit his title to the goods in favour of the vendee, and not any amount paid by the vendee towards any taxability incurred by him on making the purchase of the goods.
Nothing would turn on whether the bill or voucher issued to the vendee is so made out to show that the sales tax is charged separately.
If he does so he would be doing so only for the sake Of his accounting purposes and convenience.
The consid eration obtained by him from the vendee would in the eye of law be the sale price regardless of what nomenclature is given to a part of the price charged by him, [952F H; 953A E] 2.3 The amount includible in the turnover on the true interpretation of the relevant provisions cannot become excludible merely by reason of the accountancy device adopt ed by the assessee concerned.
[956D E] M/s George Oakes (P) Ltd. vs State of Madras, [1961] 12 STC 476, followed.
McDowel & Company vs Commercial Tax Officer, ; and Anand Swarup Mahesh Kumar vs The Commissioner of Sales Tax, ; , distinguished.
Government of Andhra Pradesh vs East India Commercial Company Ltd., [1957] 8 STC 114 and State of Andrha Pradesh vs Bujranga Jute Mills Ltd., [1955] 6 STC 376, referred to. 948
