Section 12(2) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 which is designed to prevent wholesale or partial evasion of repatriation of earnings from export of goods is to the effect that 'where any expert of goods has been made to which a notification under sub section (1) applies, no person entitled to sell, or procure the sale of the said goods shall, except with the permission of the Reserve Bank . . ".
In R. Venkata Subbu & Ors.
vs The Direc torate of Enforcement, Enforcement Directorate, New Delhi & Anr., ILR Vol p. 18, the Madras High Court held that section 12(2) covers not only sale proceeds of goods exported "for sale" but also "on sale" in the context of sales completed before export, while the Calcutta High Court in the judgment under appeal held that it covers sale pro ceeds of goods exported "for sale" only.
In view of the conflict of the opinions, the present appeal is by certifi cate.
Allowing the appeal and remitting the matters to the Competent Authority, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The expression 'no person entitled to sell or procure the sale of the said goods ' cannot be so narrowly construed (as referable to goods which have already been exported), so as to govern the scope of section 12(2) in such a truncated manner which renders it virtually impotent in so far as transactions of 'exports on sale ' are con cerned.
Too much is being read into too little for no more laudable a purpose than to paralyze the provision.
The expression does not necessarily induce one to the conclusion that the legislature wanted to prevent abuse in the context of 'export for sale ' only.
The expression is mean 982 ingful, relevant, and can co exist in the context of abuse arising from 'exports on sale ' from completed transactions as well.
[985H;986B] 1.2 The said expression has been employed by the Legis lature merely in order to indentify the accountable persons and is merely descriptive in that sense.
The said expression does not restrict the operation of the Act to the persons who have not yet sold the goods.
One would have to take a quantum jump in order to conclude that persons referred to in section 12(2) are the persons who have not yet sold the goods but are entitled to sell the goods in future merely because the expression 'entitled to sell ' has been employed.
The persons who have exported the goods to a foreign buyer, are not sought to be excluded from the operation of section 12(2).
Clause (a) in terms adverts to the sale of goods being delayed.
Clause (b) of section 12(2) adverts to pay ment for the goods, otherwise than in the prescribed manner, and also envisions a case where the payment does not repre sent the full amount payable by the foreign buyer in respect of the goods.
Clauses (a) and (b) are compatible both with transactions of export on sale as also to transactions of export for sale.
They are compatible with all transactions pertaining to both types of sales.
There is no warrant to assume that the Legislature has not made any provision in order to ensure that the full amount of the sale price is repatriated and foreign exchange earned therefrom is not lost to the Nation regardless of whether it is in respect of 'export on sale ' or 'export for sale '.
[986F. 987A C] 1.3 The avowed and the evident object of section 12 is to ensure that the Nation does not lose foreign exchange which is very much essential for the economic survival of the Nation.
The exporter cannot be allowed to syphon away a part of the foreign exchange or to deprive the Nation of the foreign exchange earned by the exports.
Such is the philoso phy of section 12.
To take the view that the legitimate National interest in the sphere of preservation of foreign exchange has relevance only in the context of transactions of exports for sales and that the Legislature exhibited total unconcern for the foreign exchange earned in the context of transactions of completed sales or consignment sales, is to attribute to the Legislature irrationality.
And to impute to the Legislature that it did not know its job inasmuch as it has tackled the problem only partially with out any rational basis for excluding the transactions of completed sales from the purview of the legislation which would substantially erode or defeat the purpose of the legislation.
When it is equally possible to take the view which would be conducive to the conclusion that there is no lacuna in the legislation, it would be unreasonable to take the view that the Legislature has left a lacuna eitber by 983 negligence or by lack of foresight or because it did not know its job.
[987B F] 2.1 Section 10 has no application in respect of foreign exchange earnings related to export of goods.
Section 10 Is designed primarily to impose an obligation on persons who have a right to receive any foreign exchange from a person resident outside India.
This section has nothing to do with the foreign exchange earned by export of goods.
The entire matter pertaining to payments for exported goods and the foreign exchange earnings arising therefrom has been dealt with in section 12 which is a complete Code in itself.
Section 12 has been very carefully designed.
Every possible situation has been conceived of and appropriate prophylactic measures to ensure the preservation of foreign exchange and prevention of syphoning off the foreign exchange, which is very much essential to the economic life of the Nation have been embedded therein.
The entire subject of foreign ex change earnings relatable to export of goods has been spe cifically and specially dealt with in section 12.
It would therefore be futile to search for an alibi in section 10 merely in order to support the plea that section 12 does not take within its fold the foreign exchange earnings relatable to transactions of completed sales.
[988A E] 2.2 On a plain reading of section 10, the matter per taining to the foreign exchange earned by exports in the context of completed sales will not directly fall within the ambit of it.
It will have to be strained beyond the point of endurance in order to accommodate this aspect.
Section 10 is akin to a complementary provision which deals with preserva tion of foreign exchange which does not fall within a spe cific provision like section 12.
What is more, if completed transactions are excluded from section 12, the purpose of the legislation will not be served, because sub section (6) of section 12 which has been designed to ensure compliance with the provisions made in section 12(1) to section 12 (5) cannot be availed of.
In that event, in regard to the per sons who syphon off foreign exchange earned out of the transactions in the context of a completed sale or export on sale they cannot be dealt with under section 12(6) and no sanction to ensure compliance will be available.
The Act will be thus rendered toothless to ensure compliance with evasion in the context of a completed sale.
There is accord ingly no compulsions of law, logic, or philosophy to adopt such a view.
[988F; 9B?A B] R. Venkata Subba & Ors.
vs The Director of Enforcement, Enforcement Directorate, New Delhi & Anr., ILR Vol.
3 Mad. , approved.
