A crowd of about 1500 persons had gathered near the railway line in the village Siwah, District Karnal on the morning of 2.9.85 in response to a call given by the Bhar tiya Kisan Union for a Rail Roko Abhiyan.
To safeguard the railway line and to maintain law and order the authorities posted a large contingent of police.
Since the demonstrators became violent and attempted to cause damage to the railway line, the police force resorted to lathi charge four or five times during the day and in addition fired tear gas and even resorted to shooting.
The appellant, it is alleged, came at about 8 or 8.30 p.m. to the place where lathi charge and shooting had taken place, addressed the demonstrators and incited them to violence.
According to the prosecution, P.Ws.
I and 2, who were on intelligence duty, carefully listened to the speech and on the next morning P.W.I presented a report at he Police Station.
Thereupon a case was registered against the appellant under s.4 of the Terrorists and Disruptive Activi ties (Prevention) Act, 1985 and after investigation he was charge sheeted.
The Designated Court under the Act accepted the prosecution evidence and found the appellant guilty and convicted him under s.4 of the Act.
Allowing the appeal by the appellant, this Court, HELD: 1.
The Judge of the designated court was not justified in holding the prosecution case proved beyond reasonable doubt and finding the appellant guilty under s.4 of the Act and convicting him accordingly.
The prosecution evidence is not only lacking in credibility but also suffers from numerous infirmities.
It is far from satisfactory to justify the conviction of the appellant under s.4.
The conviction and sentence awarded to the appellant are there fore set aside.
1096 2.
Section 16 of the Act provides for an appeal against a judgment rendered by a designated court to the Supreme Court alone and to no other court.
Consequently, this appeal constitutes the first appeal as well as the final appeal.
Such being the case, the Supreme Court has to necessarily scrutinise the evidence in its entirety and re appraise the testimony of witnesses to determine its evidentiary value.
[1099G H] 3.1.
I and 2 were not on security duty at that place but were only there to submit intelligence reports.
When a lathi charge had been made even at 4.30 p.m. it is inconceivable that the entire police force would have left the place in the evening and gone away elsewhere.
Therefore, this unnatural version is put forward to cover up the lacuna for not examining any police officer of a higher rank re garding the inflammatory speech alleged to have been made by the appellant at about 8.30 p.m. on that day.
[1100E F] 3.2 The prosecution could have certainly examined some independent witnesses to prove what the appellant had spoken on that night.
Surely, it cannot be said that among the 1500 or 2000 persons present there, no one would have come for ward to give evidence about what the appellant spoke on that night.
No explanation has been offered as to why no inde pendent witness has been examined.
In fact P.Ws.
I and 2 have not even stated that they tried to find out the names of any of the people assembled there or made any effort to note down their names so that they can later be summoned to appear as witnesses if a case was to be filed against the appellant.
[1100G H; 1101A] 3.3 The appellant was a stranger to P.Ws.1 and 2 and hence they could not have known who he was and what was his occupation.
I and 2 had not made any enquiries to find out who the appellant was and where he was residing.
The strange version given by P.W.I is that before the appellant began his speech he introduced himself to the demonstrators by giving out his name, address and occupation.
The state ment, apart from its artificiality is not corroborated even by P.W .2.
Another discrepancy noticed is that while P.W. I has stated that the appellant addressed the gathering from the Chaubra with a microphone in his hand, P.W.2 has stated that the appellant stood in the midst of the demonstrators and addressed them.
Moreover P.W.2 makes no reference to the appellant having any microphone.
[1101A C] 3.4 The report Exhibit P.A. is said to have been pre pared on the basis of rough notes prepared by P.W.I, but the 'rough notes ' is not forthcoming and has not been marked in evidence and is said to have 1097 been destroyed.
Since the rough notes constitute the first recorded entry of the speech it is an important document and in its absence the fair report cannot be given unreserved acceptance.
Even in the matter of the preparation of the report, one would except P.W.2 holding a higher rank than P.W.I to have prepared it.
Not only has P.W.2 not prepared any report but his own admission is that he did not sign or even initial the rough notes or the fair report Exhibit P.A. [1101D F] [The Court observed that it is highly regrettable that the authorities concerned should have launched a prosecution under the Act in a manner which can be easily termed as cavalier.
The Act though intended to effectively deal with the terrorists and disruptionists contains drastic provi sions for punishing them.
Furthermore, against any judgment, sentence or order rendered under the Act, an appeal would lie, directly to the Supreme Court and not to the High Court.
Therefore, the investigation of the case under the Act has not only to be thorough but also of a high order.]
