A large number of workmen of the respondent company were proceeded against by the management on certain charges.
Later most of them were taken back to employment.
On failure of conciliation in regard to 7 of the dismissed workmen, disputes were raised under section 11 A of the Industrial Dis putes Act, 1947.
The Government declined to make a reference to the Labour Court for adjudication.
A Single Judge as well as the Division Bench rejected the Writ Petition of the workmen.
On appeal, this Court on 9th July, 1985 set aside the judgments passed by the Single Judge and the Division Bench and directed the State Government to reconsider the matter without taking into account the ground that the domestic inquiry had been conducted by the employer according to the principles of natural justice and the punishment imposed was not disproportionate to the gravity of the offence committed by the dismissed workmen and come to decision within 30 days whether it would make a reference of the industrial dispute to the Labour Court.
The Government again declined to make a reference stat ing: (1) that the company manufactures and supplies certain items to the Defence Department; (2) that there was indus trial unrest followed by violence and stoppage of work in the establishment due to inter union rivalry; (3) that the management charge sheeted the workmen under specific provi sions of the standing order; (4) that the workmen themselves had admitted the charges against them; (5) that in view of the proven charges and the need to preserve industrial peace in the establishment it was not a fit case for adjudication both on expediency and on merits.
When the appeal came up for further hearing, on behalf of the appellants workmen it was contended that the grounds given in support 998 of the order are totally irrelevant, immaterial and do not justify the refusal to refer the dispute.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended: (1 ) that the statute authorises the State to take a prima facie view of the matter for ascertaining whether it was a fit case wherein exercise of jurisdiction under Section 10(1) read with 12(5) was called for and a reference was warranted; (2) that the State Government in declining to make a reference has kept itself within the limit set by law; (3) that the grounds advanced in support of refusal to make a reference were clearly tenable and indicated that a broad and overall view of the matter was taken by the State Government; (4) that since the jurisdiction of this Court is not appellate and order of the State Government is administrative in character, no interference was warranted; and (5) that if the grounds advanced by the State Government were neither germane nor relevant, the matter should go back to the State Government for fresh disposal as it is not for this Court to direct a reference to be made.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: I. 1 It is open to the State Government to take the broad features into consideration while exercising jurisdiction under section 10(1) of the .
If the dispute in question raises a question of law the appropriate Government should not purport to reach a final conclusion on the said question of law because that would normally lie within the jurisdiction of the Industrial Tribunal.
Similarly, on disputed questions of fact, the appropriate Government cannot purport to reach final conclu sions for that again would be the province of the Industrial Tribunal.
[1003H; 1004A B] 1.2 section 10 permits appropriate Government to determine whether dispute 'exists or is apprehended ' and then refer it for adjudication on merits.
The demarcated functions are (1) reference, (2) adjudication.
[1004F G] 1.3 There may be exceptional cases in which the State Government may, on a proper examination of the demand, come to a conclusion that the demands are either perverse or frivolous and do not merit a reference.
Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and Courts will always he vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
To allow the Government to do so would he to render section 10 and section 12(5) of the nugatory.
[1005A C] 999 Bombay Union of Journalists vs State of Bombay, ' ; = ; M.P. Irrigation Karamchari Sangh vs State of M.P., ; & Ram Awtar Sharma upon.
This is a fit case where a reference should be made.
In the order of this Court on July 9, 1985 it had been clearly stated that a direction to make a reference would have been given but for the submission advanced on behalf of the counsel for the respondents that the matter should go back and the State Government should be given an opportunity of giving other valid reasons, if any, in support of its order.
[1005G; 1006A] Nirmal Singh vs State of Punjab & Ors., & Sankari Cement Alai Thozhilalar Munnetra Sangam & Anr.
vs Management of India Cements Ltd., [1983] 1 L.L.J. 460, referred to.
