The recruitment to Class I posts in the Telecommunica tion Research Centre of the Posts and Telegraphs Department is made partly by direct recruitment through the Union Public Service Commission and partly through transfer of Group A and Group B Field Officers.
The officers brought into the Centre on transfer were being paid special pay in addition to their pay.
The direct recruits were denied this privilege.
The petitioners 2 to 22, members of the first petition er Association, who belong to the direct recruits category and are working in the Centre on the same posts, and possess same qualifications, discharge same functions and duties as the transferred officers, and are in the same pay scales, assailed the denial of special pay to them as discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Their claim was contested by the Department and the discrim ination was sought to be justified on the ground that the direct recruits were.
specifically recruited to the Centre for a limited purpose and their capability, as against transferred officers, selected by the Union Public Service Commission after rigorous competitive examination, of tak ing.
over a complete group and directing them to fruitful research was doubtful.
Allowing the writ petitions, the Court, HELD: 1.
Denial of special pay to Class I direct re cruits in the Telecommunication Research Centre amounts to violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
They are entitled to the special pay at the same rates at which it is paid to the transferred officers working in that Centre with effect from the date from which the latter have been drawing it.
[1013B C] 1008 2.1 It is not the case of the Government that the peti tioners are not competent and are not able to discharge their duties.
All the relevant things such as qualifica tions, functions, duties and responsibilities are the same as between the direct recruits and the transferred offi cials.
Their scale of pay is also the same.
[1011G H] 2.2 The special pay is not being paid to the transferred officials for compensating their displacement or for their qualifications.
It is not deputation allowance.
It is paid for the arduous and special nature of the functions to be discharged in the Telecommunication Research Centre.
The rigorous test is applied while transferring them to the Centre to prevent persons of inferior caliber amongst them getting into it.
It does not mean that persons who are directly recruited and working in the Centre are inferior to those who enter the Centre by transfer.
Nor it could be said that the transferred officials had to perform in the Centre duties which were not in their general line.
There was, thus, no justification to deny the special pay at the same rates to the direct recruits working in that Centre.
[1011H; 1012A B; 1013A] Randhir Singh vs Union of India and Others, ; and M.P. Singh & Others vs Union of India, Writ Petition Nos.
13097 13176 of 1984, decided on January 16, 1987, applied.
Union of India to pay special pay to the direct recruits with effect from the date on which the transferred officers commenced to draw it upto date and to continue to pay it in future also as long as the transferred officers continue to get it.
[1013C D]
