In 1961 the Bangalore Metropolitan Board was formed.
The Board prepared an Outline Development Plan (O.D.P.).
In February, 1963, the Mysore Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 came into force with effect from January 15, 1965.
Section 81 A(a) of the Act provides that the Outline Devel opment Plan for the Bangalore Metropolitan Area prepared by the Bangalore Metropolitan Planning Board shall be deemed to be the Outline Development Plan of the Planning Area com prising the City of Bangalore, prepared under the Act, by the Planning Authority of the Area.
Section 81 A(a) further provides 'that the said plan alongwith the particulars specified in clauses (ii), (iii), (iv) 1055 and (v) of section 12(2) shall be published and submitted to the State Government for provisional approval.
Section 81 A(b) provides that on receipt of the plan and the particulars, the State Government shall after making such modifications as it deems fit, return the plan and the particulars to the Planning Authority for taking further action in accordance with the provisions of section 13.
Section 13 deals with approval of the Outline Development Plan.
Section 76J provides for "validation of acts and proceedings".
Rule 32 of the Mysore Planning Authority Rules, 1965 provides for "publication of Outline Development Plan under sub.s.(1) and sub s.(2) of s.9.
" It prescribes that the publication shall be made by making a copy of the Plan available for inspection and displaying a notice in Form II, (a) at the office of the Planning Authority and (b) at such other places as may be specified by the Planning Authority.
The Planning Authority is also required to publish a notice in Form II in the Official Gazette and in one or more newspapers.
The Publica tion under s.9(2) is also required to be made in the same manner.
Rule 33 provides for 'Publication of Outline Devel opment Plan and Regulations under s.13(4), and stipulates that the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations as approved by the State Government under sub s.(3) ors.13 shall be published in the Official Gazette.
A 'Notice of publication of Outline Development Plan ' was published in the Mysore Gazette dated 21.12.1967 in Form II.
After the State Government provisionally approved the Plan, 'Notice of publication of Outline Development Plan ' was published in the Mysore Gazette dated 10.10.1968 again in Form II.
In response to the invitation to file objec tions, as many as 600 representations and objections were received from individuals, institutions, associations, Chambers of Commerce etc.
The Outline Development Plan was finally approved by the Government and a notification to that effect was published in the Mysore Gazette dated 13.7.72.
The Bangalore Improvement Trust Board desired to develop Raj Mahal Vilas Extension under the provisions of the City of Bangalore Improvement Act, 1945.
Land was acquired and plots were alloted to several people.
A lay out plan was prepared and conditions were imposed for construction of houses on the sites.
One of the conditions of allotment was that the sites were not to be sub divided and not more than one dwelling house was to be constructed on each of the sites.
Apparently multistoreyed, high rise buildings were not within the contemplation of either the Improvement Trust Board or the allotees at the time of allotment.
However, High buildings came up.
A number of residents of the locali ty submitted a memorandum to the Governor and 1056 the Chief Minister to take an appropriate action to prevent construction of high rise buildings in residential area of Raj Mahal Vilas Extention.
Since there was no response some persons resorted to 'Public Interest Litigation, by filing writ petitions alleging that the Outline Development Plan for Bangalore which had been published in the prescribed manner had been ignored by the authorities in granting permission to the appellants to construct the high rise buildings and that permits had been granted to construct eight floor residential buildings going to a height of 80 feet whereas under the regulations the maximum permissible height of a building was only 55 feet.
Writs were sought to quash the permits granted for construction, to restrain the appellants from constructing the eight floor buildings, to direct them to demolish the structures already put up and to require the Bangalore Urban Area Commission to recommend to the State Government against the construction of highrise buildings in any of the existing extensions of Banglore.
The High Court allowed the petitions and declared the licences granted for constructions illegal and directed the Commissioner, Corporation of the City of Bangalore to modify the licences os as to bring them in confirmity with the Outline Development Plan and the Zonal Regulations appended thereto promulgated under s.13(4) of the Karnataka Town and Country Planning Act and take all consequential actions in accordance with law.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellants it was contended: (1) that publication of the Outline Devel opment Plan and the Regulations in the prescribed manner, that is, in the Official Gazette was mandatory under section i3(4) and that failure to so publish the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations rendered them ineffective.
The licences already granted to the appellants could not be cancelled or directed to be modified so as to be in accord with the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations; (2) that the Regulations were distinct from the Outline Develop ment Plan and that in the case of the Regulations, there was no attempt whatever at publication; (3) that the High Court was in error in holding that s.76 J cured whatever defect there was in regard to the publication of the Plan and the Regulations and that the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations became effective as soon as they were approved by the Government under section 13(3) of the Act irrespective of the date of publication under s.13(4); (4) that offer of inspection cannot be a substitute for publication; (5) that section 13(1) used the words "the Plan and the particulars", section 13(2) used the words "the Plan and the the Regulations".
s.13(3) used the words "the Plan and the Regulations" and s.13(4) used the words "the Out 1057 line Development Plan and the Regulations" as well as the words "the Plan and the Regulations" and this signified that the particulars and the Regulations are not to be treated as part of the plan but as creations distinct from the Plan.
In the notice published on 27.6.1972, the Planning Authority mentioned that the Plan was available for inspection at the office of the planning authority but made no reference to the Regulations and, therefore, it must be considered that the Regulations were not made available for inspection and so never published; and (6) that neither the Municipal Corporation nor any other Civic Authority appeared to be aware of the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations as was evident from the circumstances that in the years that passed since the approval of the Plan by the Government and before the writ petitions were filed, as many as 57 build ings licences had admittedly been issued in contravention of the Regulations.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended: (1) that there was sufficient publication of the Plan and the Regula tions, that the Plan and Regulations were always kept avail able for inspection at the office of the concerned authori ties and that it was not the case of the appellants origi nally that there was no publication and that they had no knowledge of the Plan and the Regulations: (2) that the defect in the publication of the Plan and the Regulations was effectively cured by s.76J and the passage of time; and (3) that the Regulations were integral part of the Outline Development Plan.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD 1.
There was compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Mysore Town and Country Planning Act, 1961 and Rule 33 of the Mysore Planning Authority Rules, 1965.
[1075G] 2.
At every stage the public were informed by notices published in the Official Gazette that the Outline Develop ment Plan was available for inspection at the office of the Planning Authority.
[1078H] 3.
The Authorities justifiably always treated the Plan as including the Regulations and what was kept for inspec tion was the Plan alongwith the Regulations.
[1079A B] 4.(i) Where a law, whether Parliamentary or subordinate, demands compliance, those that are governed must be notified directly and reliably of the law and all changes and addi tions made to it by various processes.
Whether law is viewed from the standpoint of the 1058 'conscientious good man ' seeking to abide by law or from the standpoint of Justice Holmes 's 'unconscentious bad man ' seeking to avoid the law, law must be known, that is to say, it must be so made that it can be known.
[1074C E] 4.(ii) Delegated or subordinate Legislation is all pervasive and there is hardly any field of activity where governance by delegated or subordinate legislative powers is not as important if not more important, than governance by Parliamentary legislation.
But unlike Parliamentary Legisla tion which is publicly made, delegated or subordinate Legis lation, is often made unobtrusively in the chambers of a Minister, a Secretary to the Government or other official dignitary.
It is, therefore, necessary that subordinate Legislation, in order to take effect, must be published or promulgated in some suitable manner, whether such publica tion or promulgation is prescribed by the parent statute or not.
[1074E F] 4.(iii) Where the parent statute prescribes the mode of publication or promulgation that mode must be followed.
Where the parent statute is silent, but the subordinate Legislation itself prescribes the manner of publication such a mode of publication may be sufficient, if reasonable.
If the subordinate Legislation, does not prescribe the mode of publication or if the subordinate Legislation prescribes a plainly unreasonable mode of publication it will take effect only when it is published from the customarily recognised official channel, namely, the Official Gazette or some other reasonable mode of publication.
There may be subordinate Legislation which is concerned with a few individuals or is confined to small local areas.
In such cases publication or promulgation by other means may be sufficient.
[1074F H; 1075A] 4.(iv) In the present case, s.13(4) has prescribed the mode of publication of Outline Development Plan and the Regulations.
It requires the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations to be published in the prescribed manner and the Plan and particulars to be permanently displayed in the office of the Director and the Planning Authority and a copy to be kept available for the inspection of the public at the office of the Planning Authority.
The particulars referred to presumably are the particulars mentioned in section 12(2) of the Act consisting of various reports, including the Regula tions. 'The prescribed manner ' is what is prescribed by Rule 33, that is, publication in the Official Gazette.
[1075A C] 4.(v) Under s.9(1) and 9(2) also the Outline Development Plan is 1059 required to be published in 'the prescribed manner '.
The prescribed manner for the purposes of sub s.(1) and (2) of s.9 is that prescribed by Rule 32.
Rule 32 prescribes making a copy of the Plan available for inspection, publishing a notice in Form No. II in the Official Gazette and in one or more newspapers and displaying a notice in Form No.11 at the office of the Planning Authority and at other specified places.
[1075C E] 4.(vi) Rule 33 speaks of publication of approved Outline Development Plan and Regulations in the Official Gazette suggestive of a requirement that the Outline Development Plan and Regulations should bodily be incorporated in the Official Gazette.
But if the entire scheme of the Act and the rule is considered as an integral whole it becomes obvious that what section 13(4) contemplates besides permanently displaying the Plan and the particulars in the offices of Director and Planning Authority and keeping available a copy for the inspection of the public at the office of Planning Authority, is a.public notice to the general public that the Plan and Regulations are permanently displayed and are available for inspection by the public.
Such public notice is required to be given by a publication in the Official Gazette.
This is how it was understood by the authority and everyone else concerned and this is how it was done in the present case.
This appears to be a reasonable and a rational interpretation of s.13(4) and Rule 33 in the setting and the scheme.
[1075D H] 4.(vii) Section 13(1) requires the provisional Outline Development Plan and particulars to be published by notifi cation in the Official Gazette with a view to invite com ments from the public.
What was published in the present case under s.13(1) was also a notice in Form No. II and not the whole of the Plan and particulars.
Such publication evoked considerable public response.
As many as 600 repre sentations from individuals and Institutions were received.
Therefore everyone concerned, i.e., the Government, the Director, the Planning Authority and the public, individual and institution alike, thought that publication of a notice in the Gazette inviting the attention of the public to the display and availability for inspection of the Plan and particulars was all that was contemplated by the provisions providing for publication.
There is no reason or justifica tion to adopt an interpretation which departs from common understanding of the Act and the Rules.
[1075H; 1076A C] Shalagram Jhajharia vs National Co. Ltd. & Ors., , Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co. vs Syn thetics & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors., ,Municipal Board, Pushkar vs State Transport Authority, Rajasthan & Ors., [1963] Suppl.
2 1060 S.C.R. 373 and Joint Chief Controller of Imports & Exports, Madras vs M/s. Aminchand Mutha etc.
; , , distinguished.
The effect of the non performance of a duty imposed by a statute in the manner prescribed by the statute is not discovered by a simple answer to the question whether the statute is mandatory or directory.
These are not simple chemical reactions.
The question whether a statutory re quirement is mandatory or directory cannot itself be an swered easily.
Many considerations must prevail and the object and the context are the most important.
[1077A B] Liverpool Borough vs Turner, ; , referred to.
6.(i) The High Court was of the view that such defect as there was in regard to publication of the Plan was cured by s.76J, the Omnibus Curative clause, called by this Court as the "Ganga" clause.
Provisions similar to s.76J are found in several modern Acts and their object is to put beyond chal lenge defects of constitution of statutory bodies and de fects of procedure which have not led to any substantial prejudice.
A defective publication which has otherwise served its purpose is not sufficient to render i1legal what is published and that such defect is cured by Section 76 J. [1077B D] Bangalore Woollen, Cotton & Silk Mills Co. Ltd. Banga lore vs Corporation of the City of Bangalore, and Municipal Board, 'Sitapur vs Prayag Narain Saigal & Firms Moosaram Bhagwandas, ; , followed.
6.(ii) In the present case, there certainly was an effort to bring the Plan and Regulations to the notice of the public by giving notice of the Plan in the Official Gazette.
Non publication of the Plan in the Official Gazette was, therefore, a curable defect capable of being cured by s.76J. [1077H; 1078A B] 7.
Failure of the appellants to plead want of publica tion or want of knowledge assumes importance.
In the answer to the Writ Petitions, the appellants took up the substan tial plea that they had complied with the requirements of the Outline Development Plan and the Regulations but not that they had no knowledge of any such requirement.
It can safely be said that the defect or irregularity did not effect the merits of the case.
[1078B] 8.
The Outline Development Plan and the Regulations are not 1061 distinct from each other.
The Regulations are born out of the Plan and the Plan thrives on the Regulations.
The Plan is the basis for the Regulations and the Regulations are what make the plan effective.
Without the Regulations, the Plan virtually becomes a dead letter.
The reference in the four clauses of s.13, where the word 'Plan ' or the 'Outline Development Plan ' is used, is to the core plan, without the particulars and the Regulations and not the whole of the Outline Development Plan which must include the Regulations.
What the different phraseology is meant to convey is to emphasise tile different parts of the Plan which have to be forwarded to the Government, considered by the Government, made available for inspection by the public, as the case may be and to the extent necessary.
Merely because the words "and Regulations" are added to the word 'Plan ', the Regula tions are not to be treated as not constituting part of the Plan even as when a building is sold along with the fix tures, it does not mean that the fixtures are not treated as part of the building.
[1078D G] 9.
Notwithstanding the Regulations some building li cences were granted in contravention of the Regulations but that only exposes the deplorable laxity of the concerned authorities and emphasises the need for greater public vigilance.
The present Writ Petitions are forerunners of such vigilance.
[1079C D]
