There are two classes of officials amongst those who are holding the posts of Sub Inspectors, Inspectors and Deputy Superintendents of Police in the Central Bureau of Investi gation namely (i) who are directly recruited and (ii) those who have been drawn from various State cadres on deputation basis.
The deputationists are paid Deputation Allowance as compensation for the temporary displacement from their parent cadres occasioned by their deputation to the Central Bureau of Investigation.
Pursuant to the recommendation of the Third Pay Commission as accepted by the Central Govern ment both the Direct recruits and "deputationists" in the rank of Sub Inspectors and Inspectors were paid equal rate of Special Pay from 1.7.73, while the Dy.
Superintendents were not paid anything.
Both the direct recruits and the deputationists posted in one of the Central Units were granted Special Pay considering the special nature of duties of investigating officers, by its letter No. 203/13/76 AUD II dated 21.6.1976.
But the Special Pay granted to the deputationists were more in all the three categories.
Having failed to get the disparity in the pay ment of Special Pay set aright at the departmental level, the aggrieved direct recruits (non deputationists) have approached the Supreme Court for justice through their petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution.
Allowing the petitions, the Court, HELD: It is well settled by several decisions of the Supreme Court that in order to pass the test of permissible classification of persons belonging to the same class into groups for purposes of differential treatment two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes 1015 persons who are grouped together from others left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the law which brings about discrimination between the two groups.
[1017G H; 1018A] The Special Pay that was being paid to all the officers in the cadre of Sub Inspectors.
Inspectors and Deputy Super intendents of Police in the Central Investigating Units of the Central Bureau of Investigation has nothing to do with any compensation for which the deputationists may be enti tled either on the ground of their richer experience or on the ground of their displacement from their parent depart ments in the various States, but it relates only to the arduous nature of the duties that is being performed by all of them irrespective of the fact whether they belong to the category of the 'deputationists ' or to the category of 'non deputationists '.
That being the position, the classifi cation of the officers working in the said cadres into two groups, namely, deputationists and non deputationists for paying different rates of Special Pay does not pass the test of classification permissible under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India since it does not bear any ration al relation to the object of classification.
[1022D F] The Court directed the Central Government to pay the nondeputationists who have been working in the cadres of Sub Inspectors, Inspectors and Deputy Superintendents of Police in the Central Investigating Units of the Central Bureau of Investigation Special Pay at the same rates at which the deputationists are being paid with effect from the date from which the decision contained in the letter of the Government of India, Cabinet Secretariat beaming No. 203/13/76 AVD.II dated 21.6.1976 came into force upto date and to pay hereafter Special Pay to all the officers (depu tationists and non deputationists) in the said cadres at the same rates.) [1022G H; 1023A B]
