Clause (.i) of s.13(1) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 empowers the court to order recovery of possession of any premises in favour of the landlord where the tenant has given notice to quit but has failed to deliv er possession in accordance with such notice.
The appellant tenant while remitting monthly rent by postal money order stated in the coupon that they shall vacate the premises within the next 6/8 months.
This was taken note of by the respondent landlord in his subsequent letter.
When the tenant failed to deliver vacant possession of the premises the respondent filed a suit for ejectment under s.13( 1 )(j), which was contested by the tenant con tending that it was never intended by him to vacate the premises and that the said statement in the money order coupon was not made by him but by his brother without any authority from him.
The trial court dismissed the suit holding that the statement in the money order was neither written by the appellant nor by his authorised agent and accordingly it did not amount to a notice to quit within the provision of s.13(1)(j) of the Act.
The lower appellate court affirmed the finding of the trial court, but held that the said statement in the money order coupon was made by the brother of the appellant under his specific instruction.
Respondent 's second appeal was allowed by the High Court, which took the view that the statement in the money order coupon constituted a valid notice to quit within the meaning of section 13( I )(j).
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that the notice to quit was vague and uncertain and as it did not comply 1109 with the provisions of section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act it was defective and could not be treated as a notice to quit within the meaning of cl.(j) ors.13(1) of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was justified in decreeing the suit for eviction on the ground contained in clause (.i) of section 13(1) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956.
That clause reserves an option to the tenant to relinquish the protection under the Act by giving a notice to quit.
On failure of the tenant to vacate the premises in accordance with the notice to quit, the landlord would be entitled to a decree for ejectment.
[1114 ; 1112C D] 2.
The notice to quit must not be vague and uncertain.
There must be a clear indication in it of the tenant 's intention to vacate the premises.
Such an intention will be apparent when it is stated in the notice to quit that the tenant will vacate on a particular date or after a certain period of time.
When the tenant says that he will vacate by a certain date that will simply mean that he would vacate on or before that date.
[1112D; 1113B C] In the instant case, the notice to quit could not be said to be vague and uncertain.
Though it did not specifi cally mention the date when the appellant would vecate the premises, it was apparent from the statement "we shall vacate the premises within the next 6/8 months" that the appellant 's stay in the premises would not be beyond eight months.
It contains a clear intention to vacate the premises positively after the expiry of eight months from the date of the notice.
[1113C] Joseph vs Joseph, and Matthewson vs Wright man, , referred to.
The respondent had by his letter dated April 9, 1969 enquired of the appellant as to the date on which the appel lant would vacate the premises so as to enable the respond ent to arrange his occupation of the premises accordingly.
If the respondent had not accepted the notice to quit, there was no necessity for him to enquire of the appellant as to the precise date of his vacating the premises.
The notice having thus been accepted by the respondent, the appellant was precluded from challenging the validity thereof.
[1114E G] 4.1 A notice to quit even if it is defective can be accepted by the 1110 landlord, and after such acceptance the tenant will be estopped from challenging the validity of the notice given by him.
[1114C] 4.2.
Clause(j)of s.13(1) of the Act uses the expression "notice to quit" and does not lay down the particulars to be mentioned in such notice.
It does not also refer to the provision of section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act.
Even assuming that it is a notice under s.106 of the Transfer of Property Act and, accordingly the instant notice to quit was bad, yet the respondent having accepted the notice to quit, it was not open to the appellant to contend that it was invalid and could not be relied upon by the respondent as a ground for eviction.
[1113G; 1114A C] Calcutta Credit Corporation Ltd. & Anr.
vs Happy Homes (P) Ltd., , referred to.
