The respondent Accused, who was working as an Accounts Clerk in the appellant Bank in the very branch where P.W. 1 had her account, was alleged to have presented forged cheques on her account and misappropriated the sum with drawn.
He has prosecuted for offences under s.467 read with sections 109, 471, 408 and 420 of Indian Penal Code.
The trial court and the appellate court found that the signatures on the withdrawal forms were not that of P.W. 1 and that they were also not forged by the accused.
But they recorded a concurrent finding of fact that the withdrawal forms bearing forged signatures of P.W. 1 were presented in the Bank by the respondent accused and he obtained money and put his signatures on the reverse in acknowledgement of receipt of money, that the money so obtained was pocketed by the respondent accused and was not returned or paid to P.W. 1.
He was acquitted by the trial court of the charge under s.408 and by the appellate court under s.420, and ultimately convicted of the offence under s.467 read with section 109 and s.471.
The State did not prefer appeal against the acquittal under ss.408 and 420.
On appeal by the accused respondent, the High Court took the view that there was no evidence as to who forged the signatures of P.W. 1 on the withdrawal form and that it could not be said that the accused respondent knew that the document was forged or that he got the document forged.
It came to the conclusion that the offence under s.467 read with section 109 was not made out and that consequently his conviction under s.471 also could not be maintained.
In these appeals it was contended on behalf of the appellant Bank that the respondent accused was liable be cause he has admitted that the signatures on the back of the withdrawal form were his signatures 88 acknowledging the receipt of money which he pocketed him self.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The acquittal of the respondent accused by the High Court for an offence under s.467 read with section 109 of the Indian Penal Code was not justified.
1.2 Though there was no evidence about the forgery of the signatures of P.W. on the withdrawal forms still the fact remained that the signatures were forged, that the withdrawal form was in the possession of respondent accused and it was he who represented it in the Bank and obtained money.
P.W. 1 used to take the assistance of the responden taccused whenever she wanted to have any transaction in the Bank and therefore it was expected of him to have known the signatures of P.W. 1.
Apart from it there was nothing to establish as to from where the respondent accused got these withdrawal forms.
These facts lead to the only inference that it was the accused respondent who got the signatures of P.W. 1 forged on the withdrawal form.
It could not be doubted that the accused respondent used the withdrawal forms knowing them to be forged or at least believed them to be forged on the basis of which he obtained money to which he had no claim and thereby caused wrongful gain to himself and wrongful loss to P.W. 1.
It could not, therefore, be said that the respondent accused could not be convicted for an offence under s.47 1. 3.
As three separate prosecutions were launched the respondent is convicted of the offences under s.467 read with section 109 and s.47 1 of the Indian Penal Code in each one of the three cases and sentenced to 9 months rigorous im prisonment for each of the offences.
The sentences to run concurrently.
