The Income tax Officer rejected the account books of the respondent assessee on the ground that the sales and ex penses were not verified and the margin of profit shown was low.
He adopted the net profit rate at 8% thereby com puting the profit at Rs.60,800 and the total income was computed at Rs.60936 after addition of Rs. 136 for interest receipts.
On appeal the Appellate Assistant CommiSsioner confirmed this order of the Income tax Officer.
As the total income returned was less than 80% of the correct income computed, he held that the case feb within the ambit of s.27 1(1) of the Act, and issued a show cause notice under sec tion 274 read with section 271 to the assessee.
It was contended on behalf of the assessee before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner (i) that the assessee did not conceal the particulars of income nor furnish inaccurate particu lars; (ii) that the income returned was based on the books of account maintained in the regular course of business; (iii) that the assessee could only declare the income as ref1ected in the books of account; (iv) that the difference between the returned income and the assessed income did not arise from any fraud or gross or unlawful neglect on the part of the assessee; and (v) that it could not be consid ered in the circumstances that the assessee came within the mischief of s.27 1(1)(c) of the Act.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner rejected these contentions, confirmed the order of the Income tax Officer and in view of the Explanation to section 271(1) levied a penalty of Rs.8,300 under section 271(D(c) read with section 274(2) of the Act.
The respondent assessee went up in appeal to the Tribu nal which cancelled the penalty order 'and finally deter mined the income of the assessee at Rs.50,750 holding: (a) that the assessee had maintained certain types of books of account and had honestly believed that the same were suffi cient for the true ascertainment of his profits and, from 68 the facts he disclosed, it could not be said that he had been grossly or wilfully negligent in filing the return of income and as such there was no fraud; (b) that the differ ence between the income returned and the income assessed arose mainly on account of excess profit, in view of the various defects in the account books and the application of a higher profit rate on estimated turnover.
The application of the appellant revenue seeking refer ence under s.256( D of the Act, was rejected by the Tribunal on the ground that no question of law arose.
The appellant revenue went before the High Court under section 256(2) of the Act seeking a reference on the ques tion of cancelling the penalty imposed under sec.
271(1)(c) of the Act, and this application was also dismissed on the ground that the finding of the Tribunal that the assessee acted honestly notwithstanding the defective nature of the account books maintained by him was a finding of fact and therefore no question of law arose.
Dismissing the appeal of the appellant revenue, this Court, HELD: 1. I If the Income tax Officer and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner were satisfied that the assessee had concealed the particulars of his income or furnished inaccu rate particulars of such income, he can direct that such person should pay by way of a penalty the amount indicated in sub clause (ii) of clause (c) of section 271(1).
Under the law as it stood prior to the amendment of 1964, the onus was on the revenue to prove that the assessee had furnished inaccurate particulars or had concealed the income.
Difficulties were found to prove the positive ele ment required for concealment under the law prior to amend ment.
This positive element had to be established by the revenue.
To obviate that difficulty, the explanation was added.
The effect of the Explanation is that where the total income returned by any person is less than 80% of the total income assessed, the onus is on such person to prove that the failure to file the correct income does not arise from any fraud or any gross or wilful neglect on his part and unless he does so, he should be deemed to have concealed the particulars of his income or furnished inaccurate particu lars, for the purpose of section 271(1).
The position is that the moment the stipulated difference was there, the onus that it was not the failure of the assessee or fraud of the assessee or neglect of the assessee that caused the difference shifted on 69 the assessee but it has to be borne in mind that though the onus shifted, the onus that was shifted was rebuttable.
1.3 If in an appropriate case the Tribunal or the fact finding body was satisfied by the evidence on the record and inference drawn from the record that the assessee was not guilty of fraud or any gross or wilful neglect and if the revenue had not adduced any further evidence then in such a case the assessee cannot come within the mischief of the section and suffer the imposition of penalty.
That is the effect of the provision.
1.4 Presumptions raised by the Explanation to section 271(1)(c) are rebuttable presumptions.
The initial burden of discharging the onus of rebuttal is on the assessee.
Once that initial burden is discharged, the assessee would be out of the mischief unless further evidence was adduced.
1.5 If the returned income is less than 80% of the assessed income, the presumption is raised against the assessee that the assessee is guilty of wilful neglect or of fraud or gross or wilful neglect as a result of which he has concealed the income but this presumption can be rebutted.
The rebuttal must be on materials relevant and cogent.
It is for the fact finding body to judge the relevancy and suffi ciency of the materials.
If such a fact finding body bearing the aforesaid principles in mind comes to the conclusion that the assessee has discharged the onus, it becomes a conclusion of fact.
No question of law arises.
In the instant case, the Tribunal has borne in mind the relevant principles of law and has also judged the facts on record.
It is not a case that there was no evidence or there was such evidence on which no reasonable man could have accepted the explanation of the assessee.
In that view of the matter the Tribunal rightly rejected the claim for reference under section 256(1) and the High Court correctly did not entertain the application for reference under sec tion 256(2) of the Act.
If a party comes within the mischief of the Explana tion to section 27 1 then there is a presumption against him and the onus to discharge the presumption lies on the asses see but being a presumption ' it is a rebuttable one and if on appropriate materials, the Tribunal has rebutted that presumption, no question of law can be said to arise.
