A family dispute between the parties pertaining tO movable and immovable property left intestate by their father was referred by them to arbitration.
The award made on February 12, 1977 stated: (i) that the appellant should pay to the 1st respondent a specified sum, on payment of which she will have no right to live in the house and also have no other interests in the said property as a legal heir; (ii) that till the full amount was paid she would be entitled to live in the portion of the house in her occupa tion and not be liable to pay any rent; (iii) that the 2nd respondent shall have right of residence in the said house.
plus right to receive from the appellant a specified sum per month as maintenance for life or till she is married; and (iv) that in case of her marriage the appellant should pay her the specified sum upon which she will have no right to live in the house or get any maintenance.
The aforesaid award was filed in court on March 10, 1977 and accepted by the appellant and the 2nd respondent on May 11, 1977.
The first respondent filed her objection to the award on October 1977 on two grounds: (i) that being unregistered it was incapable of being made the rule of the court in terms of section 17 of the , and (ii) that the second respondent being mentally retarded could not be a party to the arbitration proceedings.
The High Court upheld the first objection but not the second.
152 In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that even if the award was not properly registered as required under section 17 of the , in view of the fact that it was filed within a period of one month of its making and since four months time was there to have the award registered by the arbitrator the court should have exercised its powers under section 15(b) and section 16(1)(c) of the .
For the first respondent it was contended that the award effected partition of immovable property and having not been registered it could not be made a rule of the court.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The award did not create any right in any immovable property,.
nor did it effect partition in any immovable property.
It was, therefore, not compulsory to register the award.
[162G] 1.2 The award merely indicated the entitlement of the respondent in the property and the cessor of their interest in the property on receipt of money.
Their right and inter est was to cease only on the payment of the amount and not otherwise, not even by the operation of the document itself.
[161B C] 1.3 The award only declared that the right of the appel lant to get the immovable property was dependent upon the payment of the amount by him.
A right to the property was not created by the award itself, a right to certain property was declared.
A right to get the property was declared on the payment of the money.
The award did not create any right to the property, extinguish any right to the property, which was not there.
It quantified in terms of money the value of that right and declared the method of working out those rights.
[162D E] Rajangam Ayyar vs Rajangam Ayyar, AIR 1922 Privy Council p. 266; Upendra Nath Bose vs Lall and Others, AIR 1940, Privy Council p. 222; Sheonarain Lal vs Rameshwari Devi and another, Civil Appeal No. 296 of 1960 decided on 6.12.1962; Satish Kumar & Ors.
vs Surinder Kumar & Ors., [1969] 2 SCR p. 244 and Ratan Lal Sharma vs Purshottam Harit, [1974] 3 SCR p. 109, referred to.
The purpose of remitting the award under section 16(D(c) of the is to enable the arbitrator to recon sider his decision where legality was connected with the decision as contained in the award.
It must not relate to a matter which has no connection with the decision or decree.
[159H; 160A] 153 In the instant case, there was no objection to the legality of the award.
The factum of registration of the award did not pertain to the decision of the arbitration on its merits and was de hors the award and for this purpose the award could not be remitted to the arbitrator under section 16 of the Act.
[159F G] Rikhabdass vs Ballabhdas and others.
, [1962] suppl.
1 SCR 475 and Nani Bala Saha vs Ram Gopal Saha and another, AIR (32) 1945 Calcutta 19, referred to.
The award was not imperfect in terms of section 15(b) of the .
There was, therefore, no scope in the facts and circumstances of the case, of exercising its powers by the High Court under section 15 of the Act.
Powers under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure could also not be exercised in this case.
[160A B] 4.
It could not be said that the 2nd respondent was mentally incapable.
Though she was not of a very cheerful disposition, she was understanding what was happening in this court.
She knew what was good and what was bad for her, and had accepted the award with a free will.
She could perform her duties satisfactorily, intelligently and social ly.
She had consciously participated in the award proceed ings.
She was never given any ECT treatment.
She was never hospitalised.
[159B C] 5.
In an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution the Court must in the interests of justice protect as far as practicable the interests of all the parties.
[163A] [Having regard to the present position of inflation and rise in price of life and living, the 2nd respondent will be entitled to a monthly maintenance of Rs.500 instead of Rs.350 and this sum would form a charge on the share allot ted to the appellant.
In the contingencies mentioned in cls.(1) and (2) of the award the first respondent would be paid Rs.75,000 instead of Rs.40,800.
Similarly, in the contingency mentioned in d.(4) the 2nd respondent would be paid Rs.75,000 instead of Rs.40,800.
The award as modified is made a rule of the Court.] [163C D]
