Respondent No. 1 State Transport Appellate Tribunal set aside a temporary permit to ply a stage carriage on the pondicherry Madras route issued under s.62 of the in favour of the appellant, and granted it in favour of respondent No. 2 for the remaining period of the temporary permit.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
The Court found that the period of temporary permit having come to an end, no further orders are necessary as regards the person who could operate a stage carriage under that permit.
The Union Territory of Pondicherry, after 'the lapse of 7 years from the date of the amendment of section 47 of the Act, issued rules on 12.6.
1985 regarding reservations to be made in favour of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes under Section 47(1A) of the Act.
Having regard to the slackness that is creeping into the manner in which the provisions of the Act regarding reservation of certain percentage of stage carriage permits to be made in favour of persons belonging to Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes, and issue of temporary permits are being adminis tered by some Transport Authorities, this Court, HELD: 1.(1) Section 47 of the Act deals with the proce dure to be followed by a Regional Transport Authority.
In considering an application for a stage carriage permit the Regional Transport Authority should have due regard to the following matters, namely: (a) the interest of the public generally; (b) the advantage to the public of the service to be provided, including the saving of time likely to be effected thereby and any convenience arising from journeys not being broken; (c) the adequacy of other passenger trans port services operating or 180 likely to operate in the near future, whether by road or other means, between the places to be served; (d) the bene fit to any particular locality or localities likely to be afforded by the service; (e) the operation by the applicant of other transport services, including those in respect of which applications from him for permits are pending; and (f) the condition of the roads included in the proposed route or area.
It should also take into consideration any representa tions made by persons already providing passenger transport facilities by any means along or near the proposed route or area, or by any association representing persons interested in the provision of road transport facilities recognised in this behalf by the State Government, or by any local author ity or police authority within whose jurisdiction any part of the proposed route or area lies.
Thus the paramount consideration that should govern the decision of a Regional Transport Authority in issuing a permit to run a stage carriage is the interest of the general publice.
[183E H; 184A B] 1.(2) It was felt that the permits for plying stage carriages in India were being cornered by persons belonging to richer and more advanced classes in society, and persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other economically weaker sections of the community were not able to compete with people who were rich and more advanced.
Parliament therefore amended section 47 of the Act by intro ducing provisions for making reservation of certain percent age of stage carriage permits to persons belonging to Sched uled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and economically weaker sec tions of the community, viz Section 47(1A).
The reservation made in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is protected by clause(4) of Article 15 of the Constitution of India.
[184B D; G] 1.(3) If stage carriage permits are to be issued then in compliance with sub section(IA) of Section 47 of the Act certain percentage of the said permits would have to be reserved for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and if the Government so desires to the economically weaker sections of the community.
If the issue of such permits is postponed for any reason and only tempo rary permits are issued then the persons belonging to Sched uled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the weaker sections would not be able to enjoy the benefit of the reservations.
[186H; 187A B] In the instant case, it is regrettable that for some reason or other the State Transport Authority of Pondicherry has not taken steps to issue regular permits on 18 routes in respect of which it has entered into inter State agreements with the State of Tamil Nadu even though the 181 need for issuing those permits is beyond dispute.
But, on the other hand for nearly six years, the State Transport Authority of Pondicherry is issuing temporary permits under s 62 of the Act repeatedly in respect of the routes.
The disadvantages suffered by the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the economically weaker sections of the community by the procedure adopted by the State Transport Authority are obvious.
[186F H] 2(1).
Under section 62 of the Act it is permissible to a Regional Transport Authority to issue temporary permits to be effective for a limited period not exceeding four months without following the procedure laid down in s.57 of the Act.
Such temporary permits can be issued only for the conveyance of passengers on special occasions such as to and from fairs and religious gatherings or for the purposes of a seasonal business or to meet a particular temporary need or pending decision on an application for the renewal of a permit.
The Regional Transport Authority cannot grant a temporary permit for a route or area specified in an appli cation for grant of a new permit under s.46 or s.54 of the Act during the pendency of the application.
That section further provides that a temporary permit issued under that section shall in no case be granted more than once in re spect of any route or area specified in an application for the renewal of a permit during the pendency of such applica tion for renewal.
A temporary permit can thus be granted only if the permit is required for the purposes or reasons mentioned in clauses (a) to (d) of s.62( D of the Act or in the circumstances referred to in sub section(2) thereof.
[188F H; 189A B] 2(2).
There cannot be also a renewal or revalidation of a temporary permit.
The revalidation or renewal of a tempo rary permit or exension of the period for which a temporary permit is issued is not contemplated by law.
[189C D] In the instant case, the action taken by the State Transport Authority in issuing temporary permits repeatedly for a long number of years is clearly in violation of the letter and spirit of section 62 of the Act.
[189D] Andhra Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation vs
K. Venkataramireddy and Others, and Gandha ra Transport Co. Ltd. vs The State of Punjab and others, [ 1963] Supp.
S.C.R. 800, followed.
3(1) The Regional Transport Authority which is charged with the 182 duty of issuing permits for transport vehicles under the Act in the public interest should wherever it finds that the need for issuing such stage carriage permit is established take immediate steps to invite applications from persons who are willing to run the stage carriage on the route or in the area in question and proceed to grant the permit in favour of a deserving applicant.
If any person on his own makes application for the grant of a stage carriage permit, the Regional Transport Authority should consider such applica tion in accordance with law and proceed to grant a permit if it finds that it is necessary to do so.
[189D F] 3(2) If a regular permit is issued it would be in force for a period not less than three years and not more than five years as may be determined by the Regional Transport Authority and such permit is capable of being renewed under section 58 of the Act.
But, if the Regional Transport Au thority proceeds to issue a temporary permit then at the end of every four months, it will have to spend time over the consideration of fresh applications for the issue of such permits and it is needless to say that the necessity for making applications at the end of every four months would entail many undesirable consequences which should be avoid ed.
[189F H]
