The assessee company entered into an agreement with M/s. Charles Walker and Company, London which, inter alia, stipu lated that the latter would permit the use by the assessee of a number of registered trade marks specified in the agreement and disclose to the approved officers of the assessee the technique, practices and application of specia lised tanning processes.
Paragraph 7 of the agreement pro vided that the assessee would appoint Textile and General Supplies, nominee of the Charles Walker, as its distributors for the sale of industrial leather manufactured by it in India and the assessee would pay Rs.50,000 to the distribu tors for meeting the initial expenses of establishing the distributorship.
This agreement was to be in force for a period of seven years.
Simultaneously, another agreement was entered into between the assessee and Textile and General Supplies for a period of seven years, but no reference was made therein to the obligation of the assessee to pay Rs.50,000 to the distributors.
For the assessment year 1959 60 the assessee claimed the payment of Rs.50,000 to Textile and General Supplies as a deduction permissible under section 10(2)(XV) of the Income Tax Act, 1922, which was rejected by the Income Tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Tribunal on the ground that the said payment was in the nature of a capital expenditure.
In the Reference, the High Court allowed the claim of the assessee holding that the payment in question was a revenue expenditure.
Dismissing the Appeal of the Revenue, 134 HELD: 1.
The real question is whether the payment that had been made by the assessee under the contract in question is a mere division of profits with another party or is it a payment to the other party, the amount of which is ascer tained by reference to the profits.
[138A B] 2.
No test of Universal application can be laid down.
The aim and object of the expenditure was one of the guiding factors.
The aim and object of incurring the expenditure in this case was the acquisition of the know how.
Rs.50,000 was really part of the price paid by the assessee to obtain the know how.
Pursuant to Paragraph 7 of the said agreement the assessee was bound to appoint Textile and General Supplies, nominee of Charles Walker, as its distributor for the sale of leather manufactured by it in India.
Paragraph 7 was an integral part of the agreement with Charles Walker and was a part of the consideration for the receipt of the benefit.
It was necessary condition of the agreement with Charles Walker to appoint Textile and General Supplies as distributors of the assessee.
It was perhaps done to protect the technical know how which Charles Walker was parting so that the dis tributors would be a nominee of Charles Walker.
[138D; H; 139C D] 3.
Having regard to the nature of the agreement and having regard to the facts that the organisational set up under the distributorship agreement was to endure for seven years and upon the expiry of the period, the assessee had no relationship with the organisation and that the period of agreement between the assessee and the distributors was contemporaneous with the agreement between the assessee and Charles Walker under which the assessee became entitled to use the registered trade marks, it must be considered to be a revenue expenditure, because it,was part of the price for the acquisition of technical know how and the condition of appointment was a stipulation mentioned by Charles Walker.
[139D F] British Sugar Manufacturers, Ltd. vs Harris (Inspector of Taxes), ; Countess Warwick Steampship Co. Ltd. vs Ogg, [1924] 2 K.B. 292 at 298; Assam Bengal Cement Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City Iv.
Ciba of India Ltd., (and vice versa), ; Travancore Sugar and Chemicals Ltd. vs Commissioner of IncomeTax, Kerala, ; Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal H vs Coal Shipments P. Ltd., ; Empire Jute Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, ; ; L.H. Sugar Factory and Oil Mills (P) Ltd., vs Commissioner of Income Tax, U.P., and Commentry of Kanga and Palkhivala 's Income Tax, Seventh Edition, Volume 1 page 484 to 488, referred to. 135
