Section 2(P)(i) of the Bihar Agricultural Produce Mar kets Act, 1960 defines 'sale ' to mean any transfer of property in goods for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration.
The Explanation to section 2(P)(i) inserted by the Bihar Agricultural Produce (Markets) amend ment Act, 1982 provides that notwithstanding anything con tained in any law for the time being in force, 'sale ' shall be deemed to have taken place for the purpose of this Act within a market area when the goods are transferred form the Principal to his selling agent or to the Arhatia within the market area or outside.
The amending Act also added an Explanation to the charging section, section 27 providing that all notified agricultural produce leaving a market area shall, unless the contrary is proved, be presumed to have been bought or sold in such area.
The respondents challenged before the High Court the vires of the Explanation to section 2(P)(i) on the ground that it encroached upon Entry 42 of List I Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.
The High Court refrained from declaring the Explanation bad but read it down and held that it should be read in harmony with the Explanation to Section 27 and directed the marketing committee concerned to make assess ment of fees after giving the petitioners an opportunity as provided in the Explanation to Section 27.
Dismissing the Appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
In construing the two Explanations preference has to 211 be given to the Explanation to the charging section over the Explanation to the definition section consistent with the rules of interpretations of such provisions.
[214G H] 2.1 In fiscal laws due importance has to be given to the phraseology used in the charging section.
Section 27 gives to the market committee the power to levy and collect market fees on the agricultural produce bought or sold in the market area at the rate given therein.
The Explanation raises a presumption that all notified agricultural produce leaving a market area shall be presumed to have been bought or sold in such an area.
But this presumption is rebuttable because the Explanation gives the affected party an opportu nity to satisfy the assessing authorities that there was neither buying nor selling in a given case.
[213F H] 2.2 In all transactions, the parties get an opportunity to satisfy the assessing authorities whether such transac tions are sales or not.
But the Explanation to Section 2(P)(i) introduces complications.
This Explanation states by a deeming fiction that when goods are transferred from the principal to his selling agent or Arhatia within a market area or outside the market area, a sale takes place.
This Explanation encompasses within its sweep, sales of all kinds within the market area or outside or within the State or outside.
[214A C] 2.3 The Explanation to Section 2(P)(i) has not been well worded nor properly placed.
The Explanation is in excess of the powers of the State Legislature since the dispute can be resolved better by allowing the two Explanations to co exist by reading them harmoniously.
In doing so, it is necessary to read down the Explanation to Section 2(P)(i) and give full effect to the Explanation to the charging section.
The Explanation to Section 27 gives an opportunity to the af fected persons to satisfy the assessing authorities that the transaction in question is not a sale.
This Explanation should be deemed to take in all sales including those men tioned in the Explanation in Section 4(P)(i).
In other words, even transactions coming within the ambit of Explana tion to Section 2(P)(i) have to be governed by the Explana tions to Section 27.
[214E G] 3.
If the Government wants a stricter control over the transactions in the market area it is for them to suitably amend the Explanation in question by excluding its operation from the Explanation to Section 27.
[215B]
