Respondents 2 to 9 preferred an appeal to the Calcutta High Court against their conviction and sentence dated 19.3.
On 22.3.
1984 a Division Bench of the High Court admitted the appeal but did not grant bail on that date.
Within a fortnight thereafter, i.e. on 12.4.
1984, the application for bail moved by the Respondents came up before the Bench for consideration.
The appeal was not set for hearing on that day.
The records which had been requisi tioned from the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge had not been received and notices of the bail had not been issued.
Acting on an alleged concession made by the Public Prosecutor, the Bench allowed the appeal itself and acquit ted the respondents.
The appellant complainant 's Special Leave Petition No. 2025/84 dated 15.10.
1984 against the said orders of acquittal was allowed to be withdrawn to move the High Court for review.
The appellants ' review petition dated 5.12.
1984 having been dismissed on the ground that the High Court had no power to review its judgment under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the appellant has now come in appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
Normally, the Supreme Court, as a matter of practice, is reluctant to interfere with an order of acquit tal recorded by the High Court at the instance of a private complainant, but the circumstances of the case are such that there is no other alternative but to interfere in this 306 case.
The procedure adopted by the High Court was not in consonance with the procedure established by law and has resulted in flagrant miscarriage of justice.
[306H; 307A] Under Section 385 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 it was obligatory for the High Court to have fixed a date for the hearing of the appeal and sent for the records of the Court of Sessions and thereafter hear the parties on merits.
It does no credit to any branch of administration of justice that an appeal against conviction or acquittal should be allowed without the Appellate Court having the records before it and without pursuing the evidence adduced by the prosecution.
Assuming that the learned Public Prose cutor conceded that there was no evidence, the High Court had time to satisfy itself upon perusal of the record that there was no reliable and credible evidence to warrant the conviction of the accused under section 148 and s.302 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code.
[308B E]
