Clause 12 of the agreements separately entered into between the respondents and the appellant State provided that "for any breach of conditions the first party (the respondent) shall be liable to pay damages to the second party (the State) as may be assessed by the second party in addition to the forfeiture in part or full of the security amount deposited by the first party and that any amount that may become due or payable by the first party to the second party under any part of the agreement, shall be deemed to be and may be recovered from the first party as if they were arrears of land revenue.
According to the State the respondents committed a breach of their respective contract and, therefore, demanded payment of damages as assessed by the authorities represent ing the State.
As the respondents failed to pay the damages, the State initiated recovery proceedings under the Revenue Recovery Act.
The respondents challenged the recovery pro ceedings by filing suit/writ petition.
The Full Bench of the High Court dismissed the Second Appeal (out of which C .A. No. 471 of 1975 arises) preferred by the State holding that the State is not competent to adjudicate upon the question whether the respondent commit ted breach of contract, that the State is not competent to assess the damages for any breach of contract not admitted by the respondent and that the damages so assessed cannot be recovered as if they were arrears of land revenue.
Following this decision, the High Court allowed the writ petitions filed by the other respondents and quashed the recovery proceedings.
399 In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the State it was contended that the authorities representing the State, even though a party to the agreement are empowered under Clause 12 to not only assess the damages occasioned by the breach of the conditions but also to adjudication any issue concerning the commission of the breach itself.
Dismissing the Appeals, HELD: 1.
On a plain reading of the words in Clause 12: "and for any breach of conditions set forth herein before, the first party shall be liable to pay damages to the second party as may be assessed by the second party", it is clear that the right of the second party to assess damages would arise only if the breach of conditions is admitted or if no issue is made of it.
If it was the intention of the parties that the officer acting on behalf of the State was also entitled to adjudicate upon a dispute regarding the breach of conditions the wording of Clause 12 would have been entirely different.
A right to adjudicate upon an issue relating to a breach of conditions of the contract would not flow or is not inhered in the right conferred to assess the damages arising from a breach of conditions.
The power to assess damages is a subsidiary and consequential power and not the primary power.
[403A C] 2.
Adjudication by the Officer regarding the breach of the contract cannot be sustained under law because a party to the agreement cannot be an arbiter in his own cause.
Interests of justice and equity require that where a party to the contract disputes the committing of any breach of conditions the adjudication should be by an independent person or body and not by the other party to the contract.
The position will, however, be different where there is no dispute or there is consensus between the contracting par ties regarding the breach of conditions.
In such a case the Officer of the State even though a party to the contract will be well within his rights in assessing the damages occasioned by the breach in view of the specific terms of Clause 12.
[403D F] 3.
The Full Banch while taking the view that the State is not entitled to recover damages as arrears of land reve nue because damages for breach of conditions will not amount to "money due under the contract" has wrongly relied upon the decision of this Court in Divisional Forest Officer vs Mool Chand ; Here the Court is concerned with cases where the agreement entered into between the Govern ment and the private persons specifically provides for recovery of damages as arrears of land revenue.
The Full Bench has failed to notice that even though the damages become payable on ac 400 count of breach of conditions of contract, the liability to pay damages does not fail outside the terms of the contract but within the terms of the contract.
The words "any amount that may become due or payable by the first party to the second party under any part of this agreement" have to be read in conjunction with the earlier portion of the Clause stipulating liability on the party contracting with the State to pay damages for breach of conditions.
Therefore, it follows that though damages become payable on account of breach of conditions of the agreement they nevertheless constitute amount payable under the contract, that is, under one of the terms of the contract imposing liabilities to pay damages for breach of conditions.
Therefore, the opinion of the Full Bench in so far as the recovery of damages as arrears of land revenue is concerned is not in accordance with law.
[403H; 404A F]
