The detenu was arrested on December 17, 1985 pursuant to a detention order dated December 16, 1985 passed under section 3(2) of the and the grounds of detention were served on him the same day.
It was alleged in the order that since the year 1979 the detenu had been continuously engaging himself in committing acts prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the communiy, i.e., removing of permanent way material stocked along rail lines for maintenance of rail tracks, removing parts of carriages, wagons and signal telecommunication materials utilised for repair of railway wagons and maintenance of signals; that he used to arrange to remove railway property with the help of his 'gang ' and stock the same in his godown, himself remaining behind the scence; that in a number of cases railway properties were loaded and carried away in a truck owned by the detenu and, thus, the work of maintenance of the tracks was hampered and quick movement of the wagons loaded with essential commodities such as foodgrains, arms, ammunition required by the general public and the armed forces could not be made.
The grounds indicated six different cases in which the detenu was involved, out of which in two cases he was acquitted and four cases were pending against him on the date of the passing of detention order.
Each of the grounds indicated in the detention order individually and collectively was not only germane but also sufficient to satisfy the detaining authority with a view to preventing the detenu from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community and as such it was necessary to detain him.
838 The grounds were communicated to the detenu under section 8 of the Act read with article 22(5) of the Constitution.
Copies of the documents mentioned in the detention order and placed before the detaining authority were enclosed with the detention order sent to the detenu.
The detenu was informed that he had a right to make a representation to the State Government against the order of detention, that he should address it in the manner indicated therein, that the State Government would within three weeks from the date of detention make a reference to the Advisory Board constituted under section 9 of the Act to make a report of detention and that he had right to make the representation to the Advisory Board and if he wanted he would be heard in person by the Advisory Board if necessary.
A reference under section 10 of the Act was made to the Advisory Board and the Advisory Board considered the representation dated January 8, 1986 of the detenu at the time of interviewing him on January 29, 1986.
The Board submitted its report under section 12(1) of the Act on February 3, 1986, which was received by the Government within the stipulated period of 7 weeks from the date of the detention, and the Government after considering the representation of the detenu and the report of the Advisory Board confirmed the defention order.
The detenu challenged the detention order under Article 226 of the Constitution alleging: (i) that the order was mala fide; (ii) that there was total absence of material; and (iii) that in any event the provisions of were not attracted but the provisions of the Prevention of Black marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980 would be attracted.
A Division Bench dismissed the petition holding that permanent way material is essential to the maintenance of railway track and safety of the railway travelling public; that there were good grounds for detention and it was not possible to hold that there were no grounds of detention relevant for the Act; that only was attracted in the facts and circumstances of the instant case.
In the Special Leave Petition and the Petition under Article 32, on behalf of the detenu it was contended; (i) that the grounds of detention were vague, irrelevant and non existent; (ii) that the grounds of detention related to as far back as 1979 and, therefore, it was not open to the detaining authority to order detention on those grounds because in respect of the alleged grounds criminal cases were pending against him 839 and he had been enlarged on bail; (iii) that when a judicial authority was satisfied on the materials placed before it that there were no grounds for keeping the detenu in detention, on the same materials the executive authority could not substitute the judicial judgment and order detention to prevent to detenu from acting in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the community; (iv) that in view of the fact that the detenu was on bail, the power of preventive detention had been used to defeat the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure (v) that the alleged grounds were merely allegations of ordinary criminal cases which either had ended in acquittal or in respect of which appeals were pending or were pending determination and as such the formation of the belief by the detaining authority for the detention order was merely on surmises and on materials which the detaining authority was not competent to take note of; (vi) that the pending criminal cases did not disclose any activity of the detenu prejudicial to the maintenance of supplied and services essential to the community.
The connection of the detenu with the alleged offences was not there and as such the satisfaction could not be there of the detaining authority.
The detenu was in no manner connected with the alleged theft committed by certain named persons and though the ownership of the truck attributed to the detenu was not denied or disputed but the involvement of the detenu did not follow from that fact.
Dismissing the Writ Petition and the Special Leave Petition, ^ HLED: (1) There was no infraction of any procedural safeguard engrafted in and that there was rational subjective satisfaction arrived at bona fide on the basis of the materials available to the detaining authority and the materials had rational nexus with the purpose and object of the detention as contemplated by the Act.
The detention order was therefore valid.
[865A B] (2) In view of the Explanation to section 3 of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies Act, 1980, (Act 7 of 1980) the expression "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the communities" has certain particular connotation.
But in the instant case, the conduct of the detenu was prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community in general and contemplated by section 3(2) of the and not in any particular mode contemplated by the Explanation to section 3(1) of Act 7 of 1980 and as such is not excluded by the Explanation to sub section
(2) of section 3 of the Act.
Therefore the High Court was right in the view it took on this aspect of the matter.
[853B D] 840 (3) Even the existence of one ground is sufficient to sustain the detention order.
[853F] (4) An order is mala fide when there is malice in law although there is no malice in fact.
The malice in law is to be inferred when order is made contrary to the objects and purposes of the Act.
Whether in any particular case this is so or not must depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case.
The fact that the person sought to be detained is in fact under detention is a relevant and material factor but the allegations or the incidents leading to his detention have also to be borne in mind co related to the object of a particular Act under which preventive detention is contemplated.
[854E F] (5) The provides for preventive detention in certain cases.
Power has been given under section 3 authorising preventive detention and sub section
(2) thereof provides that the Central Government or the State Government might, if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order or from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community it was necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained then the same can be done.
The Explanation to this sub section makes it clear that the expression "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community" does not include "acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community" as defined in the Explanation to sub section
(1) of section 3 of the Prevention of Black marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act 1980.
[854F H; 855A B] (6) Merely on the ground that an accused in detention as an under trial prisoner is likely to get bail, an order of detention under the National Securuity Act should not ordinarily be passed.
If the apprehension of the detaining authority is true, the bail application has to be opposed and in case bail is granted, challenge against that order in the higher forum has to be raised.
But this principle will have to be judged and applied in the facts and circumstances of each case.
Where a person accused of certain offences whereunder he is undergoing trial or has been acquitted, the appeal is pending and in respect of which he may be granted bail may not in all circumstances entitle an authority to direct preventive detention and the said principle must apply but where the offences in respect of which the detenu is acused are so inter linked and continuous in character and are of such nature that these affect 841 continuous maintenance of essential supplies and thereby jeopardise the security of the State, then subject to other conditions being fulfilled, a man being in detention would not detract from the order being passed for preventive detention.
[855D G] Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah and Others followed.
(7) For maintaining supplies throughout the country, the railways is per se essential and, therefore, interference with railway lines would be endangering the maintenance of supplies.
[856D] Mohd.
Subrati Alias Mohd. Karim vs State of West Bengal ; at 992 followed.
(8) The past conduct or antecedent history on which the authority purport to act should ordinarily be proximate in point of time and have a rational connection with the conclusion that the detention of the person was necessary.
[861F] Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate, Burdwan & Anr. ; followed.
(9) Whether an order of detention could be passed against a person who was in detention or in jail would always have to be considered in the facts and circumstances of each case.
[864E] Makhan Singh Tarsikha vs State of Punjab ; followed.
(10) Merely because the detaining authority had chosen to base the order of detention on the discharge of the detenu by Court for want of evidence it could not be held that the order was bad in law.
This branch of jurisprudence, as interpreted by this Court, has made it futile for a detenu to urge that because the ground of detention had been subject matter of criminal cases which had ended in discharge, therefore, the order of detention was mala fide.
The basic imperative of proof beyond reasonable doubt did not apply to the component of subjective satisfaction for imprisonment for reasons of internal security.
There might be extreme cases where the Court had held a criminal case to be false and the detaining authority for want of evidence claimed to be satisfied about prospective prejudicial activities based on what a Court had found to be baseless.
There must be a live link between the 842 grounds of criminal activities alleged by the detaining authority and the purposes of detention.
This credible chain is snapped if there was too long and unexplained interval between the offending acts and order of detention.
If the detaining authority took the chance of conviction and, when the Court verdict went against it, fell back on its detention power to punish one whom the Court would not convict, it was an abuse and virtual nullification of the judicial process.
But if honestly, finding a dangerous person getting away with it by over awing witnesses or concealing the Commission cleverly, an authority thought on the material before it that there was need to interdict public disorder at his instance he might validly direct detention.
[862A D] (11) It was always the past conduct, activities or the antecedent history of a person which the detaining authority took into account, in making a detention order.
No doubt the past conduct, activities or antecedent history should ordinarily be proximate in point of time and should have a rational connection with the conclusion that the detention of the person was necessary but it was for the detaining authority who had to arrive at a subjective satisfaction in considering the past activities and coming to his conclusion if on the basis of those activities he was to be satisfied that the activities of the person concerned were such that he was likely to indulge in prejudicial activities necessitating his detention.
Where an earlier order of detention was either revoked or had expired, any subsequent detention order could be passed only on fresh facts arising after the expiry or revocation of the earlier order.
[861F H] Masood Alam Etc.
vs Union of the India and Others ; followed.
(12) Mere service of detention order in jail per se is not bad.
(13) The law of preventive detention is a hard law and therefore should be strictly construed.
Care should be taken that the liberty of the person was not jeopardised, unless the case fell squarely within the four corners of the releyant law.
The law of preventive detention is not to be used merely to clip the wings of the accused who was involved in a criminal prosecution.
Where a person was enlarged on bail by a competent criminal Court, great caution should be exercised in scrutinising the validity of an order of preventive detention which was treated on the very same charge which was to be tried by the criminal Court.
[863A B] Vijay Narain Singh vs State of Bihar & Ors. ; followed.
843 (14) Having regard to the purpose of the Act, the detaining authority must take into consideration rational, proximate, reasonable past and present and that should be the basis for the horoscope for the future so as to determine whether the person proposed to be detained comes within the mischief of the Act.
If the person is in detention or is under trial and his conviction is likely but his conduct comes within the mischief of the Act then the authority is entitled to take a rational view of the matter.
The grounds must be there.
The decision must be bona fide.
[863D F] (15) The fact that a man is not in jail per se would not be determinative of the factor that order of preventive detention could not be passed against him.
The fact that a man was found not guilty in a criminal trial would not also be determinative of the factors alleged therein.
All these factors must be objectively considered and if there are casual connections and if bona fide belief was formed then there was nothing to prevent from serving an order of preventive detention even against the person who was in jail custody if there is imminent possibility of his being released and set at liberty if the detaining authority was duly satisified.
[864E G] Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah and Others , Rameshwar Shah vs District Magistrate Burdwan & Anr. ; and Makhan Singh Tarsikka vs State of Punjab ; distinguished.
Maledath Bharathan Malyali vs The Commissioner of Police AIR 1950 Bombay 202, Merugu Satyanarayan Etc.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh and Others ; , Golam Hussain Alias Gama vs The Commissioner of Police Calcutta and Others ; , Sahib Singh Dugal vs Union of India, [1966] 1 SCR 313, Mohd. Salim Khan vs Shri C.C. Bose Bengal [1972] 2 SCC 550, Godavari Shamrao Parulekar vs State of Maharashtra & Others ; , Gopi Ram vs State of Rajasthan AIR 1967 SC 241, Masood Alam Etc.
vs Union of India and Others ; , Dulal Roy vs The District Magistrate, Burdwan & Others ; , Dr. Ramakrishna Rawat vs District Magistrate, Jabalpur and Another, at 167 and 169, The Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Company Law Board and Others [1966] Supp.
SCR 311 at 354 and 363, Prakash Chandra Mehta vs Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Kerala and Others [1985] Supp.
SCC 144 and Shiv Ratan Makim s/o.
Nandlal Makim vs Union of India and Others ; considered.
