Section 20(1) of the dealing with cognizance and trial of offences provides that no prosecution for an offence under that Act shall be instituted except by, or with the written consent o ' he Central Government or the State Government or a person authorised in this behalf, by general or special order, by the Central or State Government.
Section 24(1) empowers the State Government to frame rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act, while section 24(2) (e) states that such rules may provide for the delegation of the powers and functions conferred by this Act on the State Government or the Food (Health) Authority to subordinate or local authorities.
Rule 3 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Punjab) Rules, 1958 framed by the State Government empowered the State Government to delegate its powers to appoint Food Inspectors, to authorise a person to institute prosecutions for an offence under the Act and such other powers exercisable by it under the Act as may be specified m the order of the Food (Health) Authority of the State.
962 In pursuance of the provisions of r. 3 of the Rules the State Government issued a Notification dated October 10, 1968 purporting to delegate its powers and functions conferred by section 20(1) of the Act to institute prosecutions for an offence under the Act, to the Food (Health) Authority.
In terms of that Notification the Food (Health) Authority issued a Notification dated September 7, 1972 authorising the Food Inspector, Faridkot to launch prosecutions under section 20(1) for an offence under the Act.
On February 1, 1985 the Food Inspector, Faridkot filed a complaint against the appellants for having committed an offence punishable under section 16(1) (a) (ii) of the Act for alleged violation of rr. 24, 28, 29 and 32 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955.
During the course of the proceedings, the appellants raised an objection that r. 3 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Punjab) Rules, 1958 framed under section 24(2) (e) read with section 20(1) of the Act was ultra vires the State Government.
Alternatively it was urged that by virtue of the authority derived under r.3 the Food (Health) Authority alone had the power to institute prosecution for an offence under the Act and, therefore, he could not sub delegate his powers to launch the prosecution to the Food Inspector by the Notification dated September 7, 1972.
This preliminary objection was rejected by the Magistrate and he proceeded to frame charges against the appellants.
They thereupon moved the High Court under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for quashing of the aforesaid order taking cognizance of the offence and consequent framing of the charge, but the High Court dismissed the petition in limine.
On the question whether the Food Inspector, Faridkot was competent to lodge a complaint against the appellants under section 20(1) of the Act by virtue of the delegation of powers by the Food (Health) Authority, Punjab under the Notification dated September 7, 1972 issued by him under r. 3 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Punjab) Rules, 1958.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, the Court, ^ HELD 1.
The notification dated September 7, 1972 issued by the Food (Health) Authority is ultra vires the Food (Health) Authority insofar as he purported to delegate his powers to institute prosecutions for an offence under the Act under section 20(1) to the Food Inspector, 963 Faridkot.
The latter was, therefore, not competent to lodge the complaint against the appellants.
[972B C] 2.1 Where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way the thing must be done in that way or not at all.
Other modes of performance are necessarily forbidden.
The intention of the Legislature in enacting section 20(1) was to confer power on the authority specified therein, which power had to be exercised in the manner provided and not otherwise.
[970E F] 2.2 The use of the negative words in section 20(1) that 'no prosecution for an offence under this Act.
shall be instituted except by, or with the written consent of plainly make the requirements of the section imperative.
They inhibit insufficient of prosecutions for an offence under the Act except where it is done by the Central Government or the State Government or a person authorised in that behalf by the Central Government or the State Government, or where the prosecution is instituted with the written consent of any of the four specified categories of authorities or persons.
If either of these two conditions is satisfied, there would be sufficient authority for the institution of such a prosecution for an offence under the Act.
[970C; 969G H; 970A B] Craies on Statute Law, 6th edn., p. 263 referred to.
The use of the expression 'in this behalf ' in section 20(1) shows that the delegation of such power by the Central Government or the State Government by general or special order must be for a specific purpose, to authorise a designated person to institute such prosecutions on their behalf.
The terms of the section do not postulate further delegation of powers by the person authorised.
He can only give his consent in writing when he is satisfied that a prima facie case exists in the facts of a particular case and records his reasons for the launching of such prosecution in public interest.
[966E; 971A B] 4.1.
Rules framed pursuant to a power conferred by a statute cannot proceed or go against the specific provisions of the statute.
The maxim delegatus non potest delegare merely indicates that sub delegation of powers is not normally allowable but the Legislature can always provide for it.
The provision contained in section 24(2) (e) of the Act enables the State Government to frame a rule for delegation of powers and functions under the Act but it clearly does not envisage any sub delegation.
[971C,D] 964 4.2.
Rule 3 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration (Punjab) Rules, 1958 must, therefore, he read subject to the provisions contained in section 20(l) of the .
It cannot be construed to authorise sub delegation of powers by the Food (Health) Authority, Punjab to the Food Inspector.
So construed, it means that in the instant case, the Food (Health) Authority was the person authorised by the State Government to initiate prosecutions.
[971G H; 972A] 4.3 It was open to the State Government to have issued a notification under section 20(1) conferring authority on the Food Inspector to launch prosecutions for an offence under the Act, as is the practice in other States.
The Food Inspector having been authorised by the Director of Health Service and not the State Government, he was not a person who had been authorised by any general or special order issued by the Central Government or the State Governments.
[969G H] State of Bombay vs Parshottam Kanaiyalal, ; & The Corporation of Calcutta vs Md. Omer Ali & Anr., referred to.
