The appeal of the State against the order of acquittal of the appellants of an offence under section 7(1) read with sections 16 and 17 of the , punishable with a sentence of imprisonment exceeding two years, was heard and decided by a Single Judge, though under Rule 1 read with Rule 2 H (e) of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules 1960 such an appeal was required to be heard by a Division Bench.
The Single Judge allowed the appeal, held the appellants guilty and set aside the order of acquittal.
Allowing the appeal of the accused appellants, on the question "whether the decision of a Single Judge in a matter required to be decided by a Division Bench was a nullity," ^ HELD: 1.1 When a matter required to be decided by a Division Bench of the High Court is decided by a Single Judge, the judgment would be a nullity, the matter having been heard by a Court which had no competence to hear the matter, it being a matter of total lack of jurisdiction.
[1006C D] 1.2 In the instant case, the accused appellants were entitled to be heard under Rule 1 read with Rule 2 II(e) of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules 1960, by at least two Judges constituting a Division Bench and had a right to claim a verdict as regards their guilt or innocence at the hands of two Judges.
This right cannot be taken away except by amending the rules.
So long as, the rules are in operation it 1005 would be arbitrary and discriminatory to deny them this right regardless of whether it is done by reason of negligence or otherwise.
Negligence can neither be invoked as an alibi nor can cure the infirmity or illegality, so as to rob the accused of his right under the rules.
What can be done only by at least two Judges cannot be done by one Judge.
[1007A C] 2.
Even a 'right ' decision by a 'wrong ' forum is no decision.
It is non existent in the eye of law.
And hence a nullity.
The impugned judgment is no judgment in the eye of law.
It is set aside and appeal remanded to High Court for hearing by a Division Bench.
[1007C D] State of Madhya Pradesh vs Dewadas & Ors.
, [1982] 3 S.C.R. page 81 relied upon.
