The husband of the petitioner, who is of Ladakhi origin, was found by the Customs authorities in possession of con siderable quantity of gold with foreign markings and Indian currency.
A large number of gold pieces of foreign origin, Indian currency and US dollars were also recovered from his residence.
He failed to produce the relevant papers though he claimed these articles.
He admitted the recovery but maintained that he held the articles for a third person.
The detaining authority relying upon the materials available in the proceedings before the Customs authorities made an order of detention under s.3(1) read with s.2(f) of the .
The grounds in support of that order and copies of 17 documents were supplied to the detenu alongwith it.
The representation made by him against detention was rejected by the Advisory Board.
In the writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitu tion it was contended for the petitioner that the detenu has been denied a fair and adequate opportunity of representing against his detention in as much as the grounds of detention and the copies of documents accompanying 324 the grounds were furnished in Tibetan language while the detenu knew only Ladakhi, that copies of all the material documents shown in the list were not supplied to him, that the order was vitiated as the detaining authority did not apply its mind to the relevant papers before making the impugned order, and that the representation made by him was not sent to the Advisory Board in good time.
Allowing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The requirement of law within the provisions of article 22(5) of the Constitution is that the detenu has to be informed about the grounds of detention in a language which he understands.
The fact that the detenu 's wife knew the language in which the grounds were framed did not satis fy the legal requirement.
This denied to the detenu a fair and adequate opportunity of making an effective representa tion against his detention.
[329D E] 1.2 In the matter of preventive detention, the test is not one of prejudice but one of strict compliance with the provisions of the Act and when there is a failure to comply with those requirements it becomes difficult to sustain the order.
[329G H] The requirements of law having not been met the order of detention in the instant case, cannot, therefore, be sup ported.
[330C] Hadibandhu Das vs District Magistrate Cuttack & Anr., ; and Prakash Chandra Mehta vs Commissioner and Secretary, Government of Kerala & Ors., ; , referred to.
The respondents have acted in a casual manner and have failed to realise what amount of care has to be taken in making a return to the rule in a matter involving chal lenge to preventive detention.
In the list of documents supplied to the detenu alongwith the order of detention in all 17 items were shown whereas in the record of the detain ing authority produced before the Court 18 items in all were mentioned.
A copy of the letter of the Collector of Customs dated June 11, 1986 in reply to petitioner 's letter dated April 19, 1986 was not included in the list of documents and supplied to the detenu.
Furthermore, the letter of the Collector of Customs dated June 23, 1986 to the detenu was not in reply to the detenu 's letter dated April 28, 1986 as mentioned in the return.
When the allegation was that there was no application of mind in the making of the order of detention, the return should have come either from the detaining authority or a person who was directly connected 325 with the making of the order and not by a person who filed the affidavit on the basis of the record of the case.
[328D E; 327A]
