The Sessions Judge while acquitting the accused of the charge under s.302 IPC entertained serious doubts about PW 16 (Respondent No. 2.), the Inspector of Police, who partly investigated the case, carrying out the cellophone tape test to lift any fibres of coir sticking to the palms of the deceased and sending the tapes to the Forensic Science Laboratory and the bona fides of the exercise.
On the basis of the suspicions features mentioned in his judgment, the Sessions Judge made severe adverse remarks against PW 16 (Respondent No. 2.) DW 2 (Respondent No. 3) and another policeman and observed that the conduct of these officials was highly open to suspicion, that a full fledged enquiry should he held against them and that "otherwise indiscipline and the tendency to tamper with official documents and create false documents will set at naught the very purpose of having a police establishment.
" The Inspector PW 16 (Respondent No. 2) and the Head Constable PW 2 (Respondent No. 3) filed petitions before the High Court for expunging the adverse remarks made against them.
A Single Judge without making any examination of the conduct of the petitioners before him and without consider ing whether the features noticed by the Sessions Judge warranted the adverse remarks or not went at a tangent and put the appellant, a Deputy Suptd.
of Police (PW 17), who had also investigated the case from 26.11.80 to 5.11.81, in the dock for having failed to place before the Court the scientific materials which PW 16 502 (Respondent No. 2) had obtained in the course of investiga tion to find out whether the death of the deceased was due to suicide or homicide.
The learned judge observed that PW 16 (Respondent No. 2) and DW 2 (Respondent No. 3) had acted in a blemishless manner and the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory had been obtained through bonafide inves tigative process and it was the appellant who had schemingly kept back the crucial recordS from the notice of the Court in order to secure a conviction unjustly against the accused and as such the appellant should be raprimanded in no uncer tain terms.
Stung by the remarks made against him without even a hearing, the appellant preferred the instant appeal to seek expunction of the remarks.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The adverse remarks against the appellant in the order of the High Court under appeal will stand ex punged.
[512E] 2.
When PW 16 and DW 2 moved the High Court for expung ing the adverse remarks against them the scope of the en quiry was confined to the bona fides of their action in the investigation proceedings and whether the Sessions Judge was justified in drawing adverse inference against them on the basis of the suspicious features catalogued by him.
The High Court was not dealing with an appeal against the acquittal of the accused and there was no need or occasion for the High Court to go into the conduct of the appellant.
The enquiry was only touching upon the conduct of PW 16 and DW 2.
Furthermore the High Court had completely overlooked the fact that the appellant ceased to be in charge of the case on 5.1.81.
Thereafter the investigation of the case was taken charge of by PW 18 and still later by PW 19 and ac cording to DW 2 the report from the Forensic Science Labora tory was sent to the Crime Detachment only on 7.1.81 whereas the appellant ceased to be in charge of the case on 5.1.81 itself.
It, therefore, passes one 's comprehension as to how the appellant can be accused of having wilfully suppressed materiai documents from the notice of the Court in order to secure a conviction unjustify against the accused in a murder case.
[510D G] 3.
The High Court has not applied its mind to the series of suspicious features noticed by the Sessions Judge to draw an adverse inference against PW 16 and DW 2 in conducting theso called cellophone tape test and sending the tape to the Forensic Science Laboratory for its report.
The Judge had taken it for granted that PW 16 had actually 503 carried out a cellophone tape test, that in carrying out such a test he was wedded to scientific methods of investi gation, that he and DW 2 had acted fairly and squarely in trying to find out the real cause of the death of the de ceased and that it was the appellant who had an aversion to the use of scientific methods in investigation of crimes and that the appellant had purposely concealed materials which were favourable to the accused in order to secure a convic tion at any cost.
The Judge had failed to see that as a matter of fact the accused was not kept in the dark regard ing the cellophone tape test that was deemed to have been done but on the other hand he had full information of the test and its result, and it was on account of that he was able to summon police officials to figure as defence wit nesses and police records as defence exhibits.
The High Court had thus completely misdirected itself in its consid eration of the petitions filed by respondents 2 and 3 to seek expunction of the adverse remarks made against them by the Sessions Judge.
[510G H; 511A C] 4.
Even assuming that for expunging the remarks against respondents No. 2 and 3 the conduct of the appellant re quired scrutiny and merited adverse comment, the principles of natural justice required the High Court to have issued notice to the appellant and heard him before passing adverse remarks against him if it was considered necessary.
By its failure the High Court has failed to render elementary justice to the appellant.
[511D E] 5.
It has been judicially recognised that in the matter of making disparaging remarks against persons or authorities whose conduct comes into consideration before Courts of law in cases to be decided by them, it is relevant to consider (a) whether the party whose conduct is in question is before the Court or has an opportunity of explaining or defending himself; (b) whether there is evidence on record bearing on that conduct justifying the remarks; and (c) whether it is necessary for the decision of the case as an integral part thereof, to animadvert on that conduct.
It has also been recognised that judicial pronouncements must be judicial in nature, and should not normally depart from sobriety, moder ation and reserve.
[512A C] State of U.P.v.
Mohd. Naim; , , 374 equal to AIR 1964 S.C. 702; R.K. Lakshmanan vs A.K. Srinivasan, ; ; and Niranjan Patnaik vs Sashibhushan Kar & Anr.
, ; , relied,upon.
Judged in the light of the above tests it is clear that none of the tests is satisfied in this case.
[512D] 504
