Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were carrying on business as raising contractors and selling agents of Coking Coal of working coal mines.
Pursuant 10 an agreement with the appel lant company appointing them us contractors to raise and sell coal and manufacture hard coke in respect of the un worked mines, they installed valuable machinery, utensils and cake ovens at a heavy cost.
On the nationalisation of the coal mines by the all the mines vested in the Government.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 flied a claim under s.26 of the Act before the 4th respondent, the Commis sioner of Payment, the statutory authority constituted under the Act and also moved the High Court by way of a writ petition contending that they were also owners of some of the mines in dispute and were entitled to their shares in the compensation and prayed for a direction that they he paid compensation at the market value for machinery, plant, equipment, building, stores etc.
A Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition and held that respond ent Nos. 1 and 2 were owners under the Act and directed respondent No. 4 to proceed with the claim according to law.
Dismissing the appeal by the appellant, this Court, HELD: 1.
A combined reading of ss.4 and 5 of the Act makes it abundantly clear that the right, title, interest of the owners in relation to the mines and the coke oven plants prescribed in the First Schedule and the Second Schedule vests in the Central Government free from all encumbrances on the appointed day.
[491H; 492A] 2.1.
The term 'owner ' has been defined in section 3(a).
It is clear 485 from the definition that it takes within its ambit, occupier of the mine or any part thereof.
The definition of the word 'owner ' clearly indicates that there may be more than one 'owner ' within the meaning of s.3(n) in relation to a mine.
Each of them would be entitled to a portion of the amount shown in column 5 of the First Schedule.
Raising contractors will also come within the ambit of the expression 'owner ' in the Act.
Therefore, they are also entitled to pro rata distribution of the compensation deposited.
[497G H] In the instant case, it cannot be disputed that respond ent Nos. 1 and 2 admittedly a raising contractors, were in occupation of at least part of the mines for their operation and thus an occupier within the definition.
They do not come within the exclusion clause in the definition section.
Therefore, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are 'owners ' within the definition of section 3(n) of the Act.
[490C D] Industrial Supplies Private Limited vs Union of India, ; , relied upon.
Sections 20(1) and 21(1) to (5) of the Act occur ring in Chapter VI of the Act have deliberately avoided the expression 'the owners in the First Schedule ' so as to achieve the object of the definition 'owner ' in the Minos Act, 1952, which definition has been bodily borrowed by this Act.
If the owner whose name is mentioned in column 4 is alone entitled to the compensation, then there was no need for the remaining sections in Chapter IV for apportionment of the amount.
[494E F] 3.1.
Section 12 A makes the owner, who has employed the workers, liable for their wages and other dues and contains the procedure for making the claim, its proof and determina tion.
The important fact to be noted regarding these dues is, as provided in sub section(6) that the payment under this section shall have priority over all other debts wheth er secured or unsecured.
This is made further clear by Section 23(2) also.
[496C D] 3(ii) Secured creditors come next in priority, and will have priority regarding their dues subject to the amounts payable to the workers.
[496D] 3(iii) The amount of compensation payable under the Act is kept at the disposal of the Commissioner of Payment by the Central Government.
Section 23 provides that every person who has a claim against the owner may prefer the same before the Commissioner within the stipulated period.
[496E F] 486 3(v) Section 23(4) to (9) lays down the procedure for entertaining and hearing of the claims against the owner.
There is provision for giving a hearing to the claimants as well as to the owner before the Commissioner.
The decision of the Commissioner is subject to appeal, the Appellate Court being the Principal Civil Court of original Civil Jurisdiction within whose local limits the relevant mine is situated.
[496H; 497A B] 4.
Section 25 makes provision for payment of amounts advanced by the Central Government for the management of the mine.
It is stipulated therein that such amounts can be recovered either out of the income derived by the mine in the period during which the same remained under the manage ment by the Central Government till the ownership vested in it or if the amount advanced is not so recovered then the Central Government is enabled to make a claim before the Commissioner and this claim will have priority over the claim of all other unsecured creditors of the mine.
[497C D] 5.
Section 26 deals with cases where doubt or dispute arises as to the fight of the person who is entitled to receive the compensation and provides that the Commissioner shall refer the claim to the court of competent jurisdic tion.
[497E F] 6.
The proper manner in which sections 23 & 24 have to be understood is that the admitted claims can be deducted from the amount payable only when such claim related to the owner concerned.
In other words, it is only the owner who has incurred the said debt that would be liable to pay the same.
Care should be taken to see that the amounts of debts of one owner is not deducted from the compensation amount payable to the other owner who does not owe that money.
[498D E] 7(1) Section 25A deals with the distribution of the balance amount after meeting the liabilities.
This has to be distributed, according to the right of each owner determined by the Commissioner and in case of dispute refer the dispute to a competent court.
[499D E] 7.2.
The Commissioner will have to determine the share of the compensation of the mine claimed by respondents 1 and 2 in accordance with section 26(2).
[499H; 500A]
