The respondent, a dealer in hides and skins and export ing the same out of the territory of India, entered into transactions failing within the purview of sub section (3) of Section 5 of the and which could not be taxed because of constitutional bar under Article 286( 1 )(a) of the Constitution of India, furnished Form III A under Rule 12 A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, as an appropriate form to meet the situation was not devised under the U.P. Sales Tax Act, and sought a clarification from the Commissioner, Sales Tax, as to whether the firm was liable to tax under Section 3 AAAA of the U.P. Sales Tax Act on the purchases made against Form III A or H under the , when such dressed hides and skins were ex ported beyond the territory of India.
The Commissioner, Sales Tax clarified and held that the purchases of dressed hides and skins made against Form H were not liable to purchase tax under Section 3 AAAA of the U.P. Sales Tax Act provided the same were exported outside the territory of India and the conditions laid down in Section 5(3) of the were satisfied, but if the purchases were made against Form III A and exported outside the terri tory of India, they shall be liable to purchase tax under Section 3 AAAA.
On appeal, the Sales Tax Tribunal held that the respond ent was not liable to any purchase tax under Section 3 AAAA of the U.P. Sales Tax Act whether they were purchased against or without Form III A or H, as the same were export ed outside the territory of India in compliance with the order received from the foreign buyers and those transac tions were exempted under Section 6 of the .
631 A Revision Petition filed before the High Court by the appellant Revenue, contending that the decision of the Tribunal was bad in law was dismissed.
Disposing of the appeal by the U.P. Sales Tax authori ties, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The mere fact that Form III A has been given will not empower the State to collect or levy the sales tax/purchase tax in respect of a transaction in the course of export which satisfies the tests prescribed by Section 5(3) of the .
It would be unconstitu tional in view of the constitutional bar to levy tax on sales in the course of export regardless of the fact whether an appropriate form is used or not.
[633E F] 1.2 The transactions entered into by the respondent which are such on which sales tax/purchase tax cannot be levied on account of the constitutional bar read with sub section (3) of Section 5 of the , cannot become exigible to tax merely because a wrong form is used (particularly when the appropriate form has not been devised by the rule making authority).
[633F G] 1.3 Liability for tax in respect of such transactions cannot be fastened on the respondent for the very good reason that the State has no power to collect or levy sales tax/purchase tax on such transactions.
The U.P. Sales Tax authorities should have devised an appropriate form in this behalf.
They can do so even now (as has been done under the Delhi Sales Tax Act, by prescribing Form 49 to meet such a situation).
[633G H; 634A] 1.4 For the future purposes instead of furnishing Form III A under rule 12 A of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, the re spondent will furnish a photostat copy of Form H under the .
[634B] So fas as the past transactions are concerned, the respondent will not be liable provided the tests prescribed under Section 5(3) of the , are satis fied.
[634D] Consolidated Coffee Ltd. vs Coffee Board, Bangalore, A.I.R. (Vol. 46) p. 164 refferred to.
