The refugees from West Pakistan who had migrated into the State of Jammu and Kashmir in 1947 and had been domi ciled in that State for nearly forty years are not permanent residents as defined in s.6 of the Jammu and Kashmir Consti tution, with the result that they were disentitled to be included in the electoral rolls of the State Assembly, to be elected to village Panchayats, to be appointed to any serv ice under the State Government by direct recruitment, to purchase land in the State and to be admitted to higher technical educational institutions under the relevant Acts and Rules.
Section 6(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir Constitu tion, however, provides that permanent State subjects who had migrated to West Pakistan in 1947 shah be permanent residents of the State on their return to the State under a permit for resettlement, thereby entitling them to all the above rights.
The petitioner, who claimed to speak on behalf of the refugees from West Pakistan settled in the State, claimed that be and other persons situated like him should at least be given the same rights as are given to those who had voluntarily migrated to West Pakistan at the time of parti tion in 1947, on their return to the State for resettlement.
Dismissing the writ petition, the Court, HELD: Section 12(1)(b) of the Jammu and Kashmir Repre sentation of the People, Act 1957 disqualifying a person for registration in an 370 electoral roll if he is not a permanent resident of the State as defined in s.6 of the Constitution, s.8(a) of the Village Panchayat Act, 1958 disqualifying such a person for being chosen as or for being member of a Panchayat, s.4 of the Land Alienation Act, 1995 B.K. prohibiting transfer of land in favour of any person who is not a State subject, and r.17(a) of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classifica tion, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956 rendering ineligible a person who is not a hereditary State subject for appointment to any service under the State Government by direct recruit ment are not open to challenge as inconsistent with the rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution of India because of the "Constitution (Application to Jammu & Kash mir) Order, 1954" issued by the President of India under article 370(1)(d) of the Constitution, by which article 35A was added to the Constitution in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
[374B E] The petitioner and those like him have a justifiable grievance.
They have very anomalous rights within the State.
Though citizens of India and entitled to the various funda mental rights guaranteed by the Constitution they are not in a position to enjoy many of those rights within that State in which they are domiciled for nearly 40 years.
In view of the peculiar constitutional position obtaining in the State, it is upto the legislature of the State to take action to suitably amend legislations, and for the State Government to amend Service Rules and issue appropriate executive instruc tions to make these persons eligible to exercise greater rights of citizenship.
They constitute nearly seven to eight per cent of the population of the State.
Surely, they are entitled to expect to be protected by the State.
[376A C] The Union of India, in the peculiar context of the State also owes an obligation to make some provision for the advancement of cultural, economic and educational rights of these persons.
[376B]
