The appellant, who was holding a permanent post in a Central Government department, was selected for the post of Lecturer in a private aided college in Meghalya.
The order of appointment stated that it was subject to the approval of the first respondent.
On his seeking clarification from the Principal he was assured that the approval was a mere for mality.
Acting on the said assurance the appellant resigned his permanent post in the Government department and joined the college.
However, he found his services terminated just within five months for want of prior approval of the first respondent.
A suit filed by the appellant challenging the order of termination and for a declaration and permanent injunction was dismissed by the trial court.
The first Appellate Court found that the Assam Aided Colleges Management Rules, 1965 had not been adopted by the State Government at the time of the appellant 's appointment and that the Director of Public Instruction had acted wrongly in refusing to give approval to the appellant 's appointment, and as such the order of termination of service of the appellant was manifestly wrong.
It, therefore, declared appellant 's continuance in service.
The High Court while concurring with the view of the first Appellate Court that the termination of services of the appellant was unlawful, awarded one year 's salary and allowances as damages since the 573 appellant did not belong to the category of either Govern ment servants, industrial workmen or employees of statutory bodies, for which alone reinstatement could be ordered.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that the Appellate Court and the High Court having found the termination of service to be wrong and illegal, he should have been granted the relief sought for in the suit, that is, a declaration of continuance in service and rein statement with full back wages and allowances.
It was fur ther submitted that since the college was a private institu tion provided and by the Government and Government had full supervisory control over it, it was for all practical pur poses a Government institution.
As such, he was entitled to parity of treatment with a Government servant wrongly re moved from service.
For the respondent it was contended that the only remedy for the appellant was to file a suit for damages and not to seek a declaration of continuance in service, because it would amount to seeking specific per formance of a contract of service.
Allowing the Appeal in part, the Court, HELD: The appellant was not entitled to a declaration that he continued to be in the service of the college and that he was entitled to all the benefits flowing from the declaration.
[581G] Even though the College in question may be governed by the statutes of the University and the Education Code framed by the Government of Meghalaya and even though the college may be receiving financial aid from the Government, it would not be a statutory body because it haS not been created by any statute and its existence is not dependent upon any statutory provision.
[580F G] Vaish College vs Lakshmi Narain, ; and J. Tewari vs Jwala Devi Vidya Mandir & Others, , referred to.
There was no violation of the provisions of any Act or any Regulations made thereunder in the instant case.
The first respondent in declining to approve the appointment of the appellant had proceeded on the erroneous assumption that the Assam Aided College Employees Rules, 1960 and the Assam Aided College Management Rules, 1965 had been adopted by the State of Meghalya.
No doubt such action has been held to be wrongful but even so it was not in contravention of any 574 statutory provisions or regulations or procedural rules.
[581E G] I.P. Gupta vs Inter College, Thora, ; , distinguished.
The misfortune that has overtaken the appellant was partly due to his own hasty action in resigning his perma nent post and partly on account of the first respondent disapproving the appellant 's appointment on the basis of rules which had not been formulated and communicated to the aided colleges.
In spite of the sad plight of the appellant, therefore, it will not be possible to grant the relief of declaration as sought for by him.[578C D] [In the facts and circumstances of the case and in exercise of its powers under Article 136 of the Constitu tion, the Court enlarged the relief grunted to the appellant by the High Court by directing the State of Meghalaya to grant three years salary and allowances to the appellant at the rates prevalent when his services were terminated.
It further directed that in the event of there being a vacancy in the College in question for the post of Lecturer in English, and in the event of the Management willing to appoint him as Lecturer once again, the Management should be permitted to do so by granting relaxation of rules and regulations. ]
