The appellant who belonged to Scheduled Tribe covered by the Schedule to the Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) Schedule Tribes Order, 1962, decided to contest the 1984 election from the Dadra and Nagar Haveli Parliamentary Constituency which was a constituency reserved for the members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
As he was holding the post of an Investigator as a temporary Government serv ant governed by the Central Civil Services (Temporary Serv ices) Rules, 1965 and also by condition 6 of his appointment order, he wrote a letter on November 21, 1984 to the Collec tor of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, who was his appointing au thority, tendering his resignation and enclosing a demand draft drawn on the State Bank of India for a sum of Rs.1024.05 paise, being one month 's notice pay.
On 24.11.1984 at 10 A.M. he wrote another letter to his immedi ate officer and submitted all the records and files which were with him.
He, thereafter, filed his nomination paper on the same day i.e. two days before the last date for filing the nomination papers.
On 26.11.84, he wrote a letter to the Returning Officer, bringing to his notice each and every fact leading to his resignation and requesting the Returning Officer to note his contention that he ceased to be a gov ernment servant with effect from 21.11.84, while scrutinis ing the nomination paper.
On the same date he received a reply from the office of the Administrator Dadra and Haveli to the effect that his resignation would take effect from 21.12.84 on the expiry of one month 's notice and that 636 his remitting one month 's notice pay was not contemplated under Rule 5(1)(a) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, as per the legal opinion obtained.
On 27.11.84, the appellant sent a reply bringing to the Admin istrator 's notice condition No. 6 of his appointment order and also cases of six other officers whose resignations were accepted forthwith accepting one month 's notice pay from them.
The appellant also alleged mala fides and pressure by Respondent No. 1, the then sitting member of the Parliament on the Collector.
In reply to the said letter, the Develop ment and Planning Officer by his letter dated 21.12.84 reiterated the Administrator 's stand and returned the demand draft.
In the meanwhile on 28.11.84, i.e. the date of scrutiny of the nomination papers, the Returning Officer overruled the objection raised by Respondent No. 1 that since the appellant was holding an office of profit under the Govern ment he was disqualified to contest the election.
In the said election, the appellant secured the highest number of votes and he was declared elected.
The election petition filed by Respondent No. 1 was allowed and the appellant 's election was declared null and void.
The appeal preferred by the appellant under section 116 of the Repre sentation of People Act, 1951 was remitted to the High Court for amendment of written statement, framing of fresh issues and further findings of the High Court on them.
All the four additional issues framed were answered against the appellant and thereafter, the said appeal was set for further hearing.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The letter of resignation dated November 21, 1984 cannot be treated as one submitted under Rule 5(1) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules, 1965.
The proviso to Rule 5(1) authorises only the appointing authority to terminate the temporary service of the Govern ment servant forthwith and that on such termination the Government servant becomes entitled to claim a sum equiva lent to the amount of his pay plus allowances for the period of the notice at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the termination of his service, or as the case may be for the period by which such notice fails short of one month.
There is no provision in the CCS Temporary Service Rules which authorises a Government servant to bring about the termination of his temporary service as provided in Rule 5(1) by paying a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and 637 allowances of the period of notice at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before termination of his service or as the case may be for the period by which notice falls short of one month.
If the letter of resigna tion was truly one which had been submitted under Rule 5(1) of the CCS Temporary Service Rules which did not envision tendering of one month 's salary by the employee, there was no necessity to tender a demand draft for Rs.1024.05.
Such payment was contemplated only when the resignation was under condition No. 6 of the letter of appointment issued in favour of the appellant about which the appointing authority could not have been unaware.
If the concerned authority had not realised that it was a resignation pursuant to such conditions the said authority would have returned (instead of retaining) the demand draft at once or at the earliest.
[654D; G H; 655A E] 1.2 The letter of resignation of the appellant was one which was submitted pursuant to Condition No. 6 of his letter of appointment which was one more method adopted and accepted by the Administration to bring about the termina tion of service of a temporary government servant.
The said condition was only supplementary to the modes of termination of temporary service, referred to in Rule 5(1) of the CCS Temporary Service Rules and it was not in any way inconsist ent with the said Rules.
As a matter of fact it was not even suggested or faintly hinted in the High Court that there was any such inconsistency.
[656B C] 1.3.
It is well recognised that a new service condition may be brought into effect by an executive order and such condition would remain in force as long as it is not re pealed either expressly or by necessary implication by another executive order or a rule made under the proviso of Article 309 of the Constitution of India or by a statute.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the material pro duced in the Court and in the absence of any inconsistency between condition No. 6 and any other order, rule, or law the letter of resignation is one submitted pursuant to condition No. 6 in the letter of appointment issued in the case of the appellant.
[656C E] 2.1 There has been full compliance with condition No. 6 of the letter of appointment as a demand draft was enclosed being a month 's notice pay and allowances.
[656E F] 2.2 The resignation contemplated under Condition No. 6 is not the same as the letter of resignation which may be submitted by a government servant on the acceptance of which he ceases to be a government servant.
In the case of an ordinary resignation which is 638 governed by the Memorandum No. 39/6/57 Ests.
(A) Ministry of Home Affairs dated 6th May, 1958 no question of paying a month 's salary or allowance to the Government would arise.
In the absence of any rule or executive order prescribing the method or manner in which a temporary government servant of the rank of an investigator could be relieved from serv ice under Condition No. 6 of the letter of appointment or any evidence adduced as to what practice had been in vogue as regards relieving such a person, it must be held that it is implicit in such a condition that the nature of his employment is such that he can be relieved forthwith without the need for waiting for a month and that he would be so relieved as was indeed done in the case of others governed by such a condition.
[657A C] 2.3 The appellant should be deemed to have been relieved from his service at 10.00 A.M. on 24.11.1984 and he had ceased to be a Government servant before he submitted his nomination paper on 24.11.1984.
At 10.00 A.M. on 24.11.1984, before the appellant submitted his nomination paper to the Returning Officer, he had handed over all the records, registers, files etc.
which were with him to the head of his office along with a letter, a copy of which was submitted to the Collector, who was the appointing authority.
This cannot be termed as an unilateral act of the appellant.
There was no refusal to accept the records.
There was no order to report for duty and discharge any functions.
The appellant had not, in fact, been paid any salary or allowance for the period subsequent to 20.11.84, that is, the date previous to the date of the letter of resignation.
He had not attended and he was not required to attend his office from 21.11.84 except for handing over the records, files, registers etc.
on 24.11.84.
The appellant was not asked by the Collector to attend the office till 21.12.84 nor grievance was made against him for his absence in the wake of his resignation.
There was no disciplinary proceeding or any other kind of enquiry pending against the appellant which required the appointing authority not to relieve the appellant from his service in the public interest.
And there was no objection raised as a matter of fact on any ground to his being treated as having ceased to be in service eventually till the expiry of one month from the date of his service.
It is not as if for administrative reasons his resignation was not acceptable for any reason.
[657C F] 3.
The Returning Officer had rightly overruled the objection and accepted his nomination paper.
It is not established by the election petitioner on whom the onus rested that the returned candidate held an office of profit on the date of scrutiny or that his nomination paper was Wrongly accepted by the Returning Officer.
He cannot there fore suc 639 cessfully assail the election of the returned candidate, the appellant herein.
[657G H]
