One Kalu Ram was the owner of 90 Kanals of land.
He sold this land in favour of three brothers, Kewal Ram, Chet Ram and Kuldip Ram for a consideration of Rs.65,000 by a regis tered sale deed dated 1.8.1966.
Kewal Ram is residing in Village Badala in Jullunder District.
Chet Ram and Kuldip Ram were residing at 71, Windsor Road, Forest Gate, London.
Ram Lubhai, minor daughter of Kalu Ram filed a suit for possession of the land on the ground that she being the daughter of the vendor had superior right of pre emption as against the vendees who were strangers.
Kewal Ram alone was served in the suit.
The other two were not served.
Substi tuted service was, therefore, taken for service on them by publication in a vernacular paper.
The suit was decreed on 31.7.1969 against all the three defendants, ex parte against Chet Ram and Kuldeep Ram.
Kewal Ram filed an appeal against this decree and judgment.
He made his brothers Chet Ram and Kuldip Ram as proforma respondents giving their village address for service.
In the appeal also they were served by substituted service.
The appeal was heard on 5.1.1971 and was dismissed.
On 24.3.1971, Kuldip Ram and Chet Ram filed an applica tion under Order 9, Rule 13 of C.P.C. in the Trial Court for setting aside the ex parte decree against them on the ground that they were neither served in the Trial Court nor in the Appellate Court.
The Trial Court 786 accepted the application and set aside the decree passed.
Against this order dated 10.1.1972, the plaintiff filed a revision petition in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana as C.R.P. No. 147 of 1972.
The High Court felt that there was no error of jurisdiction in the order sought to be revised, but held that since Kewal Ram had contested the suit, there was no ground to set aside the decree against him.
On this around, the petition was partly allowed.
The decree against Kewal Ram was allowed to stand but was set aside against the other two.
The review petition filed by Smt.
Ram Lubhai was dismissed by the High Court.
Hence the appeals by special leave.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, HELD: It is well settled that when a decree of the Trial Court is either confirmed, modified or reversed but the Appellate decree, except when the decree is passed without notice to the parties, the Trial Court decree gets merged in the appellate decree.
But when the decree is passed without notice to a party, that decree will not, in law, be a decree to which he is a party.
Equally so in the case of an appel late decree.
In this case these two persons were not served in the suit.
A decree was passed ex parte against them without giving them notice of the suit.
In law, therefore, there is no decree against them.
In the appeal also they were not served.
If they had been served in the appeal, things would have been different.
They could have put for ward their case in appeal and got appropriate orders passed.
But that is not the case here.
That being so, there is no bar for an application by them before the Trial Court under Order IX, Rule 13, to set aside the ex parte decree against them.
[689G H; 690A B] There is no error of law in allowing a joint decree to stand against the person who contested throughout while setting aside the ex parte decree passed against others without serving them personally on admitting the application under Order IX Rule 13 C .P.C. [690C]
