The respondent was employed by the appellant company, but later on his work and conduct became very unsatisfactory and repeated warnings, both oral and written, did not show any improvement.
A thorough inquiry into his record of service was made and a report was submitted which showed that he was unsuitable to be retained in its service.
No formal enquiry, however, was held by submitting a charge sheet to the respondent and giving him an opportunity to rebut those chares.
The appellant gave him a choice either to terminate his services on payment of full retrenchment compensation, or if he refused to accept the same, to make an application for permission to terminate his services.
Eventually, the appellant filed an application before the Labour Appellate Tribunal under section 22 Of the Industrial Disputes (Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950, for permission to discharge the respondent from its service.
The application was originally heard ex parte, the respondent not appearing, and the Tribunal, by order dated October 14, 1955, allowed the application.
Subsequently the respondent made an appli cation for a review of the order under Or.
47, R. I, for setting it aside under Or. 9, R. 13 and for restoration of the application under Or. 41, R. 21, Of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The Tribunal found that there was sufficient cause for the respondent not appearing when the application was called on for hearing, and set aside the ex parte order and restored the appellant 's application.
On a further hearing of the application, the parties adduced evidence and the Tribunal, after hearing them, rejected the application on the, ground that a prima facie case had not been made out for permission to discharge the respondent.
On appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended for the appellant (1) that the Labour Appellate Tribunal had no jurisdiction to review its own order and (2) that it exceeded its jurisdic tion under section 22 Of the Act, in discussing the evidence led before it in meticulous detail and coming to the conclu sion that the appellant failed to make out a prima facie case to discharge the respondent from its service.
Held: (1) that under section 9, sub sections
(1) and (10) of the Act the Labour Appellate Tribunal had jurisdiction to set aside the 515 ex parte order dated October 14, 1955, and restore the application to its file.
(2) that under section 22 of the Act, the jurisdiction of the Labour Appellate Tribunal in considering whether a prima facie case has been made out by the employer, is to see whether the employer is acting mala fide or is resorting to any unfair labour practice or victimisation, and whether on the evidence led it is possible to arrive at the conclusion in question.
Though the Tribunal may itself have arrived at a different conclusion it has not to substitute its own judgment for the judgment in question.
Atherton West & Co. Ltd. vs Suti Mill Mazdoor Union and Others, , The Automobile Products of India Ltd. vs Rukmaji Bala & others; , and Laksh mi Devi Sugar Mills Limited vs Pt.
Ram Sarup, (1956) S.C.R. 916, relied on.
In the instant case, though the appellant was justified in making the application for permission to discharge the respondent on account of his work and conduct being demon strably unsatisfactory, and the standard of proof which the Tribunal ];ad applied for finding whether there was a Prima facie case was not strictly justifiable, in view of the fact that no formal inquiry into the charges against the respond ent was held and the evidence on behalf of the appellant did not show that the respondent was given an opportunity to controvert the allegations made against him, the decision of the Tribunal was upheld.
