The appellants ' father had obtained sale of the property in question during the minority of the respondent through his widowed mother, who was acting as his guardian.
The respondent, on attaining majority, filed a suit for declara tion that the said sale deed was invalid and not binding upon him and for recovery of possession of the property.
The judgment and decree of the trial Court dismissing the suit was affirmed by the Appellate Court.
In Second Appeal, the High Court set aside the judgments of the Court below, allowed the appeal and decreed the suit, directing recovery of possession of properties on payment of Rs.4,700 being the sale consideration and a sum of Rs.4,164 being the compensa tion for improvement.
The Special Leave Petition filed by the appellants was dismissed.
The respondent filed execution, which was resisted by the appellants on the ground that the properties could not be ordered to be delivered without payment of the value of improvements effected by them subsequent to the year 1952.
They also filed an application for the issue of a commission to revalue the improvements, claiming that they had effected improvements to the tune of Rs.gO,O00.
The respondent con tested this application denying that the appellants had made any improvements and contended that the question of improve ments had been concluded by the judgment of the High Court in the Second Appeal.
The executing Court dismissed this petition.
The District Judge allowed the appeal filed by the appellants and set aside the order of the executing Court.
The High Court set aside the judgment of the District Judge and restored the order of the executing Court and directed recovery of the property.
The High Court observed that "the sum of Rs.4,164.8.0 was directed to be paid not because the respondents were entitled to it, but because the appellant agreed to pay it. ' ' In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellants it was 701 contended: (1) that the judgment of the High Court was wrong and that the conclusion arrived at by the High Court was as a result of confusion regarding the pleadings in the case and the question of law involved; (2) that at the trial stage an issue was struck as issue No. 8 regarding the value of improvements which was adjudicated and the value of improvements was adjudged; (3) that the appellants were tenants within the meaning of section 2(d) of the Kerala Compen sation for Tenants Improvements Act, 1958 (Act 29 of 1958) and that their claim for value of improvements was made on the strength of section 5 of the Act and, therefore, they are entitled to the value of improvements; and (4) that the value of improvements has to be ascertained under the Act on the execution side and their claim cannot be defeated by flourishing the judgment of the High Court and the dismissal of the S.L.P. Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The suit was filed in 1952.
At that time there was no enactment available for the defendant to claim value of improvements.
Neither in the original written statement nor in the additional written statement dated 15.11.1954, did the defendants claim the value of improvements under the Act.
Though at the execution stage a plea was raised under section 5 of Act 29 of 1958, but in the Judgment in the Second Appeal No. 464 of 1964 dated 27.11.1969, the Division Bench decided that no claim for improvements was made either under section 51 of the Transfer of Property Act or under section 4 of Act 29 of 1958.
Moreover, the High Court also found that no objection was taken by the appellants in the lower Appellate Court or before the High Court to the finding that in case of eviction the defendant would be entitled to Rs.4,164.8.0.
as compensation.
This judgment was rendered when Act 29 of 1958 had already come into force.
Against this judgment a special leave petition was filed and dismissed.
Thus, there is a concluded finding against the appellants that they were not entitled to anything more than the value of improvements decreed by the trial Court.
[706H; 707A C] 2.
Section 5 comes into operation only when a defendant against whom a suit for eviction is instituted establishes a claim for compensation under the Act.
The Judgment of the High Court rendered in 1969 has clearly held that the value of improvement awarded was not under section 4 of the Act but was an amount agreed by the plaintiff.
The appellants cannot succeed and have not succeeded in satisfying this Court that they ever made a claim for compensation under section 4 of the Act and succeeded in such a claim.
Therefore, their further claim for getting the improvements revalued cannot be ac cepted.
[707E G] 702 3.
The question whether a person who came into posses sion of the properties of a minor could be brought within the definition of 'tenant ' in section 2(d)(iii) will have to be considered in an appropriate case.
[707G H] 4.
Purely on an equitable basis, the respondent shall pay to the appellants a sum of Rs.30,000 in addition to the amount decreed.
On such payment the appellants shall deliver the property to the respondent.
The respondent shall be at liberty to withdraw the amounts deposited by the appellants in the trial court pursuant to the order of this Court, if not already withdrawn.
[709B C]
