The prosecution alleged that in order to wreak their vengeance on account of long drawn litigation in respect of certain agricultural property between P.W. 1 and the appel lants two real brothers and their three sons, the appel lants effected entry on the night of 13/14 8 1984 into the courtyard of the adjoining house where P.W. 1 and her two daughters.
were sleeping and brutally attacked them with gandasas and a banka.
The younger daughter was repeatedly struck with a gandasa and her neck was severed, as a result of which she died instantaneously, while the other daughter was struck on the neck and face with a banka and her right hand was chopped off with the gandasa, and she died later in the hospital.
P.W. 1 was struck on the face and upper part of the body with the gandasa.
She ran from the house through the village abadi and narrated the incident to P.W. 2 who, in turn, informed P.W. 5, the Village Pradhan.
After visit ing the scene of offence, P.W. 3 filed a First Information Report.
The appellants were tried and the two brothers were convicted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code on two counts of murder and were awarded capital punishment while the other three appellants were convicted under Section 302 read with Section 149 of Indian Penal Code and sentenced to life imprisonment.
All the appellants were also convicted under Section 148 of the Indian Penal Code.
723 The High Court, affirming the conviction and sentences awarded to the two brothers, observed that it was satisfied that this was one of the 'rarest of the rare cases ' where death penalty was the only appropriate sentence which ought to be imposed on them.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court HELD: 1.1 It is the duty of the Court to impose proper punishment depending upon the degree of criminality and desirability to impose such punishment.
[726B] 1.2 The punishment must fit the crime.
The present cases were cold blooded brutal murders in which two innocent girls lost their lives.
The extreme brutality with which the appellants acted shocks the judicial conscience.
The only punishment which the appellants deserve for having committed the reprehensible and gruesome murders of two innocent girls to wreak their personal vengeance over the dispute they had with regard to property with their mother is nothing but death.
[725H; 726B C] 1.3 Failure to impose death sentence in such grave cases where it is a crime against the society particularly in cases of murders committed with extreme brutality, will bring to naught the sentence of death provided by Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
[726A B] 1.4 As a measure of social necessity and also as a means of deterring other potential offenders the sentence of death on the two appellants is confirmed.
[726C] 1.5 The two appellants were guilty of a heinous crime out of greed and personal vengeance and deserve the extreme penalty.
This case falls within the test 'rarest of the rare cases ' as laid down by this Court.
[725G H] Bachan Singh vs State of Punjab, [1980] SCC 684 and Machhi Singh vs State of Punjab, referred to.
