After the services of the respondent No. 1, who was working as a Confidential Lady Stenographer with the peti tioner company, were terminated on June 13, 1977, she insti tuted a petition before the Authority appointed under sub section
(1) of section 7 of the complaining that during the period of her employment, after the Act came into force, she was being paid remuneration at the rates less favourable than those paid to the Stenographers of the male sex in the petitioner 's establishment for performing the same or similar work 660 and claimed that she was entitled to recover the difference between remuneration paid to her and the male Stenographers.
The petitioner opposed the petition contending, inter alia, that the business carried on by it was not one of those businesses notified under sub section
(3) of section 1 of the Act; that there was no difference in the scales or grades or pay between lady Stenographers and male Stenographers; that the respondent No. 1 and other lady Stenographers who had been doing the duty as Confidential Stenographers attached to the Senior Executives were not doing the same or similar work which the male Stenographers were discharging; and that since there was no discrimination in salary on account of sex s.4 of the Act had not been violated.
The Authority found that the male Stenographers and the lady Stenographers were doing the same kind of work, but rejected the complaint holding that in view of a settlement arrived at between the employee 's Union and the management the respondent No. 1 was not entitled to any relief and that the petitioner had not committed the breach of section 4 as no discrimination on the ground of sex has been made.
The Appellate Authority allowed the appeal of Respondent No. I holding that there was clear discrimination between the .male Stenographers and the female Stenographers and the petitioner had committed the breach of the provisions of the Act and directed the petitioner to make the payment of the difference between the basic salary and dearness allowances paid to respondent No. 1 and her male counter parts from 26.9.1975 to 30.6.1977 and to contribute to the Employees Provident Fund.
In the petition under Article 226 the Learned Single Judge affirmed the order of the Appellate Authority but remanded the case for computing the amount due to the re spondent No. 1 afresh.
The Division Bench dismissed the further appeal.
Dismissing the Petition, HELD: 1.
To implement article 39(d) of the Constitution of India and Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951 (adopted by International Labour Organisation), the came to be enacted providing for the payment of equal remuneration to men and women workers and for the prevention of discrimination on the ground of sex against women in the matter of employment and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
In so far as the establish ment 661 of the petitioner was concerned, the Act came into force with effect from October 8, 1976.
[668B F] 2.
In order to grant relief under section 4 of the Act the employees should establish that the remuneration paid by the employer, whether payable in cash or kind, 1s being paid at rates less favourable than those at which remuneration is paid by him to the employees of the opposite sex in his establishment for performing the same work or work of a similar nature.
[670D E] 3.
In deciding whether the work is the same or broadly similar and whether any differences are of practical impor tance, the Authority should take an equally broad approach, for, the very concept of similar work implies differences in details, but these should not defeat a claim for equality on trivial grounds.
It should look at the duties actually and generally performed not those theoretically possible by men and women.
Where, however, both men and women work at incon venient times, there is no requirement that all those who work e.g. at night shall be paid the same basic rate as all those who work normal day shifts.
Thus a woman who works days cannot claim equality with a man on higher basic rate for working nights if in fact there are women working nights on that rate too, and the applicant herself would be enti tled to that rate if she changed shifts.
[670E H] I.T. Smith and J.C. Wood; Industrial Law, 2nd Edition (Butterworths) page 308, referred to. 4.
It cannot be suggested that there can be no discrimi nation at all between men and women in the matter of remu neration on the basis of nature of work which women may not be able to undertake but in such cases there cannot be any discrimination on the ground of sex.
Discrimination arises only where men and women doing the same or similar kind of work are paid differently.
Wherever sex discrimination is alleged, there should be a proper job evaluation before any further enquiry is made.
If the two jobs in an establishment are accorded an equal value by the application of those criteria which are themselves non discriminatory (i.e. those criteria which look directly to the nature and extent of the demands made by the job) as distinct from criteria which set out different values for men and women on the same demand and it is found that a man and a woman employed on these two jobs are paid differently, then sex discrimination clearly arises.
[671A C] Paul Davis and Mark Freedland: Labour Law, Text and Material (1979) page 297, referred to.
662 5.
In the instant case, the Authority, the Appellate Authority and the Single Judge have found that the Confiden tial Lady Stenographers were doing the same work or work of a similar nature as defined in section 2(h) of the Act which the male Stenographers in the establishment of the petitioner were performing.
The respondent No. 1 was working as a lady Stenographer.
The lady Stenographers working in the estab lishment of the petitioner were called "Confidential Lady Stenographers" since they were attached to the senior Execu tive working in the petitioner company.
In addition to the work of the Stenographers they were also attending to the persons who came to interview the senior Executives and to the work of filing, correspondence.
There was practi cally no difference between the work which the Confidential Lady Stenographers were doing and the work of their male counter parts.
If the Lady Stenographers were found by the management to he proper persons to he Confidential Stenogra phers it does not mean that they should suffer for their loyalty, integrity, sincerity and punctuality and receive less pay for possessing those qualities when they are doing the same kind of work as men.
Applying the true tests to the facts of the instant case there is no ground to take a different view from the view taken by the Authorities and the Single Judge.
[671D H] 6.
Though a settlement was arrived at between the em ployee 's Union and the management in the year 1975 after negotiations, but after the settlement the respondent No. 1 was getting every month Rs.730.20 paise less than the remu neration which her male counterpart was getting.
In view of the provisions of section 3 the management cannot rely upon the settlement arrived at between the parties.
The settlement has to yield in favour of the provisions of the Act.
The fact that the management was not employing any male as a Confidential Stenographer attached to the senior Executives in the establishment and that there was no transfer of Confidential Lady Stenographer to the general pool of Ste nographers where males were working ought not to make any difference for purposes of the application of the Act.
Once It is established that the lady Stenographers were doing practically the same kind of work which the male Stenogra phers were discharging the employer is hound to pay the same remuneration to both of them irrespective of the place where they were working unless it is shown that the women are not fit to do the work of the male Stenographers.
Nor can the management deliberately create such conditions of work only with the object of driving away women from a particular type of work which they can otherwise perform with the object of paying them less remuneration elsewhere in its establish ment.
[672B H; 673A B] 663 7.
The meaning of sub section
(3) to section 4 of the Act is that if for doing the same or similar work there are more than two or three rates of remuneration, the higher or the high est of such rates shall be the rate at which the remunera tion shall be payable from the date of the commencement of the Act to men and women workers doing the same or similar kind of work in the establishment.
The proviso provides that nothing in the sub section shall be deemed to entitle a worker to the revision of the rate of remuneration payable to him or her with reference to the service rendered by him or her before the commencement of the Act.
[673E F] 8.
Under the settlement of 1975 the male Stenographers came under the category of "Clerical and Subordinate Staff".
Undisputedly the terms regarding the fitment to lady Stenog raphers either In the 'A ' Grade or 'B ' grade, referred to In the settlement is less favourable to them and the same conditions were allowed to remain in force even after the Act came into force.
The very fact that the lady Stenogra phers are treated differently and as a class different from the clerical and subordinate staff by paying less remunera tion even though they have put in the same length of service and they are placed in the same scale of pay smacks of discrimination.
The discrimination thus brought about by the terms of settlement only on account of the sex of the em ployees cannot be allowed to persist in view of section 4 of the Act.
The work of the Confidential Lady Stenographer cannot be said to be sex based one like the work of air hostesses.
There is no custom or rule that only ladies can be Confiden tial Stenographers.
If only women are working as Confiden tial Stenographers it is because the management wants them there.
Women are neither specially qualified to be Confiden tial Stenographers nor disqualified on account of sex to do the work assigned to the male Stenographers.
Even if there is a practice in the establishment to appoint women as Confidential Stenographers such practice cannot be relied on to deny them equal remuneration due to them under the Act.
[675B E] 9.
The management is liable to pay the same remuneration to all the Stenographers on the same basis irrespective of their sex.
The salary and remuneration payable to the lady Stenographers should be computed in accordance with the terms applicable to all the male Stenographers.
When so computed, undisputedly the Respondent No. 1 would be enti tled to higher remuneration as observed by the Appellate Authority and the Single Judge.
The management cannot derive any benefit from sub section
(3) of section 4 of the Act and the proviso thereto because sub section
(3) would be attracted only where in an establishment or an employment rates of remuner ation payable before the commencement 664 of the Act for the men workers and for the women workers for the same work or work of similar nature are different.
In the instant case, after the settlement was arrived at there was a common pay scale both for men and women as can be seen from the settlement.
The discrimination was, however, brought about while carrying out the fitment of the lady Stenographers in the said scale of pay.
[675E H; 676A] 10.
The proviso to sub section
(3) to section 4 comes into opera tion only where sub section
(3) is applicable.
Since there are no different scales of pay in the instant case sub section
(3) of section 4 of the Act would not be attracted and consequently, the proviso would not be applicable at all.
The proviso cannot travel beyond the provision to which it is a proviso.
This is a case to which sub section
(1) to section 4 of the Act applied because the impugned remuneration payable to lady Stenogra phers has been reduced on account of the inequitable provi sion regarding fitment in the common scale of pay which is applicable to both men and women Stenographers.
[676A C] 11.
The Act does not permit the management to pay to a section of its employees doing the same work or a work of a similar nature lesser pay contrary to section 4(1) of the Act only because it is not able to pay equal remuneration at all.
The applicability of the Act does not depend upon the financial ability of the management to pay equal remunera tion as provided by it.
[676E]
