The driver of a truck handed over the control of his vehicle to the cleaner while its engine was running and the ignition key was in the ignition lock.
In the absence of the driver, who had gone for bringing snacks the cleaner inter fered with the vehicle.
which resulted in an accident.
The Tribunal as well as the High Court held that this being the immediate cause of the accident, the owner of the truck was vicariously liable.
The High Court further held that since the owner never gave permission to his cleaner to drive, he could not he held guilty of the breach of the contractual condition embodied in the policy of insurance and, therefore, the insurer cannot plead any exception on the ground that the owner had committed breach of the speci fied condition.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellant Insurance Company it was contended: (i) that in view of the exclusion clause in the insurance policy the Insurance Company would not be liable if it was established that the accident occurred when an unlicenced person was at the wheels; (ii) that the exclusion clause is strictly in accordance with the statutorily permissible exclusion em bodied in section 96(2)(b)(ii) of the and (iii) that under the circumstances the appellant Company is not under a legal obligation to satisfy the judgments against the insured.
Dismissing the Appeal, HELD: 1.
The exclusion clause in the policy of insurance does not exonerate the Insurer.
[766B] 753 Kilari Mammi and Others.
vs Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Ors., A.I.R. 1979 (Andhra Pradesh) 75, approved.
Kirpa Natha Chakravarthy and others vs Rup Chand Luna wat, A.I.R. 1955 Assam p. 157; Shankar Rao vs M/s Babulal Fouzdar and another, A.I.R. 1980 (Madhya Pradesh) 9. 154; Orissa State Commercial Transport Corporation, Cuttack vs Dhumali Bewa & Ors.
, A.I.R. 1982 (Orissa) 70 and Dwarka Prasad Jhunjhunwala and another vs Sushila Devi & Ors., A.I.R. 1983 Patna 246, overruled.
The vicarious liability of the owner of the vehicle for damages arising out of the accident cannot be disputed having regard to the general principles of law also having regard to the violation of the obligation imposed by section 84 of the Act which provides that no person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the vehicle to remain stationary in any public place, unless there is in the driver 's seat a person duly licensed to drive the vehi cle or unless the mechanism has been stopped and a brake or brakes applied or such other measures taken as to ensure that the vehicle cannot accidentally be put in motion in the absence of the driver.
[764B C] 3.
In order to divine the intention of the legislature in the course of interpretation of the relevant provisions there can scarcely be a better test than that of probing into the motive and philosophy of the relevant provisions keeping in mind the goals to be achieved by enacting the same.
[761G] 4.
Ordinarily it is not the concern of the legislature whether the owner of the vehicle insures his vehicle or not.
If the vehicle is not insured any legal liability arising on account of third party risk will have to be borne by the owner of the vehicle.
Section 94 has been enacted to protect the members of the community travelling in vehicles or using the roads from the risk attendant upon the user of motor vehicles on the roads.
The law may provide for compensation to victims of the accidents who sustain injuries in the course of an automobile accident or compensation to the dependents of the victims in the case of a fatal accident.
However, such protection would remain a protection on paper unless there is a guarantee that the compensation awarded by the Courts would be recoverable from the persons held liable for the consequences of the accidents.
The legislature has, therefore, made it obligatory that no motor vehicle shall be used unless a third party insurance is in force.
To use the vehicle without the requisite third party insurance being in force is a penal offence under section 94 of the Act.
In 754 order to make the protection real, the legislature has also provided that the judgment obtained shall not be defeated by the incorporation of exclusion clauses other than those authorised by section 96 and it will be the obligation of the Insurance Company to satisfy the judgment obtained against the persons insured against third party risks.
[761G H; 762A B] 5.
Section 96(2)(b)(ii) extends immunity to the Insur ance Company if a breach is committed of the condition excluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is not fully licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification.
Therefore, the insur er will have to establish that the insured is quilty of an infringement or violation of a promise that a person who is duly licensed will have to be in charge of the vehicle.
The very concept of infringement of violation of the promise that the expression 'breach ' carries within itself induces an inference that the violation or infringement on the part of the promiser must be a wilful infringement or violation.
If the insured is not at all at fault and has not done anything he should not have done or is not amiss in any respect how can it be conscientiously posited that he has committed a breach? It is only when the insured himself places the vehicle in charge of a person who does not hold a driving licence, that it can be said that he is 'guilty ' of the breach of the promise that the vehicle will be driven by a licensed driver.
It must be established by the Insurance Company that the breach was on the part of the insured and that it was the insured who was guilty of violating the promise or infringement of the contract.
Unless the insured is at fault and is guilty of a breach the insurer cannot escape from the obligation to indemnify the insured and successfully contend that he is exonerated having regard to the fact that the promisor (the insured) committed a breach of his promise.
Not when some mishap occurs by some mis chance.
When the insured has done everything within his power inasmuch as he has engaged a licensed driver, and has placed the vehicle in charge of a licensed driver, with the express or implied mandate to drive himself it cannot be said that the insurer is guilty of any breach.
And it is only in case of a breach or a violation of the promise on the part of the insured that the insured can hide under the umbrella of the exclusion clause.
[763B G] 6.
The question is as to whether the promise made by the insured is an absolute promise or whether he is exculpated on the basis of some legal doctrine.
In the present case even if the promise were to be treated as an absolute prom ise the grounds for exculpation can be found from section 84.
In view of this provision apart from the implied mandate to the licensed driver not to place a non licensed person in charge of the 755 vehicle, there is also a statutory obligation on the said person not to leave the vehicle unattended and not to place it in charge of an unlicensed driver.
What is prohibited by law must be treated as mandate to the employee and should be considered sufficient in the eye of law for excusing non compliance with the conditions.
It cannot therefore in any case be considered as a breach on the part of the insured.
[763G 764A; C El 7.
The statutory provisions defining the conditions of exemption under section 96(2)(b)(ii) and not the contract of insurance must be interpreted in the spirit in which the same have been enacted, accompanied by an anxiety to ensure that the protection is not nullified by the backward looking interpretation which serves to defeat the provision rather than to fulfil its life aim.
To do otherwise would amount to nullifying the benevolent provision.
[764F G] 8.
When the option is between opting for a view which will relieve the distress and misery of the victims of accidents or their dependents on the one hand and the equal ly plausible view which will reduce the profitability of the insurer in regard to the occupational hazard undertaken by him by way of business activity, there is hardly any choice.
The Court cannot but opt for the former view.
[765B C] 9.
The exclusion clause has to be 'read down ' in order that it is not at par with the 'main purpose ' of the provi sions enacted for the protection of victims of accidents so that the promisor is exculpated when he does everything in his power to keep the promise.
[765C D] Collins English Dictionary and Carter 's Breach of Con tract (1984 Edn.) Paras 239 and 251, relied upon.
