The Inspector of Mines, after an inspection, found that the respondents were engaged in working an open cast mine and that the number of persons employed on any one day exceeded 50.
As respendents fell within the mischief of the proviso to clause (b) of Section 3(1) of the , and became subject to the provisions of the Act, he served a notice under Section 22 read with Section 17 of the Act calling upon the respondents to appoint a qualified Manager for the mine.
The respondents filed a writ petition in the High Court which allowed the petition and quashed the impugned notice on the ground that the use of the word 'and ' occurring at the end of paragraph (b) of sub clause (ii) of the proviso to clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 3 of the Act made the three paragraphs conjunctive and unless the condi tions specified in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) co existed, the Inspector had no authority to serve the impugned notice.
Allowing the appeal by the Joint Director of Mines, Safety.
HELD: 1.1.
The High Court was not right in its interpre tation of the word 'and ' used at the end of paragraph (b) of sub clause (ii) of the proviso to clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 3 of the , as being conjunc tive.
It overlooked the fact that the use of the negative language in each of the three clauses implied that the word 'and ' used at the end of clause (b) had to be read disjunc tively.
[803G] 801 2.1 Sub section (1) of section 3 of the Act provides that the provisions of the Act, except those contained in sections 7, 8, 9, 44, 45 & 46 shall not apply to (a) any mine or part thereof in which excavation is being made for prospect ing purposes only and not for the purpose of obtaining minerals for use or sale, (b) any mine engaged in the ex traction of any of the minerals specified therein, including lime stone.
There is a proviso under each of the clauses (a) and (b) and they set forth three conditions on the happening of any one of which the proviso would be attracted, that is to say, the provisions of the Act would be made applicable to such a mine.
[802F H] 2.2 According to the plain meaning, the exclusionary clause in sub section (1) of Section 3 of the Act read with the two provisos beneath clauses (a) and (b), the word 'and ' at the end of paragraph (b) of sub clause (ii) of the provi so to clause (b) of Section 3(1) must in the context in which it appears be construed as 'or '; and if so constrned, the existence of any one of the three conditions stipulated in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) would at once attract the proviso to clauses (a) and (b) of sub section (1) of Section 3 and thereby make the mine subject to the provisions of the Act.
Such construction is in keeping with the legislative intent mainrested by the scheme of the Act which is primari ly meant for ensuring the safety of workmen employed in the mines.
[803E H] [The Department will find a qualified person and depute him to work as Manager, and respondents shall be liable to pay his salary and allowances as may be stipulated by the Joint Director of Mines Safety.]
