The appellant was married to the respondent on May 11, 1980.
A girl was born on May 9, 1981.
On grounds of neglect and failure to provide maintenance, the appellant filed a petition under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Proce dure, 1973, seeking maintenance for herself and the child at Rs.500 and Rs.300 per month respectively.
The Magistrate dismissed the petition on the ground that the appellant had failed to establish adequate justification for living sepa rately.
The appellant preferred a Revision Petition to the Sessions Judge.
During the pendency of the said petition the respondent married again on October 18, 1984.
It was urged on behalf of the appellant in the revision petition that irrespective of the other grounds, the second marriage of the respondent was by itself a ground for grant of mainte nance.
The Sessions Judge, however, held that the appellant was not entitled to claim maintenance since the respondent had contracted the second marriage after giving the appel lant sufficient time and opportunity to rejoin him and since he had offered to take her back even after the second mar riage.
Insofar as the child was concerned the Sessions Judge granted maintenance at Rs.100 per month.
The appellant preferred a Petition to the High Court under Section 482 for grant of maintenance to her and for enhancing the maintenance awarded to the child and the High Court declined to interfere on the ground that the concur rent findings of the Court below precluded the appellant from agitating her claim.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave the appellant con 774 tended that the second marriage of the respondent had added a new dimension to her maintenance action and that she had become entitled under law to live separately and claim maintenance.
The appeal was contested by the respondent on the ground that he was driven to the necessity of marrying again because the appellant failed to rejoin him and he had offered to take her back to maintain her and the said offer exonerated him from his liability to pay maintenance.
It was further contended that as he was permitted by Muslim Law to take more than one wife his second marriage cannot afford a legal ground for the appellant to five separately and claim maintenance.
On the questions whether the second marriage of the respondent confers a right upon the appellant to live sepa rately and claim maintenance and whether the appellant 's rights stand curtailed in any manner because of the personal law governing the parties permitting a husband to marry more than one wife, and whether, even if the respondent is liable to pay maintenance, he stands absolved of his liability after his offer to take back the appellant and maintain her.
Allowing the Appeal, HELD: 1.1 Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, its fore runner being section 488 of the Criminal Procedure Cede 1898, has been enacted with the avowed object of preventing vagrancy and destitution.
It is intended to ensure the means of subsistence for three categories of dependents viz. children.
wives and parents who are unable to maintain themselves.
[782D E] 1.2.
Before an order of maintenance can be passed the three essential requisites to be satisfied are that: (1) the person liable to provide maintenance has sufficient means; (2) that he has neglected or refused to maintain; and (3) the dependent/dependents is/are unable to maintain himself/herself/themselves as the case may be.
[782E F] 1.3 The Legislature being anxious that for the sake of maintenance, the dependants should not resort to begging, stealing or cheating etc.
, the liability to provide mainte nance for children has been fixed on the basis of the pater nity of the father and the minority of the child and in the case of major children on the basis of their physical handi cap or mental abnormality without reference to factors of legitimacy or illegitimacy of the children and their being married or not.
[782F G] 1.4 In the case of wives, whether their ties of marriage subsist or 775 not, the anxiety of the Legislature is that they should not only not resort to begging, stealing or cheating etc.
but they should also not feel compelled, for the sake of main taining themselves, to resort to an adulterous life or in the case of divorced women, to resort to remarriage, if they have sentimental attachment to their earlier marriage and feel morally bound to observe their vows of fidelity to the persons whom they had married.
[782G H] 2.1 By reason of sub sections (4) and (5) a husband can avoid his liability to pay maintenance if his wife is living in adultery.
Correspondingly a right has been conferred on the wife under the Explanation to live separately and claim maintenance from the husband if he breaks his vows of fidel ity and marries another woman or takes a mistress.
It mat ters not whether the woman chosen by the husband to replace the wife is a legally married wife or a mistress.
[783B C] 2.2 The Explanation is of uniform application to all wives including Muslim wives whose husbands have either married another wife or taken a mistress.
[783C D] 2.3 The purpose of the Explanation is not to affect the rights of a Muslim husband to take more than one wife or to denigrate in any manner the legal and social status of a second wife to which she is entitled to as a legally married wife, as compared to a mistress but to place on an equal footing the matrimonial injury suffered by the first wife on account of the husband marrying again or taking a mistress during the subsistence of the marriage with her.
[781E F] 2.4 This Explanation has to be construed from the point of view of the injury to the matrimonial rights of the wife and not with reference to the husband 's right to marry again.
[782B] 3.
The offer to take back the wife and maintain her does not absolve the husband of his liability to pay maintenance.
A husband who marries again cannot compel the first wife to the conjugal home with the co wife and as such unless he offers to set up a separate residence for the first wife, any offer to take her back cannot be considered to be a bona fide offer.
[783D F] Chand Begum vs Hyderbaig, [1972] Crl.
Law Journal 1270, referred to.
In the instant case, the offer to take back the appellant had been 776 made only before Revisional Court and that too after the second marriage had taken place.
The offer was not to the effect that he would set up a separate residence for the appellant so as to enable her to live in peace and with dignity.
The offer was only a make believe one and not a genuine and sincere offer.
On the basis of such an insincere offer the appellant 's rights cannot be negated or defeated.
[783D F] The Court granted maintenance to the appellant wife Rs.300 per month and enhanced the maintenance to the minor girl to Rs.200 per month.
[784B; C] Bayanna vs Devamma, [1953], Mad.
W.N. Crl.
243 = AIR 1954 Mad. 226; Kundaswami vs Nachammal, AIR 1963 Mad. 263; Syed Ahmed vs
N.P. Taj Begum, AIR 1958 Mys 128; Shambu vs Ghalamma, AIR 1966 Mys 311; Teja Bai vs Shankarrao, AIR 1966 Bom 48; Mohammed Haneefa vs Mariam Bi, AIR 1969 Mad 414; Bela Rani vs Bhupal Chandra, AIR 1956 Cal 134; Rupchand vs Charubala, AIR 1966 Cal 83; Ishar vs Soma Devi, AIR 1959 Punj 295; Dhan Kaur vs Niranjan Singh, AIR 1960 Punj 595; Ramji Malviya vs Munni Devi, AIR 1959 All.
767; Sahulmmeedu vs Subaida Beevi, [1970] Kerala Law Times Page 4; and Mohd. A. Khan vs Shah Bano Begum, ; at 856, re ferred to.
