In the factory of the appellant Company there were about 1100 permanent as well as temporary workmen.
On account of non availability of raw materials and other compelling circumstances the appellant Company issued a 'closure no tice ' dated September 30, 1971 intimating all its workmen that their services would stand terminated due to the clo sure of the factory with effect from November 1, 1971 and that they would be paid compensation under section 25FFF of the .
Thereafter, the workmen indulged in go slow tactics and various acts of sabotage rendering the running of factory and office virtually impos sible and an atmosphere of terror, intimidation and vilifi cation prevailed.
On October 30, 1971 the workers and mem bers of the staff became more and more aggressive and after threatening the managerial staff resorted to acts of riot ing, hooliganism and destroyed considerable part of the Company 's properties.
To control the situation police had to be summoned.
The workers became more violent and prevented the Directors and Senior Officers from leaving the factory and threw missiles on them and the police.
A good number of Police Officers and Constables were injured and the police then arrested about 183 workers.
The Company terminated the services of the workmen with immediate effect by its notice dated October 30, 1971 issued under the Standing Orders applicable to its employees and the notice was duly published.
Thereafter, the workmen raised an industrial dispute which was referred for adjudication to the Industrial Tribu nal being I.T. No. 325 of 1971.
826 The factory was completely closed down from November 1, 1971 and there was no production till May, 1972.
Pursuant to notice dated June 7, 1972 by the appellant, many workmen rejoined the factory.
Before the Tribunal the case of the Union and the work ers was that the services of the workers were terminated due to closure and although the Tribunal cannot go into the question of legality or illegality of the closure, yet they would be entitled to compensation under section 25 FFF of the .
The contention of the appel lant company was that the workers were validity discharged on October 30, 1971 under Standing Order 21 i.e. before the alleged closure became operative and that it was not liable to pay compensation under section 25 FFF.
The question before the Tribunal was whether the workmen continued to be in employment till the closure took effect on November 1, 1971 or whether they ceased to be the employ ees of the appellant on October 30, 1971 or October 31, 1971 by virtue of the notice of the discharge issued under Stand ing Order 21.
The Tribunal held that the workers were validly dis charged on 30th October, 1971 before their services could be terminated due to closure and, therefore, could not be said to have been retrenched due to closure; that the workers ' services stand to have been terminated at least from 10.30 a.m. on October 31, 1971 when the order of discharge became effective; that thereafter the workers were not in service of the company and also were not in the service at the time of the alleged closure and that since the termination of services of the workers is not connected with the closure, they would not be entitled to any compensation due to clo sure.
The reference was rejected by the Tribunal by its order dated October 30, 1974.
The award remained unchal lenged and became final.
Thereafter at the instance of 440 workers another refer ence being IT No. 245 of 1975 was made.
The Tribunal held that the workmen included in the Schedule to the reference should be deemed to have been retrenched on March 20, 1980 i.e. the date of the Award, that they were entitled to retrenchment compensation under section 25 F of the Act and they were entitled to recover 75% of their back wages from Octo ber 31, 1971 till March 20, 1980.
The Tribunal rejected the contention of the management that the present case was barred by the principle of res judicata and held that the termination of the services of workers under the notice of discharge dated October 30, 1971 was invalid.
827 The management challenged the latter award in a writ petition before the High Court.
The petition was dismissed by a Single Judge.
The Division Bench dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal, to this Court on behalf of the appellant management it was submitted that the latter Industrial Tribunal was in error in treating the workmen in question as being in the employment of the management until it made the Award even though the first Tribunal had held that the workmen had been validly discharged by the notice dated October 30, 1971 issued under Standing Order 21 and the enquiry into the very same question between the same parties was barred by the principle of res judicata.
Allowing the Appeal and disposing of the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
That the rule of res judicata applies to pro ceedings before the Industrial Tribunals is beyond question.
However, it is not that a question which is once decided can never be re agitated.
There are certain classes of cases like disputes regarding wage structure, service conditions etc.
which arise as circumstances change and new situations arise which may not be barred by the rule of res judicata.
[834F; 836D E] Burn & Co., Calcutta vs Their Employees, [1956] S.C.R. 781; Workmen of the Straw Board Manufacturing Company Limit ed vs M/s Straw Board Manufacturing Company Limited; , ; Workmen of Balmer Lawrie and and Co. vs Balmer Lawrie and Co. ; and Associated Cement Staff Union and another vs Associated Cement Company and others, [1964] Vol. , followed.
The question whether the workmen concerned were entitled to retrenchment compensation under section 25F as on the date of the Award and payment of back wages from October 31, 1971 to March 20, 1980 depends upon their right to be in service from the date on which they ceased to work in the factory upto the date of the Award.
In the first reference the workmen specifically prayed for payment of compensation under section 25 FFF on the ground that the factory had been closed with effect from November 1, 1971 as per notice of closure thereby accepting the position that they had ceased to be the employees of the management on November 1, 1971.
That claim was resisted by the management on the footing that the workmen had been discharged pursuant to the notice of discharge dated October 30, 1971.
Even though the first Tribunal had observed that it had considered the question of 828 discharge as an "incidental question in view of the defence taken by the Company" the case was decided only on the basis of its finding that the workmen had been validly discharged by the notice dated October 30, 1971.
Though the said Tribu nal had observed "that there is nothing on the record to show at this stage that the discharge order is not proper", it did not mean that the validity of the discharge order could be reagitated later on because the first Tribunal further observed, "it would then be evident that all the workers of the Company were discharged by the Company on 30th October, 1971 before the closure could become effec tive".
[836F H; 837A B] 3.
The one and the only ground on which the claim of the workmen for compensation under section 25 FFF was rejected was that the workmen had ceased to be employees of the appellant by reason of the notice of discharge dated October 30, 1971.
The validity of that notice of discharge was directly and substantially in issue in the first reference.
[837B C] 4.
Before the first Tribunal the workmen could have urged that the discharge was invalid and, therefore, they continued to be in service till November, 1, 1971 and hence were entitled to compensation under section 25 FFF.
The case of the workmen that they were entitled to compensation under section 25 FFF was negatived by the first Tribunal holding that the workmen had been validly discharged by the notice dated October 30, 1971.
The decision of the first Tribunal may be erroneous and could have been set right if its Award had been challenged but it was allowed to become final.
The decision of the first Tribunal was not one rendered without jurisdiction nor can it be characterised as a nullity on any ground known to law.
[837D F] 5.
The question whether a person was or was not an employee under a management after a particular date is one which cannot be re agitated in a subsequent case if it has already been decided finally by an industrial Tribunal of competent jurisdiction in an earlier case where the said question necessarily arose for decision.
[837F] Buran & Co., Calcutta vs Their Employees, [1956] S.C.R. 781 and Workmen of the Straw Board Manufacturing Company Limited vs M/s Straw Board Manufacturing Company Limited, ; , followed.
The workmen did not claim before the first Tribunal the relief of reinstatement or compensation under section 25F even though the factory had been reopened in 1972 before the first Award was passed but only 829 confined their relief to compensation under section 25 FFF.
The workmen could not have, therefore, been permitted to re agitate the said matter before the second Tribunal which decided the second reference and to contend that they had continued to be employees of the management on the ground that the notice of discharge and the notice of closure were both invalid.
The second Tribunal should have rejected the said contentions by holding that the validity of notice of discharge dated October 30, 1971 was not open to question before it.
The second Tribunal was in error in re examining the issue relating to the validity of the notice of dis charge and in expressing a contrary view.
The Award dated March 20, 1980 passed by the second Tribunal is, therefore, liable to be quashed.
[837G H; 838A C] [The Court appreciated and accepted the submission of the appellant management that it would give up its right to claim the refund of Rs.48,00,000 lying with the Commissioner of Labour even though the Award is set aside and the same may be distributed ex gratia amongst the 440 workmen in volved in the second reference equally and issued necessary directions in that behalf.
The Court also directed that the amount of Rs.1,63,000 realised by the Collector shall be refunded to the appellant.]
