The assessee respondent was assessed to income tax as a representative assessee of ten non resident companies.
The companies were grouped under three heads six in Group A, three in Group B and one in Group C.
In regard to the companies under Group A, the assessee had no direct agree ment but had dealings by virtue of its agreement with the exporting company; as regards the three companies under Group B, the assessee had no business connection with them; and so far as the only company under Group C was concerned, the assessee 's stand was that it had an agreement dated December 16, 1948 with the export company, but no liability accrued under the law in respect of the transactions.
The Income tax Officer referred specifically to the agreement of 1948 and refuted the stand of the company.
He held that the agreement was a clear authority that the non resident had employed the Indian Company for selling its goods in India on commission and that it brings into exist ence a business connection between the two companies.
He also held that the Group A companies were connected with the Indian Company through the export company.
Appeals were filed by the assessee challenging the assessments before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
The assessee tried to establish the actual course of dealing between the Indian Company and the ten non residents and contended that no liability under the Act accrued.
The Appellate Authority dismissed the contentions of the asses see by holding that the assessee had produced no proof of its assertions and on the contrary had blocked the inquiry.
Before the Tribunal, an appeal was filed by the asses see.
Along with the grounds, an affidavit dated December 27, 1965 of the Secretary of the assessee was also filed and it was stated therein that there was no 884 obstruction to the proceedings before the Appellate Assist ant Commissioner with regard to the attempted probe by the Appellate Authority and that several documents were made available before the Appellate Authority and were actually placed before him, and in case the Appellate Authority wanted any information or further documents to be produced, the Secretary was prepared to do so.
The Tribunal did not deal with the aforesaid affidavit on the ground that it was not necessary for the purpose of determining whether the Indian Company could be appointed agent under Section 163 of the Act.
It upheld the assess ments and referred to the High Court the questions whether the non resident companies had business connection with the Indian Company and whether the Indian Company was correctly treated as an agent of the said non resident companies under Section 163 of Income tax Act, 1961.
The High ,Court held that the Indian assessee had no business connections with the non resident companies within the meaning of Section 9 of the Act.
Dismissing the appeals of the Revenue, this Court, HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that the Indian assessee had no business connections with the non resident companies within the meaning of Section 9 of the 1961 Act.
Unless the matter comes under Section 163(1)(a) of the Act, there will be no liability for assessment.
[893F] 2.
Whether a relationship would amount to "business connection" as provided in Section 163(1)(b) of the Income tax Act of 1961 for the purpose of giving rise to the li ability under Section 9(1) of the Act would depend upon a set of facts arising in a particular case.
[889F G] 3.
The, order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner shows that the Secretary appeared before him at the hearing on September 3 and 4, 1965 and the appeals were dismissed by order dated September 17, 1965.
[890F] 4.
Ordinarily, the High Court should have declined to use the assertions in the affidavit for the purpose of recording findings of fact and if, at all, in its opinion the affidavit was to be utilised, the matter should have gone before the Tribunal for a fresh disposal of the ap peals.
[892H] 885 5.
In the instant case, the High Court relying upon the affidavit of the Secretary of the assessee had found that during the hearing of the appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Secretary had produced certain records to show the manner in which the business had been carried on and the nature of the transactions.
The Tribunal obviously fell into an error in brushing aside the affida vit.
The facts stated therein had a direct bearing on the point in issue, namely, whether there was any business connection between the assessee and the non resident compa nies.
[889G H; 891C D] 6.
The assessments relate to a period about a quarter of a century back and by its conduct, the Revenue appears to have waived its right to dispute the facts asserted in the affidavit on one hand by not challenging its admissibility and on the other by not disputing the contents thereof.
It would not be appropriate at this stage to put back the matter to the stage of the second appeal before the Tribu nal.
[893D El Commissioner of Income Tax, Punjab vs
R.D. Aggarwal and Company and another, , referred to.
