The prosecution alleged that there was a dispute between the appellant in Appeal No. 287 of 1978 and the deceased in regard to payment of repair charges for a machine part and that three or four days later this appellant alongwith others attacked the deceased when he was accompanied by P.W. 1 and P.W. 2.
It was further alleged that while the appel lant in Appeal No. 288 of 1978 caught hold of the deceased, the appellant in the first appeal and two others repeatedly stabbed him with knives and caused several injuries.
P.W. 2 was also injured when he tried to intercede.
The deceased and P.W. 2 were taken to hospital where the deceased was pronounced dead.
P.W. 1 presented a complaint at the Police Station.
The appellant in the first appeal absconded and surren dered before the court later.
On questioning, he named the assailants, who were arrested on different dates.
Test indentification parades were held for two accused persons wherein the appellant in the second appeal was identified by three witnesses, but the other accused was identified by only of them.
In the subsequent identification parade held for another accused, none of the witnesses was able to identify him.
All the accused were tried and the two appel lants and another accused were convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code and Section 324 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code for having committed murder of the deceased and caused hurt with a knife to P.W. 2 and were awarded imprisonment for life and three years ' rigorous imprisonment respectively, the sentences to run concurrently.
The fourth accused who was not identified by any one of the witnesses at the identification 963 parade and whose name was not mentioned in the First Infor mation Report, was acquitted.
The High Court in appeal confirmed the conviction of the two appellants but acquitted the third accused on the ground that he had been identified by only P.W. 2 and not by other witnesses.
In the appeal to this Court, it was submitted on behalf of the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 287 of 1978 that the prosecution evidence suffers from numerous infirmities and as such, the trial court and the High Court ought not to have convicted him, that in any case the benefit of doubt given to the two of the other accused ought to have been given to him, that there was an attempt to cover up the delay in making the report, that the motive put forward for the occurrence was of a flimsy nature and it was unbelieva ble that for non payment of repair charges the deceased would have been attacked alongwith his companions, that P.W. 1 did not have proper eye sight, that P.W. 3 was a chance witness and that C.W. 1 failed to support the prosecution case, and that even though P.W. 2 was an injured witness, there was no guarantee that his evidence is truthful.
It was further urged that the appellant could be convicted only for an offence under Section 324 Indian Penal Code for the injury caused to the deceased as well as P.W. 2, that as the sub stratum of the prosecution fails, the entire case had to fail and that when the other accused persons were acquitted, the appellant alone cannot be convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C., in the absence of evidence that he caused any of the fatal injuries on the deceased.
It was submitted on behalf of the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 288 of 1978 that neither his name nor any of his characteristics were mentioned in the First Information Report by any of the eye witnesses, that he was falsely implicated, that there was no motive for him to murder the deceased, that one of the prosecution witnesses had alto gether denied his presence, that there was delay in his arrest and ho1ding of the identification parade and he was exposed to the identifying witnesses by not covering his distinctive features, that the prosecution had failed to prove beyond reasonable doubt his participation in the commission of the occurrence and that when the other ac cused, one of whose name figured in the First Information Report, were acquitted by giving the benefit of doubt.
he should also have been given the same benefit of doubt.
Dismissing the appeal of the appellant in Appeal No. 287 of 1978 and allowing the appeal of the appellant in Appeal No. 288 of 1978, this Court, 964 HELD: 1.
When participation of the appellant with the other assailants is established beyond reasonable doubt by the prosecution, he cannot escape the consequences of the attack committed by him and his accomplices in furtherance of their common intention and conviction under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Panel Code even though the other accused stand acquitted and even though there may be no evidence that the accused caused one of the fatal injuries.
[973E] 2.
The other accused were acquitted only for want of acceptable proof of their identity and not because the eye witnesses had not seen the occurrence or that the occurrence had taken place in a different manner.
Therefore, there is no merit in the contention that when the other accused persons were acquitted, the appellant in Criminal Appeal No.287 of 1978 alone cannot be convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code, in the absence of evidence to show that he caused any of the fatal injuries on the deceased.
The appellant, therefore, cannot escape the consequences of the attack jointly committed by him and his accomplices in furtherance of the common intention.
[972B E] 3.
There is nothing improbable in the appellant having nurtured a grievance against the deceased and wanting to settle scores with him.
The evidence of the eye witnesses was clearly to the effect that the appellant told his com panions on seeing the deceased that he was the person who had quarreled with him and taken away the machine part without paying the repair charges.
Making common cause of his grievance, the appellant 's companions had also joined him in perpetrating an attack on the deceased.
The trial court and the High Court were right in accepting the evi dence of these witnesses.
[970F G] 4.
There is no merit in the contention that the appel lant can be convicted only for an offence under Section 324 Indian Penal Code for injury caused to the deceased as well as P.W. 2.
The trial court had framed a separate charge against the appellant under Section 324 Indian Penal Code in addition to the charge under Section 324 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code.
There is also no merit in the conten tion that when the sub stratum of the prosecution case fails, the entire case has to fail.
The prosecution version fully survives in spite of the acquittal of the other ac cused for want of proof of identity.
[971 D F] 5.
Where there is delay in holding an identification parade, it would not be safe to place reliance on the iden tification of the accused by the eye witnesses.
[969D E] 965 6.
Where the witnesses had not given any description of the accused in the First Information Report or in the state ments during the investigation, their identification of the accused at the trial cannot be safely accepted by the court for convicting the accused.
[969E] 7.
The appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 288 of 1978 was not arrested for nearly nine weeks after coming to know of his name and address from the other appellant.
It was not the case of the prosecution that the appellant was abscond ing.
Apart from this infirmity, the appellant was not put up for test identification parade promptly and it was held three weeks after his arrest and no explanation was offered for the delay in holding it.
There is, therefore, room for doubt as to whether the delay in holding the identification parade was in order to enable the identifying witnesses to see him in the police lock up or in the jail premises and make a note of his features.
A sufficiently long interval of time had elapsed between the date of occurrence when the witnesses had seen the appellant for a few minutes and the date of the identification parade.
[968D H; 969A] 8.
Although all the three witnesses had identified the appellant at the identification parade, after nearly four months, in the absence of any descriptive particulars of the appellant in the First Information Report or in the state ments of witnesses during the investigation, it would not be safe and proper to act upon the identification of the appel lant by the three witnesses at the identification parade and hold that he was one of the assailants of the deceased.
[969A D] 9.
As the conviction of the appellant was based solely with reference to his identification at the parade, he has to be given the benefit of doubt and acquitted.
[973E] Muthu Swami vs State of Madras, AIR 1954 SC 4; Mohd. Abdul Hafeez vs State of Andhra Pradesh, ; Gurdev Singh and others vs The State, 1963 Punjab Law Re porter, 409; State of U.P. vs Hari Prasad, ; ; Ugar Ahir vs State of Bihar, AIR 1965 SC 277; Vijay Kumar v: State of J & K, AIR 1982 SC 1022; and Amir Hussain vs State of U.P., AIR 1975 SC 2211, referred to.
