The respondents, said to be armed with spears pharsas and lathis, were alleged to have assaulted the police party returning after apprehending a suspect villager, resulting in the death of the informer and grievous injuries to the constables, and to have secured the release of the suspect.
They were also alleged to have snatched the private gun and belt of cartridges from the constable.
The incident took place at night.
They were convicted by the trial court under section 302 read with section 149, and sections 395 and 147 I.P.C.
The High Court on appraising the evidence and the FIR came to the conclusion; (i) that the sole object of the respondents in going to the place of occurrence was only to rescue the suspect and not to assault or murder anyone; (ii) that the arrest of the suspect by the police was absolutely unjustified and not legal since no material had been pro duced either to indicate his involvement in a cognizable offence or for causing reasonable suspicion, therefore, the respondents had a right to get the suspect rescued from custody; (iii) that the respondents did not use force till one of the constables tried three shots, one after another, which was sufficient to cause a reasonable apprehension of either death or grievous hurt in the minds of the respond ents, therefore they were acting in the right of private defence; (iv) that none of the respondents made any attempt on the life of the informer till he himself intervened to help the constable, and held that as such it could not be said that they were members of an unlawful assembly or were committing rioting when they used force.
In the premises, the Court recorded acquittal of the respondents.
954 In the appeal to this Court it was contended for the State: (1) that even if the arrest of the suspect was not legal, in view of section 99 I.P.C. right of private defence was not available to the respondents under section 97 I.P.C. and they could have taken recourse to use lawful methods for rescuing the suspect rather than resorting to violence; and (2) that there was no cause for reasonable apprehension of serious injuries to the respondents, for the constable had fired shots in the air just to frighten the respondents and since it was moonlit night the respondents could have seen the direction in which shots were fired.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: Section 99 of the Indian Penal Code is only at tracted where there is no reasonable apprehension of death or grievous hurt.
In the instant case.
the respondents did not use force unless and until one of the constables actual ly fired shots.
Even if it is accepted that it was a moonlit night, it could safely be inferred that the light may not be sufficient enough so that from a distance the respondents could notice the direction of the barrel of the gun when shots were fired.
In such a situation, the conclusion reached by the High Court that it was sufficient to cause reasonable apprehension in the minds of the respondents of death or grievous injury, and, therefore, they were entitled to right of private defence.
was justified.
[959H; 960E G] If the respondents could not be held to be members of an unlawful assembly as their object at best could only be to rescue the suspect from unlawful custody, then even if the right of private defence is not accepted, it is not possible on the basis of the prosecution evidence to find out what respondent caused what injury and it will not be possible to find them guilty for their individual acts.
The same will be the situation even if it is held that they exceeded the right of private defence.
[960G H; 961A]
