Battan Singh had two wives, namely, Mahan Kaur and Khem Kaur.
Mahan Kaur died during his lifetime after giving birth to two sons, Lachman Singh (petitioner) and Gurdas Singh.
Gurdas Singh pre deceased Battan Singh leaving behind his widow Gurbax Kaur and his son Amarjit Singh.
Respondent No. 1, Kirpa Singh is the son of the Battan Singh and Khem Kaur.
Battan Singh died intestate after the came into force and his property devolved on his heirs including his second wife Khem Kaur.
On her death, Kirpa Singh claimed her entire property on the ground that he was her only son.
Lachman Singh, Amarjit Singh and Gurbax Kaur claimed that Kirpa Singh was entitled to only 1/3rd share in the property of Khem Kaur, Lachman Singh was entitled to 1/3rd share and Amarjit Singh was entitled to the remaining 1/3rd share.
Kirpa Singh filed a suit for declaration that he was entitled to the entire property belonging to Khem Kaur against Lachman Singh, Amarjit Singh and Gurbax Kaur.
The trial Court decreed the suit.
The appeals filed by Lachman Singh before the Additional District Judge and in the High Court were dismissed.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
Ordinarily laws of succession to property follow the natural inclinations of men and women.
[938C D] 2.
The list of heirs in section 15(1) of the is enumerated having regard to the current notions about the propinquity 934 or nearness of relationship.
The words 'son ' and 'step son ' are not defined in the Act.
[938C D] 3.
Under the Act, a son of a female by her first mar riage will not succeed to the estate of her 'second husband ' on his dying intestate.
In the case of a woman it is natural that a step son, that is, the son of her husband by his another wife is a step away from the son who has come out of her own womb.
But under the Act a step son of a female dying intestate is an heir and that is so because the family headed by a male is considered as a social unit.
If a step son does not fail within the scope of the expression 'sons ' in cl.
(a) of section 15(1) of the Act, he is sure to fail under cl.
(b) thereof being an heir of the husband.
[938D F] 4.
The word 'sons ' in cl.
(a) of section 15(1) of the Act includes: (i) sons born out of the womb of a female by same husband or by different husbands including illegitimate sons too in view of section 3(j) of the Act, and (ii) adopted sons who are deemed to be sons for purposes of inheritance.
[938F G] 5.
Under the Hindu law as it stood prior to the coming into force of the Act, a step son, i.e. a son of the husband of a female by another wife did not simultaneously succeed to the stridhana of the female on her dying intestate.
In that case the the son born out of her womb had precedence over a step son.
Parliament would have made express provi sion in the Act if it intended that there should be such a radical departure from the past.
[938G H; 939A] 6.
The word 'sons ' in cl.
(a) of section 15(1) of Act does not include 'step sons ' and that step sons fail in the category of the heirs of the husband referred to in cl.
(b) thereof.
[939A B] Mallappa Fakirappa Sanna Nagashetti and Others vs Shi vappa and another, A.I.R. ; Rama Ananda Patii vs Appa Bhima Redekar and Others, A.I.R. 1969 Bombay 205; Gumam Singh vs Smt.
Ass Kaur and Others, A.I.R. 1977 P & H 103 and Smt.
Kishori Bala Mondal vs Tribhanga Mondal & Others, A.I.R. 1980 Calcutta 334 approved.
Ram Katori vs Prakash Nati L.L.R., [1968] 1 Allahabad 697, overruled.
The rule of devolution in section 15 of the Act applies to all kinds of properties left behind by a female Hindu except those dealt with by cls.
(a) and (b) of section 15(2) which make a distinction as regards the property 935 inherited by her from her parents and the property inherited from her husband or father in law and that too when she leaves no sons and daughters (including children of prede ceased sons and daughters).
[941B C] 8.
When once a property becomes the absolute property of a female Hindu it shall devolve first on her children (including children of the predeceased sons and daughter) as provided in section 15(1)(a) of the Act and then on other heirs subject only to the limited change introduced in section 15(2) of the Act.
The step sons or step daughters will come in as heirs only under cl.
(b) ors.
15(1) or under cl.
(b) or section 15(2) of the Act.
[941E F]
