Sub section (2) of Section 35 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 confers power of appointment of ministerial officers of all courts controlled by a District Court and their suspen sion and removal on the District Court.
Sub section (3) makes every appointment subject to such rules as the High Court may prescribe in this behalf, while sub section (4) makes orders passed by the District Judge subject to the control of the High Court.
Chapter 18 A of the High Court Rules and Orders framed under Section 35(3) controls the appointments, promotion and punishment of ministerial officials in the District and other civil courts, other than the High Court.
Sub rule 2(a) of Rule IX in that Chapter enables the District Judge to inflict any of the penalties mentioned in sub rule (1): censure, fine, recovery of any pecuniary loss, withholding of increments or promotions, suspension, removal and dis missal of the ministerial officers of his own court or any court subordinate to him other than the Court of Small Causes.
Sub rule (2) of Rule X provides 'for appeals to the High Court against penalties.
Sub rule (3) requires the persons appealing to the High Court to do so by a petition to the District Judge, who shall forward the same to the Registrar of the High Court with remarks that he may wish to make.
After reading the petition the High Court may either (a) summarily reject it without hearing the petitioner; (b) refer it to the District Judge for report and on receipt of such report reject the petition without hearing; or (c) hear the petitioner, and where other persons are held to be concerned such other person in open court.
1006 Sub rule (4) forbids the petitioners to attend personally at the High Court unless summoned and provides for communica tion to them of orders on their petitions through the Dis trict Judge.
The appellants, who were the employees in the ministeri al establishment of the courts at Ferozepur and Zira, were alleged to have taken a prominent part in raising objection able slogans against the Judicial Magistrate and the Dis trict Judge, in a demonstration organised by the subordinate court officials, to protest against the slapping of a subor dinate by the Judicial Magistrate, Zira.
They were charge sheeted for their misconduct.
After enquiry it was found that they contravened Rule 7(1) of the Government Employees (Conduct) Rules, 1966 by acting prejudicially to the public order, decency and morality and were dismissed from service by the District Judge in his capacity aS the punishing authority.
The appellants preferred a service appeal before the High Court which was dismissed.
While granting the special leave on 2nd April, 1982 this Court made the following order: "Appeal will be heard . . on the prelim inary issue as to whether the High Court in disposal of appeal was acting in administra tive capacity under article 235 or as a Tribunal or as a High Court and the circumstances in which the appeal was maintained, if so.
" It was contended on behalf of the appellants that the decision of the High Court in this case was the judicial decision of a tribunal which could be examined by this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The appeal is not maintainable.
Every decision or order by an authority which has a duty to act judicially is not subject to appeal to this Court.
Article 136 contem plates appeals only from adjudications of courts and tribu nals.
Such adjudication must doubtless be judicial.
if the power exercised was administrative in nature it would ex clude such a tribunal from the ambit of Article 136.
[1029C; 1028H; 1020D] 1.2 Every authority which is required to act judicially either by its constitution or by virtue of the authority conferred upon it is 1007 not necessarily a tribunal for the purposes of Article 136.
A tribunal, whose adjudication is subject to appeal must besides being under a duty to act judicially, be a body invested with the judicial power of the State.
[1029A] 1.3 There is a clear distinction between courts of law exercising judicial powers and other bodies.
Decisions by courts are clearly judicial.
That Is not the case with bodies exercising administrative or executive powers.
In certain matters even judges have to act administratively and in so doing may have to act quasi judicially in dealing with matters entrusted to them.
It is only where the authorities are required to act judicially either by express provisions of the statute or by necessary implication that the decision of such an authority would amount to a quasi judicial pro ceeding.
When Judges in exercise of their administrative functions decide cases it cannot be said that their deci sions are either judicial or quasi judicial decisions.
The test that has to be applied to find out whether an order is a judicial order or not is the existence of a lis between the parties.
[1028F; 1025C] In the instant case, the High Court while disposing of the appeal was not acting as a tribunal.
It was acting purely administratively.
It was not resolving any dispute or controversy between two adversaries but only exercising its power of control over the subordinate judiciary which is the same as control under Article 235 of the Constitution of India.
[1028E; 1027C; 1029B; 1013C] Durga Shankar Mehta vs Thakur Raghuraj Singh & Ors., [1955] 1 SCR 267; Bachhittar Singh vs The State of Punjab, [1962] Snppl.
3 SCR 713; Associated Cement Companies Ltd. vs P.N. Sharma & Anr, ; ; Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Shyam Sundar Jhunjhunwala, ; ; Jaswant Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Lakshmichand and others, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 242; Engineering Mazdoor Sabha vs Hind Cycles Limited, Bombay, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 625; Indo China Steam Navigation Co. Ltd. vs Jasjit Singh, Additional Collector of Customs & Ors., ; and APHLC vs M.A. Sangma, ; , referred to.
2.1 In deciding the appeal under Rule X in Chapter 18 A the High Court exercises only a supervisory administrative control over the subordinate courts and does not act as a tribunal disposing of an appeal involving a lis between two rival parties and arriving at a judicial decision.
[1019D] 1008 2.2 The appeal under Rule X(3) has to be by a petition, to be routed through the District Judge who sends it to the Registrar of the High Court.
These are procedural formali ties which normally govern appeals preferred before the High Court on the administrative side.
The permission given to the authority who imposes penalty to record his own remarks which he wishes to make concerning his own order is further proof of the fact that what the High Court has to consider is not a matter on the judicial side but one in its power of control and superintendence over the subordinate courts.
[1018A] 2.3 The procedure contained in Rule X(3) of hearing the petition not similar to the procedure followed in regular judicial proceedings.
It is not obligatory for the High Court to hear the petitioner.
It can go into the papers and reject it summarily without giving the petitioner an oppor tunity to be heard.
Alternative, it could get a report from the District Judge and on receipt of such a report dismiss it without hearing the petitioner.
Thirdly, it could give a hearing to the petitioner and also those who will be affect ed.
This manner of disposal of the petition makes it appar ent that it is not strictly a judicial proceeding but has all the trappings of an administrative proceeding and an administrative decision.
[1018E H] 2.4 Sub rule (4) of Rule X again marks a complete depar ture from the normal judicial proceeding before a court.
The petitioners are forbidden to attend personally at the High Court.
They can do so only when summoned.
In a judicial proceeding, the party has a right to appear personally or through counsel.
This denial also robs the appeal of its character of a judicial proceeding.
[1019C] 2.5 The fact that Rule X is found in Chapter 18 A, which deals with control, also gives the administrative shade to the proceeding under this Rule.
Section 35(4) of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918, which stipulates that any order passed by the District Judge under this section shall be subject to the control of the High Court, further fortifies the view that the proceedings under Rule X(3) and the decisions made thereunder are not judicial in nature.
[1019E] It cannot, therefore, be said that in the instant case the High Court while deciding the appeal acted as a tribunal whose order can be challenged before this Court under Arti cle 136 of the Constitution.
[1019F] [The Registrar to transfer the records of the case to the High Court.
The latter to take the petition on its file as a petition under 1009 Article 226 and dispose of the matter expeditiously.] [1029D]
