For the year 1964 65, the assessee, a registered dealer, under the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1959 returned a gross turn over of Rs.53,39,981 which was accepted by the Assessing Officer.
He determined the taxable turnover at Rs.52,79,962 representing the sale of wheat products taxable at 2%.
He found that the dealer has sold gunny bags in which wheat products had been packed and determined its turnover at Rs.1,37,150 and assessed the same at 4 1/2%.
The First Appellate Authority on assessee 's appeal held that the Assessing Officer was not justified in adding back the price of container in the gross turnover.
What he should have done is to tax a portion of the taxable turnover at a different rate or out of the turnover taxable, the price of bags calculated at the rate of 70 paise per 100 kilogram should have been deducted and taxed at the rate of 4 1/2%.
The remaining was to be taxed at the rate of 2%.
In the revision before the Tribunal the assessee con tended that the demand of sales tax payable at different rates on the calculated turnover of gunny bags was not at all warranted as no price had been charged for the contain ers.
The Tribunal held that the lower Courts were justified in levying tax at a different rate on the turnover on ac count of sale of gunny bags in which the wheat products were sold and directed that the Assessing Officer should ascer tain from the accounts, the turnover on account of sale of gunny bags as container of wheat products during the period under consideration and assess tax thereon at the prescribed rate of 4 1/2%.
The balance turnover shall be assessed at 2%.
In the reference the High Court affirmed this view.
Dismissing the appeal, 1048 HELD: 1.
The Control Order contemplates a net weight which means that the weight of the bag is included in the price to be charged by the dealer.
Under the explanation when packing is done in clothbags, a higher rate is admissi ble.
The scheme clearly suggests that the price of gunny bags is inclusive and where cloth bag is used, a higher price over and above what has been provided for ordinary containers is permitted.
[1051C D] Commissioner of Taxes vs Prabhat Marketing Company Ltd., 19 STC 84, referred to. 2.
The Tribunal rightly came to the conclusion that there was implied agreement of sale of the gunny bags.
Admittedly, gunny bags are a different commodity and sale thereof is assessable to tax at 4V1%.
It is not disputed that appellant bought gunny bags for packing wheat products for the purpose of sale.
[1051C] 3.
The question as to whether there was an agreement to sell packing material is a pure question of fact depending upon the circumstances found in each case.
[1051G H] 4.
The Tribunal and the High Court in the instant case, have recorded a clear finding that there was an implied contract for sale of the gunny bags with the products con tained therein.
[1051H]
