By a common order dated April 18, 1985 in C.A. No. 1423 of 1984, etc., Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros. the Court had directed issue of Export House Certificates and Addi tional Licences to the petitioners and other diamond export ers under the Import Policy 1978 79 stating: "Save and except items which are specifically banned under the preva lent Import Policy at the time of import, the respondents shall be entitled to import all other items whether cana lised or otherwise in accordance with the relevant rules".
The petitioners, who were issued Additional Licences pursu ant to this order, imported several consignments of items falling under Appendices 2B, 3 and 5 of Import Policy, 1985 88, and, while clearing them, the Customs Authorities imposed a fine of Rs.45,000 in respect of certain items failing in Appendix 2B and issued show cause notices in respect of certain other items failing in Appendices 2B and 5.
The petitioners challenge was directed not only against these orders, but extended to certain subsequent decisions of the Court which, according to them, had cut down the effect of the Court 's earlier order dated April 18, 1985 in Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros. Dismissing the petitions, HELD: The decisions rendered subsequent to the decision dated April 18, 1985 in Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros. do not take any different or contrary view.
Indeed, they give effect to the letter and spirit of that decision.
The basic background in which the decision in Union of India vs Rajni kant Bros. was rendered was that Export Houses had been refused Export House Certificates on the ground that they had not diversified their exports.
It was found that was wrong.
The wrong was undone by directing issue of Export House Certificates for 990 the year 1978 79 though the order was passed in April, 1985.
That was a measure of restitution, but the Court, while doing so, ensured that nothing illegal was done.
It is a presumption of law that the courts act lawfully and will not ask any authority to do anything which is illegal.
It was directed that except those items which were specifically banned under the prevalent import policy at the time of import, the respondents therein were entitled to import all other items whether canalised or not canalised in accordance with the relevant rules.
Analysing the said order, it is apparent: (1) that the importation that was permissible was of goods which were not specifically banned, (2) that such banning must be under the prevalent import policy at the time of import.
and (3) whether items which were canalised or uncanalised would be imported in accordance with the relevant rules.
These conditions had to be fulfilled.
The court never did and could not have said that canalised items could be imported in any manner not permitted nor it could have given a go bye to the canalisation policy.
[1000C H] (ii).
In Raj Prakash Chemicals vs Union of India,, it was explained that only such items could be imported by diamond exporters under the Additional Licences granted to them as could have been imported under the Import Policy 1978 79 and were also importable under the Import Policy prevailing at the time of import.
These were the items which had not been 'specifically banned ' under the prevalent Import Policy.
The items had to pass through two tests, firstly, they should have been importable under the Import Policy 1978 79 and, secondly, they should also have been importable under the Import Policy, 1985 88 in terms of the Order dated 18th April, 1985 and if one may add, in such terms 'in accordance with the import rules ' whether cana lised or not canalised.
The Court had no occasion to consid er in that case the significance of the words 'whether canalised or otherwise ' mentioned in the Order dated 18th April, 1985 in Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros., because that point did not arise there.
[1000H; 1001A D] (iii) What did the court then intend by the words 'whet her canalised or otherwise ' used in the order dated 18th April, 1985 in Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros? The diamond exporters could import the items which they were entitled to import under the Import Policy 1978 79 provided they were importable also under the Import Policy ruling at the time of import.
These are items which were open to import by Export Houses holding Additional Licences for Sale to the Actual Users (Industrial).
These are items which were di rectly imported, for example, items in Part II List 8 of Appendix 6 of Import Policy 1985 88.
These are items which are not canalised.
Canalised items are those 991 items which are ordinarily open to import only through a public sector agency.
Although generally these are import able through public sector agencies, it is permissible for any Import Policy to provide an exception to the rule and to declare that an importer might import a canalised item directly.
It is in that sense and that sense only that the Court could have intended to define the entitlement of diamond exporters.
They would be entitled to import items which were canalised or not if the Import Policy prevailing at the time of import permitted them to import items failing under such category.
[1001D G] (iv) In the Order dated 18th April, 1985 in Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros., this Court did not do away with canalisation.
That was not the issue before this Court.
This expression 'whether canalised or not canalised ' was to include both.
This Court did not say that canalised items could be imported directly by the importers ignoring the canalisation process.
High public policy, it must be empha sised, is involved in the scheme of canalisation.
This purpose of canalisation was examined by.this Court in Daruka of this Court observed that the policies of imports or exports were fashioned not only with reference to internal or international trade, but also on monetary policy, the development of agriculture and industries and even on the political policies of the country and rival theories and views may be held on such policies.
If the Government decid ed an economic policy that import or export should be by a selected channel or through selected agencies, the court would proceed on the assumption that the decision was in the interest of the general public unless the contrary was shown.
Therefore, it could not be collaterally altered in the manner suggested.
The policy of canalisation which is a matter of policy of the Government was not given a go bye by the observations referred to in the Order of 18th April, 1985.
Indeed, it is possible to read the Order in a manner consistent with canalisation scheme in the way we have indicated.
If that is so, then it should be so read.
When this Court observed that the fact whether items were sought to be imported by diamond merchants were canalised, would not be an impediment to the import directly by them, the Court meant to say that this could be imported directly by them through the canalisation organisation.
The need for canalisation stands on public policy and that need cannot be lightly or inferentially given a go bye.
It should not be presumed that collaterally the court had done away with the system of canalisation based on sound public policy.
We have found nothing in the different authorities on this subject, which militate against the above views.
Therefore, the action taken by the Customs Authorities in issuing adjudica tion notice and proceeding in 992 the manner they did we are of the opinion that they have not acted illegally or without jurisdiction.
This must proceed in accordance with law as laid down by this Court which, in.
our opinion is clear enough.
The fact that in subsequent decision, the petitioner is not a party is not relevant.
Generally legal positions laid down by the court would be binding on all concerned even though some of them have not been made parties nor were served nor any notice of such proceedings given.
[1001H; 1002A G] Union of India vs Rajnikant Bros., C.A. No. 1423 of 1984 decided on April 18, 1985; Raj Prakash Chemicals Ltd. & Anr.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; M/s. Indo Afghan Chambers of Commerce &Anr., etc.
vs Union of India & Ors., etc., [1986] 3 S.C.C. 352; Union of India vs Godrej Soaps Pvt. Ltd. &Anr., ; ; and M/s. Star Diamond Co. India vs Union of India & Ors., [1986] 4 S.C.C. 246, discussed, explained and reiterated.
Daruka & Co. vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
