The appellant a student of intermediate class, was alleged to have led the attack on the rival faction along with his accomplices armed with deadly weapons like gun, pistol, sword, kanta, lathi etc.
resulting in triple murder.
He was also alleged to have opened fire with his gun at the deceased.
The trial court disbelieved his plea of alibi, that on the date of occurrence he was actually attending his classes in college, in support of which he tendered in evidence the attendance register and also examined DW 1, the lecturer in college, and he was convicted under section 302 read with section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
The High Court in appeal affirmed the conviction.
Agree ing with the trial court it reached the conclusion that the entries in the college attendance register were forged and passed strictures against the witness.
In the appeal before this Court by special leave the appellant came forward with the belated plea that he was a child below the age of 16 years within the meaning of section 2(4) of the U.P. Children Act, 1952 and therefore, the trial was vitiated by reason of section 29 of the Act.
It was contended that in spite of repeated requests of his counsel he was not heard by the High Court Judges on the point.
While making this frivolous assertion the accused also made wild allega tions in an attempt to 1054 destroy the credibility of the Judges and create doubt about the correctness of the judgment appealed from.
To substanti ate the allegation he and his legal advisors brought into existence certain correspondence.
In support of his age he filed affidavits of his father and the advocate.
In addi tion.
he also placed on record copies of extract of the kutumo register of the Gaon Sabha, certificate of High School examination, entry from the electoral roll, and endorsement in ink below his statement recorded unders section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court HELD: 1.1 The appellant was not a child within the meaning ors.
2(4) of the U.P. Children Act, 1952 at the time of occurrence and, therefore, was not entitled to the bene fit of section 29 of the Act.
[1062F; 1055G H] 1.2 The affidavits and the copies of documents placed on record, after the grant of the special leave extract of the kutumo register of the Gaon Sabha, certificate of High School Examination and entry from the electoral roll, in support of appellant 's age are all of doubtful authenticity and it would be unsafe to rely upon them.
Such documents can always be brought into existence.
So is the endorsement in ink below the statement of the appellant recorded by the trial court under section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973, to the effect that "the age of 17 years appears to be correct".
Even assuming that the endorsement was made by the trial court, that was only an estimate of age and does not necessarily show that the appellant was a child within the meaning of section 2(4) of the Act at the time of occurrence.
[1062F; 1063C] 1.3 The attempt made by the appellant and his legal advisors earlier to substantiate the false plea of alibi by production of forged attendance register, and the tendering of evidence of DW 1, against whom the High Court has passed strictures for suborning himself in an attempt to thwart the course of justice, makes it evident that the appellant and his legal advisors would go to any extent in creating evi dence to support the false plea now taken.
[1063CD] The |acts brought out in the prosecution case clearly show that the incident which led to the triple murder was calculated, preplanned and ruthlessly executed, and that the appellant not only led the assault but also played a promi nent role in it.
It is incredible that he was a child below the age of 16 years at that time.
[1056H; 1057A] 2.
There is nothing on record to substantiate the allegation that 1055 the appellant was not heard by the High Court on the ques tion of his age.
If there was any truth in that assertion it was expected that the learned Judges would have made a mention of the fact that a contention was advanced on his behalf that he was a child within the meaning of section 2(4) of the Act, for whatever it was worth.
[1060DE] 3.1 The appellant and the other accused have gone fur ther and made wholly wild and unfounded allegations against the Judges of the High Court casting serious aspersions on them.
They have brought into existence certain correspond ence in an attempt to create prejudice against them.
The propriety of placing copies of the correspondence on record cannot be seen unless it was with a view to create doubts and suspicion about the integrity of the Judges.
It shows that the appellant and his legal advisors can go to any extent to secure a reversal of the judgment of the High Court.
[1060FG] 3.2 The practice of making baseless imputations on the part of unsuccessful litigants against Judges is most un healthy and this Court takes serious notice of this evil.
The members of the bar equally share this responsibility and should ensure that such uncalled for aspersions are not cast on the Judges.
The counsel who drafted the special leave petition should have shown greater circumspection.
[1063E; 1062D]
