The assessee, assessed as an individual, derived income from "other sources" in the shape of interest, dividends etc.
In the assessment year 1966 67 she claimed deduction of Rs.26,986 being interest paid on loans taken by her, under section 57(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The income Tax Officer found that out of the loans real investment was Rs.1,250 only.
He disallowed the claim of Rs.10,275 on proportionate basis.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner relying upon the ratio of the decision in Bai Bhuriben Lallubhai vs Commissioner of Income tax, Bombay North Cutch and Saurashtra, [1956 ITR (XXIX) 543] dismissed the appeal of the assessee.
Before the Tribunal the assessee contended: (1) that expenditure under the head of payment of income tax and wealth tax and annuity deposits should have been taken as revenue expenditure and the claim of interest in respect of such loans should have been admitted and (2) that the asses see instead of liquidating the investments which was return oriented, found it commercially expedient and viable to raise a loan instead of disturbing the investments and, therefore, the claim became admissible.
The Tribunal reject ing the contentions and dismissing the appeal observed that the loans were taken for meeting her personal obligation like payment of taxes and deposit of annuity and these had nothing to do with the business.
On reference, the High Court held that at the relevant time it was obligatory for the assessee to make the annuity deposit and the earning of interest through such deposit was merely incidental and that the portion of the loan was not intended to meet expenditure wholly and exclusively for the purpose of earning the income and.
therefore.
did not come under section 57(iii) of the Act.
1168 Dismissing the appeal of the assessee the Court.
HELD: 1.
Unless the claim comes within the purview of section 57(iii) of the Income Tax Act.
1961 it would not be admissi ble as a deduction.
[1170C] 2.
The test to apply is that the expenditure should be wholly and exclusively for the purpose of earning the in come.
[1172C] Eastern Investments Ltd. vs Commissioner of income tax, West Bengal, and Commissioner of Income tax, West Bengal vs RaJendra Prasad Moody. , followed.
In order that the claim for deduction could be sus tained, it was for the assessee to satisfy the Income Tax Officer that the loan, interest in respect of which is claimed as deduction, was laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for earning the income from out of which the deduction was claimed.
[1170F G] 4.
The Income Tax Authorities as also the High Court have clearly recorded a factual finding of facts that the expenditure in this case was to meet the personal liability of payment of income tax and wealth tax and annuity and that no part of the expenditure came within the purview ors.
57(ii) of the Act.
[1171H 1172A, D] 5.
This Court is inclined to agree with the High Court that so far as meeting the liability of income tax and wealth tax is concerned, it was indeed a personal one and payment thereof cannot at all be said to be expenditure laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of earning income.
So far as annuity deposit is concerned.
the Tribunal and the High Court have come to the right conclu sion that the dominant purpose was not to earn income by way of interest but to meet the statutory liability of making the deposit.
[1172B C] 6.
Unless the loan is incurred for meeting the liability connected with the sources itself it would ordinarily be difficult to entertain the claims for deduction.
[1172F]
