Sub section (3) of section 24 of the Income tax Act, 1922, required that when it was established that a loss of profits or gains had taken place.
Which the assessee was entitled to have set off, the Income tax Officer should notify to the assessee by an order in writing the amount of loss as com puted by him.
This benefit was continued in section 74 of the Income tax Act, 1961 which provides for carrying forward to the following years the net loss computed under the head 'capital gains ' in respect of an assessment year.
Section 80, however, interdicts that no loss which has not been so determined shall be carried forward and set off.
The assessee, a private limited company disclosed in its return for the assessment year 1965 66 capital gains of Rs.3 lacs and odd but claimed set off of capital loss of a like amount sustained during the assessment year 1957 58 over sale of shares.
This claim was disallowed by the Income tax Officer on the footing that when in the assessment year 1957 58 the loss was claimed it was excluded in the computa tion of income as capital loss.
A challenge to that order by the assessee was rejected by the Appellate Assistant Commis sioner who took the view that the loss was essentially notional in nature, and that the claim for set off to be admissible, had to be notified by the income tax Officer under section 24(3) of the 1922 Act to the assessee by an order in writing.
That having not been done the claim was not admissible.
Allowing the assessee 's claim, the Tribunal however, came to the conclusion that the assessee was entitled to the benefit of set off of loss provided it satisfied that capi tal loss was computed under the old Act, and as in the instant case the Income tax Officer had neither computed the loss nor passed an adverse order.
the Income tax Officer was not entitled to take advantage of his own failure and reject the assessee 's 1160 claim on the ground that loss had not been determined as required under section 24(3) of the Income tax Act, 1922.
The High Court agreed with the conclusion of the Tribu nal and found against the Revenue.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: Reading the provisions of section 74(1)(b) and section 80 of the Income tax Act, 1961 together makes it evident that the benefit conferred under section 24 of the 1922 Act has been continued to be given effect to under the 1961 Act.
and notwithstanding the words of section 80 of the latter Act, the claim of set off was admissible.
The conclusion reached by the High Court was.
therefore.
correct.
[1166CD] The Income tax Officer in the instant case, did compute the amount by specifying it in his assessment order.
When the assessee had made the claim and the Income tax Officer took Rote of it, his failure to comply strictly With the requirement of sub section
(3) of section 24 of the 1922 Act could not be permitted to be taken advantage of by the Revenue.
nor could it be used to the prejudice of the assessee.
[1164D]
