Under a deed of partnership dated 12.11.1958, a firm by the name M/s. Chhotalal Vedilal came into existence with Chhotalal Mohanlal (the assessee), Gunvantilal Chhotalal and Pravinchandra Vedilal, as partners, each having 7 annas, 4 annas and 5 annas share respectively in the firm.
This position continued until on 9.11.1961 when a change took place in the constitution of the firm.
Under the new deed, Pravinchandra Vedilal retired.
One Ramniklal Chhotalal became a partner with 4 annas share.
The share of the asses see, Chhotalal Mohanlal was reduced.
For the remaining 4 annas, two minor sons of the assessee were admitted to the benefits only of the firm.
In the assessment year 1963 64, the Gift Tax Officer concluded that the assessee had deprived himself of 19% share In the profits and had gifted away 19% share in the goodwill of the firm in favour of his two minor sons.
He valued the .goodwill and treated 19% thereof as taxable gift.
In the appeal before the Appellate Assistant Commission er the assessee took the stand that the gift was not of a share of the goodwill but in respect of the right to receive future profits.
He valued that right and since the amount was higher than what the Income Tax Officer has estimated, he enhanced the quantum.
In further appeal by the assessee the Tribunal held that in the circumstances of the case there could be no gift of goodwill and found that the right to receive future profits could not be subject matter of a gift as the transfer did not relate to existing property and the situation did not give rise to any gift which could be made liable to tax under the Act.
In the Reference the High Court upheld the view of the Tribunal.
1043 In the appeal to this Court on behalf of the Revenue, it was contended that the order of the Gift Tax Officer was right and the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Tribunal and the High Court had gone wrong in holding that the ar rangement under the deed of 9.11.1961 did not give rise to a taxable event under the Act.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Goodwill of a firm is an asset.
[1045E] Khushal Khemgar Shah & Ors.
vs Khorshed Banu Dadiba Boatwalla & Anr., ; , followed.
Once goodwill is taken to be property and with the admission of the two minors to the benefits of partnership in respect of a fixed share, the right to the money value of the goodwill stands transferred, the transaction does con stitute a gift under the Gift Tax Act, 1958.
[1046F] 3.
Since there has been no dispute about valuation of the goodwill as made by the Gift Tax Officer, with the conclusion that there has been a gift in respect of a part of the goodwill the transfer of the benefit of the partner ship constitutes a gift under the Act.
[1046F G] Commissioner of Gift Tax vs Nani Gopal Mondal, ; M.K. Kuppuraj vs Commissioner of Gift Tax, ; Sirehmal Nawalkha vs Commissioner of Income Tax, and Commissioner of Gift Tax, Bombay vs Premji Trikamji Jobanputra, , approved.
