Clause (c) of sub section
(3) of section 10 of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960, enables a landlord occupying only a part of a building, whether resi dential or non residential, to seek eviction of a tenant occupying the whole or any portion of the remaining part of the building, notwithstanding anything contained in cl.
(a), for bona fide requirement of additional accommodation.
The first proviso thereto enjoins the Rent Controller to reject the application of the landlord under that clause even where the need is found to be genuine, if the hardship caused to the tenant would outweigh the advantage to the landlord.
Sub clause (i) of cl.
(a) of section 10(3) enables eviction from residential building if the landlord or any member of his family is not occupying a residential building of his own in the city, while sub cl.
(iii) enable eviction from non residential building if the landlord or any member of his family is not occupying for purposes of a business a non residential building in the city.
A 'building ' is defined in section 2(2) to mean any building or hut or part of a building or hut, let or to be let separately for residential or non residential purposes.
The respondent legatees of the landlady, using the first floor of the building for residence sought eviction of the appellant tenant from the ground floor used by him as a godown for storing his business wares on the ground that they bona fide required additional accommodation 1174 for their residential needs.
The Rein Controller upheld their claim.
The Appellate Authority reversed the findings of the Rent Controller but in revision the High Court re stored the order of eviction passed by the Rent Controller.
In this Appeal by Special leave it was contended that since the ground floor constituted a building by itself within the meaning of section 2(2) of the Act.
the respondents could seek eviction of the appellant only under section 10(3)(a)(i) of the Act and not under section 10(3)(c), that even if the respondents were entitled to invoke section 10(3)(c) they could seek eviction only if they required the ground floor for non residential purposes and not for residential pur poses, that the factors of relative hardship between the parties weighed more in favour of the appellant than the respondents, and that the High Court was in error in inter fering with the findings of fact rendered by the Appellate Authority while exercising its revisional powers under section 25 of the Act.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.1 The ground floor of the building in occupation of the appellant did not constitute a distinct and separate unit.
The respondent landlords could.
therefore seek evic tion under section 10(3)(c) of the Act.
1.2 A 'building ' has been defined in section 2(2) of the Act as not only a building or hut but also part of a building or hut, let separately for residential or non residential purposes, which could only means that a part of a building that has been let out or that has to be let out separately can also be construed as a separate and independent building without reference to the other portion or portions of the building where it is not necessary to treat the entire building as one whole and inseparable unit.
A limitation has thereby been placed by the Legislature itself, by providing that the application of the definition is subject to the contextual position.
It follows therefrom that where the context warrants.
the entire building being construed as one integral unit.
It would be inappropriate to view the build ing as consisting of several disintegrated units and not as one integrated structure.
1.3 In enacting section 10(3)(c) the Legislature has intended that the entire building.
irrespective of one portion being occupied by the landlord and the other portion or portions being occupied by a tenant or tenants should be viewed as one whole and integrated unit and not as different entities.
1175 1.4 There is vast difference between the words "residen tial building" and "non residential building" used in section 10(3)(a)(i) and (iii) on the one hand and section 10(3)(c) on the other.
While section 10(3)(a)(i) and (iii) refer to a building only as residential or non residential, section 10(3)(c) refers to a landlord occupying a part of a building, whether resi dential or non residential.
Furthermore, section 10(3)(c) states that a landlord may apply to the Controller for an order of eviction being passed against the tenant occupying the whole or any portion of the remaining part of the building.
1.5 TO import the expansive definition of the word "building" in section 2(2) into section 10(3)(c) would result in rendering meaningless the words "part of a building" occu pied by the landlord and a tenant "occupying the whole or any portion of the remaining part of the building", leaving no scope for such a landlord to seek eviction.
1.6 The provisions of an Act should be interpreted in such a manner as pot to render any of its provisions otiose unless there are compelling reasons for the Court to resort to the extreme contingency.
If a portion of a building let out to a tenant is to be treated in all situations as a separate and independent building then section 10(3)(c) will be rendered otiose because the landlord can never then ask for additional accommodation since section 10(3)(a) does not provide for eviction of tenants on the ground of additional accommo dation for the landlord either for residential or non resi dential purposes.
Saraswathi Sriraman vs
P.C.R. Chetty 's Charities, ; Mohammed Jaffar vs Palaniappa Chettiar, [1964] 1 M .L.J. 112 and Cheilaromal vs Accommodation Controller, , approved.
2.1 It cannot be said that a landlord can seek addition al accommodation for residence only if the building is a residential one and likewise he can seek additional accommo dation for business purposes only if the building is a non residential one.
2.2 Section 10(3)(c) provides for both situations, viz. a landlord occupying a part of a building which is residen tial or non residential.
The words used in it arc "any tenant" and not "a tenant" who can be called upon to vacate the portion in his occupation.
Unless the legislature had intended that both classes of tenant i.e. residential or nonresidential, can be asked to vacate by the Rent Control ler for providing landlord the additional accommodation it would not have used the 1176 words "any" instead of using the letter "a" to denote a tenant.
Further, the words "as the case may be" in cl.
(0) only mean "whichever the case may be", i.e. either residen tial or non residential.
They do not restrict the landlord 's right to secure additional accommodation for residential purposes only in respect of a residential building and in the case of additional accommodation for business purposes only to a non residential building.
2.3 Section 10(3)(c) stands on a different footing from section 10(3)(a) (i) and section 10(3)(a)(iii).
The non obstante clause has been added to cl.
(c) to give it an overriding effect over both the restrictions placed by cls.
(a)(i) and (a)(iii), viz., landlord seeking eviction of a tenant should not be occupying a building of his own and secondly the nature of user of the leased property by the tenant must correspond to the nature of the requirement of the landlord.
Thus, the requirement of additional accommodation under cl.
(c) is not a case of a landlord not occupying a residential or non residential building of his own but a case of a landlord occupying a part of a residential or non residen tial building of his own and putting it to such user as deemed fit by him.
If it was the intention of the legisla ture that only a tenant occupying a residential portion of a building can be asked to vacate for providing additional residential accommodation to the landlord and corresponding ly a tenant occupying a portion of a building for non resi dential purposes alone being asked to vacate for the non residential requirements of the landlord.
it would have provided specific stipulation to that effect in cl.
In the instant case.
the requirement of additional accommodation pertains to the need of the landlord and the manner of user of the portion of the building already in his occupation and consequently the bona fides of his require ment will outweigh all the restrictions imposed by section 10(3)(a).
K. Parasuramaiah vs Lakshmamma, (AIR 1965: 220).
approved.
Thirupathi vs Kanta Rao.
[1981] Vol. 1 ILR Madras 128 overruled.
Once a landlord is able to satisfy the Controller that he is bona fide in need of additional accommodation for residential or nonresidential purposes and that the advan tage derived by him by an order of eviction will outweigh the hardship caused to the tenant.
then he is entitled to an order of eviction irrespective of any other consideration.
1177 4.
The Rent Controller has gone into the question of comparative hardship and rendered a finding in favour or the respondents.
The Appellate Authority 's findings have been vitiated because of its non advertance to the evidence and application of wrong tests in assessing the comparative hardship between the parties.
The High Court, was.
there fore, entitled to allow the revision.
