The first respondent and three others were alleged to have murdered the deceased.
The first respondent absconded after the occurrence and surrendered in court later.
The trial court rejected his bail application, and three succes sive bail applications were rejected by a Single Judge of the High Court.
The first respondent made another attempt in the High Court to get bail.
Having regard to the judicial discipline and prevailing practice in the High Court, anoth er Single Judge of the High Court, sitting as a Vacation Judge, ordered that the bail application be placed before the same learned Judge who had dealt with the case on earli er occasions.
However, a few days later, the Judge, after recalling his earlier order, granted bail on the ground that the trial could not be commenced or completed as directed by another Single Judge and because of the delay the accused was entitled to bail, and that the liberty of a citizen was involved.
The complainant has filed an appeal to this Court against the aforesaid order.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the order of the High Court granting bail, this Court, HELD: 1.
Normally this Court does not interfere with bail matters and the orders of the High Court relating to grant or rejection of bail are generally accepted to be final but some disturbing features have persuaded this Court to interfere in the instant case, with the order of the High Court.
[38E] 2.
No doubt liberty of a citizen must be zealously safe guarded by 35 court.
Nonetheless, when a person is accused of a serious offence like murder and his successive bail applications are rejected on merit, there being prima facie material, the prosecution is entitled to place correct facts before the Court.
Liberty is to be secured through process of law, which is administered keeping in mind the interests of the accused, the near and dear of the victim who lost his life and who reel helpless and believe that there is no justice in the world as also the collective interest of the communi ty so that parties do not lose faith in the institution and indulge in private retribution.
[40C E] 3.
The convention that subsequent bail application should be placed before the same Judge who may have passed earlier orders has its roots in principle.
It prevents abuse of process of court inasmuch as an impression is not created that a litigant is shunning or selecting a court depending on whether the court is to his liking or not, and is encour aged to file successive applications without any new factor having cropped up.
If successive bail applications on the same subject are permitted to be disposed of by different Judges there would be conflicting orders and a litigant would be pestering every Judge till he gets an order to his liking resulting in the credibility of the court and the confidence of the other side being put in issue and there would be wastage of court 's time.
Judicial discipline re quires that such a matter must be placed before the same Judge, if he is available for orders.
[39B D] 4.
One of the salutory principles in granting bail is that the Court should be satisfied that the accused being enlarged on bail will not be in a position to tamper with the evidence.
When allegations of tampering of evidence are made, it is the duty of the court to satisfy itself whether those allegations have basis and if the allegations are not found to be concocted it would not be a proper exercise of jurisdiction in enlarging the accused on bail.
[40FH] 5.
In the instant case, as three successive bail appli cations made on behalf of the first respondent had been rejected and finally disposed of by the same Judge, it would have been appropriate and desirable and also in keeping with the prevailing practice in the High Court that the subse quent bail application also should have been placed before the same Judge for disposal.
In tact, being conscious of the long standing convention and judicial discipline, the Judge himself passed an order directing the bail application to be placed before the other Judge.
The Judge should have re spected his own earlier order and ought not to 36 have recalled it without the confidence of the parties in the judicial process being rudely shaken.
[38E G; 39E] 6.
The Judge was unduly influenced by the concept of liberty, disregarding the facts of the case.
There were serious allegations, but the Judge did not either consider or test the same.
Objections were raised against hearing of the bail application on a number of grounds and time was sought for filing a detailed counter affidavit which was refused.
He granted bail simply on the ground that liberty was involved, which is the case in every criminal case, more particularly in a murder case where a citizen who, let alone losing liberty, has lost his very life, and that because of the delay in the trial the accused was entitled to bail.
The Judge committed serious error in recallint his earlier order and enlarging the first respondent on bail.
[40E; H; 39G H; 41A]
