By order dated 5.2.1986 this Court had directed that all salaries and wages due to the workers from May 1984 onwards shall be paid to them In three instalments.
They have not yet been paid.
It was brought to the notice of the Court that the State of Bihar has issued a Notification dated December 12, 1986 declaring the respondent industry a sick industry under section 3 of the Bihar Relief Undertakings (Special Provisions) Act, 1981 and that the said Industrial Undertaking shall be and remain a relief undertaking for one year.
On behalf of the industry it was contended that the liability of the industry for payment to the workers cannot be enforced.
However, counsel for the State conceded that the State Government wants that the wages to the workers should be paid.
According to the Report of the Official Liquidator finished products of the value of Rs.91,77,000 are lying in stocks and that from May, 1984 till 8th July, 1984 an amount of Rs.89,00,000 remains to be paid to the workers as their salaries and emoluments.
On behalf of the financial institution it was contended that the products lying in stocks are pledged with them and they have prior claim over the sale proceeds of these stocks and, therefore, the products could not be sold and the workers could not be paid off.
It was suggested that a scheme has been drawn up to revive the industry and finan cial problems may arise if the stock is sold out and wages paid to the workera out of sale proceeds.
Issuing directions the Court, 1217 HELD: 1.
Though the stock of products is pledged with Banks and they have a priority in law, but it is the result of the hard work of the workers that these stocks could be produced.
Therefore, it could not be said that the wages and emoluments for the period upto closure would not rank in priority.
Their subsistance and living is also of paramount importance and has to rank with highest priority.
For this reason the Government of India is keen to have a scheme for revival of this industry and the State Government also desires that the workers should be paid their salaries.
[1219A D] 2.
Looking to all the circumstances and taking a broad and humane view of the situation it would be just and proper that these goods which are lying in stock should be sold out and out of the sale proceeds the workers should be paid their dues upto the date of the closure (from May 1984 to 8th July, 1984).
The Official Liquidator will ensure that the disposal fetches the best rates.
This shall be completed within two months.
[1219F] 3.
The financial institutions have other sufficient securities and properties of the Company and if the stocks of finished products are sold to meet the basic requirements of the workers, their interests would not be in jeopardy.
[1219G H] 4.
The balance out of the sale proceeds, if any, will be utilised for meeting other pressing demands in the discre tion of the Official Liquidator subject to orders of the Court.
[1220B] 5.
The Official Liquidator may keep the amount of insur ance claim separately and allow the State Bank to adjust the same against its insurance.
[1219G] 6.
Issuance of the Notification by the Bihar State Government will not come in the way of sale of these assets and payment of the workers.
[1220C]
