Section 1(4) of the Maharashtra Private Security Guards (Regulation of Employment and Welfare) Act, 1981 makes the provisions of the Act applicable to security guards who were not direct and regular employees of the factory or the establishment.
A 'security guard ' is defined in section 2(10) as a person who is engaged or is to be engaged through any agency or an agent to do security work.
Section 3 empowers the State Government to make schemes to provide for the registration of employers and security guards and the terms and conditions of employment of registered security guards and their general welfare.
Section 22 provides for preserva tion or ' existing rights and privileges of security guards if they are more favourable to them than those under the Act.
Section 23 empowers the State Government to exempt security guards from the operation of the provisions of the Act or any scheme made thereunder.
The Security Guards Board was constituted under section 6 of the Act and the Private Security Guards (Regulation or ' Employment and Welfare) Scheme, 1981 was also made to give effect to the Act.
The respondents ' applications for exemption from the provisions of the Act having been rejected by the State Government they filed writ petitions before the High Court which were dismissed by a Single Judge.
20 On appeal, the Division Bench took the view that the applications had been rejected as a result of the policy decision not to grant exemption to any security agency and that this was wrong, that each application for exemption had to be considered on its own merits and so disposed of, and consequently directed the Government to consider the appli cations afresh.
In these appeals, it was contended for the appellant Security Guards Board that section 23 of the Act did not contem plate the grant of exemption in favour of a security agency, on which ground alone the applications were liable to be rejected, and that the applications were rejected after consideration on merits and not on the basis of any policy decision.
For the respondents it was argued that if section 23 was read in the light of section 22 it would follow that an agency could ask for exemption from the operation of the Act, that wherever the conditions of service were better than those proposed under the scheme the Government was under a duty to grant exemption, and that the Act did not contemplate the abolition of the agency system as such or termination of the contract of employment between the agency and the security guards, or for the transfer of the services of the security guards from the employment of the agency to that of the factory or establishment.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, HELD: 1.
The orders of the State Government refusing to grant exemption to the respondents from the operation or ' the provisions of the Maharashtra Private Security Guards (Regulation of Employment and Welfare) Act, 1981 do not call for any interference.
[32GH] 2.
Section 23 of the Act read with section 1(4) and the definition of 'security guard ' in section 2(10) makes it apparent that the exemption is in regard to security guards employed in any factory or establishment or in any class or classes of factories or establishments and not in respect of an agency or an agent.
All security guards employed in a facto ry may be exempted or security guards of a particular grade or doing a particular type of work in the factory may be exempted.
Again, all security guards employed in a class of factories, say textile mills, may be exempted.
All security guards in textile mills doing a particular type of work or drawing a particular scale of pay may be exempted.
The correlationship of the security guards or classes of securi ty guards who may be exempted from the operation of the Act is to the factory or establishment or class or classes of factories or establishments in which they work and not to the agency or agent through and by whom they are employed.
[30A D] 21 3.
The question is not one of locus standi at all but which or what class of security guards are to be exempted from the operation of the Act and the scheme.
The security guards or classes of security guards employed in a factory or establishment or in a class or classes of factories or establishments may apply to the Government to exempt them from the operation of the Act.
Similarly a factory or an establishment or a class or classes of factories or estab lishments may apply to the Government to exempt security guards employed in their factories or establishments from the operation of the Act.
Where security guards have been engaged or are to be engaged through an agency or agent in any factory or establishment or a class of factories or establishments, such an agency Or agent may also apply to the Government, not t9 exempt all security guards engaged or to be engaged through them but to exempt security guards engaged or to be engaged in a factory or establishment or a class of factories or establishments.
The exemption to be granted by the Government is not to be of any agency or agent but only of security guards employed in a factory or establishment or a class or classes of factories or estab lishments.
[30H 31 A; 30E; G; 31 AB] 4.
Even if section 23 is read in the light of section 22 it does not follow that any agency can ask for exemption from the operation of the Act of all security guards employed through them.
All that section 22 provides in effect is that the rights or privileges of any registered security guard shall not be altered to his detriment, which only means that if hitherto as an employee of the agency the terms and conditions of his service were more attractive on the whole than the terms and conditions of service offered by the Act and the scheme under the factory or establishment, the original terms and conditions of service will be preserved and become applica ble to their service under the factory or establishment.
[31B D] 5.
The Act and the scheme provide for termination of the contract of employment between the agency and the security guards, and by necessary implication the services of the security guards will stand transferred to the service of the factory or establishment on allotment to it by the Board.
It is in that fashion, among other things, that security of service is secured to the security guards.
[31 DE] 6.
In cases of this nature where exemptions are sought from the operation of the Act, it is not necessary for the Government to state its reasons.
Of course if there is a charge of mala fides or arbitrariness.
the Court may look into the matter to discover if there were any mala fides or if the refusal of the Government was arbitrary.
In the instant case.
there was none.
[32GH] 22 7.
The merits of each case were fully considered by the Government and the applications were rejected because it was their policy not to grant exemption if it was not in the interest of the security guards.
There was no predeter mined policy decision as such.
[32F] 8.
Every individual registered security guard who was previously working in a factory or establishment will be allotted to the same factory or establishment and if the total package of the terms and conditions of his service were better than the terms and conditions of service offered by the Board such person would be employed on the previous terms and conditions of service.
[33CD] 9.
Charging of 'capitation fee ' by a union before spon soring a security guard tot registration under the scheme is not permissible under the Act or the scheme.
