Section 7D of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 Act 1 of 1964 as amended by Act 35 of 1969 provides that a person occupying private forests or unsurveyed lands shall be deemed to be a tenant if he or his predecessor in interest was continuously in occupation of such land for not less than two years within a period of 12 years immediately precedings the 11th day of April, 1969.
In the instant case, the High Court while interpreting section 7D took the view that the benefit of section 7D would apply only to persons whose occupation of the private forests or unsurveyed lands had a lawful origin and not to persons in unlawful occupation based on trespass or forcible and unlaw ful entry.
In the appeal to this Court also the so1e question concerning the interpretation of section 7D was raised.
Dismissing the appeal and the special leave petitions, HELD: 1.
On a careful scrutiny of the provisions con tained In sections 7A to 7C and sections 8 and 9 of the Act it is clear that the intention of the legislature was to grant protection only to persons whose possession had a lawful origin in the sense that they had either bona fide believed the lands to be Government 's lands of which they could later seek assignment or had taken the lands on lease from persons whom they bona fide believed to be competent to grant such leases or had come into possession with the intention of attorning to the lawful owners or on the basis of arrange ments like varam etc.
which were only in the nature of licences and fell short of a leasehold right.
It was not within the contemplation of the legislature to confer the benefit of protection on persons 110 who had wilfully trespassed upon lands belonging to others and whose occupation was unlawful in its origin.
[114A C] 2.
The expression "in occupation" occurring in section 7D must be construed as meaning ' 'in lawful occupation".
[114C] 3.
In the present case, the finding of fact entered by the High Court is that the appellant had come into posses sion of the lands by trespass.
His plea before the Courts below was that he was himself the owner of the area having acquired title to it by adverse possession.
In such circum stances the High Court was fully justified in holding that the appellant was not entitled to the protection ors.
7D. [114D] [In view of the offer made by the respondents that they are prepared to pay to the appellant a sum of Rs.50,000 as ex gratia payment in full and final settlement of his claim, the Court directed that an amount of Rs.50,000 shall be deposited by the respondents in trial Court within three months with liberty to appellant to withdraw the same with out furnishing any security.
[114E]
