The Director of Enforcement initiated adjudication proceedings against the appellants a partnership firm, under Section 23(1), as amended, for failure to repatriate the full value in foreign exchange earned by it against export shipments of manganese ore made during 1952 1958, and thereby contravening Section 12(2), as well as Section 4(1) of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947.
The appellants did not contest the charge under Section 12(2) of the Act but questioned the liability of the firm on the ground that the amended Section 23(1) as well as Section 23C introduced by the Amendment Act came into force on September 20, 1957 and were, therefore, inapplicable to the export shipments from the year 1952 onwards till that date and if at all, the firm could only be held liable under the amended Section 23(1) read with Section 23C as from that date.
It was con tended that the word 'whoever ' in sub section (1) of Section 23 of the Act before its amendment denoted only a natural person, and association of persons, such as a firm, would not fall within the connotation of the word 'whoever '.
The Director of Enforcement held that the firm and its partners had deliberately underinvoiced shipments at the time of export and also diverted the undeclared proceeds to their accounts with foreign banks with an intention not to repa triate the sale proceeds in the prescribed manner within the prescribed period in respect of each shipment.
He also held that the two persons incharge of, and responsible for, the conduct of the business of the partnership firm during the relevant period did not produce any evidence to show that the contravention in question had taken place without their knowledge or that they had exercised due diligence to pre vent such contravention, and they were accordingly made liable for contravention of Section 12(2) of the Act for failure to repatriate the foreign exchange earned on the shipments and a penalty was imposed on the partnership firm.
138 The Foreign Exchange Regulation Appellate Board, howev er, disagreed with the Director of Enforcement, accepted the contention of the appellants and accordingly reduced the amount of penalty.
The High Court allowed the appeal of the Director of Enforcement and restored the original order of the Director of Enforcement.
In appeal to this Court it was submitted on behalf of the appellants that though Article 20(1) of the Constitution would not in terms apply, the principles embodied thereto would still govern and that the word 'whoever ' in sub sec tion (1) of Section 23 before its amendment by Act XXXIX of 1957 connoted only a natural person i.e. those who actually contravened the provisions of Section 12(1) of the Act by failure to repatriate full value of foreign exchange earned or exports and would not take in corporate liability and, therefore, association of persons, such as a firm, would not fall within the connotation of the word 'whoever ', that by the Amendment Act, a new Section 23(1) was substituted and Section 23C was introducted and the effect of these provi sions was that after September 20, 1987 adjudication pro ceedings or criminal proceedings could be taken in respect of a contravention mentioned in Section 23(1), while before the amendment only criminal proceedings before a court could be instituted to punish the offender.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that on a combined reading of Section 23(1) and 12(2), the only possi ble construction was that the word 'whoever ' includes a person and, therefore, initiation of adjudication proceed ings against the partnership firm was permissible and sub section (4) of Section 23 clearly contemplates prosecution of a company or other body corporate.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is clear from Sections 4(1), 12(2), 23(1), 23(4) and 23C that the word 'whoever ' in sub section (1) of Section 23 of the Act before its amendment was comprehensive enough to include an association of persons, such as a firm, and did not connote a natural person alone.
The word 'whoev er ' in the unamended Section 23(1) must be read in juxtapo sition with Section 12(2) and must mean any person who commits a contravention of that Section without exception.
That must be the legal connotation of the word 'whoever ' and it necessarily takes in corporate liability and includes any association of persons such as a partnership firm.
Such a construction is borne out by the plain language of sub section (4) of Section 23 inserted by the Act XXXIV of 139 1950 which provides that if the person committing an offence punishable under sub section (1) of Section 23 is a company or other body corporate, every director, manager, secretary or other officer thereof, unless he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent its commission, be deemed to be guilty of such offence.
The Act, therefore, clearly contem plated that adjudication proceedings under sub section (1) of Section 23 prior to its amendment could be initiated not only against the person who actually commits contravention but also casts vicarious liability on an association of persons such as a partnership firm or an artificial 'or a legal entity like a company.
[143FH; 144A C] The High Court was right in setting aside the order of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Appellate Board and restor ing that of the Director of Enforcement levying a penalty of Rs. 15,00,000 on the appellants for failure to repatriate foreign exchange in contravention of Section 12(2) of the Act.
The initiation of adjudication proceedings for failure to repatriate foreign exchange on shipments of manganese ore prior to September 20, 1957, the date when the Amendment Act came into force, was permissible.
[144D; F] Union of India vs Sukumar Pyne, ; , referred to.
