The predecessor in interest of the appellants, namely, Babulal, purchased a house in the year 1947 from the sons of one Mannulal.
The appellants and the respondents No. 6 to 8 are the sons of the other three brothers of Mannulal.
In the year 1976 the respondents Nos. 2 to 5 started reconstructing or renovating their house and in the course of digging the plinth a treasure consisting of gold and silver ornaments and currency notes was found.
They intimated the discovery of the treasure to the Collector, who issued a notification under section 5 of the Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878.
Respond ents Nos. 2 to 5, the appellants and the respondents Nos.
6 to 8 flied claims before the Collector.
The Collector held that the respondents Nos. 2 to 5, the finders of the treas ure, are the owners of the house from where the treasure was found and permitted them under section 8 to institute a suit to establish their right before February 22, 1979.
The respondents Nos. 2 to 5 instituted a suit for decla ration of their title to the treasure without making the other claimants before the Collector parties to the suit.
On an application filed under Order I, Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure by the appellants and respondents Nos.
6 to 8, the District Judge made them defendants in the suit.
Thereafter, they filed their written statement, denying the claim 01 ' the respondents Nos. 2 to 5 to the treasure and claimed the title thereof to them.
After the filing of the written statement, the appel lants flied a counter claim claiming title to the treasure.
The respondents Nos. 2 to 5 156 filed an application praying that the counter claim should be dismissed contending that it was barred by limitation as prescribed in section 14 of the Act and that it was also not maintainable under Order VIII, Rule 6A(1) of the Code 01 ' Civil Procedure.
The District Judge dismissed the counter claim holding that it was barred by section 14 of the Act.
In the Revision, the High Court upheld the order of the District Judge and further held that the counter claim having been filed after the filing of the written statement, was not maintainable under Order VIII, Rule 6A(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Allowing the Appeal to this Court, HELD: 1.
The order of the District Judge and the Judg ment of the High Court are set aside.
The District Judge is directed to proceed with the hearing of the suit and the counter claim in accordance with law.
[164F G] 2.
Under the scheme of the Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878 two kinds of suits can be filed at two stages, namely, one under section 8 and the other under section 14.
Section 8 provides that if the Collector has reason to believe that the treas ure was hidden by any person appearing before the Collector within one hundred years or by some other person under whom such person claims, the Collector shall adjourn the hearing for such period as he deems sufficient to allow the claimant to institute a suit to establish his right to the treasure.
[161G H; 162A] 3.
On the other hand, the question of filing a suit under section 14 will not arise unless the Collector makes a declaration under section 9 that the treasure is ownerless.
Such a declaration under section 9 will be made by the Collector if he sees no reason to believe that the treasure was not hidden within one hundred years or if no suit is instituted under section 8 within the period for which the hearing is adjourned by the Collector or if the plaintiff 's claim is rejected.
[162B] 4.
If no such contingencies as mentioned in section 9 take place, the Collector will have no jurisdiction to make a declaration that the treasure is ownerless.
If, however, any of such contingencies happens and the Collector makes a declaration under section 9 and two or more persons have appeared before the Collector each claiming the ownership of the place where such treasure was found or the finder of the treasure disputes the right of any person who has so ap peared and claimed, the Collector shall make an order under section 13 staying the proceedings with a view to the matter being enquired into by a Civil Court.
157 5.
The object of an enquiry as to the ownership of the place by the Civil Court is necessary inasmuch as section 10 of the Act provides that when a declaration has been made in respect of any treasure under section 9, such treasure shall either be delivered to the finder or be divided between him and the owner of the place in which it has been round.
[162F] 6.
A suit under section 14 relates to the establishment of the ownership of the place where the treasure was found for the purpose of division of the treasure between the finder and the owner of the place and that such a suit has to be filed within one month from the date of such order to obtain a decree declaring his right after the Collector had de clared the treasure to be ownerless under section 9 after making a claim before the Collector under section 13.
The words "such order" in section 14, refer to the order passed by the Collector under section 13.
[163B] 7.
Section 8 and section 13 and section 14 contemplate two differ ent situations.
While under section 8 the suit has to be filed within the period during which the hearing stands adjourned, the suit under section 14 has to be filed within one month of the order of the Collector under section 13 of the Act.
[163C D] 8.
To hold that suits under section 8 and section 13 are both governed by the limitation prescribed by section 14, will be to do violence to the provisions of the Act and the clear intention of the Legislature as indicated in the provisions.
[163E] 9.
In the instant case, as the respondents Nos. 2 to 5 have instituted the suit within the period during which the hearing before the Collector stood adjourned under section 8, the question of making a declaration by the Collector under section 9 of the Act does not arise and, consequently, there is no scope for filing any suit under section 14 of the Act.
Thus section 14 has no manner of application to a suit filed under section 8 of the Act.
[163G H; 164A] 10.
Rule 6A(1) of Order VIII of Code of Civil Procedure does not bar the filing of a counter claim by the defendant after he had filed the written statement.
What is laid down under Rule 6A(1) is that a counter claim can be filed, provided the cause of action had accrued to the defendant before the defendant had delivered his defence or before the time limited for delivering his defence has expired, whether such counter claim is in the nature of the claim for damages or not.
[164B C] 11.
The High Court has misread and misunderstood the provision of Rule 6A(1) in holding that as the appellants had filed the counter 158 claim after the filing of the written statement, the coun ter claim was not maintainable.
Under Article 113 of the , the period limitation of three years from the date the right to sue accrues, has been provided for any suit for which no period of limitation is provided elsewhere in the Schedule.
in the instant case, the counter claim has been filed by the appellants within three years and as the cause of action for the counter claim had arisen before the filing of the written statement, the counter claim was, therefore quite maintainable.
[164C E]
