The first Respondent who was discharging the functions of a Public Relations Officer in the Bihar Irrigation De partment when that post fell vacant in 1979, filed a writ petition claiming the post for himself when another person was appointed to that post for six months.
At the time of hearing, it was represented on behalf of the State that the other person had been appointed only on ad hoc basis for a period of six months and that after the expiry of that period, the matter would be referred to the Public Service Commission and that, at that stage, the case of the first Respondent would also be considered.
On this assurance, the petition was allowed to be withdrawn on 19th December, 1979.
However, the assurance was not respected and no reference was made to the Public Service Commission for making a regular appointment to the post, and, in April, 1983, yet another person was appointed to the post, again on ad hoc basis, and the same was challenged by 'another writ peti tion.
When that petition was heard, the Advocate General informed the High Court that the appointment was only ad hoc and gave the impression that a regular appointment would be made after the expiry of six months and, on that representa tion, the High Court disposed of the petition on May 4, 1983, directing inter alia, that the post should be filled up in a regular way, and that, in case the appointment was not made within a period of six months, the ad hoc appoint ment shall stand terminated.
The six months ' period was to expire on October 17, 1983, and according to the State Government, the Irrigation Department had written to the Public Service Commission on April 4, 1983 to give concur rence to the appointment of the ad hoc incumbent since it was an ex cadre post and he had been selected by a Selection Committee but that the concurrence was given only on.
April 2, 1985 and thereafter the matter was further examined with reference to the provisions of the Rules governing reserva tions and a decision was taken to send a requisition to the Public Service Commission for advertising the post.
Accord ingly, the post was advertised on May 12, 1985, setting out the eligibility criteria for selection to the post.
The 2 advertisement was challenged by yet another petition on the ground that the eligibility criteria had been so drafted as to suit only the ad hoc incumbent of the post.
The High Court, which summoned the relevant records from the Govern ment, felt, on their examination, that the direction given by it while disposing of the earlier writ petition on May 4, 1983 had been disregarded, and, issued notices to the appel lants calling upon them to show cause why they should not be punished for contempt for ignoring the order dated May 4, 1983.
The appellants expressed regret but contended that no contempt had been committed by them for the reason that expression of views in the notings made on the files, wheth er they were right or wrong, did not amount to contempt of Court, as no order had been passed appointing the ad hoc incumbent after October 17, 1983.
The officials of the Public Service Commission pleaded that the appointment of the ad hoc incumbent from October 18, 1983 should be treated as a fresh appointment, that they did not know about the order passed by the High Court, and that though concurrence was given, it had been withdrawn when the correct facts were made known to them.
The High Court, after going through the relevant files of the State Government and the Public Service Commission came to the conclusion that, although the State of Bihar as a juristic person was not liable for contempt for the reason that the Chief Minister had minuted that its order must be obeyed and the Chief Secretary had noted that the ad hoc incumbent should not be granted further ad hoc appointment, the appellants, inspire of the advice of the Advocate Gener al that taking any step to appoint the ad hoc incumbent would amount to contempt of Court, were busy trying to find out how to ignore its earlier order.
The High Court further observed that when its earlier direction was that regular appointment should be made through the Public Service Com mission, there was no occasion for seeking the concurrence of the latter for the appointment of the ad hoc incumbent.
According to the High Court, the whole file gave the impres sion that the appellant Officers were not reconciled to the orders passed by it earlier.
In these premises, the High Court convicted the appellants for contempt and the ad hoc incumbent of the post for abetting contempt sentencing each of them to a fine of Rs.50 in default to suffer simple imprisonment for two weeks.
Allowing the appeals and discharging the contempt orders passed by the High Court, HELD: Notings made by officers in the files cannot be made the basis of contempt action against each such officer who makes the notings.
[10D] 3 (i) A government functions by taking decisions on the strength of views and suggestions expressed by the various officers at different levels, ultimately getting finality at the hands of the Minister concerned.
Till then, conflicting opinions, views and suggestions would have emanated from various officers at the lower level.
There should not be any fetter on the fearless and independent expression of opin ions by officers on matters coming before them through the files.
The expression of opinion in internal files are for the use of the department and not for outside exposure or for publicity.
To find officers guilty for expressing their independent opinion, even against orders of courts in de serving cases, would cause impediments in the smooth func tioning of the Government.
[9H; 10A C] (ii) Officers of the Government are often confronted with orders of courts which are impossible of immediate compliance for various reasons.
They may find it difficult to meekly submit to such orders.
On such occasions, they will necessarily have to note in the files, the reasons why the orders cannot be complied with and also indicate that the Court would not have passed those orders if full facts were placed before them.
The notings differ from officer to officer.
It may well be that the notes made by a particular officer, technically speaking, is in disobedience of an order of the Court or may be in violation of such order, but a more experienced officer sitting above him can always correct him.
We must guard against being over sensitive, when we come across objectionable notings made by officers, some times out of inexperience, some times out of over zealousness and some times out of ignorance of the nuances of the question of law involved.
[11A B] (iii) The functioning of the Government in a State is governed by article 166 of the Constitution.
A study of this Article makes it clear that the notings in a file get culmi nated into an order affecting rights of parties only when it reaches the head of the department and is expressed in the name of the Governor and authenticated in the manner provid ed in article 166(2).
Viewed in this light, it cannot be said that what is contained in a notes file can ever be made the basis of an action either in contempt or in defamation.
The notings in a notes file do not have behind them the sanction of law as an effective order.
It is only an expression of a feeling by the concerned officer on the subject under re view.
To examine whether contempt is committed or not, what has to be looked into is the ultimate order.
The expression of opinion in notes file at different levels by concerned officers will not constitute Criminal Contempt; it would not constitute Civil Contempt either, for the reason that mere expression of a view or suggestion will not bring it within the vice of sub section
(c) ors.
2 of the , [12A E] 4 Bachhittar Singh vs State of Punjab, [1961] Supp.
3 S.C.R. 713, relied on.
(iv) The internal notes file of the Government, main tained according to the Rule of Business, enjoys quasi privilege and a disclosure in such communications cannot be made the basis of an action in contempt.
The general princi ple on which confidentiality of State documents should be protected is that if a person is involved in litigation, the Courts can order him to produce all the documents he has which relate to the issues in the case.
Even if they are confidential, the Court can direct them to be produced when the party in possession does not produce them, for the other side to see, or, at any rate, for the Court to see.
When the Court directs production of these documents there is an implied understanding that they will not be used for any other purpose.
The production of these documents in ordinary cases is imposed with a limitation that the side for whose purpose documents are summoned by the Court cannot use them for any purpose other than the one relating to the case involved.
[10E F] Home Office vs Harman, ; Harman vs Secretary of State for the Home Department, and S.P. Gupta ' vs Union of India, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 365, referred to.
(v) In this case, the Court, after looking into the notes file could have passed appropriate orders giving relief to the affected party and expressing its displeasure at the manner in which its order was implemented instead of initiating action on the notings made in the file.
That way the Court would have enhanced its prestige.
[18B C]
