Section 3 of the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 provides for vesting of an estate or tenure in the State by notifica tion.
Under section 9 from the date of such vesting all mines comprised in the estate or tenure, as were in operation at the commencement of the Act and were being worked directly by the intermediary were deemed to have been leased to the intermediary and he was entitled to retain possession there of.
Section 10 provides for vesting of subsisting leases of mines and minerals.
Section 25 provides for computation of compensation payable to the intermediary in respect of royalties on account of mines and minerals or directly working mines comprised in the estate or tenure.
Rule 25 E of the Bihar Land Reforms Rules, 1951 deals with the proce dure for determination of the amount of compensation or annuity.
The estate of the ex landlord comprising vast areas of mineral bearing lands was vested in the State by virtue of a notification under section 3 of the Act with effect from 4th November, 1951.
Some part of the said area was being worked by the lessees under the leases granted to them, who paid royalty to him.
The ex landlord died in 1969.
His successors in inter est, the appellants herein, filed writ petition before the High Court claiming compensation in respect of the coal bearing area having coal reserves vested in the State.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the ex intermediary was not entitled to the compensation as claimed, and dis missed the petition.
225 In this appeal by certificate, it was contended for the appellants that where there are minerals which were not tapped and not exploited by the ex intermediary, acquisition of the source of income for the intermediary would be acqui sition of property, that there was no provision for compen sation for this purpose in the Act, and the statute was, therefore, exproprietary in nature.
For the respondents, it was contended that there was no question of expropriation.
The property being not in existence, it was acquisition of a right which might be a source or ' income and property it ' tapped, but it was not an existing right.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD 1.
A statute must be read as a whole, fairly and reasonably.
It must be so read, if possible, and warranted by the context to give effect to the manifest intent of the framer.
So read, it cannot be said that the Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 provides for any compensation for the minerals not exploited.
That does not make the Act unconsti tutional.
[232D] 2.
The Rules and the sections must be harmoniously construed.
In the instant case, the legislature was acquir ing the estate of an ex intermediary.
For all the existing sources of his income and which were being exploited, com pensation has been provided for.
But for a right which might become a source of income which had not been exploited, no compensation has been provided.
Where a statute provides for the assumption and enforcement of an existing right or liability, it will not be construed as extending that li ability or creating a new one unless it does so in clear terms.
[231F] Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edition, Vol.
44, page 556, paragraph 904, referred to.
In the instant case there is no question of interpreting any law which will expose the Act to constitutional infirmi ty.
The right was not existing at the time of vesting, no question therefore, arises of depriving the ex intermediary of any right without compensation.
[231G] 3.
The basic principle of construction of every statute is to find out what is clearly stated and not to speculate upon latent imponderables.
The scheme of the Act does not support the appellant that it is exproprietary in nature.
Section 25(1)(a) and (b) deal with independent items and section 25(1)(c) is a combination of the two.
The other sub sections make it quite clear.
Compensation for the acquisition of a source which 226 when exploited might become property or income is not neces sary.
Ownership is a bundle of rights and for the existing bundle of rights compensation has been provided lot.
[231 H 232B] 4.
It is not for the court to provide for compensation where legislature has thought it fit not to do so.
The fact that compensation for existing rights has been provided for would not expose the statute to the vice of unconstitution ality as exproprietary.
Had there been such a possibility, other considerations might have been there.
The Act has been incorporated in Item 1 of the 9th Schedule of the Constitu tion.] [232C]
