The first respondent in the Appeal, a Superintending Engineer, was directly recruited by the U.P. Electricity Board as an Assistant Engineer on October 7, 1964.
He was given nine advance increments by reason of his varied expe rience in different governmental and other organisations, as against two advance increments given to others.
The peti tioners in the connected special leave petition also working as Superintending Engineers were Assistant Engineers in the Irrigation and Power Department and were placed on deputa tion with the Electricity Board by the State Government from the year 1960 onwards, and were confirmed as Assistant Engineers with effect from April 1, 1975.
There was no seniority list of Assistant Engineers in the Board nor were there any rules of seniority at the time when the first respondent joined service.
The Electricity Board, in exercise of the power con ferred under section 79(c) of the framed the U.P. Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Integration and Seniority) Regulations 1976.
Regulation 7(iv)(b) provided that ' 'while determining the seniority under clauses (ii) and (iii), Engineers directly recruited by the Board before the commencement of these regulations shall be given advantage of as many years of service as was the number of advance increments which were allowed to them at the time of recruitment by the Board.
" It also provided that "in doing so, no officer shall, however, be given advantage beyond the date of his initial regular appointment in the Government department or the other organisations.
" The Board amended the regulation to remove certain anomalies and to give effect to the intention of the Board in framing the rule of seniority.
The amended regulation substituted the words "U.P. 336 C.R. Government or Central Government Department in consideration of the service for which advance increments were so allowed." The Board, in accordance with the amended regulation, published the integrated seniority list in which the name of the first respondent figured at SI.
No. 12 below other officers working as Superintending Engineers including the petitioners in the connected special leave petition.
The first respondent made a representation to the U.P. Services Tribunal challenging the amended regulation which was allowed.
The Tribunal held that in terms of Regulation 7(iv)(b) of the Regulations, the first respondent having been granted seven advance increments was entitled to the benefit of as many years of service as the number of advance increments given to him at the time of his recruitment.
A batch of writ petitions seeking to quash the order of the Tribunal was filed in the High Court, which upheld the order of the Tribunal.
The Appeal by special leave by the Electricity Board, the connected Special Leave Petition of the aggrieved peti tioners and the Writ Petition challenged the construction and application of Regulation 7(iv)(b).
Dismissing the Appeal, the Special Leave Petition and the Writ Petition, the Court HELD: (1) Regulation 7(iv)(b) of the U.P. State Elec tricity Board of Service of Engineers (Integration and Seniority) Regulations, 1976 comprises of two parts.
The first part referred to the advantage of advance increments.
This advantage is based on special qualification and past experience and its consequent effect on seniority.
The Regulation before its amendment, mentioned 'Government departments or other organisations ' but after its amendment it was changed to 'in the U.P. or Central Government Depart ment. ' This change showed a deliberate attempt to deny its benefit to employees who came from service not comprised in either U.P. or Central Government Departments.
It would be neither just nor fair to give a limited meaning to the second part of the amended regulation and thereby to deny its benefit to those Engineers who came from other depart ments or corporations etc.
[343D F; 344B] 2.
The first part of the regulation does not speak of Engineers in the U.P. or Central Government Departments.
It speaks only of Engineers 337 directly recruited by the Board before the commencement of the regulation, which expression takes in, Engineers who came into the service of the Board from all sources.
It would not be proper to completely eliminate Engineers who came from other sources from the benefit of the regulation giving a restricted meaning to the expression 'in doing so '.
[343H; 344A] 3.
The Board 's advertisement in the instant case, invit ing applications provided higher start for those having special qualifications and experience irrespective of the source of the service held by them.
The second part of the regulation has, therefore, to be construed only as a proviso to the first part confining its scope to the employees of the U.P. as well as Central Government Departments and not to affect the generality as contemplated in the first part.
[344B] 4.
The Tribunal was right in holding, and the High Court in agreeing with it, that the second part was in the nature of proviso limited to persons who had been in service of either U.P. or other Central Government Departments and who had been given advance increments in consideration of such service.
[344G H] 5.
In the instant case, the first respondent was given nine increments taking into consideration his special quali fication and experience as against two increments common to all, and thus, giving him seven extra increments.
It is apparent that if these extra increments on the basis of his experience and special qualification did not carry with it seniority in the Board, he would not have either applied or accepted the job.
It cannot be assumed that he would have joined the Board willingly as a new entrant.
Under these circumstances.
the Tribunal was right in holding that the first respondent should be deemed to have been appointed with effect from October 7, 1957, giving him the advantage of extra increments under the second part of Regulation 7(iv)(b).
The seniority will have to be fixed in accordance with the number of increments excluding the original two increments given to the entrants in the Board both from U.P. and the Central Government Departments and from other sources.
[344E G; 345B]
