The mortgagee decree holder in execution of the final decree for mortgage, himself purchased the disputed property in the auction sale held on July 14, 1978.
On September 20, 1978 the judgment debtor, the predecessor in interest of the appellants, filed an application under Order XXI Rule 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure for setting aside the aforesaid sale.
Two other petitions of objections were filed, one of these being by another judgment debtor.
All these objections including the application under Order XXI Rule 90 of the Code of Civil Procedure were dismissed for default.
Conse quently, the sale was confirmed by the District Judge, the executing Court on January 2, 1979.
On July 17, 1980 more than one year after the sale was confirmed the decree holder auction purchaser filed an application under Order XXI Rule 95 of the Code of Civil Procedure for delivery of possession of the property auc tioned purchased by him.
This application was opposed by the judgment debtor on the ground that as the application was filed more than one year after the confirmation of sale it was barred by limitation under Article 134 of the .
The District Judge held that in view of Explanation II of Section 47 which was inserted in the Code of Civil Proce dure, by Section 20 of 356 the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1974, Article 136 prescribing a period of limitation of 12 years for the execution of the decree and not Article 134 of the Limita tion Act would be applicable, and held that the application was not barred by limitation and directed issuance of the warrant of possession in respect of the disputed property.
The judgment debtor filed a revision application under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure and a Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the revision application.
The High Court held that after the insertion of Explanation II to Section 47 of the Cede of Civil Procedure, the pur chaser of property at a sale in execution of a decree would be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree was passed, and all questions relating to the delivery of pos session of the property to such purchaser of immovable property would be questions relating to the execution of the decree and, as such, Article 136 and not Article 134 of the would apply.
It was also held after the amendment of the Code of Civil Procedure, Article 134 and Article 136 of the Limitation act became so inconsistent that both could not exist and that Article 134 stood im pliedly repealed by Section 47 of the Code of Civil Proce dure read with Article 136 of the .
A certificate for appeal to this Court under Article 134A of the Constitution, was granted by the Single Judge.
As the certificate on the basis of which the appeal was filed was not competent in view of clause III of Article 133, the appeal was treated as one under Article 136.
After conclusion of the hearing, the parties settled the dispute, the respondent decree holder agreeing to relinquish all his rights as the auction purchaser upon the appellants paying an agreed amount.
In spite of such settlement the Court felt the necessity of laying down the correct legal position.
Setting aside the judgment of the Single Judge of the High Court and that of the District Court, HELD: 1.
Article 134 of the would apply to an application under Order XXI Rule 95 of the Code of Civil Procedure by the auction purchaser for delivery of possession of the property sold in execution of a decree.
[363G] 357 2.
The Single Judge of the High Court has misunderstood the scope of the provision of section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure and that of the provisions of Articles 134 and 136 of the .
It may be that before the amendment of section 47, an auction purchaser could file a suit for recovery of the possession of the property within 12 years from the date of the sale, but in view of the amendment of Section 47 of the Code such a suit cannot be filed.
But that is no ground for holding that Article 136 of the would apply to an application for deliv ery of possession.
[363C D] 3.
It is for the Legislature to prescribe the period of Limitation, and the Court is only to see whether any partic ular application has been filed within that period.
[363F] 4.
When a property is sold in execution of a decree an application for setting aside the sale may be made under Rule 89, 90 or 91 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Proce dure by the persons and on the ground mentioned therein.
Such an application has also to be made within the pre scribed period of limitation of 60 days from the date of the sale under Article 127 of the .
Article 134 prescribes a limitation of one year for an application for delivery of possession by a purchaser of immovable property at a sale in execution of a decree.
The limitation of one year will be computed from the date the sale becomes absolute.
Such an application for delivery of possession can be filed only after the decree is put into execution within the period of limitation as prescribed by Article 136 of the .
[362B D] 5.
The period of limitation prescribed by Articles 136 and 134 are for two different purposes, the former being for the execution of a decree for possession in respect of which the decree is passed, and the latter for an application for delivery of possession of immovable property which is pur chased in the course of execution of a decree.
The two articles have nothing in common for their operation.
They do not stand in conflict with each other.
[362D E] 6.
The scope of Articles 134 and 136 and the subject matter being completely different, the question of implied repeal of Article 134, does not at all arise.
[363F] 7.
Merely because Explanation II to Section 47 CPC was inserted by the C.P.C. (Amendment) Act 1976, an application for delivery of possession under Order XXI Rule 95 C.P.C. cannot be equated with an application for the execution of a decree for possession so as to apply 12 358 years period of limitation as prescribed by Article 136 of the Limitation Act.[362F G] 8.
An application for delivery of possession of immova ble property purchased in execution cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be construed as an application for execution of a decree for possession of property so as to invoke the provision of Article 136 of the .
[362E] 9.
After a sale becomes absolute on the dismissal of the application of the judgment debtor 's claim for setting aside the sale, another application for setting aside the sale by the judgment debtor is not maintainable and the period of limitation as prescribed by Article 134 of the cannot be computed from the date of the dismissal of the second application for setting aside the sale.
[366H; 367A] 10.
In the instant case, on January 2, 1979 while dis missing the application of the judgment debtor under Order XXI Rule 90 the District Judge confirmed the sale.
The said order confirming the sale is binding not only on the judg ment debtor, who made the application under Order XX1 Rule 90, but also on all other parties to the execution proceed ings including the 4th judgment debtor.
Accordingly, there can be no doubt that the application filed by the 4th judg ment debtor praying for setting aside of the sale on grounds other than those mentioned in Rules 89 to 91 was not main tainable after the confirmation of the sale.
By the order dated July 21, 1979 the District Judge while dismissing the application of the judgment debtor observed that after the confirmation of the sale the Court was not authorised to entertain the application.
The application of the judgment debtor not being maintainable in law, the respondent decree holder was not entitled to compute the period of one year under Article 134 of the from the date of dismissal of the second application by the 4th judgment debtor.
[365C E; 368B] Chandra Mani Sahai & Ors.
vs Anarjan Bibi & Ors., AIR 1934 PC 134 Kamakshi Ammal & Anr.
vs Arukkani Ammal & Ors., AIR 1957 Madras 440 explained and distinguished.
