Before nationalisation of banking companies, the members of the staff of the Central Bank of India Ltd. were entitled to remain in the service of the bank till 60 years by virtue of the circular dated March 11, 1969.
Section 12(2) of the upon nationalisation provided that any employee of the Bank whose services were transferred to the correspond ing new bank could hold his office in that bank on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension, gratuity, etc.
until they were duly altered by the corre sponding new bank.
Clause (d) of section 19(2) of the Act specif ically conferred powers on the Board of Directors of the corresponding new bank to make regulations with regard to the conditions or limitations subject to which the corre sponding new bank might appoint officers or other employees and fix their remuneration and other terms and conditions of service.
Regulation 19 of the Central Bank of India (Officers ') Service Regulations, 1979, empowered the Board of Directors to determine the 166 age of retirement of officer employees of the Bank.
Rule 1 of the Rules for Age of Retirement contained in Annexure I to the Regulations requires an officer employee of the Bank recruited/promoted prior to the 19th July, 1969 (the date on which banking business was nationalised) to retire on com pletion of the 60 years of age; rule 2 requires an officer employee of the Bank recruited prior to 19th July, 1969 but promoted as an officer on or after 19th July, 1969 to retire on completion of 60 years of age, while rule 3 requires an officer employee of the Bank recruited on or alter 19th July, 1969 to retire on completion of 58 years of age.
The 1st petitioner was appointed on 13th August, 1972 as Chief Cashier in the Bank.
The letter of appointment con tained a clause which stated that he will be governed by the terms and conditions of service as applicable to the other officer staff of the Bank.
He was served with a notice dated 25th February, 1980 stating that he would be treated as finally retired from the Bank 's service after the close of business on February 29, 1980 on completion of 58 years of age.
In the writ petitions assailing the order of retirement it was contended for the petitioner, that there could not be two different ages of retirement in the case of officers of the Bank, and that since rule 3 of the Rules for Age of Retirement required the officers, who were recruited subse quent to July 19, 1969 to retire on completion of 58 years of age while others falling under rules 1 and 2 could con tinue till 60 years of age, rule 3 was liable to be struck down as being violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitu tion.
For the respondents, it was contended that the employees whose services were transferred to the Bank under sub section
(2) of section 12 of the Act were entitled to continue in service till 60 years of age by virtue of the conditions of service prevailing in the Central Bank of India Ltd. prior to the nationalisation of bank, that the officers and employees other than the award staff recruited after the nationalisa tion of the banks were required to retire on completion of 58 years of age, which was the age of superannuation gener ally prevailing in the service of all Public Section Corpo rations, Central Government and many of the State Govern ments, and that since the employees recruited prior to July 19, 1969 belonged to a different class altogether, it could not be said that there had been violation or ' articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Dismissing the writ petitions, the Court, 167 HELD: 1.
The classification of the employees into two categories, i.e. those falling under rules 1 and 2 of the Rules for Age of Retirement and those tailing under rule 3 thereof satisfies the test of a valid classification laid down under articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Rule 3 of the Rules for Age or Retirement, therefore, cannot be de clared as unconstitutional.
[179BC] 2.
The difference between the age of retirement of officer employees tailing under rules 1 and 2 of the Rules for Age of Retirement, and the age of retirement of the officer employees tailing under rule 3 thereof arose on account of the decision taken by the Government of India and the Bank not to alter to their prejudice the right which the employees of the Bank who had been recruited prior to July 19, 1969 had acquired under the circular issued by the Central Bank of India Ltd. on March 11, 1969 before nation alisation of the banks.
Since there was no alteration of the condition relating to the age of superannuations.
the said officers continued to enjoy the benefit of the condition of service relating to retirement.
But as regards employees who were recruited after July 19, 1969, the Bank fixed the age of superannuation at 58 years having regard to the prevail ing age of superannuation of the members belonging to the various services in public sector corporations, Central Government and many of the State Governments.
[176AD] 3.
At the time of nationalisation the corresponding new banks did not have their own employees to run the vast business taken over under the Act.
There was necessity to secure the services of the employees of the former banking companies without causing much dissatisfaction to them.
The terms and conditions of the service of the employees of the banks which were taken over under the Act had, therefore, been protected by the Act.
Insofar as the employees recruit ed after nationalisation were concerned the Government applied the rules generally applicable to all its employees in other spheres of Government service.
The Bank 's attitude cannot be said to be unreasonable particularly when the age of retirement of the new entrants is quite consistent with the conditions prevailing in almost all the sectors of public employment.
There cannot, therefore, be said to be any hostile discrimination against the petitioner.
[177G; 178F; B; 179AB;] Life Insurance Corporation of India & Anr.
vs S.S. Srivastava & Others, (Civil Appeal Nos.
1076 1077 of 1987), applied.
Nikhil Bhushan Chandra vs Union of India & Ors., (1983 LABI.C.
NOC 109 Cal.), approved.
168 4.
Though the order of appointment in the case of the first petitioner stated that he would be governed by the terms and conditions which were applicable to other officers of the Bank.
it did not prevent the Bank from making a regulation which was applicable exclusively to the officers recruited after July 19, 1969.
In the case of officers tailing under rules 1 and 2 of the Rules for Age of Retire ment no extra benefit was conferred on them.
They were only permitted to carry the benefit of the rules for Age of Retirement which was prevailing in the former banking compa ny, which was taken over by the Government on nationalisa tion.
[177EG]
