An officer in the Army filed a complaint before a Magis trate alleging that another officer has assaulted him, that the Commanding Officer to whom he had complained earlier had failed to take satisfactory action and thus both of them had committed offences under the Indian Penal Code.
The Magis trate examined the complainant under section 200 Cr.
P.C., took cognizance of the offences under section 190(A) and, on being satisfied of the existence of a prima facie case, issued summons under section 204(A) for the appearance of the accused.
Upon applications being made by the appellants urging that the case be handed over to the Military Authorities for disposal, the Magistrate made an order directing that the case be transferred to the Army Authorities for disposal in accordance with the provisions of the after trial by a Court Martial at any place within the jurisdic tion of his Court and that the progress of the case be reported to him at intervals of two months.
Upon the appel lants making further applications praying for review of the said order on the ground that under the and the Army Rules, it was not mandatory that all disciplinary cases against military personnel should culminate in a trial by Court Martial and submitting that the disciplinary action against the officers concerned would be initiated after an investigation of the alleged offences, the Magistrate, pointing out that the judicial process for ascertaining the prima facie existence of a case had already been completed, held that the trial of the accused by Court Martial was mandatory under section 475 Cr.
P.C. and, 457 therefore, it was not permissible for the Army Authorities to hold a preliminary investigation.
However, having regard to section 127 of the , the Magistrate directed that the progress of the case be intimated at intervals of four months.
in the Revision filed by the appellants, the High Court interfered with the order of the Magistrate insofar only that it deleted the direction requiring the Army Au thorities to inform the Magistrate of the progress of the case 'at intervals of four months and directed instead that the result of the Court Martial proceeding be communicated to the Magistrate, as soon as may be, in accordance with r. 7 of the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules, 1978.
Dismissing the appeal by Special Leave, HELD: The Army Authority is not entitled to ignore the proceeding taken by the Magistrate and to invoke the provi sions of r. 22 and related rules of the Army Rules.
The Magistrate having held that there is a case for trying the two accused officers and having directed their appearance, the Army Authority must proceed to hold a Court Martial for their trial or take other effectual proceedings against them as contemplated by the law.
[468G H] (i) It is open to a Magistrate under sections 200 203, Cr.
P.C. to inquire into a complaint of an offence alleged to have been committed by a military person, where it falls within his jurisdiction and to take proceedings for trial of the accused.
Likewise, a duly constituted Army Authority has power under the provisions of r. 22 onwards of the Army Rules to investigate into a charge against a military person accused of an offence triable under the , and after such hearing to decide whether his trial by a Court Martial should be ordered.
The provisions of the Army Rules run parallel to the provisions in the Cr.
P.C. Inasmuch as there is always a possibility of the same offence being triable either by a Criminal Court or by a Court Martial, section 475, Cr.
P.C. empowers the Central Government to make rules as to cases in which persons shall be tried by a Court to which the Code applies or by a Court Martial, and the section provides that whenever a person is brought before a Magis trate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which the Code applies or by a Court Martial, such Magistrate must have regard to such rules and must, in proper cases, deliver the person together with a statement of the offence of which he is accused, to the Commanding Officer of the unit to which he belongs for the purpose of being tried by a Court Martial.
The language used in section 475 is significant.
It refers to a person 458 who "is brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence." In other words, he must be a person respecting whom the Magistrate has taken the proceedings envisaged by sections 200 to 204 of the Cede.
He will be a person in respect of whom the Magistrate has found that there is a case for trial.
It is for that reason that section 475 goes on to say that when such person is delivered to the Commanding Officer of the unit to which he belongs, it will be "for the purpose of being tried by a Court Martial".
When he is so delivered, a statement of the offence of which he is accused will also be delivered to the Commanding Officer.
The relevance of deliv ering such statement can be easily understood, for it is to enable the Army Authority to appreciate the circumstances in which a Court Martial is required by the law.
[464C D; 465E H] (ii) It is clear from r. 7(1) of the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules, 1978 framed under section 475 of the Cr.
P.C. that when the accused is made over by the Magistrate under section 5 or 6 thereof to the competent military or other authority, it is for the purpose of trial by a Court Martial or other "effectual proceedings" to be taken or ordered to be taken against him inasmuch as the competent authority must, as soon as may be, inform the Magistrate, whether the accused has been tried by a Court Martial or other effectual proceedings have been taken or ordered to be taken against him and the communication of such information is mandatory.
When the Magistrate is in formed that the accused has not been tried or other effectu al proceedings have not been taken or ordered to be taken against him, he is obliged to report the circumstances to the State Government and the State Government, in consulta tion with the Central Government, may take appropriate steps to ensure that the accused person is dealt with in accord ance with law.
The policy of the law is clear.
Once the Criminal Court determines that there is a case for trial, and pursuant to the aforesaid rule, delivers the accused to the competent military or other authority, the law intends that the accused must either be tried by a Court Martial or some other effectual proceedings must be taken against him.
[467B E] (iii) The policy of our Constitutional Polity is that no person should be regarded as being above the law.
Military, navel or air force personnel are as much subject to the law as members of the civil population.
It is significant that r. 8 of the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules, 1978 empowers the Magistrate, on coming to know that a person subject to the military, naval or air force law or any other law relating to the Armed Forces has committed an offence and proceedings in respect of which ought to be instituted 459 before him and that the presence of such person cannot be procured except through military, navel or air force author ities, to require the Commanding Officer of such person either to deliver such person to a Magistrate for being proceeded against according to law or to stay the proceed ings against such person before the Court Martial if since instituted, and to make a reference to the Central Govern ment for determination as to the Court before which the proceedings should be instituted.
[467G H; 468A B] (iv) Section 127 of the provides that a person convicted or acquitted by a Court Martial, may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, be tried against by a Criminal Court for the same offence or on the same facts which is an exception to the rule contained in article 20 of the Constitution that no person shall be prose cuted and punished for the same offence more than once.
It is to enable the operation and application of section 127 of the Act that r. 7(1) of the Criminal Courts and Court Martial (Adjustment of Jurisdiction) Rules, 1978 requires the compe tent military or other authority to inform the Magistrate whether the accused has been tried by a Court Martial or other effectual proceedings have been taken against him.
[468B D] (v) Section 125 of the , which provides that when a Criminal Court and a Court Martial have each juris diction in respect of an offence, it will he in the discre tion of the Commanding Officer of the accused to decide before which Court the proceedings shall he instituted, is of no assistance in deciding whether it is open to the Army Authority to take proceedings for determining prima facie whether there is substance in the allegations made against the accused and decline to try him by a Court Martial or take other effectual proceedings against him even where a Magistrate has taken cognizance of the offence and finds that there is a case for trying the accused.
[468E F] (vi) There is nothing in the provisions of the Army Rules relating to Courts of Inquiry which can support the contention that notwithstanding the proceeding taken by the Magistrate it is open to the Army Authority to hold a Court of Inquiry and determine whether there is any case for trying the accused by a Court Martial.
If, it is not open to the Army Authority to have recourse to r. 22 of the Army Rules and investigate the charge directed against the ac cused officer in this case, for the same reason, it is not open to it to hold a Court of Inquiry and supersede the proceeding already taken by the Magistrate.
[469B D] 460
