Clause (e) of section 3 of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regula tion of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972 defined 'Pre scribed Authority ' to mean a Magistrate of the First Class having experience as such of not less than three years, authorised by the District Magistrate to exercise the powers of such authority.
When the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 came into effect in 1974 this definition was amended to mean an officer having not less than three years experience as Munsif or as Magistrate of the First Class or as Executive Magistrate authorised by the State Government to exercise the power of the Prescribed Authority.
The respondents having their residence in the second floor of the premises and their business establishments in a portion of the ground floor, sought recovery of possession under section 21 of the Act of the first floor and another por tion of the ground floor leased out by their father to the predecessor concern of the appellant for residential and nonresidential purposes respectively.
The Prescribed Author ity passed an order of release holding that the requirement of the leased portions by the respondents for their residen tial and non residential purposes was a bona fide one and that the comparative hardship factor was more in their favour than in favour of the appellant.
These findings were confirmed by the Appellate Authority.
497 In the writ petition filed before the High Court it was contended for the first time that the order of the Pre scribed Authority had been passed without jurisdiction and was, therefore, a nullity and its affirmation by the Appel late Authority could not validate it.
That contention was repelled by the High Court holding that even if the order of the Prescribed Authority was a defective one, it had got merged with the order of the Appellate Authority when it was confirmed and that the question of jurisdictional competence of the Prescribed Authority to pass the order of release involved adjudication upon disputed questions of fact and such an enquiry was beyond the scope of proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The Government had in exercise of its powers under sections 12 and 39(1), Cr. P.C., 1898 by a general notification dated 6.2.1968 conferred on all Tehsildars the powers of a First Class Magistrate, and on all Naib Tehsildars the powers of a Second Class Magistrate.
The Deputy Secretary, Government of U.P. had, however, in his note forwarding the General Noti fication to all the District Magistrates stated that the conferment of powers was confined to the maintenance of law and order.
By means of a notification dated 9.9.1974 the Government had designated the Additional City Magistrate II, Kanpur to be the Prescribed Authority under the Act for certain areas.
The Prescribed Authority, whose order is impugned had served as Tehsildar from 29.9.1962 to 6.11.1964 and again from November, 1965 to 15.2.1974, when he was promoted to Deputy Collector and posted as Additional City Magistrate, Kanpur, which post he held when he dealt with the applica tion in the instant case.
In the special leave petition it was contended that the powers of a First Class Magistrate under section 39(1) Cr.
P.C. 1898 cannot be deemed to have been conferred on the incum bent in the instant case in the absence of requisite proof under section 39(2) of the Code, that even if the general notifi cation dated 6.2.1968 empowered him to act as such, the conferment of power was only for ensuring the maintenance of law and order and not for trial of cases, and that section 3(e) requires that an Executive Magistrate to be lawfully empow ered to act as Prescribed Authority must have had not less than three years experience in the trial of cases as a First Class Magistrate.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Prescribed Authority 's experience as an Execu 498 tive Magistrate in the instant case satisfied the require ments of section 3(e) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent & Eviction) Act, 1972.
He was not, therefore, incompetent 10 act as such and pass the impugned order of release.
[507] 2.
The General Notification dated February 6, 1968, conferring the powers of a First Class Magistrate on all Tehsildars and the powers of a Second Class Magistrate on all Naib Tehsildars, which was published in the Official Gazette on February 17, 1968, had been communicated to all the Tehsildars of the District by the District Magistrate.
It must, therefore, be taken that the Government Notifica tion should have been fully acted upon and all Tehsildars, including the official whose order is impugned, must have been conferred powers of a First Class Magistrate in the year 1968 when he was serving as Tehsildar.
The requirement of section 39(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 had thus been complied with.[504B D,G; 505A] 3.
There is nothing in the Government Notification dated February 6, 1968 or in the Gazette publication dated Febru ary 17, 1968 to indicate that the powers of a First Class Magistrate and a Second Class Magistrate conferred on Teh sildars and Naib Tehsildars respectively was only for the limited purpose of ensuring the maintenance of law and order and not for exercise of those powers in the trial of crimi nal cases.
The note of the Deputy Secretary appears to be only an administrative instruction and not an order passed by the Government itself in exercise of its powers under sections 12 and 39 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1898.
The adminis trative instruction cannot whitle down the Government Noti fication conferring higher magisterial powers on Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars.
[504E F] 4.
All that section 3(e) of the Act says is that for being conferred the powers of a Prescribed Authority an Executive Magistrate should have had experience as such magistrate for a period of not less than three years.
Having regard to the terms of the stipulation, it would suffice if he had ac quired experience in the trial of criminal cases, albeit cases triable by a Second Class Magistrate, for more than three years, while at the same time having the right to exercise the powers of a First Class Magistrate.
This is because of the fact that as per Schedule III of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 a Magistrate Of the First Class is also entitled to exercise all the powers of a Magistrate of the Second Class.
A First Class Magistrate, therefore, can also gain experience by the trial of cases triable by a Second Class Magistrate.
What is of relevance is the gaining of experience in trial of criminal cases for a period of three 499 years and more and at the same time.having the powers of a First Class Magistrate and not necessarily the experience of trying cases triable by a First Class Magistrate alone.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the Prescribed Authority did not have requisite qualification in the instant case to be so appointed under el.
(e) of section 3 of the Act and hence the release order passed by him was a nullity.
[505C F] 5.
The appointment of Prescribed Authority in the in stant case was not made as persona designata.
He exercised the powers of a Prescribed Authority by reason of his post ing as Additional City Magistrate II, Kanpur, by virtue of an earlier Notification of the Government dated September 9, 1974 constituting the Additional City Magistrate II, Kanpur, as the Prescribed Authority, for certain specific areas in the city.
The said Notification of the Government was a General Notification and therefore whoever came to be posted as Additional City Magistrate II, automatically became a Prescribed Authority for the areas indicated in the Govern ment Notification.
Therefore, as long as the Government Notification dated September 9, 1974 was not challenged, the exercise of powers by him as a Prescribed Authority could not also be challenged.
The appellant was also not entitled to question the validity of the appointment of Prescribed Authority in a collateral proceedings.
[505G 506A; 507G] 6.
Even if the person appointed as Prescribed Authority was not fully qualified to act as such and pass the order of release, the validity and legality of the order of release passed by him cannot be impugned because of the de facto doctrine in as much as he did not hold the office as an usurper but only under colour of lawful authority.
[507E F] G. Rangarajan vs Andhra Pradesh, ; , referred to.
