The respondents brothers of the deceased instituted a petition before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal under the , claiming compensation for the death of their brother in an accident on the ground that they were the heirs and legal representatives of the de ceased.
The Tribunal awarded a compensation of Rs.32,000 to the claimants, and directed the Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation to pay the said amount to the claimants.
The appeal of the Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation under Section 110D of the Act was dismissed by the High Court.
In the special leave petition to this Court it was contended that the Tribunal and the High Court were in error in awarding compensation in favour of the brothers of the deceased, since in law they were not entitled to any compen sation under the provisions of the , and it was submitted that the provisions in Chapter VIII of the were merely procedural in character under which an alternative forum is created for deciding the question of compensation payable in respect of injuries and death caused on account of motor vehicles accidents, that they have not modified in any manner the substantive law governing the said question, and, therefore, the principles contained in the law of torts as modified by the , alone would govern the said question even now.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court 405 HELD: 1.
Where a pedestrian, without negligence on his part, is injured or killed by a motorist whether negligently or not, he or his legal representatives, as the case may be, should be entitled to recover damages if the principle of social justice should have any meaning at all.
[416C] 2.
T0 a limited extent relief has been granted under Section 92A to the legal representatives of the victims who had died on account of motor vehicle accidents.
Compensation of Rs. 15,000 can be claimed without proof of any negligence on the part of the owner of the vehicle or of any other person.
This part of the Act is clearly a departure from the usual common law principle that a claimant should establish negligence on the part of the owner or driver of the motor vehicle before claiming any compensation for the death or permanent disablement caused on account of a motor vehicle accident.
To that extent the substantive law stands modi fied.
[416H, 417A B] 3.
The brother of the person who dies in a motor vehicle accident is entitled to maintain a petition under Section 110A of the Act if he is a legal representative of the deceased.
[422C] 4.
Every legal representative who suffers on account of the death of a person due to a motor vehicle accident should have a remedy for realisation of compensation and that is provided by Sections 110A to 110F of the Act.
These provi sions are in consonance with the principles of law of torts that every injury must have remedy.
It is for the Motor Vehicles Accidents Tribunal to determine the compensation which appears to it to be just as provided in Section 110B of the Act and to specify the person or persons to whom compensation shall be paid.
The determination of the compen sation payable and its apportionment as required by Section 110B of the Act amongst the legal representatives for whose benefit an application may be filed under Section 110A of the Act have to be done in accordance with well known prin ciples of law.
[421F H, 422A] 5.1 Clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 110A of the Act provided that the application for compensation arising out of an accident may be made where death has resulted from the accident by all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased.
The proviso to sub section (1) of Section 110A provides that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such application for compen sation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined shall be impleaded as respondents to the application.
[419A B] 406 S.2 The expression 'legal representative ' has not been defined in the Act.
Section 2(11) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 defines 'legal representative ' as a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in a representa tive character, the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued.
[419C D] 5.3 A legal representative ordinarily means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person or a person on whom the estate devolves on the death of an indi vidual.
[419D] 5.4 A legal representative in a given case need not necessarily be a wife, husband, parent and child.
[420B] In an Indian family brothers, sisters and brothers ' children and some times foster children live together and they are dependent upon the bread winner of the family and if the bread winner is killed on account of a motor vehicle accident, there is no justification to deny them compensa tion relying upon the provisions of the , which has been substantially modified by the provi sions contained in the Act in relation to cases arising out of motor vehicle accidents.
[422A B] 5.6 The fact that the Parliament declined to take any action on the recommendation of the Law Commission to ' define the expression 'legal representative ' suggests that Parliament intended that the expression 'legal representa tives ' in Section 110A of the Act should be given a wider meaning and it should not be confined to the spouse, parent and children of the deceased.
[422G] 6.1 Although Chapter VIII of the Act provides for an alternative forum for realisation of compensation payable on account of motor vehicles accidents, these provisions are not merely procedural.
They substantially affect the rights of the parties.
As the right of action created by the was "new in its species, new in its quality, new in its principles, in every way new", the right given to the legal representatives under the Act to file an application for compensation for death due to motor vehicle accident is equally new and an enlarged one.
This new right cannot be hedged in by all the limitations of an action under the .
New situations and new dangers require new strategies and new remedies.
[415G, 420E F] 407 6.2 While the provides that a suit shall be for the benefit of the wife, husband, parent and child of the deceased, Section 110A(1) of the says that the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of the legal representatives of the deceased.
Section 110A(1) in a way is a substitute for the provisions of Section 1 A of the .
Similarly, Section 110B which authorises the Claims Tribunal to make an order determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be just, and specifying the person or persons to whom the compensation shall be paid takes the place of the third paragraph of Section I A of the , 18 '55 which provides that in every such action, the court may give such damages as it may think proportionate to the loss resulting from such death to the parties respectively, for whom and for whose benefit such application shall be brought.
[420A C] 6.3 Persons for whose benefit such application can be made and the manner in which the compensation awarded may be distributed amongst persons for whose benefit the applica tion is made are dealt with by Sections 110A and 110B and to that extent the provisions of the Act do supersede the provisions of the , insofar as motor vehicle accidents are concerned.
[420D] Megjibhai Khimji Vira and another vs Chaturbhai Taljab hai and others, AIR 1977 Gujarat 195 affirmed; Budha vs Union of India and Ors., [1981] M.P. 151 overruled; Minu B. Mehta and Another vs Balkrishna Ramchandra Nayan and Another, ; ; Rylands vs Fletcher, ; , 340; P.B. Kader and others vs Thatchamma and others, A.I.R. 1970 Kerala 241; Dewan Hari Chand and Others vs Municipal Corporation of Delhi and another, A.I.R. 1973 Delhi 67; Perumal vs Ellusamy Reddiar, ; Vanguard Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Hanu mantha Rao, Pradesh); Mohammed Habi bullah and another vs K. Seethammal, A.I.R. 1967 Mad. 123; Veena Kumari Kohli vs Punjab Roadways, and Smt.
Ishwar Devi Malik vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1969 Delhi 183, referred to.
