Section 2(1)(b) of the U.P. Urban Building Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction Act, 1972 lays down that "nothing in this Act shall apply to any building belonging to or Vested in a recognised institution, the whole of the income from which is utilised for the purpose of such institution.
" The manager of the appellant school, a recognised insti tution under the U.P. Basic Education Act, 1972, run and managed by a Registered Society issued notice of termination of tenancy to the four tenants of the super structures (Khaprails) purchased by it, under Section 106 of the Trans fer of Property Act and demanded surrender of possession.
As the tenants failed to surrender possession, he filed sepa rate suits against the four tenants for ejectment and pay ment of arrears of rent.
The respondent and the other ten ants contended that the school was not a recognised educa tional institution entitled to the benefit of Section 2(1)(b) of the U.P. Urban Building Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction Act, 1972 and that the notice of termina tion of tenancy was not valid.
The trial court rejected the contentions of the tenants and decreed the suits in favour of the school.
The revisional court confirmed the judgment and decree of the trial court and dismissed all the revision petitions.
511 In the writ petitions before the High Court, it was contended for the first time that the appellant school was not a juristic person and was not, therefore, entitled to file the suits through its manager.
It was submitted on behalf of the school that as a recognised institution under the U.P. Basic Education Act, 1972, it has juristic status, that the suit had been instituted by a person who was not only the manager of the school but also the secretary of the Registered Society and as such the suits were fully main tainable under law.
The appellant school, also filed a petition under Order 1 Rule 10 of Code of Civil Procedure for amending the plaint by correcting the name of the plain tiff into the name of the Society by its secretary in place of the name of the school by its manager.
The High Court held that in view of the specific provi sion in Clause (14) of the Constitution of the Registered Society to the effect that "all the legal proceedings by the Society and against the Society will be done either by the Manager or by the Secretary or by a person authorised by them", the appellant school was not a juristic person and only the Registered Society had the authority and competence to file the suits and that the suits filed by the appellant school were not maintainable.
It quashed the judgments and decrees passed by the courts below in three suits since the fourth suit had been compromised after the filing of the writ petition.
Insofar as the application under Order 1 Rule 10 was concerned the High Court held that the proper course for the appellant school was to move the trial court for getting the description of the appellant corrected and then pursue the proceedings for eviction.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, this Court, HELD: 1.
It is well settled that if the court is satis fied that a bona fide mistake has occurred in the filing of the suits in the name of the wrong person, then the court should set right matters in exercise of its powers under Order 1 Rule 10 and promote the cause of justice.
The Courts have also held that even if the suit had been instituted in the name of a person who had no competence to file the suit, the courts should set right matters by ordering the addition or substitution of the proper plaintiff for ensuring the due dispensation of justice.
[519D E] 2.1 By reason of recognition granted under U.P. Basic Education Act, 1972, the appellant school stands clothed with legal status, and is not a non entity in the eye of law.
[517G] 512 2.2 Any proceedings instituted to impugn the recognition of the school subsequent to the filing of the suits cannot affect the status of the school at the time the suits were filed.
[518A] 2.3 The appellant constitutes the landlord of the ten ants after the property was purchased in its name and rents from the tenants came to be collected.
Once a jural rela tionship between landlord and tenants was formed between the appellant and the tenants by operation of law, the appel lant 's right to initiate actions against the tenants for recovery of arrears of rent or recovery of possession of the leased property cannot be questioned or disputed.
[518C D] 2.4 Even if the status of the appellant is to be judged solely with reference to clause (14) of the Constitution of the Society, the person who filed the suits is not only the manager of the school but also the Secretary of the Society and even as per this clause he is competent to file suits on behalf of the Society.
The suits, even if not instituted in the name of Registered Society, are nevertheless competent actions because they have been filed by the Manager of the school who is competent to file suits on behalf of the Society also for recovering possession of the leased proper ty.
[518E H; 519A] 2.5 The appellant is, therefore, entitled to file the suits through its Manager to seek the eviction of the ten ants occupying the superstructure.
[517] 3.
The High Court was in error in sustaining the belated objection.
taken by the tenants regarding the competence of the appellant to file the suits and quashing the decrees for eviction passed against the tenants and remanding the suits to the trial court for fresh disposal, after first consider ing whether the suits had been instituted in the name of the wrong plaintiff due to a bona fide mistake and whether the mistake called for rectification by allowing the petition filed under Order 1 Rule 10 Code of Civil Procedure.
[517D E] 4.
Appeal allowed and the matter remitted to the High Court for disposal on merits after allowing the application filed under Order 1 Rule 10 Code of Civil Procedure by the appellant and ordering the Society through its Secretary to be also added as a plaintiff in the suits so as to make it clear that the person who has filed the suits is represent ing not only the appellant school but also the Registered Society.
[522A B] Hughes vs The Pump House Hotel Company Limited (No. 2), 513 [1902] 2 Kings Bench 485; Krishna Bai vs The Collector and Government Agent, Tanjore & Others, ILR 30 Madras 419; Sitla Bux Singh vs Mahabir Prasad, AIR 1936 Oudh 275; Dinanath Kumar vs Nishi Kanta Kumar and Others, A.I.R. 1952 Calcutta 102; Laxmi Kumar Srinivas Das vs Krishnaram Baldev Bank, Lashkar and another, A.I.R. 1954 M.B. 156; Karri Somalu vs Thimmalapalli Venkataswamy and others, ; Udit Narain Singh Malpaharia vs Additional Member Board of Revenue, Bihar and another; , and Murari Mohan Deb vs Secretary to Government of India, ; , referred to.
