The Haryana Board of School Education Act, 1969 by section 4(A) stipulates that the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members of the Board shall hold office during the pleasure of the State Government.
Section 9 of the Act provides that the State Government may remove a member whose continuance in office is not in the interest of the Board provided that before making such order, the reasons for removal shall be communicated and he shall be given an opportunity of tender ing an explanation in writing which shall be considered by 'the State Government.
In exercise of powers conferred by the sub section (4) of section 3 of the Act, the appellant was appointed as Chairman of the Haryana Board of School Education for a period of two years.
On his appointment as Chairman, he resigned his post as Professor Director of the Punjabi University Regional Centre, Bhatinda and took over as Chairman on 11th December, 1985.
The appointment letter stated that the terms and conditions of the appointment will be notified later on.
The appellant received a communication dated 24.3.86 from the Education Department that the Government may cur tail his tenure of office at any time.
Subsequently he was served with an order stating that his terms of office hod been curtailed with immediate effect and that he would cease to function as Chairman from 8.6.86.
Similarly, with the termination of the appellant 's services, the services of Chairmen of several other Boards and organisations were terminated.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order before the High Court in a writ petition which was dismissed in limine.
347 In appeal to this Court, he contended; (i) that the curtailment of the original period fixed, altered his posi tion to his detriment and that this was done mala fide; (ii) that the word 'term ' did not indicate the period of service and therefore, the government did not have the requisite authority to curtail his tenure; and (iii) that the proce dure laid down under section 9 of the Act was not followed and consequently his removal was void.
On the other hand, it was argued by counsel for the respondents: (i) that appellant 's tenure of service could be curtailed at any time by the government; (ii) that appellant 's tenure of service was curtailed alongwith the Chairmen of 11 other Boards and corporations pursuant to a general decision taken by the State Government dispensing with the service of non offi cials; (iii) that in the absence of any challenge to Rule 4A of the Act, the order of curtailment was valid in law since the appellant can be in service only during the pleasure of the government.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: 1.
Section 4A is an insurmountable hurdle in the way of the appellant.
If section 4A is valid, the order of remov al of the appellant has to be upheld.
The validity of the section has not been challenged by the appellant either before the High Court or before this Court.
Therefore the judgment of the High Court is upheld.
[353D] 2.
The expression 'terms of service" clearly includes tenure of service.
[353F] 3.
It is apparent on a comparison of the terms of section 4A and section 9 that while the former deals with the general power of the State Government to terminate the tenure of the Chairman, Vice Chairman and Members, the latter carves out a special field dealing with a category of cases where the State Government may remove a member whose continuance in office is not in the interest of the Board.
A case failing within section 9 is a case where removal must be for reasons personal to the member and flow from his conduct or such other factor which requires that, in the interest of justice and fair play, he should be given an opportunity to tender an explanation.
In the view that section 9 carves out a special field, section 4A is left with an abridged scope.
So abridged, it deals with cases other than those where the continuance of a member calls for termination in the interest of the Board and requires that such member be given an opportunity of tendering an explanation before such removal.
Section 4A can be said to include cases where the tenure of a Chairman, Vice Chairman or a member is liable to termination on grounds of general policy.
[352E H; 353A] 348 In the instant case, the termination of the appellant 's tenure was neither prompted by mala fides nor was punitive in nature.
The appellant 's services were dispensed with because of a general decision taken by the government dis pensing with the services of non officials and non MLAs as Chairman of the Boards and Corporations excluding the Kuruk shetra Development Board and the Tourism Corporation, Har yana.
[353B C] [The Court expressed the hope that the Punjabi Universi ty will be generous enough to accommodate the appellant properly.]
