The first respondent sold his lorry to the second re spondent but did not report the transfer to the Transport Authority and the latter issued a demand notice for payment of tax due under section 3(1) of the Mysore Motor Vehicles Taxa tion Act, 1957.
The first respondent refuted his liability on the ground of transfer of the vehicle, and the second respondent, on the plea that the vehicle was not in a fit condition and lying in a workshop during the relevant peri od.
A complaint was filed against them under section 3(1) read with section 12(1)(a) of the Act.
The Magistrate held that since the first respondent had sold the vehicle he was not liable to pay the tax and, likewise, the second respondent too was not liable since the vehicle did not have a fitness certifi cate and had been left in a workshop for repairs.
The Magis trate further held that the currency of the Registration Certificate during the relevant period did not alter the situation in any manner because it could not have currency so as to attract tax liability when the vehicle was not covered by a valid Certificate of Fitness.
The appeal filed against the acquittal of the respondents was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
Holding that the Trial Court was in error in acquitting the respondents and the High Court was not justified in dismissing in limine the appeal against acquittal, and, allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The expression 'suitable for use on roads ' occur ring in section 3(1) of the Act and its Explanation must have the same meaning as in Entry 57 of the State List and as con strued by this Court in Automobile Transport Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan; [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491.
The resultant position that emerges is that section 3(1) confers a right upon the State to levy 482 a tax on all motor vehicles which are suitably designed for use on roads at prescribed rates without reference to the road worthy condition of the vehicle or otherwise.
Section 4 enjoins every registered owner or person having possession or control of the motor vehicle to pay the tax in advance.
The Explanation to section 3(1) contains a deeming provision and its effect is that as long as the Certificate of Registra tion of a motor vehicle is current, it must be deemed to be a vehicle suitable for use on the roads.
The inevitable consequence of the Explanation would be that the owner or a person having control or possession of a motor vehicle is statutorily obliged to pay the tax in advance for the motor vehicle as long as the Certificate of Registration is cur rent irrespective of the condition of the vehicle for use on the roads and irrespective of whether the vehicle had a Certificate of Fitness with concurrent validity or not.
[490B C; E G] State vs Boodi Reddappa, [1975]1 Karnataka Law Journal 206, overruled.
V. Naraina Reddy vs Commissioner of Transport, , B.G. Bhagwan vs Regional Transport Officer, A.I.R. , discussed and distin guished.
Automobile Transport Ltd. vs State of Rajasthan, [1963] 1 SCR 491 referred to.
(ii) The scheme of the Act is such that the tax due on a motor vehicle has got to be paid in terms of section 3 at the prescribed rate, and in advance, and, the liability to pay tax continues as long as the Certificate of Registration is current; but, if it so happens that inspite of the Certifi cate of Registration being current, the vehicle had not actually been put to use for the whole of the period or a continuous part thereof, not being less than one calendar month, the person paying the tax should apply to the Pre scribed Authority under section 7 and obtain a refund of the tax for the appropriate period after satisfying the Authorities about the truth and genuineness of his claim.
Sections 3 and 4 are absolute in their terms and the liability to pay the tax in advance is not dependent upon the vehicle being covered by a Certificate of Fitness or not.
Even if the vehicle was not in a road worthy condition and could not be put to use on the roads without the necessary repairs being carried out, the owner or person having possession or con trol of a vehicle is enjoined to pay the tax on the vehicle and then seek a refund.
The principle underlying the Act is that every motor vehicle which has been issued a Certificate of Registration is to be deemed a potential user of the roads all through the time the Certificate of Registration is current and therefore liable to pay tax under section 3(1) read with section 4.
[491E H; 492C D] 483 (iii) It is not for the Transport Authorities to justify the demand for tax by .proving that the vehicle is in a fit condition and can be put to use on the roads or that it had plied on the roads without payment of tax.
It would be absolutely impossible for the State to keep monitoring all the vehicles and prove that each and every registered vehi cle is in a fit condition and would be making use of the roads and is therefore liable to pay the tax.
For that reason, the State has made the payment of tax compulsory on every registered vehicle and that too in advance and has at the same time provided for the grant of refund of tax when ever the person paying the tax has not made use of the roads by plying the vehicle and substantiates his claim by proper proof.
Any view to the contrary would defeat the purpose and intent of the Act.
[492E G] (iv) Section 3(1) of the Act and the Explanation thereto have to be construed on their own force and not with refer ence to sections 22 or 38 of the .Motor Vehicles Act.
Section 22 of that Act deals with the necessity for registration of motor vehicles and mandates that no person shall drive a motor vehicle and no owner shall cause or permit his motor vehicle to be driven in any public place or in any other place for the purpose of carrying passengers or goods unless the vehicle is registered in accordance with Chapter 3 of that Act and the Certificate of Registration granted has not been suspended or cancelled.
Section 38 of that Act on the other hand deals with the Certificate of Fitness for trans port vehicles.
This Section lays down that a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly registered for the purposes of section 22, unless it carries a Certificate of Fit ness in the prescribed form issued by the Prescribed Author ity.
The very terms of section 38 limit the deeming effect caused by the absence of a Certificate of Fitness to the rights conferred under section 22 pursuant to the registration of a vehicle.
There is therefore, no scope for extending the deeming provision in section 38 of the Motor Vehicles Act to s.3(1) and the Explanation thereto of the Act.
In fact the Explanation to s.3(1) clearly sets out that the deeming effect conferred by it will have overriding force on section 3(1).
This is made clear by the words "for the purposes of this Act" contained in the Explanation.
The reason is that section 38 of the Motor Vehicles Act has been provided so as to effectively prevent an owner or person having possession or control of a motor vehicle from carrying passengers or goods in it inspire of the vehicle not being in a fit condition and not carrying a Certificate of Fitness and thereby endan gering the safety of the public.
The deeming effect on the Certificate of Registration of a vehicle when it is not carrying a Certificate of Fitness is to ensure that the safety of the public is not jeopardised , by any one driv ing or using a vehicle without a Certificate of Fitness for 484 carrying passengers or goods and trying to take umbrage for the violation by contending that he was entitled to make such use because of the Certificate of Registration issued to the vehicle being current.
It has also to be noticed that section 38 of the Motor Vehicles Act contains a safety measure while section 3 of the Act pertains to a compensatory measure.
The former cannot therefore limit the operation of the latter.
[493C43; 494A C]
