The respondent Society terminated the service of the appellant, who stayed away from work for a few days, without holding a domestic enquiry.
Upon an industrial dispute having been raised, the question whether the termination of service was justified was referred to the Labour Court under section 10(1)(c) of the .
The appel lant submitted that he had stayed away from work due to his illness and gave evidence in support thereof.
The respondent pleaded that the appellant had gone 'on a strike ' without obtaining any leave and had also committed embezzlement of money belonging to it.
The Labour Court came to the conclu sion that the appellant had absented himself from duties without obtaining leave and, accepting photostat copies of certain documents furnished by the respondent found that the appellant had committed the alleged embezzlement.
It accord ingly held that the termination of service was justified.
The appellant 's writ petition against the award of the Labour Court was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal by special leave and ordering rein statement of the appellant in service with full back wages, HELD:The termination of the service of the appellant without holding any domestic enquiry is unjustified.
[530E F] The finding of the Labour Court that the appellant had embezzled amounts belonging to the respondent without going into the question whether the photostat copies of documents produced could be accepted as evidence in the absence of the originals, when no explanation was given by the respondent for not producing the originals, is without any basis and is liable to be set aside.
The finding of the Labour Court that the appellant had absented himself from duties without obtaining leave is not sustainable for the reason .that the case of the respondent was that 528 the appellant had gone 'on a strike ' and, if that was so, no question of obtaining any leave would arise.
There was also no reason to reject the evidence given by the appellant in support of his assertion that he had not attended to his work during the relevant period due to his illness.
[530A C] (ii) If the appellant has worked in any other society, the amount of back wages payable shall be reduced by the salary drawn by the appellant from such society during the period subsequent to his termination of service.
[531A]
