On account of the continued illegal stoppage of work, 'glow down ' tactics, and strikes indulged in by the workmen despite the advice of their Union, the appellant company issued a notice dated August 23, 1953, that in consequence of the illegal strike the Management has no option but to declare a lock out of the entire works except the special shifts with effect from August 24, 953 The services of all other workers shall be deemed to be discharged with effect from August 24, 953.
" Subsequently, the company lifted the lock out.
and gave notice on September 17, 1953, to the effect that all employees on the Works rolls of the Company on August 23, 1953, and who wish to report for duty, must resume work on September 18, 1953 A third notice gave extension of time to the workmen to resume work.
The question was whether the notice dated August 23, 1953, terminated the services of the respondents by discharging them with effect from August 24, 1953, and the notice dated September 17, 1953, merely gave them an opportunity of re employment at the pleasure of the company on fulfilment of certain conditions.
Held, that, on a construction of the notices, the expression "shall be deemed to be discharged" had to be read in the context of the declaration of a lock out, and the intention of the company was that the employees whose employment bad been refused during the period of lock out were to be permitted to resume work without any conditions if they reported for duty by a particular date, and on fulfilment of a condition if they reported for duty after that date.
Where some of the workmen who were taken in custody by the police applied for leave when in custody but were refused leave by the company acting under Standing Order No. o, and the Labour Appellate Tribunal took the view that as the workmen were in custody the company was not justified in refusing leave, held, that whether in such circumstances leave should be granted or not must be left to the discretion of the employer, unless, it was proved, that it was a case of colourable or mala fide exercise of power under the Standing Order.
668 Burn and Co., Calcutta vs Their Employees, [1956] S.C.R. 781, followed.
The powers of an Industrial Tribunal to interfere in cases of dismissal of workmen by the company, are not unlimited and the Tribunal does not act as a court of appeal and substitute its own judgment for that of the management.
It will interfere (1) when there is want of good faith, (2) when there is victimisation or unfair labour practice, (3) when the management has been guilty of a basic error or violation of a principle of natural justice, or (4) when on the materials the finding is completely baseless or perverse.
