Clause 24 of the arbitration agreement between the parties provided for reference of all questions of dispute arising under the contract to the sole arbitration of the Director/Unit Heads of the respondent Authority, not con nected with the particular work.
All such officers having already expressed their opinion in respect of the disputes that had arisen, the appellant apprehended that he may not get justice or proper relief.
He, therefore, moved an appli cation under section 20 of the for appointment of an independent member of the bar as arbitrator instead of the named officer of the respondent Authority.
A Single Judge of the High Court held that the arbitra tor named had disqualified himself on the ground of bias and appointed an outside advocate as the sole arbitrator on April 19, 1983.
When arbitration proceedings commenced both the parties submitted to his jurisdiction and filed their respective claims and documents.
Upto November 1985 the said arbitrator held 74 sittings which were attended by the parties of both sides and their counsel.
Respondent No. 1 had moved three interlocutory applications.
Both the parties got extension of arbitration proceedings at least 4 times upto November 1985.
Respondent No. 1 challenged the validity of the order of appointment of arbitrator dated April 19, 1983 in the year 1985, when another Single Judge took the view that if the court was bound to enforce the particular agreement with which the parties came to the court, the parties were not entitled to have any fresh opportunity to appoint a new arbitrator as that would amount to a new agreement between the parties.
He further observed that no appointment can be made by the Court on the ground of disqualification of the arbitrator without having proper materials on record and without coming to a definite finding on this point.
Until then the Court did not have the jurisdiction to appoint 570 any new arbitrator and had to follow the correct machinery.
This order of the Single Judge dated December 8, 1986 set ting aside the earlier order dated April 19, 1983 was as sailed in the appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: Long participation and acquiescence in arbitration proceedings preclude a party from contending that the pro ceedings were without jurisdiction.
The principle is that a party shall not be allowed to blow hot and cold simultane ously.
[573F] Basically the principle of Waiver and estoppel is not only applicable where the award had been made but also where a party challenges the proceedings in which he participated.
In the instant case, there was no demur but something which can be called acquiescence on the part of the respondents or which precludes them from challenging the participation.
[574G H] Arbn.
Jupiter General Insce.
Co. Ltd. vs Corporation of Calcutta, at 472; Chowdhury Murtaza Hossein vs Mussumat Bibi Bechunnissa, 3 I.A. 209; N. Chel lappan vs Secretary, Kerala State Electricity Board & Anr., ; and Russel on Arbitration, 18th Edn.
p. 105, referred to.
