The deceased husband of the respondent leased out the entire portion of his house, except a big hall, to tenant in Chandigarh.
He was then putting up in a Government quarter.
After his death, his widow the respondent, leased out the hall to the appellant on April 1, 1981 for a period of 11 months on a monthly rent of Rs.650.
The Government quarter which had been allotted to her husband was transferred to the name of her eldest son.
The respondent filed two applications, more or less concurrently, in February 1982 against tenants of both the portions of the house seeking their eviction oh grounds that they had changed the user of the premises to non residential purposes, and that she bona fide required the premises for her own use and occupation.
The Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority held that the first tenant had changed the user of the premises and ordered his eviction.
Insofar as the appellant was concerned, both the authorities found against the respondent on both the grounds and dismissed the action for eviction.
The High Court dismissed the revision preferred by the first tenant, but allowed the one filed by the respondent and ordered the eviction of the second tenant too.
The first tenant abided by the order of eviction and surrendered possession to the respondent.
The second tenant, however, appealed by special leave to this 553 Court.
It was contended that when the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority have rendered concurrent findings of the fact, the High Court was not entitled to disregard those findings, and come to a different conclusion of its own, that the respondent could not seek recovery of possessing of the hail by means of an application under section 13(3)(a) (i)(a) of the East Punjab Rent Restriction Act, 1949 for residen tial use because even of the hail had been let out for residential and nonresidential purposes, the premises would constitute a non residential building as per the amended definition under the East Punjab Rent Restriction (Chandi garh Amendment) Act, 1982, that he was entitled to raise these questions though they had not been raised earlier because they were questions of law, that as per the second proviso to section 13(3)(a) of the Act the respondent was not entitled to apply once over again for eviction of a tenant on the ground of bona fide requirement after having obtained an earlier order on the same ground.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The findings of the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority are vitiated by inherent defects.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in taking the view that those findings have no binding force on the revisional court.
[565E] 1.2 The rule that when the courts of fact render concur rent findings of fact, the High Court would not be entitled to disregard those findings and come to a different conclu sion of its own, would apply where the findings have been rendered with reference to facts.
In the instant case, both the statutory authorities have based their findings on conjectures and surmises and lost sight of relevant pieces of evidence which have not been controverted.
When the evidence of the respondent and her son, which has not been challenged, was that the Government quarter consisted of only one bed room, one store, one kitchen and one small dining room and nothing more, it has been construed by the authorities as comprising of three bed rooms and held that as there was enough accommodation for the entire family she was not likely to vacate it.
When the respondent wanted the entire house to be vacated by the two tenants so that she and her family members could occupy the whole house, the authorities have proceeded on the basis that the respondent was seeking recovery of possession of one hail alone for her residential needs and held that the entire family could not manage to live in a single hail.
They have failed to take note that the respondent had con temporaneously initiated proceedings against the 554 other tenant also for recovery of possession of the remain ing portion of the house leased to him.
Those proceedings were also before the very same Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority and they themselves had ordered the eviction of the other tenant.
The respondent had clearly stated in her evidence that she required the property for her own use and for her children and that she had filed the ejectment petition against the other tenant also.
That evidence was not and indeed could not be challenged.
When the respondent had not demanded increase of rent, even as per the admission of the appellant, the authorities have proceeded on the basis that the respondent was not likely to forego the income derived by way of rent for the hall.
They have failed to give due consideration to the respondent 's statement that her daughter and sons were all fully grown up and she wanted to perform their marriages and as such she was very much in need of the entire house, including the hall, for her occupation.
All these findings have been rendered on either non existent or fictitious material.
They cannot, therefore, be construed as findings of fact and once they cease to be findings of fact, they stand denuded of their binding force on the appellate or revisional court.
[558H; 559A H] Hiralal Vallabhrara vs Sheth Kasturbhai Lalbhai and others, AIR 1967 S.C. 1653, referred to.
2.1 The finding rendered by the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority about the purpose for which the hall was let out were vitiated by several errors of fact and law.
The appellant, therefore, was not entitled to rely on those findings and dispute the respondent 's right to seek his eviction under section 13(3)(a)(i)(a) of the Act.
[563C] 2.2 The pleadings of the parties form the foundation of their case and it is not open to them to give up the case set out in the pleadings and propound a new and different case.
[560H] In the instant case, the tenant had averred in his written statement that the hall was taken by him for the purpose of his residence and for running his clinic but when he entered the witness box he propounded a different case that the hall had been taken on lease only for non residen tial purposes.
The statutory authorities failed to notice the perceptible manner in which the appellant had shifted his defence.
[560G] 2.3 Yet another factor which vitiates the findings of the statutory authorities is that both of them have over looked section 11 of the Act and the sustainability of any lease transaction entered in contravention of that 555 provision which interdicts conversion of residential build ings into nonresidential ones without the written consent of the Rent Controller.
[561C D] In the instant case the parties had not obtained the consent in writing of the Rent Controller for converting the hall in a residential building into a clinic.
Such being the case the appellant cannot get over the embargo placed by section 11 by pleading that the respondent was well aware of his running a clinic in the hall and that she had not raised objection at any time to the running of the clinic.
[561D E] Kamal Arora vs Amar Singh & Ors., [1985] SCC (Supplemen tary) 481, referred to.
Dr. Gopal Dass Verma vs Dr. S.K. Bhardwaj & Anr., [1962] 2 SCR page 678, distinguished.
Having taken a categoric stand during the enquiry that he had taken the hail on rent only for running his clinic and not for his residential needs as well, the appel lant cannot reprobate and contend that the lease of the hall was of a composite nature, to seek the benefit of the en larged definition of a 'non residential building ' given in the Amendment Act.
A pure question of law can be raised for the first time before the High Court or the Supreme Court even though the question had not been raised before the trial court or the appellate court.
But in the instant case, the conten tions advanced by the counsel on the nature of user of the hail pertain to mixed questions of fact and law.
Moreover these contentions run counter to the legislative direction contained in section 11 of the Act prohibiting conversion of a residential building into a non residential one without the written consent of the Rent Controller.
These contentions cannot, therefore be said to be pure questions of law.
Management of the State of Bank of Hyderabad vs Vasudev Anant Bhide and others; , , referred to.
The eviction proceedings were initiated by the re spondent against both the tenants concurrently and not after an interval of time.
As such, merely because the respondent succeeded in one of the petitions and failed in the other it cannot be said that the continuation of the proceedings in that case in appeal or revision would amount to applying once over again under the Act to seek eviction of a tenant on the ground of bona fide requirement.
