The appellants, who had let out the premises in question to the respondent Riled a suit for eviction inter alia on the ground that the tenant had erected unauthorised struc tures of a permanent nature in violation of the provisions of cl.
(p) of section 108 of the and section 13(1)(b) of the Bombay Rents.
Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1974 and was using the premises for unauthorised purposes.
The alleged permanent structures consisted of lofts and rooms which had been constructed by sinking pillars and stanchions into the flooring and the tenant admitted that these had been constructed after it had taken the premises from the landlord.
After discussing the evidence tendered in detail, including the deposition of the architect who had prepared the plan of the constructions in question and who had deposed that the constructions consist ed of permanent structures, the Judge of the Court of Small Causes held that the structures were of a permanent nature and ordered eviction of the tenant on the ground of perma nent construction.
The respondent 's appeal was dismissed by the Appellate Bench of the Court of Small Causes which, on a detailed reappraisal of the evidence on record, not only confirmed the decree for eviction on the ground of permanent construction but granted eviction on the ground of change of user as well.
The respondent went in appeal against the order of the appellate court.
The High Court, dealing with the matter under article 227 of the Constitution, reversed the concurrent findings of the courts below and allowed the respondent 's petition.
Allowing the appeal and restoring the order of the lower appellate court, 594 HELD: 1.
(a) Interference by the High Courts under article 227 of the Constitution must be within limits.
This question has been considered by this Court from time to time and principles laid down.
The power under article 227 is one of judicial superintendence and it cannot be exercised to upset the conclusions of facts, however erroneous these may be.
It is possible that another Court may be able to take a differ ent view of the matter by appreciating the evidence in a different manner, if it determinedly chooses to do so.
That will not be justice administered according to law to which courts are committed.
[605D E] (b) In exercise of jurisdiction under article 227 ' of the Constitution, the High Court can go into questions of facts or look into the evidence if justice so requires it.
But the High Court should decline to exercise that jurisdiction to look into the facts in the absence of clear cut reasons where the question depends upon the appreciation of evi dence.
The High Court should not interfere with a finding within the jurisdiction of the inferior tribunal or court except where the finding is perverse in law, in the sense that no reasonable person properly instructed in law could have come to such a finding, or there is misdirection in law, or view of fact has been taken in the teeth of prepon derance of evidence, or the finding is not based on any material evidence or it resulted in manifest injustice.
Except to the extent indicated above the High Court has no jurisdiction.
[606B D] Satyanarayan Laxminarayan Hegde & Ors.
vs Mallikarjun Bhavanappa Tirumale, [1960] 1 S.C.R. 890; India Pipe Fitting Co. vs Fakruddin M.A. Baker & Anr., ; ; Ganpat Ladha vs Shashikant Vishnu Shinde, [1978] 3 S.C.R. 198; Mrs. Labhkuwar Bhagwani Shah & Ors.
vs Janardan Mahadeo Kalan & Anr., and Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao vs Ashalata section Guram, ; ; re ferred to. 2.
No hard and fast rule can be laid down for determin ing the question whether a particular structure put up by the tenant is a permanent structure for the purpose of cl.
(p) of section 108 of the as it is dependent on the facts of each case.
One must look to the nature of the structure, the purpose for which it was in tended and take a whole perspective as to how it affects the enjoyment, the durability of the building, etc.
and other relevant factors and come to a conclusion.
[601D E; 602D E] Surya Properties Private Ltd. & Ors.
vs Bimalendu Nath Sarkar & Ors., and M/s Surya Proper ties Private Ltd. 595 vs Bimalendu Nath Sarkar, A.I.R. 1965 Calcutta 408, ap proved.
Khureshi Ibrahim Ahmed vs Ahmed Haji Khanmahomad, A.I.R. 1965 Gujarat 152 and Ramji Virji & Ors.
vs Kadarbhai Esufa li, A.I.R.1973 Gujarat 110, referred to.
In this case, on an analysis of the evidence the trial court as well as the appellate court had held that the structures were permanent.
All the relevant factors had been borne in mind by the learned trial Judge as well as the Appellate Bench of the Court of Small Causes.
The view taken by them was a possible view.
A different view might have been taken but that is no ground which would justify the High Court to interfere with the findings.
[600F]
