All the surplus lands in the compensation pool of the Central Government as well as the excess area in the occupa tion of allottees were transferred under a package deal to the Punjab Government with effect from April 1, 1961.
In October 1961 the Managing Officer, Rehabilitation Department detected that there was excess allotment of land to the appellant in lieu of land left by him in Pakistan.
By an order dated February 21, 1962 he allowed the petitioner to purchase the said excess area.
The petitioner deposited the required amount in the Treasury on March 6, 1962.
On reference, the Chief Settlement Commissioner held that the excess land which was found in October 1961 could not be sold by the Managing Officer under the as under the package deal this land had been transferred to the Punjab Government.
The petitioner then made an application under section 33 of the said Act to the Central Government which was dismissed.
Thereupon he moved a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution before the High Court, and contended that he is entitled to get the same land as he had already depos ited the price in accordance with the order of the Managing Officer, and that the said purchase could not be can 625 celled on the plea that the land had already been trans ferred to the Punjab Government by the Central Government under the package deal.
The petition was opposed by the respondent, who contended that the transfer of the land in dispute to the petitioner was void ab initio as under the package deal it vested in the State Government.
The High Court held that the Chief Settlement Commissioner (Lands), had jurisdiction to cancel the allotment even after confer ment of the proprietary right, that in view of the package deal the title to the land had already passed to the Punjab Government in 1961 and no authority under the Displaced Persons Act could make any order in regard to the sale of the land to the appellant at a concessional rate, and that only the Punjab Government could deal with the said land.
Dismissing the appeal by special leave, HELD: 1.
The Chief Settlement Commissioner had duly and properly made the order.
He was competent under section 24 of the to cancel the allotment of land in excess of the area the petitioner was entitled to get under the provisions of the Act.
[630F, 629E] Smt.
Balwant Kaur vs Chief Settlement Commissioner (Lands), Punjab, [1963] Punjab Law Reporter (Vol. 65) 1141 at 1187, approved.
The excess land allotted to the appellant was package deal property vested in the State of Punjab.
As such the same could not be sold nor could it be allowed to be sold to the petitioner appellant by the Managing Officer under the provisions of the Displaced Persons Act.
The order of the Managing Officer, was, therefore, wholly without jurisdic tion inasmuch as the said property was no longer in the compensation pool of the Central Government.
[629CD] Ram Chander vs State of Punjab, [1968] Current Law Journal (Punjab & Haryana) 668 approved.
It is for the Government of Punjab to consider and decide whether the legal representatives of the deceased appellant are entitled to purchase the said excess land under the provisions of the Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Act, 1976.
The Punjab Package Deal Properties (Disposal) Rules, 1976 prescribe procedure as to how the lands in excess of the entitlement, which have been can celled, may be transferred to the allottees or their succes sors in interest.
Rule 4 lays down that the allottee or his legal representatives will not be entitled to 626 have the excess land which was cancelled on the ground of fraud, concealment or mis representation of material facts.
It is also provided in clause 8 of the said rules that the price of the land that will be transferred shall be the current market price to be determined by the Tehsildar (Sales).
[630G, 63lAB]
