The appellant, a stage carriage operator, applied for renewal of a permit to ply his bus on a particular route but was granted only a temporary permit to do so.
Thereafter he applied for issue of a regular permit, but once again, action was initiated for issue of a temporary permit only.
Aggrieved by this approach of respondent No. 1, who was exercising the power of the Regional Transport authorities in the State, the appellant filed a writ petition seeking a direction that respondent No. 1 should consider and grant stage carriage permits to eligible persons under section 46 read with section 57(2) and grant renewal of such permits under section 58 of the .
The High Court dismissed the petition at the admission stage.
Respondent No. 1, in his counter affidavit, stated that the State Government had approved and published two Schemes under section 68(D) (2) of the Act for grant of stage carriage permits in favour of State Transport Undertakings and pri vate operators in two specified areas of the State which envisaged the complete take over of all the routes by the State Transport Undertakings in a phased manner within 3 years of the expiry of the Scheme.
Since the State Transport Undertakings had not taken over the operations from the private operators in accordance with the two Schemes and the State Government had neither announced new schemes to re place them, nor declared its transport policy, Respondent No. 1 had considered it inadvisable to grant regular permits on long term basis and was issuing temporary permits only.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, 662 HELD: The Transport Authorities which are statutory authorities have to discharge the duties imposed on them by the Act without waiting for any policy to be announced by the State Government.
In doing so, primary consideration should be given to the public interest and also to the fundamental right of the citizens to carry on motor trans port business in accordance with law.
This Court has ob served in several decisions that a Regional Transport Au thority would be failing in its duty if it grants repeatedly temporary permits to ply stage carriages on routes even though it is aware of the fact that there is a permanent need for granting regular permits in respect of the said routes.
[666E; G] The entire policy followed by the State Government and the 1st Respondent is contrary to the general scheme of the Act.
The schemes said to have been published under s.68 D do not specify any notified routes or any notified areas.
It is not possible also to find out from the said schemes whether private operators have been excluded from any particular area or route.
The schemes appear to be incomplete and, therefore, are ineffective.
In the above situation the Regional Transport authorities whose functions have been delegated under the Act to the State Transport Commissioner, Punjab, cannot decline to grant stage carriage permits on applications properly made to them by intending operators only because the State Government has not announced its transport policy.
The State Government cannot have any policy different from or independent of the provisions contained in Chapters IV and IV A of the Act.
[666B E] In the instant case, it is not denied that there is a permanent need to grant permits to ply stage carriages on the several routes in the State of Punjab.
The policy adopt ed by the 1st Respondent, namely, issuing of temporary permits from time to time, is highly irregular and is against the language and spirit of section 62 of the Act, which provides for the grant of temporary permits.
[666F]
