The appellant, Parshotam Lal Dhingra, was appointed to the Indian Railway Service as a Signaller (Telegraphist) in 1924 and was promoted to the post of Chief Controller in 1950, both the posts being in class III Service.
On July 2, 1951, he was appointed to officiate in class II Service as Asst.
Superintendent Railway Telegraphs.
On certain adverse remarks made against him in his Confidential Report for the year ending March 31, 1953, the General Manager on June 21. 1953, remarked as follows "I am disappointed to read these reports.
He should revert as a subordinate till he makes good the short coming noticed in this chance of his as an officer.
Portions underlined to be communicated to him.
" Thereupon the appellant made a representation, but on (I) ; 829 August 19, 1953, the General Manager issued a notice as follows: "Shri Bishambar Nath Chopra, Instructor Railway Training School, Saharnpur, is transferred to Headquarters office and appointed to officiate in Class II service as Assistant Signal and Tele Communication Engineer (Telegraphs) vice Shri Parshotam Lal Dhingra who on relief reverts to Class III T appointment.
" Against this order the appellant moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution.
The single judge who heard the matter held that the order was invalid as the provisions of article 311(2) of the Constitution had not admittedly been complied with.
The Division Bench on appeal, however, set aside the order of the Single judge and dismissed the appellant 's writ application.
The question for decision was whether the order of the General Manager amounted to a reduction in rank within the meaning of article 311(2) of the Constitution and the appellant was entitled to a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the order.
Held (per Das, C. J., Venkatarama Aiyar, section K. Das, A. K. Sarkar jj., Vivian Bose J., dissenting) that the order of reversion made against the petitioner did not amount to a reduction in rank within the meaning of article 311(2) Of the Constitution and he was not entitled to the protection of that Article.
Like article 31O of the Constitution, which makes no distinction between persons holding permanent or temporary posts in the matter of their tenure being dependent on the pleasure of the President or the Governor, article 311 which is in the nature of a proviso to article 310, also makes no distinction between permanent and temporary posts and extends its protection equally to all Government servants holding permanent or temporary posts or officiating in any of them.
Laxminarayan Chiranjilal Bhargava vs The Union of India, I.L.R. ; Engineer in Chief, Army Head Quarters vs C. A. Gupta Ram, A.I.R. (1957) Punj.
42 ; State of Punjab vs section Sukhbans Singh, A.I.R. (1957) Punj.
191 and Chironjilal vs Union of India, A.I.R. (1957) Raj. 81, overruled.
But the protection of article 31I can be available only where dismissal, removal or reduction in rank is sought to be inflicted by way of punishment and not otherwise.
These were the major punishments evolved by the Service Rules and Rules of the Railway Code, and well understood as such, against which protection was sought to be provided by the Rules.
These protections were in due course incorporated in section 240 of the Government of India Act, 1935, and reproduced in article 311 of the Constitution, thus qualifying the principle embodied in article 310(1).
Venkataraman vs The Union of India, ; , referred to.
jayanti Prasad vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, A.I.R. (1951) All.
793 ; Shrinvas Ganesh vs Union of India, A.I.R. (1956) Bom.
455; Jatindra Nath Biszwas vs R. Gupta, A.I.R. (1954) 830 Cal. 383 ; Rabindra Nath Das vs The General Manager, Eastern Railway, ; jatindra Nath Mukherjee vs The Government of the Union of India, ; Ahmad Sheikh vs Ghulam Hassan, A.I.R. (1957) J. & K. 11; Ganesh Balkrishna Deshmukh vs The State of Madhya Bharat, A.I.R. (1956) M.B. 172; D. P. Ragunath vs The State of Coorg, A.I.R. (1957) Mys. 8; M. V. Vichoray vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, A.I.R. (1952) Nag.
288; Kanta Charan Srivastava vs Post Master General, A.I.R. (1955) Pat.
381 and Sebastian vs State, A.I.R. (1955) Tr.
CO. 12, approved.
One test for determining whether the termination of service was by way of punishment or otherwise is to ascertain whether under the Service Rules, but for such termination, the servant has the right to hold the post.
In the three cases of (1) substantive appointment to a permanent post, (2) temporary appointment for a fixed term and (3) a temporary appointment which has ripened into a quasi permanent status under the Temporary Service Rules, where such a right exists, the servant will be entitled to the protection of article 311.
Conversely, where no such right can exist, as in the case of a probationary or officiating appointment to a permanent or temporary post or where the service has not ripened into a quasi permanent status, and under the general law the service can be terminated on reasonable notice, the termination of service cannot amount to a punishment and attract the Article.
Broadly speaking, article 311(2) can apply to those cases where the Government servant, if in private employment, could maintain an action for wrongful dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.
So where the Government has, by contract, express or implied, or under the Rules, the right to terminate the service at any time, such termination, in the manner provided in the contract or under the Rules, cannot attract the provisions of article 311.
That does not, however, mean that the termination of service of a servant who has no right to the post can never be a dismissal or removal by way of punishment.
Although in such a termination the actual motive of the Government must be wholly irrelevant, where it expressly chooses to penalise the servant for misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or the like by inflicting on him the punishment of dismissal, removal or reduction, the requirements of article 311 must be complied with.
Satish Chander Anand vs The Union of India, (1953) S.C.R. 655 Shyam Lal vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, (1955) 1 S.C.R. 26 and Shrinivas Ganesh vs Union of India, L.R. 58 Bom.
673, referred to.
A reduction in rank must, similarly, be a punishment if it carries penal consequences with it and the two tests to be applied are (1) whether the servant has a right to the post or the rank or (2) whether evil consequences such as forfeiture of pay or allowances, loss of seniority in his substantive rank, stoppage or postponement of future chances of promotion, follow as a result of the order.
Where either of these tests applies, the reduction in 831 rank mast be one within the meaning of article 311 (2) of the Constitution and attract its protection.
In the instant case, the appellant was holding an officiating post and had no right under the rules of the Railway Code to continue in it.
Under the general law such appointment was terminable at, any time on reasonable notice, and the reduction could not operate ' as a forfeiture of any right.
The order of the General Manager visited him with no evil consequences.
Consequently, he was not reduced in rank by way of punishment.
Per Bose J. While there can be no doubt that article 311 applies to all classes of Government Servants whether permanent, quasipermanent, officiating, temporary or on probation and that the words dismissal, removal and reduction in rank used therein have a special meaning, that Article, properly construed, cannot be confined to the penalties prescribed by the Service Rules.
The gist of it is neither the form of the action nor the procedure nor what operated in the mind of the competent authority.
The real test is whether evil consequences over and above those that would ensue from a "contractual termination" are likely to ensue.
If they are, article 311 is attracted even though such evil consequences are not prescribed as "penalties" under the Rules.
Though the conditions of service prescribed by the Rules can be varied unilaterally in some cases because of the "pleasure" of the President, they cannot be ignored as long as they stand, and if they are infringed while in force, article 311 will be attracted in an appropriate case.
Satish Chandya Anand vs Union of India, ; and Shyam Lal vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , referred to.
Nor can the protections afforded by article 311 be nullified by a splitting up of the order.
In the present case the General Manager 's remarks in the confidential file, which formed a part of the operative order and was its real foundation, clearly indicated the mischief, that the appellant was not to be promoted to a like post until in the opinion of some competent Officer he had made good his previous short comings.
That was an evil consequence, over and above that which would follow from a mere "contractual termination" of his engagement in the higher post, and so was sufficient to attract the protection of article 311.
