The Supreme Court having quashed in appeal the dismissal orders dated April 14, 1967 passed against the appellant policemen, they were served fresh orders of dismissal on June 5, 1971 In exercise of the power conferred under clause (c) of second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
The appellants challenged that these orders, without an inquiry as envisaged in Ariticle 311(2), were vitiated as the power under sub clause (c) of the second proviso to that Article had not been exercised upon personal satisfaction of the President.
On behalf of the respondent Union of India, it was contended that the President had personally consid ered all the facts and circumstances of each case and, after having satisfied himself, passed the order that in the interest of the security of the State it was not expedient to hold the inquiry.
The High Court held that the exercise of the power by the President under clause (c) to the proviso to Article 311(2) was fully covered by clause (1) of Article 361 and the President was not answerable to any court for the exer cise and performance of his powers and duties under this clause of the proviso to Article 311 and no court had juris diction to examine the facts and circumstances that led to the satisfaction of the President envisaged in clause (c) except probably on the ground of mala fide, and dismissed the Writ Petitions.
705 In the appeals before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the impugned order of dismissal in 1971 which was claimed to have been passed on the person al satisfaction of the President was vitiated in view of the rule laid down in the case of Shamsher Singh and Anr.
vs State of Punjab, that the appellants having been reinstated in service in terms of judgment of this Court, without leave of the Court, no second order of dismissal on the same material could have been passed, and that the High Court was wrong in holding that the sufficiency of satisfaction of the President was not justiciable.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: 1.1 The order of the President was not on the basis of his personal satisfaction as required by the Rule in Sardari Lal 's case but was upon the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers, as required in Shamsher Singh 's case.
The dismissal order was, therefore, not vitiated.
[711H, 712A] 1.2 This Court quashed the orders of dismissal earlier on account of non compliance of the requirement of law and when the police officers returned to service it was open to the employer to deal with them in accordance with law.
No leave of Court was necessary for making a fresh order in exercise of the disciplinary jurisdiction after removing the defects.
[712B] 1.3 There was a constitutional obligation to record in writing the reason for the satisfaction that one of the sub clauses was applicable and if such reason was not re corded in writing, the order dispensing with the inquiry and the order of penalty following thereupon would both be void and unconstitutional, and the communication of the reason to the aggrieved Government servant was not obligatory but perhaps advisable.
[712D] In the instant case, the record of the case indicates that the reason has been recorded though not communicated.
That would satisfy the requirements of law.
[712E] Union of India & Anr.
vs Tulsiram Patel & Ors., ; , followed.
1.4 No malafides could be attributed to the impugned order of dismissal.
The President 's order is dated 2nd of June and the typed orders of dismissal bear the date of the following day.
There is, there 706 fore, no scope to suggest that typed orders representing Government 's decision were available on the record by the time the matter was placed before the President.
[712F] [This Court has no sympathy for indiscipline.
In an orderly force like police, indiscipline is bound to give rise to serious problems of administration.
The Government had made it known that they intended to treat even these policemen liberally by giving them compassionate aliowances.
The situation would be met in a just way if lump sum amounts are paid to the dismissed policemen who are alive or to their legal representatives in the case of those who are dead, at the rate of Rs.60,000 to Sub Inspectors, Rs.50,000 to Head Constables and Rs.40,000 to Constables.] [713B, D F] Sardari Lal vs Union of India & Ors., ; and Shamsher Singh & Anr.
vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
