Pursuant to this Court 's directions regarding the reser vation of seats for admission to different courses of study such as MBBS/BDS and Post Graduate Specialities and holding of an All India Entrance Examination therefor, contained in its judgment delivered in a group of writ petitions on June 22, 1984, a Scheme was prepared by the Medical Council of india, in consultation with various authorities, and submit ted to the Court.
The Court considered the said Scheme along with objec tions and, by its order dated July 21, 1986 approved the Scheme and the syllabus with modifications and the States were directed to bring their syllabi for the 12th year in line with the syllabus approved by this Court.
The Central Board of Secondary Education was directed to hold the All India Entrance Examination.
The Scheme was intended to be implemented from the 1985 86 academic session but was de ferred to 1986 87 academic session and later to 1987 88 academic session.
The revised Schemes in accordance with the Court 's directions were not placed before the Court for confirma tion/finalisation in the manner indicated by the Court and when the concerned authorities proceeded with making neces sary arrangements for holding the All India Entrance Exami nation, several applications were moved objecting to the holding of the examination, in the absence of final clear ance from this Court.
On 30th April, 1987 this Court restrained the States and their respective medical colleges from filling up the 15% reserved seats in the first year MBBS course until further orders, and the States which had not filed their objections were directed to do so.
745 Several States filed objections.
The common objection was that more time was needed to conveniently adapt to the switch over as contemplated by the Scheme and.
therefore, implementation of the Scheme under the main judgment should be deferred at least for two more years.
Another objection was that the syllabus curriculum of study in some of the States being different from the syllabus formulated under the orders of this Court, the students would be handicapped when taking the entrance examination.
Yet another objection was that the medium of study in the qualifying course being the State language, it would be difficult for the students to take the All India Entrance Examination in English.
This Court, disposing of the objections, HELD: 1.1 Ours is a large country and the level of education is not uniform throughout.
Undoubtedly some States are more advanced than others in the field of education.
The idea underlying the Scheme is to bring about a national cohesion and understanding and the Scheme has to be looked at from that stand point.
In introducing a Scheme of this type which requires a switch over from the prevailing pat tern, there is bound to be some inconvenience.
Whether it is introduced now or two years after, it would indeed bring about a feeling of anxiety and uncertainty till one gets used to it.
This is a part of human nature.
There is general welcome to the Scheme, but there is an objection to its implementation.
The Scheme is intended to be implemented and if the Scheme is welcome, its implementation should also be received well.
There could, therefore, be no room for objec tion at the threshhold.
[754E F] 1.2 It would be appropriate to bring the Scheme into operation from the coming year so that all the preliminaries can be properly conducted and in regular course the students can seek admission to the 1988 89 session.
Accordingly, the authorities will hold the examination in June, 1988.
[755C] It may be open to the State of Punjab to apply for directions of this Court when the Scheme is about to be implemented in case the present law and order situation continues.
[754D] 1.3 As the Scheme syllabus had already been prepared, the Court had indicated in the order of July 21, 1986 that the courses of study at least for the 12th Class should be so changed as to fit into the syllabus.
The State Government should have taken immediate steps for that pur 746 pose.
Now that implementation of the Scheme is being de ferred till the next session, a gap of almost two years would have intervened between the earlier order of the Court and the time when the Scheme would be implemented.
The implementation of the Scheme cannot, therefore, be deferred any further beyond the coming session.
[753A, C] 1.4 The medium of study of the MBBS course being in English, those students who propose to study the MBBS have got to be reasonably proficient in that language.
Besides, the manner in which the entrance examination would be held does not require long answers to be written so that profi ciency in English should become an absolute necessity so far as that examination itself is concerned.
[753E F] 1.5 By the time the Scheme is put into operation in 1988 89 session, all the States would have four years of notice of the judgment proposing the switch over to the Scheme.
Four years ' period is certainly sufficient notice and no one can have any occasion to feel aggrieved that there is any hustling up in the implementation of the Scheme.
[752F] 1.6 In view of the direction that the Scheme should be operative from the 1988 89 academic session, the order of injunction regarding the 15% seats is recalled.
The respec tive institutions are now free to fill up these vacancies in accordance with their own procedure of admission.
[755F]
