Upon the respondent tenant committing default in payment of rent from June, 1984, the appellant landlady, after serving a notice determining the tenancy with effect from 31st January, 1985 and calling upon him to deliver posses sion of the premises in question, filed a suit in the High Court for recovery of possession, arrears of rent at the rate of Rs. 1,400 per month and mesne profits/damages at the rate of Rs.7,800 per month from the date of termination of the tenancy.
The respondent filed an application praying that the plaint be taken off from the file of the High Court and returned to the appellant for filing the same in the proper Court.
The High Court, accepting the plea of the respondent that under the provisions of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956, the expression 'tenant ' included a person continuing in possession of the accommodation even after the termination of his contractual tenancy and on such termination the possession of a tenant did not become wrong ful, held that the appellant was not entitled to claim mesne profits/damages aggregating to Rs.78,000 and therefore, the suit should have been valued at Rs.42,000 and, since no suit the value of which was less than Rupees one lakh could have been filed in the High Court, directed that the plaint be returned to the appellant for presentation to the proper Court.
Allowing the appeal and directing the High Court to proceed with the hearing of the suit.
HELD: On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the High Court was in error in prejudging the issue relating to the right of the appellant to claim mesne profits/damages and in directing that the plaint should be returned for presentation to the proper Court.
[797C D] (i) The principles which regulate the pecuniary jurisdiction of 793 civil courts are well settled.
Ordinarily, the valuation of a suit depends upon the reliefs claimed therein and the plaintiff 's valuation in his plaint determines the Court in which it can be presented.
Under section 15, C.P.C., every plaint should be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade compe tent to try it.
The Court always has the jurisdiction to prevent the abuse of the process of law and the plaintiff cannot invoke the jurisdiction of a Court by either grossly over valuing or grossly under valuing a suit.
Under r. 10 of 0.7, C.P.C., the plaint can be returned at any stage of the suit for presentation to the Court in which the suit should have been instituted.
[796A C] (ii) In the instant case the appellant has claimed a decree for Rs.78,000 for the period between 1st February, 1985 and 30th November, 1985 on the footing that the re spondent 's possession was unauthorised or illegal and he was liable to pay mesne profits or damages.
The question whether the appellant would be entitled to a decree for mesne prof its/damages at the rate of Rs.7,800 per month or at any other rate after the termination of the tenancy is a matter which has to be decided in the suit and it could not have been disposed of at a preliminary stage even before the trial had commenced.
That question has to be decided at the conclusion of the trial along with other issues arising in the suit.
Having regard to some of the decisions on which reliance is placed by the appellant in the course of the appeal, the matter is not free from doubt and the claim for mesne profits/damages is neither palpably absurd nor imagi nary.
It needs judicial consideration.
[796D G] (iii) The acceptance of the view put forward by the respondent may lead to encouraging a tenant who has forfeit ed his right to the tenancy to carry on a dilatory litiga tion without compensating the landlord suitably for the loss suffered by him on account of the unreasonable deprivation of the possession of his premises over a long period until he is able to get possession of the premises through the Court.
It cannot, therefore, be stated at this stage that the claim for mesne profits/ damages had been made without good faith and with the sole object of instituting the said suit before the High Court even though it had no jurisdic tion to try it.
[796G H; 797A]
