Rule 161(1)(a) of the Bombay Civil Services Rules, 1959, as applicable to the State of Gujarat, provides for compul sory retirement of a Government servant other than Class IV, on his attaining the age of 58 years, while proviso (i) thereto empowers the appointing authority to retire a Gov ernment servant on his attaining the age of 55 years or any date thereafter.
Rule 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) lays down that except as otherwise provided, Government servants in the Service of Engineers, Class I must retire on reaching the age of 58 years and may be required by Government to retire on reach ing the age of 50 years if they have not attained the rank of Superintending Engineer.
The appellant, who was officiating as Superintending Engineer in the Gujarat Service of Engineers, Class I was sought to be compulsorily retired by the State Government under the first proviso to r.161(1)(a) with effect from December 15, 1967, he having attained the age of 55 years on November 12, 1967.
He assailed that order by a petition in the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution, in which it was submit ted for the State that the case of the appellant was gov erned by r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) of the Rules and not by r. 161(1)(a) and reference to a wrong provision would not necessarily invalidate the order, that the appellant had not substantively attained the rank of Superintending Engineer before he reached the age of 50 years and therefore the Government could compulsorily retire him at any time after he reached that age, that by virtue of the power vested in the Government under the first proviso to r. 161(1)(a) the Government could even otherwise direct the compulsory re tirement of a 641 person who had attained the rank of Superintending Engineer before reaching the age of 50 years and that power was not excluded by reason of r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1).
The High Court held that since the appellant had not attained the substantive rank of a Superintending Engineer he could be made to retire at any time under r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1), i.e. on the date he attained the age of 55 years or thereafter, that since the appellant was merely holding the post in an officiating capacity he could not be held to have attained the rank of Superintending Engineer, in order to have the benefit of the normal age of superannu ation of 58 years.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that the post of Superintending Engineer was a selection post and the appellant was promoted as such in a clear vacancy, that the word 'rank ' in r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) must in collocation of the words being preceded by the word 'attained ' mean the status or the grade, that the word 'rank ' is not qualified by the word 'substantive ' and that he had acquired the status or rank of a Superintending Engineer.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The order of compulsory retirement of the appellant purported to be under the first proviso to r. 161(1)(a) of the Bombay Civil Services Rules, 1959 is struck down as arbitrary, and he shall be deemed to have retired from service on attaining his normal age of superannuation of 58 years.
[652BC] 2.1 Under r.161(1)(a) compulsory retirement of all government servants is at the age of 58 years which is the general provision.
But the same cannot be said of the com pulsory retirement of a government servant under proviso (i) to that rule on the date on which he attains the not an incident of the tenure.
It is not conceived the interests of the employee.
It is the mode of terminating his employment at the discretion of the appointing authority.
This absolute power of the Government to direct premature retirement does not exist on its satisfaction that it is necessary to do so in the public interest.
It is unlike FR 56(j) to that ex tent.
[647G 648B, 649BC] 2.2 Rule 161(1)(c)(ii)(1), which is a special rule dealing with Service of Engineers, Class I, provides for two ages of superannuation.
The first part adopts the general rule of superannuation, as provided in r. 161(1)(a).
The second part, however, confers powers on the Govern 642 ment to terminate the services of such officers at the age of 50 years without giving any notice.
The words 'in the public interest ' are not there in r. 161(1)(c).
[648B, DE, 649C, E] 2.3 The effect of r. 161(1)(a) and r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) is the same.
Arbitrariness is writ large in both these rules.
They enable the Government to deprive a permanent civil servant of his office without enquiry.
The power of compulsory retirement may he used when the authority exer cising this power cannot substantiate the misconduct which may be real cause for taking action.
Both violate article 311(2) of the Constitution.
[649A, CD] Union of India vs Col. J.N. Sinha & Anr., [1971] 1 SCR 791, referred to.
3.1 The word used in r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) is 'rank ' and not 'substantive rank ' and there is no reason why it should not be understood according to its ordinary sense as meaning grade or status, particularly when it is preceded by the words 'have not attained '.
The word 'attained ' means ac quired or reached.
The word 'rank ' has both a narrower as well as a wider meaning.
[648G] 3.2 If the word 'rank ' is so construed in its wider sense in its context and setting in the collocation of words 'if they have not attained the rank of Superintending Engi neer ' as meaning status or grade then the second part of that rule must be treated as an exception to the special rule empowering the Government to direct superannuation of such officers on the date they attained the age of 50 years.
[650D] 3.3 In the instant case, the appellant having attained the rank of Superintending Engineer he could not be compul sorily retired by the State Government under r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) before the age of superannuation.
[643G] S.C. Jain vs State of Haryana & Anr.
, ; , referred to.
Ishwarlal Kasanji Naik vs State of Gujarat, , overruled.
4.1 The words 'if they have not attained the rank of Superintending Engineer ' in r. 161(1)(c)(ii)(1) do not confer an immunity on these officers from being compulsorily retired at any age below the normal 643 age of superannuation at 58 years.
The benefit which the Superintending Engineers enjoy under the second part of that rule is necessarily subject to the absolute power of the Government to direct compulsory retirement of such officers on the date they attain the age of 55 years under the first proviso to r. 161(1)(a) or under FR 56(j)(1), on which it is based.
Although the words 'in the public interest ' are not there but such power to direct premature compulsory retire ment at the age of 55 years can be exercised subject to the condition that the concerned authority must be of the opin ion that it is 'in public interest ' to do so.
[650E G] 4.2 In the instant case, there was no material placed to show that such compulsory retirement was necessary in the public interest.
The appellant has had an unblemished record and there was nothing against him to doubt his integrity, fitness and competence.
[651E] H.C. Gargi vs State of Haryana, , referred to.
Union of India vs K.R. Tahiliani & Anr., ; , distinguished.
