In the Union Territory of Delhi there are two main civic bodies viz. the New Delhi Municipal Committee and the Delhi Municipal Corporation.
The NDMC was constituted under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1913 to discharge all civic functions including supply of water and electricity in the area fall ing within its jurisdiction.
The Delhi Municipal Corporation was constituted in pursuance of the Delhi Municipal Corpora tion Act, 1957.
The NDMC forming a compact unit, had divided its civic work into various departments.
Besides technical staff, it also engaged nontechnical staff such as Municipal staff, clerks etc.
The non technical staff constituted one unified cadre, liable to transfer from one department to another with common seniority.
The set up of the MCD was, however, different consisting of three separate and independent wings viz. the electrici ty, the general and the water, sewage and disposal wings.
The electricity wing was designated as the Delhi Electricity Supply Undertaking and its employees were governed by a separate cadre and seniority list, Similarly, the general wing, performing other general civic duties and functions, and the third wing concerning with distribution of water and disposal of sewage etc.
To satisfy the demands of the employees of the MCD, NDMC etc.
the Government accepted the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission.
The New Delhi Municipal Committee as well as the general wing of the Municipal Corporation, Delhi accepted the pay scales recommended by the Third Pay Commis sion.
However, the tech 809 nical staff of Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking were not satisfied and claimed higher scales of pay.
The Government, therefore, constituted a Committee known as the Shiv Shankar Committee to go into the question of revision of pay scales etc.
of the technical staff of the DESU.
The Committee submitted its report in 1973.
Subsequently, the DESU agreed to revise the pay scales of the non technical staff also to the level recommended by the S.S. Committee.
The New Delhi Municipal Committee, by its Resolution dated 19.10.73, decided to give the benefit of the revised scales to the technical and ministerial staff working in its electricity wing as, in its view, such staff were performing same or similar functions and duties performed by the staff of DESU and hence parity should be maintained, and by Reso lution dated 7.1.1974, it decided to give the benefit with effect from 1.4.72.
Two of the employees of the general wing filed a writ petition before the High Court for quashing the Resolution dated 7.1.1974 which sought to implement the earlier Resolu tion of 19.10.1973.
The HighCourt held that the Resolution was discriminatory in nature, and restrained the implementa tion of the Resolution till the NDMC considered afresh the question of revision of pay scales for all sections of the ministerial staff after giving an opportunity to them.
In compliance with the above directions, the NDMC passed a revised Resolution dated 25.6.1975 treating all the non technical staff as equal and granting uniform pay scales at the rates recommended by the Third Pay Commission and not at different rates for different wings.
This Resolution was again challenged by some of the affected members of the electricity wing before the High Court, which disposed it of on the assurance given by the NDMC that the whole position would be reviewed after giving all the parties including the ministerial staff of the electricity wing due notice of the matter.
The Letters Patent Appeal, originally filed by the NDMC, and in which some of the affected employees of the electric ity wing had got themselves impleaded as appellants, was allowed and the judgment of the Single Judge was set aside as it had been rendered without all the necessary parties being before the Court.
The Special Leave Petition filed in the Supreme Court by two staff members of the general wing was dismissed in limine.
The NDMC, after giving opportunity to all sections of the emp 810 loyees to make their representation passed a Resolution on 27.6.78 constituting the electricity wing w.e.f. 1.5.78 composed of pump drivers, welders, carpenters, mechanics and 496 posts of ministerial staff, carrying scales of pay as per the S.S. Committee report and benefit of exgratia on DESU pattern, and treated these as ex cadre posts and to be filled on deputation basis on rotation, for a period of three years in one spell.
Three writ petitions were filed in the High Court con tending (a) that the ministerial staff should be treated on par with their counterparts in the electricity wing in the matter of pay and allowances, (b) that, as there was no difference between the civil and electrical engineers, civil engineers should be equated with the electrical engineers on DESU pattern, and (c) that since the employees of DESU were being paid ex gratia amount the staff in the general wing should also be paid likewise.
The High Court, while upholding the order of the NDMC, modified the placement of the ex cadre posts in the overall set up.
It evolved a Scheme according to which the S.S. Committee scales were to be given only to those who opted to work in the electricity department and the posts were to be filled on the basis of seniority cum option.
It further directed that since higher scales of pay was linked with the service rendered in the electricity wing, S.S. Committee scales should be paid to all those who had worked in the electricity wing during the period subsequent to June 1975 till 30th May, 1982, that such payment would not amount to discriminatory payment and that after the 30th May, 1982 the postings should be done in accordance with senioritycum option formula.
It also held that the civil engineers could not seek parity with electrical engineers in the electricity wing in the matter of pay scales as the junior engineers (Civil) had no common seniority with the electrical engi neers in the electricity wing, that the posts were not interchangeable and that they could not draw comparison with the employment pattern of DESU because it was a separate and independent entity unlike the electricity wing of the NDMC and that the nature of the duties performed by the electri cal engineers and civil engineers was different.
Upholding the refusal of the NDMC to grant ex gratia payment to the staff of the general wing, it directed the NDMC to treat the amount already paid "as one time special ad hoc payment not serving as a precedent." 811 In the appeals before this Court it was contended on behalf of the ministerial staff in the general wing that the electricity wing was not a distinct and indepen`dent unit entitled to have its own scales of pay, that the ministerial staff of the NDMC belonged to a unified cadre and the staff members were liable to transfer from one branch to another and, as such, the NDMC could not create a cadre within a cadre and fix a different scale of pay for those in the carved out cadre, that the nature of duties performed by the ministerial staff in all the three units was more or less similar, if not identical, and hence the well established rule of equal pay for equal work should govern the staff members, that instead of restricting the payment of S.S. Committee pay scales to the 496 ex cadre posts in the elec tricity wing and directing the NDMC to fill up those posts on the basis of seniority cum option, the High Court should have directed the NDMC to give the S.S. Committee pay scales to all the members of the ministerial staff and also pay ex gratia payment and should not have directed the NDMC to treat the adhoc payment as one time special adhoc payment and refrain from recovering the said amount.
The NDMC, in turn.
filed two appeals against the High Court judgment directing the payment at S.S. Committee scales for the period from June 1975 to May, 1982 and fill ing up the ministerial posts in the electricity wing on seniority cum option basis instead of a three years deputa tion basis on rotational system and payment of arrears of pay etc.
and for giving up the proceedings for recovery of the adhoc payment towards ex gratia payment and contending that the Government or any State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution had a right under law to create new departments or new cadres with different scales of pay and hence the appellants could not impugn the action of the NDMC in treating the ministerial staff in the elec trical wing differently and giving them pay scales as per S.S. Committee Report.
On behalf of some of the staff members in the general wing, it was contended that since the NDMC constituted an integrated unit with common fund, common budget etc., the High Court ought not to have sustained the payment of ex gratia amount to only those persons working in the electric ity wing and water works wing and should have made the payment applicable to all or to none.
In the writ petition and appeal filed on behalf of the Assistant and Junior Engineers (Civil), it was contended that there could not be any discrimination between civil engineers and electrical engineers and since the NDMC fol lowed the pattern of scales of pay adopted by DESU 812 which paid the Civil Engineers according to S.S. Committee pay scales they were as much entitled as the electrical engineers to be paid according to the S.S. Committee pay scales and also for payment of ex gratia amount.
Allowing the appeals of the employees in the general wing and dismissing the appeals and WP of NDMC and the engineers (civil), this Court, HELD: 1.1 All sections of the ministerial staff should be treated alike and all of them should be entitled to the same scales of pay for the work of equal nature done by them.
[825C] 1.2 Merely because a member of the ministerial staff had been given a posting in the electricity wing either due to force of circumstances or due to voluntary preferment, he cannot stand on a better or higher footing or in a more advantageous position than his counterparts in the general wing.
The ministerial staff in the NDMC constitute a unified cadre with a common recruitment policy, a common recruitment agency a common seniority list, and the posts in the three wings are inter changeable and postings are made from the common pool according to administrative convenience and exigencies of service and not on the basis of any distinct policy or special qualification.
[825B, 824H, 825A] 1.3 The only reason which prompted the NDMC to pass the resolution was that since DESU had implemented the S.S. Committee pay scales for its technical and non technical staff, the NDMC should also follow suit in so far as its electricity wing is concerned.
In doing so, the NDMC had failed to bear in mind several distinguishing features between its set up and the set up of the DESU and its staff pattern and the staff pattern of DESU.
[825G] The NDMC is governed by the Punjab Municipal Act, while the DESU is governed by the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.
The set up of the NDMC is that of an integrated unit comprising all the three wings while the set up under the Municipal Corporation Act of the MCD is that its three wings have to function as distinct and independent units.
Such being the case, the DESU is a separate and independent unit of MCD and constituted an independent body.
The DESU has its own budget and consequently it has freedom without reference to the other units.
In contrast, the NDMC 's revenue is the income derived from all the three wings of it and the ex penses are governed by a common 813 budget.
Apart from the diference in the set up, the ministe rial staff in the NDMC are comprised in a unified cadre and the posts in the three wings are transferable and inter changeable which is not so in the case of the staff of the DESU.
[825H, 826A] 1.4 There is no room whatsoever for treating the elec tricity wing of the NDMC on par with the DESU and adopting the pattern of pay scales implemented by DESU and the deci sion taken by the NDMC originally to place the non technical staff in the electricity wing on a higher footing and give them alone the S.S. Committee pay scales cannot be legally sustained.
The action of the NDMC clearly suffered from the vice of arbitrariness and discrimination.
[826B D] 2.1 The NDMC has no legal ground to project any justifi cation of its action in making the posts in the electricity wing as ex cadre posts and giving the benefit of S.S. Com mittee pay scales only to persons serving in those posts.
[828A] 2.2 The resolution only sought to provide all the mem bers of the staff the benefit of the higher scales of pay for a period of three years at some point of time in their service provided they opted to serve in the electricity wing but it did not provide an answer for the criticism that there was no justification to treat the ministerial staff in the electricity wing on a higher footing than the rest of the staff and give them a higher scale of pay.
[826F G] 2.3 The proposal would perpetuate the imbalance in the pay scales between the different sections of the staff working in the three wings of the NDMC.
The system of depu tation would lead to a long period of wait for large sec tions of the staff before getting postings in the electrici ty wing on deputation basis.
The staff members would have to forego the higher scales of pay and come back to the lesser scales when the period of deputation was over.
The insist ence on the staff members being entitled to deputation service in the electricity wing only if they exercised their option to work in that wing introduces an element of compul sion among the members comprised in a unified cadre.
These factors vitiate the revised propsoal of the NDMC to make 496 posts as ex cadre and to fill them up on deputation basis by adopting a rotational cum option system.
[826G H, 827A B] 3.
The scheme formulated by the High Court cannot be sustained or accepted.
The High Court, apart from laying itself open to the criticism that it had gone beyond its power in formulating the scheme, has 814 failed to provide for equal benefits for all the members of the ministerial staff.
If the electricity wing is to be filled up on the basis of seniority cum option, those who had served earlier in the electricity wing would get a distinct advantage over the rest of the ministerial staff including the senior members in the matter of higher pay scales.
Besides, the seniority cum option system would give grater benefit to some and lesser benefit to some depending upon their age etc.
Moreover, the insertion of the option clause would introduce an element of compulsion and make it appear that the staff working in the electricity wing per form more onerous and more skilled duties and hence they stand on a higher footing.
It would also lead to packing all the senior members of the staff in the electricity wing and denuding the other two wings of the services of the senior ministerial staff.
[827C F] 4.
Merely because some of the Civil engineers are as signed to do civil engineers ' work in the electricity wing it cannot be said that they are not different from the electrical engineers and that they should be paid higher scales of pay.
In the matter of promotions etc., they are governed by the common seniority list maintained for civil engineers and their posting to the electricity wing cannot make them a separate class by themselves.
They cannot com pare themselves with the civil engineers working in DESU because that is a separate and distinct unit, and all the engineers working therein constitute a single unit.
There is no disparity of scales of pay between civil engineers work ing in the electricity wing and those working in the other wings.
It cannot, therefore, be said that there is discrimi nation in the matter of pay scales.
[828H, 829A C] 5.
The pattern of payment of ex gratia payment adopted by the MCD cannot have any binding force on the NDMC because the three units of the MCD are different and distinct enti ties whereas the three wings of the NDMC are inter dependent wings of the integrated Municipal Committee.
[830A] 6.1 In the absence of justifiable reasons of compulsive nature, the payments whether as salary or as ex gratia amounts have to be on the same and equal basis and not differently for the different wings.
All the ministerial staff working in the NDMC are entitled to get pay scales as per S.S. Committee report and are also entitled to be given ex gratia payment likewise.
The grant of S.S. Commitee pay scales to only the staff working in the electricity wing or the grant of ex gratia payment to only the staff working in the electricity wing and the water works wing cannot be legally sustained as it suffers from the vice of discrimina tion.
[830B, 831C] 815 6.2 There should be uniformity not only in payment of S.S. Committee pay scales and the ex gratia payment to the staff working in all the wings or departments of the NDMC but the payment should also be made from a date common to all.
[831D] [In so far as payment of uniform salary to all the ministerial staff as per S.S. Committee pay scales and payment of ex gratia payment is concerned, the NDMC will give effect to this judgment with effect from 1st June, 1982.
The amount involved should be distributed equally amongst all the ministerial staff and not confined to the ministerial staff of the electricity wing alone.
In view of the financial committment involved the NDMC is permitted to pay the difference in scales of pay and ex gratia amount between June 1, 1982 to July 31, 1987 in three equal instal ments within a period of 15 months.] [831F H] Randhir Singh vs Union of India, ; ; Dhirendra Chamoli vs State of U.P., ; P. Ramachandra Iver vs Union of India, ; , Reserve Bank of India vs
N.C. Paliwal; , and Reserve Bank of India vs
C.N. Sahasranaman, [1986] (Suppl.) SCC 143, referred to.
