The petitioner, a Constable in the Haryana Police Serv ice, was removed from service during the period of proba tion.
However, he was not given any opportunity of hearing against the purported order of dismissal from service.
He challenged the impugned order of removal on the ground that he was removed from service because of his activities in the Haryana Police Association and it was in fact a penal order and as such the same being made without complying with the requirements of Article 311(2) as well as Rule 16.24(ix)(b) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, it is wholly arbitrary, illegal and unwarranted.
It was contended on behalf of the respondent that the impugned order is not an order of dismissal from service and in fact this is an order of discharge made under Rule 12.21 of the Rules since the appointing authority was of consid ered opinion on the assessment of his conduct and perform ance that the petitioner was unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
Allowing the writ petition to this Court, HELD: 1.
(i) The impugned order of removal/dismissal from service was in substance and in effect an order made by way of punishment after considering the service conduct of the petitioner.
It is therefore quashed and it is directed that he be reinstated in service with 50 per cent back wages from the date of termination of his service till the date of his reinstatement.
He would, however, be entitled to his full salary and other allowances admissible w.e.f.
the date of his reinstatement.
There would however be no break in continuity of service for purposes of seniority and pension benefits.
[1144D; 1145A C] 1139 (ii) There is no doubt that the impugned order casts a stigma on the service career of the petitioner and the order being made by way of punishment, the petitioner is entitled to the protection afforded by the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution as well as by the provisions of Rule 16.24(ix)(b) of the Punjab Police Rules 1934.
[1144E] (iii) It cannot be said that the impugned order is an order simpliciter of removal from service of a probationer in accordance with the terms and conditions of service.
The impugned order undoubtedly tantamounts to the dismissal from the service for reasons of misconduct of the petitioner in discharge of the official duties as police constable.
[1144G H] 2.
A probationer has no right to the post and if he is found by the concerned authorities to be unsuitable for the post during the probation period his service may be done away with.
But nonetheless such a probationer has a right to have an opportunity of hearing against the order of dismiss al/removal from the service if the same is made in effect by way of punishment or the same casts a stigma on the service career of the petitioner.
[1141G H; 1142A] In the instant case, the petitioner has not been served with any charges of misconduct in discharge of his duties as a police constable nor has he ever been asked to show cause against the said charges.
The order of removal from service was made because of his union activities namely participat ing in the call for expressing the protest of the Associa tion for improvement in service conditions by abstaining from taking meals in the Mess on 15th August, 1982 although the petitioner like other members of the association per formed his duties on that day and did not abstain from duty.
[1144E G] P.L. Dhingra vs Union of India, AIR 1958 (SC) 36; Samsh er Singh vs State of Punjab and Anr., AIR 1974 (SC) 2192; Anoop Jaiswal vs Government of India & Anr., AIR 1964 (SC) 636 and Alit Singh & Ors.
vs State of Haryana & Ors.
, W.P. No. 9345 94 98/1983, followed.
