The Andhra Pradesh Commissionerate of Higher Education Act, 1986 (Act No. 26 of 1986) providing for the constitu tion of a Commissionerate to advise the Government in mat ters relating to Higher Education in the State and to over see its development with perspective planning and for mat ters connected therewith and incidental thereto and to perform all functions necessary for the furtherance and maintenance of excellence in the standards of higher educa tion in the State was enacted on the basis of the recommen dations of a high power committee constituted by the State Government to study the Higher Education system in the State with special reference to its curricula, courses of study, finance and management.
The validity of the aforesaid Act was challenged in the High Court which, while upholding it, held that the Act fell under Entry 25 List III Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India.
In the appeals to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the Act was just a duplicate of the University Grants Commission Act and the State had no legis lative power at all to enact it since it squarely fell under Entry 66 List I.
On behalf of the Staterespondent it was submitted that the enactment in pith and substance fell within Entry 25 of List III and not under Entry 66 of List I of the Seventh Schedule.
Allowing the appeals, this Court, 950 HELD: 1.1 Entry 25 List III relating to education in cluding technical education, medical education and Universi ties had been made subject to the power of Parliament to legislate under Entries 63 to 66 of List I. Entry 66 List I and Entry 25 List III should, therefore, be read together.
[955F G] 1.2 Entry 66 gives power to the Union to see that a required standard of higher education in the country is maintained.
The standard of Higher Education including scientific and technical should not be lowered at the hands of any particular State or States.
It is the exclusive responsibility of the Central Government to co ordinate and determine the standards for higher education.
That power includes the power to evaluate, harmonise and secure proper relationship to any project of national importance.
It is needless to state, that such a coordinate action in higher education with proper standards, is of paramount importance to national progress.
It is in this national interest, the legislative field in regard to 'education ' has been distrib uted between List 1 and List 111 of the Seventh Schedule. ]955G H; 956A B] 1.3 Parliament has exclusive power to legislate with respect to matters included in List I.
The State has no power at all in regard to such matters.
If the State legis lates on the subject failing within List I that will be void, inoperative and unenforceable.
[956B] 1.4 The Commissionerate Act has been drawn by and large in the same terms as that of the U.G.C. Act.
Both the enact ments deal with the co ordination and determination of excellence in the standards of teaching and examination in the Universities.
Here and there, some of the words and sentences used in the Commissionerate Act may be different from those used in the UGC Act, but nevertheless, they convey the same meaning.
It is just like referring the same person with different descriptions and names.
[966B D] 1.5 The High Court has gone on a tangent, and would not have fallen into an error if it had perused the UGC Act as a whole and compared it with the Commissionerate Act or vice versa.
[966D] 1.6 The Commissionerate Act contains sweeping provisions encroaching on the autonomy of the Universities.
The Commis sionerate has practically taken over the academic programme and activities of the universities.
The universities have been rendered irrelevant if not nonentities.
[965D; 966A B] 1.7 It is unthinkable as to how the State could pass a parallel 951 enactment under Entry 25 of List III, unless it encroaches Entry 66 of List I Such an encroachment is patent and obvi ous.
The Commissionerate Act is beyond the legislative competence of the State Legislature and is hereby declared void and inoperative.
[966E F] 1.8 The Constitution of India vests Parliament with exclusive authority in regard to co ordination and determi nation of standards in institutions for higher education.
The Parliament has enacted the UGC Act for that purpose.
The University Grants Commission has, therefore, a greater role to play in shaping the academic life of the country.
It shall not falter or fail in its duty to maintain a high standard in the Universities.
Democracy depends for its very life on high standards of general, vocational and profes sional education.
Dissemination of learning with search for new knowledge with discipline all round must be maintained at all costs.
[967D E] The University Grants Commission, it is hoped will duly discharge its responsibility to the Nation and play an increasing role to bring about the needed transformation in the academic life of the Universities.
[967E F] Kerala State Electricity Board vs Indian Aluminium Company, [1976] 1 SCR 552; Gujarat University, Ahmedabad vs Krishna Ranganath, [1963] Suppl.
1 SCR 112; DAV College, Bhatinda etc.
vs State of Punjab & Ors.
, ; R. Chitralekha & Ant.
vs State of Mysore & Ors.
, ; ; State of Andhra Pradesh vs Lavu Narendranath & Ors, etc.; , ; Ambesh Kumar vs Principal, LLRM College, Meerut, ; and Prem Chand Jain vs R.K. Chhabra; , , referred to.
