The petitioner, a limited company, having central office at Secunderabad was carrying on business of importing ferti lizers and represented some foreign principals for the sale of their products in India.
The Government of Andhra Pradesh after giving six months notice, vide its gazette notification No. 788 Health dated 25 9 74 as required under section 1(5) of the extended the provisions of the Act with effect from 30 3 75 to the establishments mentioned therein in which 20 or more persons were employed for wages on any day of the preceding 12 months by Notification G.O.M.S. No. 297, Health, dated 25th March, 1975.
Item 3(iii) in the list of establishments in that notification to which the Act was so extended by the State Government was "shops".
On inspection of the premises of the petitioner company at Secunderabad on 28 4 75, the Employees ' State Insurance Inspector found that the petitioner had employed persons ranging from 27 to 29 for wages and was carrying on the business of import of fertilizers, and the petitioner was asked to comply with the provisions of the .
The petitioner agreed and submitted contribu tion forms of its employees to the office of the Corpora tion.
After complying with the provisions of the Act for a period of four years the petitioner instituted a case under Section 75 of the Act before the Employees ' Insurance Court for a declaration that the establish 982 ment in which the petitioner was carrying on its business was not a "shop", and, therefore, it was not covered by the aforesaid notification and that the petitioner was not liable to comply with the provisions of the Act.
On behalf of the Corporation it was submitted that the establishment being run by the petitioner was a "shop" and, therefore, liable to comply with the provisions of the Act.
The Employ ees ' Insurance Court upheld the plea of the petitioner and declared that the establishment was not covered by the Act.
The High Court allowed the appeal of the Corporation and held that the establishment was a "shop" to which the Act was applicable by virtue of the State Government 's notifica tion.
In the Special Leave Petition, on behalf of the peti tioner it was urged that since no goods were actually being delivered in the premises in which the petitioner was having its establishment, the said establishment could not be treated as a 'shop ' which was referred to in item 3(iii) of the Government 's notification.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, HELD: 1.
The petitioner company is bound to comply with the provisions of the Act as, at all relevant times, the company had engaged more than 20 persons for wages at its place of business.
[986E] 2.1 The word "shop" is not defined in the Act or in the notification issued by the Government.
[985D] 2.2 In ordinary parlance a "shop" is a place where the activities connected with the buying and selling of goods are carried on.
[985E] 2.3 It is not actually necessary that the delivery of the goods to the purchaser should take place at the premises in which the business of buying or selling is carried on to constitute the said premises into a "shop".
The delivery of the goods sold to the purchaser is only one aspect of trad ing activities.
Negotiation of the terms of sale, carrying on of the survey of the goods imported, arranging for the delivery.of the goods sold, collection of the price of the goods sold etc.
are all trading activities.
[985H, A] In the instant case, the premises where business is carried on by the petitioner is undoubtedly a "shop" as the activities that are carried on there relate only to the sale of goods which are imported into India.
983 The petitioner acts as the agent of its foreign principals who are the sellers.
The petitioner directs and controls all its activities from the premises in question.
If orders are received at a place which ultimately fructify into sales and the resulting trading activity is directed from there, that place comes to be known as a "shop".
[986B C] 3.
The High Court was right in holding that while construing a welfare legislation like the Act and the noti fication issued thereunder a liberal construction should be placed on their provisions so that the purpose of the legis lation may be allowed to be achieved rather than frustrated or stultified.
[986D]
