The service of the appellant, a bus conductor, was terminated consequent upon the enquiry conducted into alle gations of non issue of tickets to nine passengers, though fare was collected from each of them.
A suit filed by the appellant, contending that the order of termination was illegal and void and was opposed to the principles of natu ral justice, as no reason was given in the order, was dis missed by the trial court.
It was also held that the Civil Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit.
The Additional District Judge, on appeal, held that the Civil Court had jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit and set aside the impugned order of termination as invalid as it was a non speaking order not containing any reason.
In second appeal, the High Court affirmed the finding of the Additional District Judge as to the jurisdiction of the Civil Court, but set aside his finding that the impugned order was a non speaking order and held that it was quite legal and valid.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the punishing authority had not ap plied his mind before passing the impugned order, which was apparent from the fact that he had not given any reason in justification thereof and this had vitiated the impugned order of termination.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: When the punishing authority agrees with the findings of the Enquiry Officer who accepts the reasons given by him in support of such findings, it is not neces sary for the punishing authority to again 1058 discuss evidence and come to the same findings as that of the Enquiry Officer and give the same reasons for the find ings.
[1060E] In the instant case, it is difficult to say that the punishing authority had not applied his mind.
The punishing authority has placed reliance upon the report of the Enquiry Officer, which means he has not only agreed with the find ings of the Enquiry Officer but also accepted the reasons given by him for the same.
When the punishing authority has accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the reasons given by him, the question of non compliance with the prin ciples of natural justice does not arise.
[1060E F] It cannot be said that the impugned order is not a speaking order and is vitiated.
[1060F] [In view of the fact that it is the first offence of the appellant, who is said to be the father of five minor chil dren and has no other means of livelihood, the respondent may consider the re employment of the appellant to the post of Conductor or to any other post, to which he may be found to be suitable.] [1060G H]
