The U.P. Cane Development (Fourth Class) Service Rules, 1972 prescribe minimum qualification of High School Examina tion for the post of Ganna Gram Sewak.
The U.P. Ganna Parya vekshak (III) Services Rules, 1972 lay down the basic quali fication of Intermediate (Agriculture) or equivalent or High School with two years ' Diploma in Agriculture for the post of Cane Supervisor, and provide for filling 50 per cent of these posts by promotion from amongst permanent Ganna Gram Sewaks.
The Cane Commissioner by his letter dated March 10, 1975 recommended to the State Government that the minimum educational qualification for Ganna Gram Sewaks should be Intermediate.
No amendment, however, has been made to the said Rules.
The duties that are to be performed by the Ganna Gram Sewaks are preparation of progress report, survey of cane areas, and development programme.
The Cane Supervisors are responsible for plant protection, inputs godown and nurser ies in the areas of Ganna Gram Sewaks.
The respondent No. 1 flied a writ petition under article 226 of the 973 Constitution praying for a writ of mandamus directing the State Government to merge the post of Ganna Gram Sewaks and the Cane Supervisors into one cadre.
The High Court took the view that although the minimum educational qualifications required were High School for Ganna Gram Sewaks and Intermediate in Agriculture for Cane Supervisors, since 1975 the minimum qualification became Intermediate in Agriculture for both Ganna Gram Sewaks and Cane Supervisors, that the nature of duties performed by the members of these two categories of posts was the same, and relying upon the principle of equal pay for equal work, as contained in article 39(d) of the Constitution, allowed the writ petition and directed the State Government to merge the said posts into one cadre of Ganna Sahayak.
The State, and the Cane Supervisors preferred appeals to this Court.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: 1.1 The High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in directing the merger of the posts of Ganna Gram Sewaks and Cane Supervisors.
[977E] 1.2 The merger or bifurcation of a cadre is an executive act.
It is for the State to consider whether two groups of persons working under two distinct posts perform the same kind of duties or not, and whether in implementing the directive principle, as contained in article 39(d) of the Constitution, it is necessary to merge the two posts into one cadre or post.
[980AB] 1.3 The principle of equal pay for equal work requires on the face of it that the work to be performed by two groups of persons must be equal.
The Court may in such cases direct equal pay by way of removing unreasonable discrimina tion and treating the two groups, similarly situated, equal ly.
[977H; 980CD] In the instant case, the nature of the duties that are performed by the members of the two categories of posts are different.
The Ganna Gram Sewaks are responsible for prepa ration of progress report, survey of.
the cane areas and development programme.
On the other hand Cane Supervisors are responsible for plant protection, inputs godown and nurseries in the areas of Ganna Gram Sewaks.
The 974 minimum qualification required for each post is also differ ent.
Both of them function more or less independently.
Furthermore, the post of Cane Supervisor is a promotional post vis a vis the post of Ganna Gram Sewak.
It will, there fore, be beyond the jurisdiction of the court to implement the principle of equal pay for equal work inasmuch as such implementation will practically result in the amalgamation of the two posts.
[978A, 979EF, 978B, 979G] 2.
Under the Rules the minimum qualification required for the Ganna Gram Sewaks is High School or equivalent.
So long as the Rules are amended and the minimum qualification is not enhanced to Intermediate in Agriculture, the Cane Development Department of the State cannot prescribe or insist on a minimum qualification of Intermediate in Agri culture.
The High Court, therefore, was not justified in relying upon the letter of the Cane Commissioner dated March 10, 1975 in preference to the Rules framed ' under Article 309 of the Constitution for taking the view that the minimum qualification for that post has been Intermediate in Agri culture since 1975.
[879CE, 978H] 3.
Article 39(d) of the Constitution lays down the directive principle of equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
The directive principles contained in Part IV of the Constitution are not enforceable in any court of law.
It is a constitutional goal that has to be achieved at the instance of the State.
[979H 980A]
