The appellant filed a petition for execution of the money decree obtained by her in High Court against the judgment debtor and attachment was levied in execution on open land and a portion of the premises in question belong ing to the judgment debtor.
Subsequently, the judgment debtor sold a portion of the attached property.
The purchas er in turn, sold a portion thereof to the respondents.
The aforesaid execution petition was dismissed for default but later on an application by the appellant, the said Execution Case was restored, and the said property was again attached, and a proclamation for sale of the said property was issued under Order 21 Rule 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The respondents ' petition under Order 21, Rule 58 of C.P.C. for releasing the property purchased by the respondents from attachment was dismissed.
The High Court allowed the appeal.
In appeal to this Court, it was urged on behalf of the appellant that in view of the provisions of Section 64 of the Code of Civil procedure, the sale of the property by the judgment debtor to the purchaser and the sale thereafter by him to the respondents, which were both effected during the subsistence of the attachment, were void as against the appellant decree holder, and although the attachment ceased on the dismissal of the Title Execution Case, on May 9, 1972, it was revived by restoration of the case.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, HELD: An order of restoration of a suit dismissed for default would certainly restore or revive the attachment for the period during which it was in subsistence, namely, prior to the dismissal of the suit or execution application.
[ 1043D] 1039 In the present case both transactions, sale by the judgment debtor and subsequent sale by the purchaser to the respondents, were effected during the subsistence of the attachment and before the Title Execution Case was dismissed for default.
[1043C] The Division Bench of the High Court was in error in taking the view that by reason of the dismissal of the said Title Execution Case, the attachment came to an end and the order of restoration of the said case would not affect any alienations made before the restoration, although such alienations might have been made during the subsistence of the attachment.
[1044C] Sushila Bala Dasi vs Guest Keen Williams Ltd., I.L.R. 1949 Vol.
1 Calcutta, p. 177 Annapuma Patrani & Ors.
vs Lakshmana Kara & Anr., A.I.R. 1950, Madras, p. 740; Pradyut Natwarlal Shah vs Suryakant H. Sangani & Ors., A.I.R. 1979 Bombay, p. 166; Tavvala Veeraswami vs Pulim Ramanna & Ors., A.I.R. 1935 Madras, p. 365 and Patringa koer vs Madhavanand Ram & Ors., Calcutta Law Journal, 1911, Vol.
14 p. 476, referred to.
