This was an appeal by the trustees of the ancient and renowned temple of Sri Venkataramana of Moolky Petta, who were managing the temple on behalf of the Gowda Saraswath Brahmins in accordance with a Scheme framed in a suit under section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
After the passing of the Madras Temple Entry Authorisation Act (Madras V of 1947) which had for its object the removal of the disability of Harijans from entering into Hindu public temples, the trustees made a representation to the Government that the temple was a private one, and, therefore, outside the operation of the Act.
But the Government did not accept that position and held that the Act applied to the temple.
Thereupon the trustees brought the suit, out of which the appeal arises ' for a declaration that the temple was not one as defined by section 2(2) of the Act but was a denominational one having been founded exclusively for the Gowda Saraswath Brahmins.
It was contended that section 3 of the Act was void as being repugnant to article 26(b) of the Constitution which vouchsafed to a religious denomination the right to manage its own affairs in matters of religion.
The trial court found against the appellants.
It held that matters of religion did not include rituals and ceremonies.
But on appeal the High Court while holding that the public were entitled to worship in the temple, passed a limited decree in favour of the appellants by reserving to the latter the right to exclude the general public during certain ceremonies in which the members of the denomination alone were entitled to participate.
The question for decision was whether the rights of a religious denomination to manage its own affairs in matters of religion under article 26(b) can be subjected to, and controlled by, a law protected by article 25(2)(b) of the Constitution.
Held, that the expression " religious institutions of a public character " occurring in article 25(2) (b) of the Constitution contemplates not merely temples dedicated to the public as a whole but also those founded for the benefit of sections thereof and includes 114 896 denominational temples as well.
While article 25(1) deals with the rights of individuals and article 26(b) with those of religious 2 denominations, article 25(2) covers a much wider ground and controls both.
Article 26(b) must, therefore, be read subject to article 25(2) (b) of the Constitution.
Although the right to enter a temple for purposes of worship protected by article 25(2) (b) must be construed liberally in favour of the public, that does not mean that that right is absolute and unlimited in character.
It must necessarily be subject to such limitation or regulation as arises in the process of harmonising it with the right protected by article 26(b).
Where the denominational rights claimed are not such as can nullify or substantially reduce the right conferred by article 25(2) (b), that Article should be so construed as to give effect to them, leaving the rights of the public in other respects unaffected.
The expression 'matters of religion ' occurring in article 26(b) of the Constitution includes practices which are regarded by the community as part of its religion and under the ceremonial law pertaining to temples, who are entitled to enter into them for worship and where they are entitled to stand for worship and how the worship is to be conducted are all matters of religion.
The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras vs Sri Lakshimindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, ; ; Gopala Muppanar vs Subramania Aiyar, (1094) and Sankaralinga Nadan vs Raja Rajeswara Dorai, (1908) L.R. 35 I.A. 176, referred to.
Held further, that it is well settled that where the original dedication is proved to have been for the benefit of a particular community the fact that members of other communities were allowed to worship cannot lead to the inference that the dedication was also for their benefit.
Babu Bhagwan Din vs Gir Hay Saroop, (1939) L.R. 67 I.A. referred to.
