The first respondent was appointed to the Indian Police Service on 4.7.1969 and allotted to the Gujarat State Cadre.
He was on probation and there was no order of extention of probation.
He was discharged by the impugned order dated 9.4.74.
The order of discharge was assailed by the first re spondent.
A Single Judge of the High Court annulled the order.
Two appeals were preferred by the Union of India and the State to the Division Bench which came to the same conclusion, though for different reasons.
The State filed an appeal before this Court, which was resisted by the respondent, contending that reference to Rule 12(bb) of the Indian Police Service (Probation) Rules, 1954 brought into the otherwise innocuous order stigma in sufficient measure warranting a proceeding of the nature contemplated under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and that the respondent should have been treated as a confirmed officer of the cadre at the time the order of discharge was made.
On behalf of the State it was contended that no order of extension of probation was necessary to be made as the process of confirmation was not automatic and even if the two year period as provided in Rule 3(1) of the Probation Rules had expired, confirmation would not ipso facto follow and a special order had to be made.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 1092 HELD: 1.
The first respondent having become a confirmed officer of the Gujarat IPS cadre, under Rule 12(bb) of the Indian Police Service Rules, 1954 his services could not be brought to an end by an order of discharge since the said Rules had no application for officer confirmed in the cadre.
Proceedings in accordance with law were, therefore, neces sary to terminate his service.
[1096A C] 2.1 While the Probation Rules prescribed an initial period of two years of probation they did not provide any optimum period of probation.
Administrative instructions issued by the Government of India on 16th March, 1973 indi cating the guidelines to be followed in the matter laid down that, save for exceptional reasons, the period of probation should not be extended by more than one year and no member of the service should, by convention, be kept on probation for more than double the normal period i.e. 4 years.
[1094F G; 1095A B] 2.2 Within the limits of executive powers under the Constitutional scheme it is open to the apropriate Govern ment to issue instructions to cover the gap where there be any vacuum or lacuna.
Since instructions do not run counter to the rules in existence, the validity of the instructions cannot be disputed.
[1095C] In the instant case, there was no order of extension and the order of discharge is about five years after the ap pointment.
The respondent, therefore, stood confirmed in the cadre on the relevant date when he was discharged.
[1096A] Sant Ram Sharma vs State of Rajasthan and Anr., ; ; State of Punjab vs Dharam Singh, ; and Moti Ram Deka etc.
vs General Manager, N.E.F. Railways, Maligaon, Pandu etc.
; , , referred to.
