The Notification No. 68/76 dated March 16, 1976 issued by the Central Government exempted converted types of papers commonly known as imitation flint papers obtained by one side of paper being subjected to printing of colour irre spective of the fact whether or not such paper is subse quently varnished or glazed by chemicals or embossed, and failing under item 17(2) of Excise Tarrif, if it was proved that the appropriate duty of excise has already been paid in respect of the paper used in their manufacture.
The appellant registered as small scale industry, which buys white paper on which duty had already been paid and manufactures flock paper out of it by a manual process, sought exemption from payment of duty under the aforesaid notification.
His claim was rejected by the Assistant Col lector.
That order was set aside by the Appellate Collector who took the view that the wording of the notification showed that as long as the one side of the paper has been printed with the colour whatever other process is undertaken of further polishing or glazing etc.
is immaterial, and that in this case the first operation of printing of one side of the paper with colour has been established.
Thereafter the matter went before the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal under section 36(2) of the Salt Act, 1944, which found that printing is not only word printing, it extends to numerous other processes whereby a surface is coated or coloured or is given an imprint, to represent, reproduce, cover, decorate etc.
and it is not just ink that is used for printing.
Since in its opinion in the instant case, there was no colour printing it set aside the Appel late order.
Allowing the appeal under section 35 L of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1942, the Court, 1069 HELD: The process carried on by the appellant is covered by the Notification No. 68/76 dated March 16, 1976 and it is, therefore, not liable to pay any duty.
[1074G] The purpose of the notification is that the paper which would have otherwise fallen under Item 17(2) of Excise Tariff would, if covered by the notification, become exempt from duty.
The words used therein make it clear that irre spective of the fact whether or not such paper is subse quently varnished or glazed by chemicals or embossed, it would be entitled to the benefit of the notification.
The word 'subsequently ' makes it clear that the process need not be simultaneous.
The Tribunal failed to notice this aspect.
[1073FG, 1074F] The Tribunal rightly indicated that printing did not require ink and many other processes would also be covered by the term printing.
The appellant has been pleading from the very beginning that the process carried on by it con sists of a colour printing on one side of the paper.
The Tribunal has further recorded a finding that the appellant 's process is to paste one side of the paper with adhesive material.
Whether adhesive material is mixed to colour or colour is mixed with adhesive does not make any difference so long as a process of screen printing is carried on to colour the paper on one side.
The fact of screen printing is accepted by respondents and that has been the case of the appellant.
The Appellate Collector was, therefore, right in holding that the appellant was entitled to the benefit of the notification.
[1074DE, 1071D]
