Certain plots of land owned by the appellants were acquired by the Government for the purpose of construction of Aviation Research Centre.
The Collector awarded compensa tion at the rate of Rs.2,000 per acre.
On a reference, the Subordinate Judge enhanced the compensation and awarded at the rate of Rs. 15,000 per acre.
On appeal by the respond ents, the High Court reduced the compensation holding that since the State Government had been offering land situate in the adjacent Industrial Area to the industrialists at the rate of Rs.7,500 per acre, the appellants were entitled compensation at that rate and that the appellants had pur chased the land at the rate of Rs. 100 per acre in the year 1956, they were not entitled to compensation more than Rs.7,500 per acre.
In the appeal to this Court, on behalf of the appellants it was contended that the High Court was not justified in reducing the compensation as there was ample evidence or record to show that the market value of the land was much more than determined by the High Court and developmental activities had taken place near the land as a result of which the value of the land had appreciated tremendously and that for adjacent land acquired by the same Notification was determined by the High Court itself at the rate of Rs. 15,000 per acre.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The judgment and the order of the High Court is set aside and R is directed that the appellant shall be paid compensation at the rate of Rs. 15,000 per acre.
[294E] 2.
Section 23 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 lays down principles for determining compensation according to which the owner is entitled to receive the market value for the land.
[291H] 290 3.
Market value means what a willing purchaser would pay to a willing seller for the property having regard to the advantages available to the land and the development activi ties which may be going on in the vicinity and the potenti ality of the land.
[292A B] 4.
An offer of sale of land to industrialists on conces sional rates with a view of induce them to set up their industries in a particular area does not reflect the pre vailing market value of the land.
The industrialists who were offered the land at concessional rates were not the willing purchasers.
[292F] 5.
The High Court committed error in proceeding on the assumption that the concessional rate offered by the Govern ment to the industrialists indicated the market value of similar land.
[292F G] 6.
In the instant case, on the evidence on record it is apparent that the land in question is adjacent to the indus trial area where a large number of factories are situate.
Even though the land was being used for agricultural pur poses but it was fit for non agricultural purposes and it had potentiality for future use as factory or building site.
[292B C] 7.
There is no valid reason to award compensation to the appellants at a reduced rates specially so when the respond ents have failed to point out any material difference in the situation, topography, lay out of the appellants ' land in respect of which compensation has been awarded at the rate of Rs. 15,000 per acre.
[293F]
