The workmen demanded bonus for the year 1950 5, on the allegation that the employers had made profits during the relevant year.
The employers resisted the demand on the ground that 879 there was a trading loss in the year and as such no bonus was payable.
To determine the available surplus out of which bonus was to be paid, the employers deducted out of their gross profits an amount for depreciation admissible under the Income tax Act.
The industrial tribunal disallowed a portion of the depreciation and found that there were profits in the relevant year and awarded three months bonus to the workmen.
The employers preferred appeals to the Labour Appellate Tribunal but they were dismissed.
The employers then applied to the Appellate Tribunal for a review and the Tribunal dismissed the application holding that it had no power to review its own decision and that even if it had the power it would not grant the review as no case for review had been made out.
Held, that the whole of the depreciation admissible under the Income tax Act is not allowable in determining the available surplus.
The initial depreciation and the additional depreciation are abnormal additions to the income tax depreciation and it would not be fair to the workmen if these depreciations are rated as prior charges before the available surplus is ascertained.
Considerations on which the grant of additional depreciation may be justified under the Income tax Act are different from considerations of social justice and fair apportionment on which the original Full Bench formila in regard to the payment of bonus to the workmen is based.
That is why only normal depreciation including multiple shift depreciation should rank as prior charges.
U.P. Electric Supply Co. Ltd. vs Their Workmen, , approved.
The Labour Appellate Tribunal had the power to review its own orders.
M/s. Martin Burn Ltd. vs R. N. Banerjee, [1958] S.C.R .5I4, followed.
The method adopted by the industrial tribunals in deter mining the trading profits of the employer is an industrial dispute, does not conform to the requirements and provisions of the Income tax Act, and it would, therefore, be fallacious to assume that gross profits determined by the industrial tribunal can be taken to be gross profits that would necessarily be taxable under the Income tax Act.
In determining the available surplus for payment of bonus provision for a higher amount of incometax cannot be made merely because the claim to initial and additional depreciation has been disallowed which increase the amount of gross profits.
