The appellant was sought to be evicted under section 10(3)(c) of the Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 from a room leased out to him for non residential purposes in a residential building.
The landlord needed additional accommodation for residential purposes due to marriages in the family.
The High Court ordered eviction.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that the portion let out to him was a separate and distinct unit for the purposes of section 10(3)(c) of the Act, that the expression 'as the case may be ' in the section has not been properly construed, and that the requirement and comparative hardship of the parties were not properly appre ciated.
Dismissing the appeal the Court, HELD: 1.
A building may consist of separate parts if the context so warrants.
In the instant case, the context and the user did not warrant treatment of the portion let out for non residential user either as a separate or distinct unit.
It was only a small part of the residential building and not a separate part.
The landlord was, therefore, enti tled to seek eviction of the tenant.
[1148B] Shri Balaganesan Metals vs
M.N. Shanmugham Chetty & Ors., ; , referred to.
The meaning of the expression 'as the case may be ' in 1147 section 10(3)(c) is what the expression says, i.e., as the situa tion may be, in other words, in case there are separate and distinct units then concept of need will apply accordingly.
Where, however, there is no such separate and distinct unit, as in the instant case, it has no significance.
[1148E] Bluston & Bramley Ltd. vs Leigh (Euler and Another, Third Parties) [1950] 2 A.E.R. page 29 at page 35, referred to.
The appellant is an affluent businessman and it is not difficult for him to get alternative accommodation.
On the other hand, the respondents who have no other residen tial house than the one in question will find it extremely difficult to get residential accommodation in the same locality and as such they will be put to immense hardship if they are not allowed to occupy the additional portion in their house which has been leased, out to the tenant.
There is no question of balance of convenience.
[1148FG]
