The appellant/plaintiffs filed a suit for a declaration that the eight agreements/contracts executed between the appellants and the defendant/respondent No. 1, were not 'hire purchase agreements ' but were agreements relating to the transaction of loan.
The suit was dismissed.
The appellate Court confirmed the decision of the Trial Court.
There was a second appeal to the High Court, whereafter the appellants moved this Court by special leave against the judgment and order of the High Court.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: The suit had been dismissed on the ground that it was not maintainable in view of the provisions of section 32 of the .
Section 32 of the Act stipulates that notwithstanding any law for the time being in force, no suit shall lie on any ground whatsoever for a decision upon the existence, effect or validity of an arbitration agreement or award, nor shall any arbitration agreement or award be enforced, set aside, amended, modified or in any way affected otherwise than as provided in the Act.
[49B C] Specific case of the appellants was that it was a transaction of loan and there was in fact no agreement of arbitration.
It appeared from the plaint as well as the issues framed that the very existence of the agreement described as hire purchase agreement was put in issue.
The execution of the documents was not denied but it was alleged that these were manipulated documents and that there were in fact no agreements which contained the arbitration agreement.
[50A C] Section 32 of the Act does not contemplate the case of suits challenging the validity of a contract because it contains an arbitration 48 clause.
The section has a very limited application, namely, where the existence of the validity of an arbitration agreement and not the contract containing the arbitration agreement is challenged.
[50D E] Every person has a right to bring a suit which is of a Civil nature and the Court has jurisdiction to try all suits of Civil nature under section 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
That right has not been taken away by section 32 of the Act.
One of the issues, framed namely.
issue No. 4 was "whether the defendant No. 1 obtained disputed hire purchase agreements from the plaintiffs in pursuance of its money lending business?" The existence of the disputed hire purchase agreements was put in issue.
It is true that the execution of an alleged document was not in issue, but the existence of that document as an arbitration agreement was in issue.
Section 32 of the Act does not purport to deal with suits for declaration that there was never any contract or that the contract is void.
This principle is well settled.
In State of Bombay vs Adamjee Hajee Dawood and Co., A.I.R. 1951 Calcutta 147, the Calcutta High Court held that section 32 of the Act does not contemplate the case of a suit challenging the validity of a contract merely because it contains an arbitration clause.
This is the correct position in law, and in the facts and circumstances of the case, the trial Court, the appellate Court and the High Court in this case were in error.
Their judgments and orders were set aside.
[50E H; 51A C] State of Bombay vs Adamjee Hajee Dawood & Co., A.I.R , referred to.
