In the Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer, there were two important offices Sajadanashin and Mutwalli.
Consequent upon the migration of the last office holder of the office of Sajadanashin to Pakistan in 1947, the Chief Commissioner of Ajmer appointed the appellant 's father as Sajadanashin in April, 1948.
This was challenged by the respondent plaintiff, in a suit, claiming that succession to the office was governed by the rule of primogeniture, that he was the rightful person to hold it and that the appellant 's father had no such right or title.
The suit was dismissed by the trial court as not maintainable in view of the bar imposed by section 119 of the Ajmer Land Revenue Regulations.
On appeal, the District Judge held that the suit was maintainable.
In second appeal by the defendant, the Judicial Commissioner upheld the view taken by the trial court and dismissed the suit.
The Supreme Court allowed the appeal of the plaintiff respondent, and remitted the case to the trial court for disposal on merits.
Meanwhile, the Government of India brought forward a legislation called the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955 and the Durgah Committee, as required under the Act, was constituted for the administrative control and management of Durgah endowment.
The aforesaid Committee, got itself impleaded as a party to the suit and resisted it, contending that the suit had become infructuous as, under sections 13 and 21 of the DKS Act, the Committee was responsible to make interim or permanent arrangement for the office of Sajadanashin and that the appellant had been appointed as interim Sajadanashin.
The trial court overruled the objection.
53 The suit was resisted by the appellant 's father on the ground that the plaintiff had no legitimate right to succeed to the office as he was not the nearest male heir to the last holder of the office, that the right to appoint Sajadanashin by established usage, custom and tradition vested exclusively in the local representative of the Government, and that the Court had no power to interfere with such appointment in any way whatsoever.
The trial court non suited the plaintiff on merits.
The High Court, in appeal, reversed the judgment and declared that the plaintiff was the nearest male heir to the last office holder and, therefore, entitled to succeed as Sajadanashin.
It, however, observed that the plaintiff had failed to prove that he was qualified to occupy the office and, therefore, left the question open for determination by the Governor, who was the competent Authority under the DKS Act to appoint the Sajadanashin.
The judgment of the Single Judge was challenged before the Division Bench under section 18 of the Rajasthan High Court Ordinance.
Meanwhile, the Governor on being satisfied with the qualifications of the plaintiff approved his appointment as Sajadanashin by a Government Notification dated July 7,1975.
On the death of the plaintiff on October 23, 1975 his son was brought on record, and following the dismissal of the Special Appeal by the Division Bench of the High Court on March 7,1980, he was recognised as Sajadanashin, by the Government by a communication dated January 24,1981.
Against the decision of the High Court an appeal was filed before this Court.
While the special appeal was pending before the High Court, and on plaintiff 's death on October 23, 1975, his son approached the Durgah Committee for recognition as Sajadanashin, but it did not accede to his request and decided to invite applications from persons who wanted to be appointed as Sajadanashin.
In response to the public notice under sub section (1) of section 13 of the DKS Act, 11 applications were received by the Committee and none of these were related to the plaintiff or the last office holder.
The Committee forwarded the applications to the Governor for making a reference to the High Court for decision, but the Governor did not make a reference and took a firm decision that plaintiff 's son was alone entitled to succeed to the office, being the son of the last office holder and that the other applicants had no right to the said office.
The Committee disagreed with the Governor 54 and referred all the applications to the High Court for determination of rival claims of the candidates.
After the disposal of the special appeal by the Division Bench, the High Court, accepting the view taken in the special appeal, rejected the reference as not maintainable.
The Committee and one of the applicants filed two Special Leave Petitions before this Court.
In the appeal before this Court, it was urged on behalf of the appellant that the plaintiff could not be considered as the nearest male heir to the last holder of the office and that there were two other persons, i.e. PW 2 and PW 3 who were nearer to the last holder of the office than the plaintiff.
In the Special Leave Petitions, on behalf of the Committee it was urged that the decision of the High Court as to the succession to the office of Sajadanashin was based on the concession made by the parties and was, therefore, not binding on the Committee, that in view of sections 13 and 21 of the DKS Act, it had the power to appoint a proper person as Sajadanashin, that it was not bound to follow the customary rules of succession to the office and that the selection of a suitable person need not be made only among the heirs of the last office holder and could be made from the public as well, to better serve the devotees.
Dismissing the appeal and Special Leave Petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The nature of the office of Sajadanashin and the rule of succession to it always remained undisputed.
It was occupied by a hereditary descendant of the Saint.
The Government of India had also recognised that Sajadanashin has always been a descendant of the Saint and that position should not be disturbed.
[61C,E] 1.2 Section 21 of the Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955 was intended to provide transitional arrangement to hold the office of Sajadanashin.
It enables the Sajadanashin who was holding the office immediately before the commencement of the DKS Act to continue to hold that office.
His right, however, was made subject to other provisions of the Act and to the final decision of the suit relating to that office.
The suit referred to under section 21 must be the suit which was pending on the date of coming into force of the DKS Act.
[63E F] 1.3 Section 13 of the Act does not confer unlimited or absolute power to the Durgah Committee.
The scope of section 13 is limited.
The Durgah Committee is only entitled to accord recognition as Sajadana 55 shin to the person legitimately entitled to succeed to the office.
The Durgah Committee cannot enlarge the scope of this power to invite applications from the public and select any person for appointment as Sajadanashin.
The power conferred under section 13 is only to locate the legitimate heir to the office by the accepted rule of succession and recognise him as Sajadanashin and not beyond that.
[64C] 1.4 It cannot be said that the plaintiff is not the legitimate person to succeed as Sajadanashin.
P.W. 2 did not consider himself nearest to the last office holder and P.W. 3 was illiterate and did not want to become Sajadanashin.
Moreover, both of them have died during the pendency of the suit leaving behind none to succeed.
[64E G] Asrar Ahmed vs Durgah Committee, Ajmer, AIR 1947 P.C. 1 and The Durgah Committee, Ajmer & Anr.
vs Syed Hussain Ali
