The petitioners were found guilty under section 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act and the currency and other goods recovered from their possession were confiscated and heavy personal penalties imposed on them by the Collector of Central Excise and Land Customs.
Complaints were thereafter lodged against them by the Customs authorities before the Additional District Magistrate under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code, read with section 23/23B of the Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1947, and section i67(8i) of the Sea Customs Act, as also under other sections of the two latter Acts.
The Magistrate granted bail but they could not furnish the requisite security and were, therefore, kept in judicial custody.
By two petitions under article 32 Of the Constitution they prayed for the issue of writs of certiorari and/or prohibition for quashing the proceedings pending against them in the Court of the Magistrate as also for the issue of writs of habeas corpus.
It was contended on their behalf that in view of the provision of article 20(2) Of the Constitution they could not be prosecuted and punished twice over for the same offence and the proceedings pending before the Additional Magistrate violated the protection afforded by article 20(2) of the Constitution.
Held, that the contention was without substance and the petitions must be dismissed.
The fact that in imposing confiscation and penalties under section 167(8) of the Sea Customs Act, the Collector of Customs acts 823 judicially is not decisive and does not attract the protection of article 20(2) of the Constitution.
Section 186 of the Act does not prevent the infliction of any other punishment to which the person concerned may be liable under any other law.
F. N. Roy vs Collectoy of Customs, Petition NO.
438 Of 955, decided on May 16, 1957, referred to.
Criminal conspiracy is an offence under section 120B of the Indian Penal Code but not so under the Sea Customs Act, and the petitioners were not and could not be charged with it before the Collector of Customs.
It is an offence separate from the crime which it may have for its object and is complete even before the crime is attempted or completed, and even when attempted or completed, it forms no ingredient of such crime.
United States vs Rabinowith, ; , referred to.
