A suit was filed by the appellants in the Court of the Assistant Collector seeking ejectment of the respondent tenant from his lands, under section 77(3) proviso 2(e) of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 on the ground that he had defaulted in the payment of rent, and it was decreed.
In execution of the decree, the respondent was ejected from the suit land.
No appeal was filed from the said decree but the respondent filed a suit in the Civil Court against the appellants alleging that he was in fact a mortgagee in possession of the suit land and not a tenant and that the decree of ejectment passed by the Revenue Court was without jurisdiction and, therefore, a nullity, and claimed restoration of the possession of the suit land from which he had been wrongly ousted by the Revenue Court.
The suit was dismissed by the Subordinate Judge holding that the claim of the respondent to be a mortgagee in possession of the suit land was wrong and that the order of the Revenue Court was perfectly in order and within that court 's jurisdictional competence and that it was of a binding nature on the respondent and was not open to challenge in subsequent proceedings.
The appellant asserted that the claim by the respondent in the subsequent suit was barred by the principles of res judicata.
The suit was dismissed.
In appeal, the Additional District Judge reversed the findings of the trial court and decreed the suit of the respondent.
The appellants filed regular second appeals before the High Court.
94 A Single Judge of the High Court was of the view that, in view of the conflicting judgments on the points for determination in the case, the matter required to be referred to a larger bench.
The Full Bench, by a majority view, held that the decision of the Revenue Court under section 77 of the Punjab Tenancy Act upon the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties would not operate as res judicata and it would be open to challenge in a subsequent suit or in other collateral proceedings between the parties, and remitted the matter back to the Single Judge for disposal in accordance with the above decision.
The question for consideration in the appeals by Special Leave before this Court was: as to how far an order of eviction of a person by the Revenue Court under section 77(3) of the Punjab Tenancy Act, 1887 operated as res judicata for a title suit filed by a person claiming to be a mortgagee and not a tenant of the alleged landlord.
Dismissing the appeals by special leave, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was right in holding that there was no res judicata so far as the second suit based on the assertion of the title of the respondent was concerned.
[105C D] 2.1 The overall scheme of the Act is to provide speedy remedies with regard to disputes between the landlords and tenants and also under what circumstances that relationship came to an end.
Sections 98 and 99 do not in any way affect the question whether the decision of the Revenue Court under the Revenue Act can operate as res judicata in certain cases.
The limits of the jurisdiction would be apparent by the fact that all suits by a landlord to eject a tenant do not encompass suits to decide whether a person was a tenant or not or whether the plaintiff was a landlord or not.
[98C; 99 F G] 2.2 ouster of jurisdiction of Civil Courts should not be inferred easily.
It must be clearly provided for and established.
If the dispute was as to the nature of the relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties, the Revenue Court under the Punjab Tenancy Act had no jurisdiction; when there was admitted position, the relationship of landlord and tenant was accepted, the remedies and rights of the parties should be worked out under the scheme of the Act.
[103C D] 2.3 A salutory and simple test to apply in determining whether the previous decision operated as res judicata or on principles analogous thereto was to find out whether the first court could go into the question 95 whether the respondent was a tenant in possession or mortgagee in A possession.
In view of the language of section 77 it is clear that it could not and, therefore, there was no res judicata.
The subsequent civil suit was.
therefore, not barred by res judicata.
[105B C] Raj Lakshmi Dasi and others vs Banamali Sen and others, ; Om Prakash Gupta vs Rattan Singh and another, ; Shri Raja Durga Singh of Solan vs Tholu; , ; Magiti Sasamal vs Pandab Bissoi, ; Lal Chand (dead) by Lrs.
and others vs Radha Kishan, [1977] 2 SCR 522 and State of Tamil Nadu vs Ramalinga Samigal Madam; , , referred to.
