HELD: 1.1 The reasonableness of the reasons given by an arbitrator in making his award cannot be challenged in proceedings under Article 136.
[183E] 1.2 Appraisement of evidence by the arbitrator is ordinarily never a matter which the court questions and considers.
Section 1 of the Evidence Act, 1872 in its rigour is not intended to apply to proceedings before an arbitrator.
In the instant case, the parties have selected their own forum and the deciding forum must be conceded the power of appraisement of the evidence.
The arbitrator is the sole judge of the quality as well as quantity of evidence and it will not be for the Supreme Court to take upon itself the task of being a judge of the evidence before the arbitrator.
It may be possible that on the same evidence the Court might have arrived at a different conclusion than the one arrived at by the arbitrator but that by itself could be no ground for setting aside the award of an arbitrator.
1186B D] Haji Ebrahim Kassam Cochinwall vs Northern Indian oil Industries Ltd., A.I.R. 1951 Calcutta 230, referred to. 2.
There was no violation of any principles of natural justice in the instant case.
It was not a case where the arbitrator had refused cogent and material factors to be taken into consideration.
The award could not therefore, be said to be vitiated by non reception of material or non consideration of the relevant aspects of the matter.
[186A B] Mediterranean & Eastern Export Co. Ltd. vs Fortress Fabrics Ltd., 11948] 2 All.
E.R. 186, referred to.
Whether in a particular contract time was the essence of the contract or not, is a mixed question of law and fact.
In the instant case, the reasons given by the arbitrator in holding that it could not be taken 182 that time was the essence of the contract, were cogent and based on materials on record and have a rational nexus with the conclusion arrived at by him.
[184C;186A] 4.
The word 'reasonable ' have in law the prima facie meaning of reasonable in regard to those circumstances of which the actor, called on to act reasonably, knows or ought to know.
An arbitrator acting as a Judge has to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to the primordial necessity of order in the social life.
Therefore, where reasons germane and relevant for the arbitrator to hold in the manner he did have been indicated, it cannot be said that it was unreasonable.
[187E F; 184E Re a Solicitor, at 371 of the Report) and Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary, Fourth Edition, page 2258, referred to.
In the instant case the arbitrator acted reasonably and rationally.
The challenge to the award was, therefore, rightly rejected by the High Court.
[187G]
