The respondents mortgaged a house property in Bhavnagar with ID possession to a business firm in July, 1947.
The ground floor of the house was already in the occupation of a tenant and hence the mortgagors endorsed the rent deed to the mortgagee for the remaining period of the lease.
Clause 5 of the mortgage deed gave option to the mortgagee to give the house property on rent to anyone and made the mortgagors accountable for loss of rental income.
Clause 7 empowered the mortgagee to keep the property in his possession till the mortgage debt was repaid.
Clause 10 entitled the mortgagors to redeem the mortgage at any time and stated that as soon as redemption took place, the mortgagee should return the documents of title and re deliver possession of the house to the mortgagors.
Notwithstanding the mortgage purporting to be possessory the deed provided for payment of interest, and for the mortgagee to demand repayment of the mortgage amount at any time it deemed fit.
When the existing tenant vacated the portion occupied by him, in November, 191;6, the mortgagee inducted the appellant as a tenant.
The Saurashtra Rent Control Act, 1951 had in the meantime come into force.
This was replaced by the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 with effect from 1.1.1964.
The ejectment proceedings initiated by the mortgagee against the tenant appellant were pending when the mortgage was discharged in October, 1972 in terms of the memo of compromise, which stated that the ground floor of the house had been given on rent to the appellant, that the mortgagee had filed a case against him, that in such circumstances the 77 vacant possession of the ground floor could not be delivered, and that the mortgagors were entitled to obtain vacant possession of the said portion from the appellant.
In the execution proceedings taken out by the mortgagors thereafter the executing court held that they were entitled to get only symbolic delivery and not physical possession of the leased property.
The High Court held that as the mortgage was an anomalous mortgage, the rights of the mortgagee have to be determined with reference to the terms of the mortgage deed, that though the mortgage deed permitted the mortgagee to create tenancies, the said permission did not extend to granting lease beyond the term of the mortgage and it was subject to the stipulation in the mortgage deed that the mortgagee should deliver possession whenever the mortgage was redeemed, and hence when the mortgagee 's right to possession came to an end, he ceased to be a lessor and the appellant was bound to surrender possession and he had no right to invoke the provisions of the Rent Acts to continue his tenancy, and that the appellant was not a necessary party to the suit or the execution application, as his possession was akin to that of a sub lessee and the execution application was therefore legally maintainable against him.
In this appeal by certificate it was contended for the appellant tenant that his tenancy rights were protected under the Saurashtra Rent Act and the Bombay Rent Act, that the mortgagors had given an unrestricted power to the mortgagee to create a tenancy for any length of time, and were therefore, bound to accept the lease transaction even after the redemption of the mortgage deed, that his tenancy rights became enlarged by the subsequent legislation enacted for affording protection to tenants, and that by reason of the authority given to the mortgagee to create tenancy the mortgagors had constituted the mortgagee as their agent and hence they as principals were bound by the acts of their agent.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 A tenancy created by a mortgagee in possession may be binding even after the termination of the title of the mortgagee in possession if the mortgagors had concurred to the grant of the lease.
[88B] 1.2 In the instant case, the mortgagors had not empowered the mortgagee to create a tenancy which would be binding on them after the 78 redemption of the mortgage.
The authorisation given to the mortgagee was not an unconditional and absolute one.
It was circumscribed by the stipulation that the mortgagee should re deliver the possession of the property whenever the mortgage was redeemed.
The lease granted by the mortgagee could not thus enure beyond the term of the mortgage.
[9lE, 90A, 91BC] 1.3 This was not a case where the mortgagee was put in possession of the mortgaged property in older to appropriate the usufructs in lieu of interest.
The mortgagors had agreed to pay interest to the mortgagee at mercantile rate and also as per contractual rate.
Furthermore, the mortgage deed absolved the mortgagee of any liability for loss of income from the mortgaged property due to fall in rent or non payment of rent or due to non leasing of the property and keeping the house vacant.
On account of these guarantees the mortgagee was under no compulsion to lease out the property just because of the permission given to him to grant lease, either to secure rental income in lieu of interest or on grounds of prudent management.
The mortgagee should have realised that by inducting the appellant, he was running the risk of being unable to deliver possession of the house to the mortgagors when the mortgage was redeemed and thereby he would be contravening clauses 7 and 10 of the mortgage deed.
[90D E] 1.4 The mortgage in the instant case was an anomalous mortgage and not an usufructuary one.
The rights of the parties to the mortgage therefore would be governed by section 98 of the , which provides for determination of the rights of the parties in accordance with the terms of the mortgage deed.
Consequently, the appellant could claim tenancy rights only as against his landlord viz. the mortgagee and not against the mortgagors.
As soon as the mortgagee 's rights became extinguished by redemption of the mortgage, neither he nor anyone inducted by him had a right to be in possession of the mortgaged property.
[85CE, 91F] Film Corporation Ltd. vs Gyan Nath, ; Purshottam vs Madhavaji Meghaji, ; AIR 1976 Gujarat 161; ; SV Venkatarama Reddiar vs Abdul Gani Rowther & Ors.
AIR 1980 Madras 276; and Devkinandan vs Roshan Lal, AIR , referred to.
No question of imprudence can arise where the rights of the tenant were enlarged by tenancy legislation enacted after the tenant was put in possession by the mortgagee.
In the instant case, the appellant 's rights, as a tenant, did not become enlarged by means of any tenancy 79 legislation which came to be enacted after the lease was granted.
The Saurashtra Rent Control Act, 1951 was already in force when the appellant was inducted into possession from December 4, 1956.
It cannot be claimed that the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947 which had replaced the Saurashtra Act from January 1, 1964, was a subsequent tenancy legislation that had enlarged the tenancy rights of the appellant, since the second appeal pertaining to the standard rent application and the suit for ejectment filed by the mortgagee were instituted in 1963 before the repeal of the Saurashtra Act.
[88A, 91E, 88F,H, 89AB,DE] Mahabir Gope vs Harbans Narain, ; ; Asa Ram vs Ram Kali, ; Dahya Lal vs Rasul Mohammed Abdul Rahim, [1963] 3 SCR l; Prabhu vs Ram Dev, ; and Mula 's , 7th Edn.
p. 514, referred to.
The relationship between the parties to the mortgage was always one of debtor and creditor.
There was, thus, no question of the mortgagors constituting the mortgagee as their agent.
[9lD] D 4.
The appellant had no independent rights and hence it was not necessary that he should have been made a party to the suit filed by the mortgagors after the redemption of the mortgage.
His position was akin to that of a sub tenant whose rights were co terminus with those of the tenant himself.
The mortgagors were, therefore, entitled to seek ejectment of the mortgagee and the tenant inducted by him.
The execution application taken against the mortgagee would be binding on the appellant.
[9lG H]
