The Hindustan Commercial Bank, the Bank of Cochin Ltd. and Lakshmi Commercial Bank were amalgamated with Punjab National Bank, Canara Bank, State Bank of India respectively in terms of separate schemes drawn under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and pursuant thereto 125 employees of these banks were excluded from employment, and their services were not taken over by the respective transferee banks.
Some of these excluded employees filed writ petitions before the High Court which granted partial relief, but on appeal by the transferee Bank the Writ Petitions were dismissed by the Division Bench.
Against this, appeals by Special Leave were filed before this Court.
Some of the excluded employees filed writ petitions before this Court directly.
It was contended on behalf of the excluded employees that the draft schemes did not include any name of employees intended to be excluded; that no opportunity of being heard as afforded to them before exclusion was ordered, and the authorities concerned had not acted fairly; that none of them was responsible for ficticious, improper or 189 on business like advances of loan to parties thereby bringing conditions nearabout bankruptcy for the appropriate banking companies, that many other employees against whom there were definite charges already pending enquiry or even orders of dismissal had been proposed had been taken over and retained in service of the transferee banks while these excluded employees, without justification, had been called upon to face this unfortunate situation.
The transferee banks, the Reserve Bank of India and the Union of India filed affidavits in opposition.
It was contended on behalf of the Union of India that the scheme in respect of each of the amalgamated banks had been approved by it as required under the Act and since finality was attached to such schemes, the schemes could not be challenged, particularly in view of the provisions contained in Article 31 A of the Constitution.
It was contended on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India that law did not require that the draft scheme should contain the names of the employees to be excluded, that the incorporation of the names finalised on the basis of scrutiny of the records before the schemes were placed before the RBI was sufficient compliance of the requirements of the law; that the provisions of the Act did not confer any right on the employees of being heard; that the scheme making process was legislative in character and, therefore, did not come within the ambit of natural justice, and the action, not being judicial or quasijudicial and, at the most, being administrative or executive was also not open to challenge on allegations of violation of rules of natural justice; that moratorium under the statutory provisions could not be beyond six months and in view of the fact that the entire operation had to be finalised within a brief time frame, the requirement of an enquiry by notice to all the officers to be excluded could not have been intended to be implanted into the provisions of section 45 and that provision of compensation had been made for those who were excluded from the respective schemes.
Allowing the writ petitions and appeals, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Rules of natural justice apply to administrative action and the decision to exclude a section of the employees without complying with requirements of natural justice was bad.
[206H] 2.1 Fair play is part of public policy and a guarantee for justice to citizens.
In our system of Rule of Law, every social agency conferred with power is required to act fairly so that social action would be just, and there would be furtherance of the well being of citizens.
[207E] 190 2.2 The rules of natural justice have developed with the growth of A civilization and the content thereof is often considered as a proper measure of the level of civilization and Rule of Law prevailing in the community.
[207E F] 2.3 Natural justice generally requires that persons liable to be directly affected by proposed administrative acts, decisions or proceedings be given adequate notice of what is proposed so that they may be in a position (a) to make representation on their own behalf; (b) or to appear at a hearing or enquiry (if one is held); and (c) effectively to prepare their own case and to answer the case (if any) they had to meet.
Even when a State agency acts administratively, rules of natural justice would apply.[206C D] 3.1 Section 45 of the Banking Regulations Act provides a legislative scheme and the different steps required to be taken have been put one after the other.
On a simple construction of sub sections (5) and (6) and on the basis of the sequence pattern adopted in section 45, it is clear that the Act contemplates the employees to be excluded to be specifically named in the draft scheme.
Since it is a draft scheme prepared by RBI and right to object or to make suggestions is extended to both the banking company as also the transferee bank, and in view of the fact that clause (i) of sub section (5) specifies this item to be a matter which may be included in the scheme, it must follow that the legislative intention is that the scheme would incorporate the names of such employees as are intended to be excluded in accordance with the scheme.
Once it is incorporated in the scheme, the banking company as also the transferee bank would be entitled to suggest/object to the inclusion of names of employees.
[199E F; H; 200A B] 3.2 In case some employees of the banking company are intended to be excluded, their names have to be specifically mentioned in the scheme at the draft stage.
The requirement of specific mention is significant and the legislature must be taken to have intended compliance of the requirement at that stage.
The excluded employees in the instant case, were in employment under the contract in the banking companies which were private banks.
They have been excluded from service under the transferee banks and the contracts had been terminated as a result of inclusion of their names in the schemes.
This exclusion has adversely affected this category of employees and has brought about prejudice and adverse civil consequences to them.
[200D E] 4.1 Natural justice cannot be employed in the exercise of legisla 191 tive power.
Power has been conferred on the RBI in certain situations to A take steps for applying to the Central Government for an order of moratorium and during the period of moratorium to propose either reconstruction or amalgamation of the banking company.
A scheme for the purposes contemplated has to be framed by RBI and placed before the Central Government for sanction.
Power has been vested in the Central Government in terms of what is ordinarily known as a Henery 8 clause for making orders for removal of difficulties.
[201H; 202A B] 4.2 Section 45(11) requires that copies of the scheme as also such orders made by the Central Government are to be placed before both Houses of Parliament.
This requirement does not make the exercise in regard to schemes a legislative process.
Framing of the scheme under section 45 does not involve a legislative process, and as such, rules of natural justice are applicable to the instant case.
[202C] 4.3 The fact that orders made by the Central Government for removing difficulties as contemplated under sub clause (10) were also to be placed before the two Houses of Parliament makes it abundantly clear that the placing of the scheme before the two Houses is not a relevant test for making the scheme framing process legislative.
[203B] 5.1 RBI which monitored the three amalgamations was required to act fairly in the facts of the case.
The situation necessitated a participatory enquiry in regard to the excluded employees.
If an opportunity to know the allegations and to have their say had been afforded, they could have no grievance on this score.
The action deprives them of their livelihood and brings adverse civil consequences and could obviously not be taken on the ipse dixit of RBI owners without verification of facts.
In view of the time frame, a detailed enquiry may not be possible but keeping the legislative scheme in view, perhaps, a simpler enquiry could be afforded.
[206E F] 5.2 In the facts of the case, there is no justification to hold that rules of natural justice have been ousted by necessary implication on account of the time frame.
On the other hand, the time limited by statute provides scope for an opportunity to be extended to the intended excluded employees before the scheme is finalised so that a hearing commensurate to the situation is afforded before a section of the employees is thrown out of employment.
[207F G] 5.3 There is no justification to think of a post decisional hearing.
H 192 on the other hand, the normal rule should apply.
The excluded employees have already been thrown out of employment and having been deprived of livelihood they must be facing serious difficulties.
There is no justification to throw them out of employment and then given them an opportunity of representation when the requirement is that they should have the opportunity as a condition precedent to action.
It is common experience that once a decision has been taken, there is a tendency to uphold it and a representation may not really yield any fruitful purpose.
[208A C] 6.
Protection of the umbrella of conclusive evidence is not attached to a situation as in the instant case, so as to bar the question regarding the requirements of the procedure laid down under the Act and the opportunity afforded to the excluded employees from being examined.
There is, therefore, nothing in sub section (7A) of section 45 to preclude examination of the question.
[208G] [Each of the three transferee banks should take over the excluded employees on the same terms and conditions of employment under the respective banking companies prior to amalgamation.
The employees would be entitled to the benefit of continuity of service for all purposes including salary and perks throughout the period.
It is open to the transferee banks to take such action as they consider proper against these employees in accordance with law.
There is no justification to penalise some of the excluded employees who have not come to the Court.
They too shall be entitled to the same benefits as the petitioners.] [208H; 209A B] Union of India & Anr.
vs Cynamide India Ltd. & Anr., [1987] 2 SCC 720; Perre Brothers vs Citrus organisation Committee, ; Re (H) K (an infant), ; State of Orissa vs Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei & Ors., ; ; A.K Kraipak & ors., vs Union of India & Ors., ; Chandra Bhavan Boarding and Lodging, Bangalore vs The State of Mysore & Anr., 11970] 2 SCR 600; Swadeshi Cotton Mills vs Union of India, ; and Smt.
Somavanti & Ors.
vs State of Punjab & Ors., , referred to.
