Section 9(1) of the U.P. Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 prohibits local body or other person from setting up within the market area any place for the sale purchase of the specified agricultural produce, except under a licence granted by the Committee concerned.
A proviso thereto, however, exempts a producer in respect of agricultural produce produced, reared, caught or processed by him or any person who purchases or stores any agricultural produce for his domestic consumption.
Clause (b) section 17(iii) empowers a Committee to levy and collect market fee payable on transactions of sale of specified agricultural produce.
Where such produce is sold through a commission agent, sub cl.
(1) of cl.
(b) makes him liable to collect the market fee and pay the same to the Committee.
The petitioners, who are producers of Khandsari sugar, claimed that as they were only 'producers ' in respect of agricultural produce in the market area they were not required to take out any licence or to pay the market fee under the Act, that the expression "for his domestic consumption" in the proviso to section 9(1) does not refer to a producer of agricultural produce but to a person who purchases or stores any agricultural produce, and that sub s.(l) of section 9 would apply.
Only to a producer who was a trader and the petitioners were not 'traders ' within the definition of the term under section 2(y) and also as contemplated by sub section
(1) of section 9.
Dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
It is not the intention of the Legislature that a 'producer ' of an agricultural produce within the Market Area should be exempted from taking out any licence even though he sells his produce in the Market Area.
[311G H] 309 2.
Sub section (1) of section 9 of the U.P. Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964 will not apply to the two categories of persons mentioned in the proviso thereto, namely, (1) a producer who produces, rears, catches or processes agricultural produce for his domestic consumption, and (2) any person who purchases or stores any agricultural produce for his domestic consumption.
If, however, the producer produces, rears, catches or processes agricultural produces not for his domestic consumption but for the sale thereof in the Market Area such a producer will not come within the purview of the proviso and he will have to take out a licence under section 9(1).
[312B C; F] Since the petitioners in the instant case are producing Khandsari for sale in the Market Area they will have to take out a licence under sub section
(1) of section 9.
They are thus also liable to pay market fee to the Committee on their transactions of sale, under section 17(iii)(b).
[313D] 3.
The expression "for his domestic consumption" in the proviso to section 9(1) refers to a producer of agricultural produce.
The proviso should be interpreted in a manner which would be in conformity with the intention of the legislature and also the object of the Act, i.e., the regulation of sale and purchase of agricultural produce and establishment, superintendence and control of market therefor.
If the proviso is interpreted to mean that the producer of agricultural produce is exempt from taking out a licence under section 9(1), even though he produces, rears, catches or processes not for his domestic consumption but for selling them in the Market Area, it would defeat the very object of the Act.
[312C D] 4.
The petitioners by producing Khandsari sugar and selling it within the market area are also 'traders ' within the meaning of section 2(y) and also as contemplated by sub section
(1) of section 9.
[313B] Ramesh Chandra vs State of U.P., [1980] 3 SCR l04, referred to.
