The appellant was the principal of an institution, the management of which had been entrusted to an Authorised Controller under section 58 of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1973.
Following upon certain disputes and differences with regard to the management of the institution, the appellant was suspended by the Controller but the order of suspension was stayed by the Vice Chancellor.
The Controller, after holding an ex parte inquiry, dismissed the appellant from service in exercise of the power vested in him by the University Statute 17.06 which provided the giving of an opportunity of being heard to the teacher concerned and prescribed a procedure for inquiry.
The Vice Chancellor, on the ground that the charges against the appellant did not warrant her dismissal, disapproved the order of dismissal and directed reinstatement of the appellant, granting liberty to the Controller to impose a lesser punishment on her.
The Controller passed an order allowing the appellant to function as the Principal but at the same time imposing various restraints and constraints on her powers and duties, which was challenged by her in a petition filed under article 226.
The High Court quashed the said order with liberty to the Controller to impose a minor penalty on the appellant in accordance with the order of the Vice Chancellor.
Three days before the High Court delivered its judgment, the Vice Chancellor had reviewed her earlier order at the instance of H 358 the appellant, and, on the basis of two reports of the Joint Director of Higher Education alleging that the appellant had committed grave financial irregularities, had approved the order of dismissal passed earlier by the Controller; but the Controller, who was a party to the writ petition did not bring it to the notice of the High Court.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order of the Vice Chancellor passed in review by a petition under article 226 which was dismissed by the High Court on the around of existence of an alternative remedy under section 68 of the U.P. State lUniversities Act.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: It is well established that an alternative remedy is not an absolute bar to the maintainability of a writ petition.
When an authority has acted wholly without jurisdiction, the High Court should not refuse to exercise its jurisdiction under article 226 on the ground of existence of an alternative remedy.
[362C D] In the instant case, the Vice Chancellor had no power of review and the exercise of such a power by her was absolutely without jurisdiction.
Indeed, the order passed by the Vice Chancellor on review was a nullity; such an order could surely be challenged before the High Court by a petition under article 226 and, in our opinion, the High Court was not justified in dismissing the writ petition on the ground that an alternative remedy was available to the appellant under section 68 of the U.P. State Universities Act.
[362D E] 2.
It is now well established that a quasi judicial authority cannot review its own order unless the power of review is expressly conferred on it by the statute under which it derives its jurisdiction.
The Vice Chancellor in considering the question of approval of an order of dismissal of the Principal, acts as a quasi judicial authority.
It is not disputed that the provisions of the U.P. State Universities Act, 1973 or of the Statutes of the University do not confer any power of review on the Vice Chancellor.
In the circumstances, it must be held that the Vice Chancellor acted wholly without jurisdiction in reviewing her order dated January 24, 1987 by her order dated March 7, 1987.
[361H; 362A B]
