The predecessors in interest of the parties were co reversioners of the testator, a Hindu widow.
Prior to 1943 she executed a deed of gift in favour of the father of the appellants of certain properties in which she had life interest.
Decreeing the suit filed by the respondent/plaintiffs the trial court made a declaration that the gift of the land in favour of the defendant/appellants was ineffective against reversionary rights of the plaintiffs after the death of the donor.
Allowing the appeal, the appellate court passed a compromise decree declaring the gift deed ineffective in respect of the land.
Subsequent after the enactment of the , the widow executed a will in respect of all her properties in favour of the appellants.
The suit and the appeal against it were dismissed.
But the High Court found the resondents entitled to claim possession of half of the share of the land earlier gifted away.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.
The effect of the is that a female Hindu can transfer her property by will.
Since in the instant case, the will was subsequent to this period she had absolute estate and full capacity to make the will.
[382B] 2.1 When the widow inherited the properties from her husband in 1942 she had only life interest in the said properties.
She was a limited owner upto 1956 when the Act came into force.
If she had gifted away her properties during that period she would not have become absolute owner after coming into operation of the Act and would not have been competent to bequeath the properties by will.
However, by the compromise decree it was declared that the purported gift deed was legally invalid.
The effect of that declaration was that she continued to 379 be the limited owner of the properties thereafter until 1956 when by virtue section 14 of Act her limited estate became absolute estate.
She was,therefore,competent to dispose it of when she made the will.
[381G H;382E] 2.2 It cannot be said that the father of the respondents did not challenge the gift till the life time of the widow, and that he filed the said suit only for the purpose of avoiding operation of the gift after her lifetime.
The compromise decree should be construed as that the parties agreed that the properties would be enjoyed by the widow till her lifetime and the gift made by her in favour of the apellant 's father would remain operative till the lifetime of the widow but not beyond that.
[381E F] 2.3 The lower courts on facts have held that the will was genuine and properly executed.
If that is so, then the claim of the appellants, who are the legatees under the will, cannot be disputed.
[382B]
