The appellant, a company, set up a fertilizer factory at Kota in Rajasthan.
The factory manufactures urea for which the main raw material is Naptha, which has to be transported from the Koyali Refinery of the Indian oil Corporation.
Before the actual setting up of the factory, the appellant requested the Railway Board by letter for a concessional frieght rate for the carriage of Naptha to the factory.
The Railway Board by its letter EX 5 dated November 5, 1966, quoted station to station rate equal to 85 B (special) as against the rate equivalent to classification 62.5 B requested for by the appellant, and also stated that as the special rate was being quoted ahead of the actual setting up of the factory, the frieght rate would be reviewed when the traffic actually began to move.
When the factory was almost ready for operation, the appellant again requested the Railway Board by letter for charging the rate under classification 62 5 B instead of 85 B (special) quoted by it.
The Railway Board refused to oblige.
The appellant wrote another letter to the Board, requesting it to permit charging the rate equivalent to 85 B (special) pending its final decision, as the movement of naptha was to commence from June/July, 1968.
The Railway Board refused to grant that request also, saying that it could reconsider the question if on the basis of the facts and figures of the cost of production vis a vis the sale price of the fertilizers, it could be established that the production of the fertilisers at Kota was uneconomical unless freight concession on the movement of naptha was granted.
The appellant filed a complaint under section 41(1)(a) and (b) of the Railways Act, 1890, before the Railway Rates Tribunal.
The Tri 384 bunal decided against the appellant.
Aggrieved, the appellant appealed to this Court by special leave for relief against the order and judgment of the Tribunal.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court ^ HELD: Three questions arise for consideration of the Court: (1) whether the Railway Board was bound to allow the concessional rate offered to the appellant, that is, 85 B (special) quoted in its letter exhibit C 5 dt.
November 5, 1966, to the appellant, (2) whether the rate charged for the carriage of the naptha between the stations concerned was unreasonable, and (3) whether the Railways were showing undue preference or advantage in respect of other traffic in contravention of the provisions of section 28 of the Railways Act.
[389E F ] Dealing with the third question first, which relates to the contravention of section 28 of the Railways Act, the scope of the section was considered by this Court in Rajgarh Jute Mills Ltd vs Eastern Railway and another; , at 241, and the Railway Rates Tribunal, considering the material on record in the light of the decision of the Court in case, held that there was no evidence produced by the appellant to justify any grievance under section 28.
This conclusions is perfectly justified.
[390E; 391C] The second question above said relates to the rate charged by the Railway Administration being per se unreasonable.
Even assuming, as argued by appellant 's counsel, that the Railways are earning some surplus income, that by itself is no ground to hold that the frieght charged is per se unreasonable.
In the case of commodities of national needs such as foodgrains, crude oil etc., it may be necessary for the Railways to charge below the operation cost, and to offset the loss, the Railways may charge higher freight for some other classified commodities.
The cost of operation cannot by itself be the basis for judging the reasonableness of the rate charged.
Counsel for the appellant also argued that crude oil and naptha were comparable commodities for the purpose of carriage but there was disparity in the rates charged in respect of the two, naptha being charged at a much higher rate.
The Tribunal rejected the demand of the appellant for parity in frieghts, and the Court cannot interfere with the finding to the Tribunal in this appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.
On merits also, there is no justification to demand that neptha should take the same freight rate as that of the crude oil.
[391D, F H; 392B. D E] 385 Lastly, the first question: It relates to the correctness of the view taken by the Tribunal on doctrine of promissory estoppel consequent upon the letter exhibit 5 of the Railway Board.
The Tribunal rejected this claim of the appellant.
Considering the conclusion of the Tribunal on this question, it appears the Tribunal has not correctly understood the doctrine of promissory estoppel: The party asserting the estoppel must have relied and acted upon the assurance given to him.
It means the party has changed or altered the position by relying on the assurance or representation.
The alteration of position by the party is the only indispensable requirement of the doctrine.
It is not necessary to prove further any damage, detriment or prejudice to the party asserting the estoppel. "A promise intended to be binding, intended to be acted upon, and in fact acted upon, is binding", said Lord Denning, sitting as a trial judge in Central London Properties Ltd vs High trees House Ltd., If the promisee has acted upon the promise, the promisor is precluded from receding from his promise.
The concept of detriment as it is understood now is whether it appears unjust, unreasonable or inequitable that the promisor should be allowed to resile from his assurance or representation, having regard to what the promisee has done or refrained from doing in reliance on the assurance or representation.
It is, however quite fundamental that the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be used to compel the public bodies or The Government to carry out the representation or promise which is contrary to law or which is outside their authority or power.
Secondly, the estoppel stems from equitable doctrine.
it requires that he who seeks equity must do equity.
The doctrine, therefore, cannot also be invoked if it is found to be inequitable or unjust in its enforcement.
or the purpose of invoking the doctrine, it is not necessary for the appellant to show that the insurance contained in exhibit (I S was mainly responsible for the establishing of the factory at Kota.
There may be several representation to one party from different authorities in regard to different matters.
Or there may be several representations from the same party in regard to different matters; In the instant case, there was one representation by the Rajasthan government to supply power to the appellant 's factory at concessional rate.
There is another representation from the same government to exempt the appellant from payment of tax for a certain period.
If those representations have been relied upon by the appellant, the Court would compel the authorities to adhere to their representations.
What is required is the fact that the appellant was induced to act on the representations.
The assurance given by the Railway Board in the letter exhibit S was not clear and unqualified.
it was subject to review to be undertaken 386 when the appellant started moving the raw material.
Accordingly, A appellant was put to notice that it has to approach the Railway administration again when it would review the whole matter.
From the tenor of exhibit 5, the railways are entitled to say that they have reviewed the matter and found no justification for a concessional frieght rate for naptha; that does not amount to resiling from the earlier assurance.
No question of estoppel arises in favour of the appellant in the case out of the representation made in Ex 5.
The Court agreed with the conclusion of the Tribunal but not for all the reasons stated.
Rajgarh Jute Mills Ltd vs Eastern Railway & Anr, at 241; Central London Properties Ltd vs High Trees House Ltd, ; Central Newbury Car Auctions Ltd vs Unity Finance Ltd, at 909; Article "Recent Development in the Doctrine of Consideration" Modern Law Review, Vol. , Grundt vs The Great Boulder Ptv Gold, Mines Ltd, ; ; Mohlal Padampet Sugar Mills Co Ltd vs State of UP and ors; , at 695= ; ; Union of India and ors vs Godfrey Philips Ltd, ; [1985] Supp. 3 SCR 123 and Halsbury 's Laws of England 4th Edn., Vol. , para 1595, referred to.
