The appellant, who had passed B.Sc.
Examination with Botany.
Chemistry and zoology securing 54.7% marks in the aggregate, and, who had passed earlier the P.U.C. examination with Physics, Chemistry and Biology securing 43.1% marks in the aggregate, joined a private medical college after its principal had confirmed in writing that she was eligible for admission to the M.B.B.S. Course.
After six months in the college, she was informed by the principal that her admission had not been approved by the University as she had secured only 43% marks in the P.U.C. examination while the required minimum was 50% according to the Regulations framed by the University.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging the validity of the cancellation of her admission to the medical college having been dismissed by a Single Judge and her appeal against the same having been rejected by the Division Bench of the High Court, she approached the Court by special leave.
Counsel for the appellant contended inter alia that she was eligible for admission in terms of the Karnataka Medical Colleges (Selection of Candidates for Admission to M.B.B.S.) Rules, 1985, and that in any case, since the appellant had completed the first year M.B.B.S. Course by virtue of interim orders passed by the High Court and this Court, she should be allowed to continue her studies in the M.B.B.S. Course.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: Under Regulation l(a) of the Regulations of the University regarding admission to M.B.B.S. Course for the Academic year 198586, a candidate after passing B.Sc.
Examination and seeking admission in the seats reserved for B.Sc.
candidates should have secured 50% of the total marks in Physics, Chemistry and Biology in the P.U.C. Exami 369 nation.
It is true that the appellant has obtained 54% marks in the B.Sc.
Examination, but she had failed to obtain 50% marks in the aggregate in the PUC Examination in Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
In the circumstances, she was not eligible for admission in the First Year MBBS Course.
[372H; 373A B] There is no substance in the contention made on behalf of the appellant that the Karnataka Medical Colleges (Selection of Candidates for admission to I MBBS) Rules, 1985 would also be applicable to the appellant.
Even assuming that the said Rules are applicable to the case of the appellant, still the appellant will not be eligible for admission in the First Year M.B.B.S. Course in view of sub r. (5) of r. 3 of the said Rules, which provides, inter alia, that a person who does not belong to any of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, has to obtain 50% of marks in P.U.C. Or equivalent examination in Physics, Chemistry and Biology as optional subjects.
Thus, the appellant was not eligible for admission.
[373H; 374A B] On the appellant 's query, the Principal of the Institute by his letter dated February 26, 1986 informed her that she was eligible for admission in the First Year M.B.B.S. Course.
lt was, inter alia, stated in the letter that the candidate should have obtained 50% marks in the optional subjects in the B.Sc.
Examination.
There is no dispute that the appellant had obtained 54% marks in those subjects in the B.Sc.
Examination.
The appellant was, therefore, quite innocent and she was quite justified in relying upon the information supplied to her by none else than the Principal of the Institute.
In the circumstances, we do not think that we shall be justified in penalising the appellant by not allowing her to continue her studies in the M.B.B.S. Course.
Prima facie it was the fault of the Principal of the Institute but, in our view, the statement that was made by him in his said letter to the appellant as to the eligibility of the appellant for admission in the M.B.B.S. Course, was on a bona fide interpretation of the Regulations framed by the University, which to some extent suffer from ambiguity.
The Regulations should have been more clear and specific.
[377C F] A.P. Christians Medical Education Society vs Government of Andhra Pradesh, [19861 2 S.C.C. 667, distinguished.
G Rajendra Prasad Mathur vs Karnataka University, A.I.R. , relied on.
