When the appellant did not pay rent for September and October, 1972, the respondent filed a petition for its eviction from the premises in question under section ll(l)(d) of the Bihar Building (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1947 which provided that on failure to pay two months ' rent a tenant was liable to be evicted from the premises taken on lease.
The appellant 's defence was that it had paid two months ' rent in advance at the inception of the tenancy with an understanding that it could be set off against the rent whenever necessary or required and, further, that since under section 3 of the Act it was not lawful for the landlord to have received any sum exceeding one month 's rent in advance, it could not be considered as a defaulter in payment of rent for purposes of section ll(l)(d) as, at least one month 's rent which had been paid in excess of what was permitted under section 3 was liable to be adjusted towards the arrears.
The Trial Court dismissed the suit, and his appeal against the same having been rejected by the Additional Subordinate Judge, the respondent approached the High Court by a Second Appeal.
Although it accepted the plea that the appellant had paid two months ' rent in advance at the inception of the tenancy, the High Court arrived at the finding that the appellant had failed to pay the rent for the months of September and October, 1972, on the ground that the appellant had not requested the respondent to adjust it towards the rent due for the aforesaid two months.
Observing that the rule of in pari delicto did not help the appellant in this case, the High Court set aside the concurrent judgments of the two courts below and directed eviction.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, 415 ^ HELD: The appellant could not be treated as a defaulter who had A failed to pay rent for two months.
[418E] (i) The High Court approached the entire case in a technical fashion.
The respondent was not entitled to receive more than one month 's rent by way of advance.
Yet, the respondent had received in advance the rent for two months.
The receipt under which the said advance was received does not state that the amount received was liable to be adjusted towards the arrears of rent only on the appellant informing the respondent orally or in writing that such adjustment is to be made.
In the written statement, however, the appellant pleaded that the amount paid by way of advance could be set off by way of rent whenever necessary or required.
This is not a case where there was any agreement to the effect that such adjustment could be made only on the tenant asking the landlord to make such adjustment.
Nor is this a case where the tenant was liable to the landlord on any other account.
The only transaction between them was the lease in question and the amount in question had been paid as rent in advance.
There was also no agreement that the amount was liable to be adjusted at the termination of the lease.
It was, therefore, open to the respondent to appropriate the said sum towards the arrears even without any option being exercised as regards such adjustment by the appellant.
[418A D] (ii) The High Court was also wrong in coming to the conclusion that the appellant could not rely on the provisions of section 3 of the Act on the ground that if the parties were in pari delicto the court would not come to the rescue of either.
[418E] Mohd. Salimuddin vs Misri Lal & Anr., [1986] 1 S.C.R. 622, relied on.
Gulab Chand Prasad vs Budwanti & Anr., A.I.R. 1985 Pat.
327, referred to.
Budhwanti & Anr.
vs Gulab Chand Prasad.
, ; , distinguished.
