The Forest Tribunal, Palghat, found that Eucalyptus trees raised by the respondent in the lands in dispute were not for raising a forest, but for supply of fuel necessary for the manufacture of tea.
It held that the question whether Eucalyptus plantations raised in a tea estate would be forest or not, had no bearing to the extent of the cultivation, that the area planted with the Eucalyptus trees in a tea estate did not form part of a vested forest or private forest and was, therefore, excluded from the purview of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971 (Act 26 of 1971) and that the Eucalyptus plantations in question were not private forest and did not vest in the Government under the Act.
Relying on an earlier Division Bench decision that in the context in which the term 'private forest ' had been used in the Act, it applied to lands other than those on which human skill, labour and resources had been spent for agricultural operations, the High Court held that the State had not succeeded in establishing that the land in which Eucalyptus had been planted could be said to be forest land and agreed with the decision of the Tribunal.
On the question whether land planted with Eucalyptus in tea estate in the Travancore area of Kerala was a 'private forest ' or not in terms of section 2(f) of the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, ^ HELD: The Eucalyptus trees in the area concerned under dispute were raised not for forest but for supply of fuel necessary for the manufacture of tea which is the industry carried on by the respondent Company.
The High Court was, therefore, right in the facts and 445 circumstances of the instant case, in holding that the land in question was outside the purview of the vesting provisions contained in the Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971.
[449B C] Malankara Rubber and Product Co. & ors etc.
vs State of Kerala & Ors. etc.
; , , referred to.
