% The appellants filed applications for renewal of their stage carriage permits on a route in Rajasthan, under section 58 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
At the same time, the Rajasthan State Road Corporation(Corporation) moved applications for the grant of fresh permits to it for the same route.
Both the applications for renewal of permits and the applications for fresh permits, were heard together by the Regional Transport Authority (R.T.A.) which reserved its orders thereon.
The R.T.A. passed orders in the matters after a year of the hearing, rejecting the renewal applications of the appellants and granting fresh permits to the Corporation.
The R.T.A. had, during the intervening period of one year, held several other proceedings and meetings in connected matters of which no notice and no opportunity had been given to the appellants whereas the Corporation was a party to all those meetings and discussions before the R.T.A.
Against the orders of the R.T.A., the appellants filed appeals before the State Transport Appellate Tribunal (S.T.A.T.).
The S.T.A.T. dismissed the appeals.
The appellants moved the High Court by writ petitions against the order of the S.T.A.T.
The High Court (Single Judge) dismissed the writ petitions.
Further appeals by the appellants to the Division Bench of the High Court were also dismissed.
The appellants moved this Court by special leave.
Allowing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: The principal issue to be decided by the R.T.A. was whether the claims of the Corporation for fresh permits had precedence over the claims of the appellants for the renewal of their permits.
[643E] 642 The appellants have not had an opportunity of putting forward their contentions and of being heard before the R.T.A. in the various proceedings meetings held by the R.T.A. during the period of one year following the reservation of orders by it on the applications of the Appellants and the Corporation.
The principles of natural justice were flouted by the R.T.A. by its failure to apprise the appellants of what had transpired at the meetings/discussions held in their absence.
[646D F] The appellants ' applications and the applications of the Corporation require to be considered and disposed of afresh by the R.T.A. in the light of the observations made by the Court.
[648H, 649A] Sher Singh vs Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 200, referred to.
