The Services of the appellants who were Railway servants, were terminated for reasons of national security under section 3 of the Railway Services (Safeguarding of National Security) Rules, 1949.
Notices served on them under that section to show cause charged them as follows: "Whereas in the opinion of the.
General Manager, you are reasonably suspected to be a member and office secretary of the B. N. Rly., Workers ' Union (Communist sponsored) and were thickly associated with communists such as Om Prakash Mehta, B. N. Mukherjee, R. L. Reddi, etc., in subversive activities in such manner as to raise doubts about your reliability and loyalty to the State in that, though a Government employee, you attended private meetings of the Communists, carried on agitation amongst the Railway workers for a general strike from November 1948 to January 1949 evidently to paralyse communication and movement of essential supplies and thereby create disorder and confusion in the country and that, consequently, you are liable to have your services terminated under rule 3 Of the said Rules".
Orders of suspension were passed on them.
They made their representations.
The committee of Advisers on enquiry and after examining them found that the charges were true and the General Manager acting on its report terminated the services of the appellants, giving them a month 's salary in lieu of notice.
The appellants moved the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution and contended that the Security Rules contravened articles 14, 19(1)(c) and 311 of the Constitution and as such the orders terminating their services were void.
The High Court did not decide the Constitutional validity of the Security Rules and dismissed the petitions on other grounds.
Held, that the words 'subversive activities 'occurring in Rule 3 Of the Railway Services (Safeguarding of National Security) Rules, 1949, in the context of the objective of national security which they have in view, are sufficiently precise in import to 1053 sustain a valid classification and the Rules are not, therefore,invalid as being repugnant to article 14 of the Constitution.
Ananthanarayanan vs Southern Railway, A. I. R. 1956 Mad. 220, disapproved.
The charge shows that action was taken against the appellants not because they were Communists or trade unionists but because they were engaged in subversive activities.
The orders terminating their services could not,.
therefore, contravene article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution since they did not infringe any of the rights of the appellants guaranteed by that Article which remained precisely what they were before.
Article 311 of the Constitution can apply only when there is an order of dismissal or removal by way of punishment.
As the terms of employment of the appellants provided that their services could be terminated on a proper notice and R. 7 Of the Security Rules preserved such rights as benefits of pension, gratuities and the like to which an employee might be entitled under the service rules, there was neither premature termination nor forfeiture of benefits already acquired so as to amount to punishment.
The order ' terminating the services under R. 3 Of the Security Rules stood on the same footing as an order of discharge under R. 148 of the Railway Establishment Code and was neither one of dismissal nor removal within the meaning of article 311 of the Constitution.
Article 311 had, therefore, no application.
Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs Union of India, Civil Appeal No. 65 Of 1957, relied on.
Satish Chandra Anand vs Union of India, [1953] section C. R. 655, Shyam Lal vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and the Union of India, ; and State of Bombay vs Saubhagchand M. Doshi, Civil Appeal No. 182 Of 1955, referred to.
Although the Rules are clearly prospective in character, materials for taking action against an employee thereunder may be drawn from his conduct prior to the enactment of the Rules.
The Queen vs St. Mary, Whitechapel, ; and The Queen vs Christchurch, ; , referred to.
