% Sometime during the period 1975 78, the first respondent Association managing the affairs of the Christian Medical College and Hospital at Vellore dismissed three of its employees from service and terminated the services of another employee who was on probation.
When industrial disputes were raised in this behalf, the State Government made two separate references to the Labour Court for adjudication: one in respect of the three employees who had been dismissed and the other in respect of the employee whose services had been terminated.
Questioning the validity of the reference the first respondent filed two Writ Petitions for quashing them and a third Writ Petition praying for a declaration that the provisions of the were unconstitutional and ultra vires and were inapplicable in entirety to the minority educational institutions protected by article 30(l) of the Constitution.
The first Respondent pleaded that the hospital attached to the Christian Medical College formed an integral part of the college which was an educational institution established and administered by a minority and thus was also entitled to the protection of article 30(l); that the college and the hospital being minority institutions entitled to the protection of article 30(l), any industrial dispute arising between the management and employees of the college and the hospital could not be adjudicated upon under the provisions of the Act as such adjudication amounted to interference with the right of the minority to 547 administer the college and the hospital; and that the Act was not applicable to educational institutions generally irrespective of their being minority institutions or not.
The High Court held that the Christian Medical College Hospital which was attached to the Christian Medical College was an educational institution; that even so, it was an industry within the meaning of the expression 'industry ' given in the Act, and that even though the College and the hospital constituted an industry, they together constituting an educational institution established and administered by a minority, sections 9 A, 10, 11 A, 12 and 33 of the Act would not be applicable to them by virtue of article 30(l) of the Constitution, and, accordingly, quashed the reference made under section 10(l)(c) of the Act to the Labour Court.
It was argued on behalf of the first respondent that the application of the provisions of the Act would result in the abridgment of the right of the management of minority educational institutions guaranteed under article 30(l) of the Constitution to administer such institutions inasmuch as the Labour Court or Tribunal might set aside an order of dismissal or removal of a workman passed by the management and reinstate him in service or make an order altering his conditions of service contrary to the agreement entered into with him and the minority educational institution would be exposed to constant and endless litigation.
Reliance was placed in support of the above propositions on the decision of this Court in Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society & Anr. etc.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr., ; wherein this Court held that certain provisions of the Gujarat University Act, 1949 were violative of article 30(l) of the Constitution.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: The has been conceived and enacted with the object of bringing into existence a machinery for investigation and settlement of industrial disputes between employers and workmen in accordance with the principles accepted by the International Labour organisation and the United Nations Economic, Social and Cultural organisation.
The Act is meant to be a counter vailing force to counteract the inequalities of bargaining power which is inherent in the employment relationship.
The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966 which is a basic document declaring certain specific human rights in addition to proclaiming the right to work as a human right treats equitable conditions of work, prohibition of forced labour, provision for adequate remuneration, the 548 right to a limitation of work hours, to rest and leisure, the right to form and join trade unions of ones ' choice, the right to strike etc.
also as human rights.
The Preamble of our Constitution says that our country is a socialist republic.
Articles 41 and 42 provide that the State shall make effective provision for securing right to work, just and humane conditions of work and for maternity relief.
Article 43 states that the State shall endeavour to secure by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way to all workers agricultural, industrial or otherwise work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities.
These rights which are enforced through the several pieces of labour legislation in India have got to be applied to every workman irrespective of the character of the management.
Even the management of a minority educational institution has got to respect these right and implement them.
Due obedience to these laws would assist in the smooth working of the educational institutions and would facilitate their proper administration.
If such laws are made inapplicable to minority educational institutions, there is every likelihood of such institutions being subjected to maladministration.
Merely because an impartial tribunal is entrusted with the duty of resolving disputes relating to employment, unemployment, security of work and other conditions of workmen it cannot be said that the right guaranteed under article 30(1) of the Constitution is violated.
If a dispute is raised by an employee against the management of a minority educational institution such dispute will have necessarily to be resolved by providing appropriate machinery for that purpose.
Laws are now passed by all the civilized countries providing for such a machinery.
The Act with which we are concerned in this case is an Act which has been brought into force for resolving such industrial disputes.
Sections 9A, 10, 11 A, 12 and 33 of the Act cannot, therefore, be construed as interfering with the right guaranteed under article 30(1) of the Constitution.
[570D H; 571A C. E F] 2.
The Act is a social security measure intended to ensure welfare of labour and it falls within one or the other of the following entries in List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution: Entry 22 Trade Unions, industrial and labour disputes; Entry 23 Social security and social insurance, employment and unemployment; and Entry 24 Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, employer 's liability, workmen 's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions and maternity benefits.
The Act generally applies to all industries irrespective of the religion or caste to which the parties belong.
It applies to industries owned by the Central and the State Governments too.
Any decision given by the Industrial Tribunal or a Labour Court under 549 the Act is subject to judicial review by the High Court under article 226 and an appeal to this Court under article 136 of the Constitution.
The Labour Court, the Industrial Tribunal, the High Court and this Court while dealing with matters arising out of the Act have to deal with them objectively.
The smooth running of an educational institution depends upon the employment of workmen who are not subjected to victimisation or any other kind of maltreatment.
The conditions of service of workmen in all institutions including minority educational institutions have to be protected in the interest of the entire society and any unfair labour practice, such as 'hiring and firing ', termination or retrenchment of the service of a workmen on irrational grounds will have to be checked.
The Act makes provisions in respect of these matters.
The Act being a general law for prevention and settlement of industrial disputes cannot be construed as a law which directly interferes with the right of administration of a minority educational institution guaranteed under article 30(1) of the Constitution.
The law is not enacted with the object of interfering with any such right.
It clearly falls within the observation of Mathew, J. in Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society & Ant.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
that "regular tax measures, economic regulations, social welfare legislation, wage and hour legislation and similar measures may, of course have some effect upon the right under article 30(l).
But where the burden is the same as that borne by others engaged in different forms of activity, the similar impact on the right seems clearly insufficient to constitute an abridgement".
[582A G] Observations of Mathew, J. in Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
, ; , relied nn 3.
The decision in Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
is distinguishable from the present one.
Clause (b) of the two sub sections of section 51 A of the Gujarat University Act, 1949 conferred a blanket power on the Vice Chancellor or other officer authorised by him to approve or not any recommendation made by the management regarding the dismissal, removal, reduction in rank or termination of service of a workman.
The said Act did not furnish any guidelines regarding the exercise of that power which was in the nature of a 'veto ' power.
Secondly, section 52 A of the said Act which required the disputes between the governing body and any member of the teaching staff, other academic and non teaching staff of an affiliated college or recognized or approved institution connected with the conditions of service of such member to be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration, consisting of one nominated by the governing body of the college 550 or, as the case may be, of the recognised or approved institution, one member nominated by the member of the staff involved in the dispute and an Umpire approved by the Vice Chancellor was held to be an unconstitutional interference with the right guaranteed under article 30(1) of the Constitution as it was likely to involve the minority educational institutions in a series of arbitration proceedings and the power vested in the Vice Chancellor to nominate an Umpire to decide all disputes between the governing body and the members of the staff connected with the letter 's conditions of service would make virtually the Vice Chancellor the person who would have the ultimate voice in the decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration.
There was also no check on the question whether the dispute was one which deserved to be considered by the Tribunal of Arbitration.
In the instant case there is no room for such contingency to arise.
A reference under the Act has to be made by the Government either when both parties request the Government to refer an industrial dispute for adjudication or only when it is satisfied that there exists an industrial dispute.
When an industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the conciliation officer should first consider whether it can be settled after hearing both the parties and it is only when his efforts to bring about a settlement fail and he makes a report accordingly to the appropriate Government, the Government is called upon to take a decision on the question whether the case is a fit one for reference to the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court.
It is only when a reference is made by the Government the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court gets jurisdiction to decide a case.
It cannot, therefore, be said that each and every dispute raised by a workman would automatically end up in a reference to the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court.
Secondly, the circumstances in which the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court may set aside the decision arrived at by the management in the course of a domestic enquiry held by the management into an act of misconduct of a workman are evolved by a series of judicial decisions.
The powers of an industrial tribunal to interfere in cases of dismissal of a workman by the management are not unlimited and the Tribunal does not act as a court of appeal and substitute its own judgment for that of the management.
It will interfere (a) where there is want of good faith; (b) when there is victimisation or unfair labour practice: (c) when the management has been guilty of the basic error or violation of the principles of natural justice; and (d) when on the materials before the Court the finding is completely baseless or perverse.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court will function arbitrarily and interfere with every decision of the management as regards dismissal or discharge of a workman arrived at in a disciplinary enquiry.
The power exercisable by 551 the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court cannot, therefore, be equated with the power of 'veto ' conferred on the Vice Chancellor under cl.(b) of either of the two sub sections of section 51 A of the Gujarat University Act, 1949.
As already stated the decision of the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court is open to judicial review by the High Court and by this Court on appeal.
Section ll A which confers the power on the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court to substitute a lesser punishment in lieu of the order of discharge or dismissal passed by the management cannot be considered as conferring an arbitrary power on the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court.
The power under section ll A has to be exercised judicially and the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court is expected to interfere with the decision of a management under section ll A only when it is satisfied that the punishment imposed by the management is highly disproportionate to the degree of guilt of the workman concerned.
The Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court has to give reasons for its decision which again, would be subject to judicial review by the High Court and this Court.
[565C H; 566A H; 567A] Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society & Anr.
vs State of Gujarat & Anr.
, ; , distinguished.
Indian Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. & Anr.
vs Their Workmen, ; ; Lilly Kurian vs Sr.
Lewina & ORS ; ; Mrs. Y. Theclamma vs Union of India &ORS. ; ; Frank Anthony Public School Employees Association vs Union of India & ORS. ; and All Saints High School, Hyderabad, etc.
vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & ORS.
; , ; referred to.
In this context it is interesting to note that the right to enter into a contract flowing from the right to liberty guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America which was considered to be an absolute right at one stage is no longer construed as a bar on the legislature making a law imposing restrictions on the managements in order to advance the welfare of the labour.
It is now settled in the United States of America that neither the 'contract ' clause not the 'due process ' clause had the effect of overriding the power of the state to establish all regulations that are reasonably necessary to secure the health, safety, good order, comfort, or general welfare of the community and that this power can neither be abdicated nor bargained away, and is inalienable even by express grant; and that all contract and property or other vested rights are held subject to its fair exercise.
In view of the change in the attitude of the Court laws 552 regulating hours of labour, labour in mines, employment of children in hazardous occupation, payment of wages, minimum wages laws, workmen 's compensation laws and collective bargaining have been upheld in recent years.
Similarly, the right to religious freedom and the right to free speech guaranteed by the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America, though they appear to be absolute have been construed to be subject to regulation by the State in exercise of its legitimate police Powers.
[572C; 573C E; 577C] Allgeyer vs Louisiana, ; ; Coppage vs Kansas, 236 U.S.l; Lochner vs New York, ; ; Adair vs United States, ; ; Lincoln Federal Labour Union vs North Western Inn & Metal Co., ; ; Reynolds vs United States, ; ; and Whitney vs California.
274 U.S. 357: referred to.
