% The appellants had joined the government service as clerks cum typists before the bifurcation, in May, 1960, of the State of Bombay into Maharashtra and Gujarat States.
The Subordinate Secretariat Service then consisted of four grades (i) Clerk cum typist, (ii) Junior Assistant, (iii) Senior Assistant, and (iv) Superintendent.
On the formation of Gujarat State, Government business in the secretariat was divided into nine separate Departments so far as the Subordinate service was concerned.
Later, by a government Resolution, a common cadre of Superintendents for all the departments was created, and promotion to the post of the Superintendent was directed to be made out of a common list of senior assistants, and by another resolution, the grades of the senior assistants and junior assistants were merged into one post termed as Assistant, and a common seniority list of the Assistants was prepared.
In October, 1974, by another Resolution, a common cadre of the clerks cum typists was created and promotion to the post of Assistant was provided therefrom.
This October Resolution of the government was challenged before the High Court by two writ petitions.
In the meantime, the Gujarat Subordinate Secretariat Service (Seniority of Assistants) Rules, 1977, were framed, which were to come into operation with retrospective effect from May, 1960.
Rule 4 of the Rules laid down the principle for determining seniority by providing that seniority among promotees Assistants inter se shall be fixed on the basis of their length of service in the joint cadre of clerk cum typist for all Departments of the Secretariat as a whole.
The High Court passed an order, dismissing the two writ petitions.
The order of the High Court is appealed against by Special Leave in this Court, mainly on the ground that the retrospective operation of the Rules regarding seniority takes away the vested rights of the appellants of their prospects of promotions.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 612 ^ HELD: A Common cadre was created for increasing efficiency A and in the interests of discipline.
After the formation of the common cadre, general feeling of dissatisfaction owing to disparity of seniority was generated.
The 1977 rules were introduced to ease that situation.
The scheme of the Rule regarding seniority protected the rank then held by every member of the service notwithstanding the alteration of seniority on the new basis.
To that extent, the 1977 rules were not retrospective.
[615B C] There was no challenge to the creation of the common cadre.
Secondly, the rules of seniority are a matter for the employer to frame, and even though the prospects of promotion were likely to be prejudiced by the introduction of some new set of rules to regulate seniority, if the rules were made bona fide to meet the exigencies of the service, no entertainable grievance could be made, and the appellants have no grievance to make.
[615E FI Mervyn vs Collector of Customs, Bombay and others, [1966] 3 S.C.R.600; Roshan Lal Tandan vs Union of India, [1968]1 S.C.R.185 and State of Jammu & Kashmir vs Triloki Nath Khosa & others, [1974] I S.C.R. 771, relied upon.
