% The State Government, by a notification dated November 6, 1961, issued under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, notified for acquisition lands belonging to the respondent.
This was followed by a declaration dated November 18, 1965, under section 6 of the Act, and the notices calling upon the respondent to put its claims for compensation in respect of the lands sought to be acquired.
Thereafter, no further action was taken in this behalf.
In the meantime, the lands in question were encroached upon by a large number of trespassers who put up slums thereon.
The respondent repeatedly asked the State Government to take steps to remove the encroachments and expedite the making of the award and payment of the compensation but no action was taken by the Government.
The respondent thereupon filed a Writ Petition in the High Court for a writ of mandamus, directing the State Government to make the award under section 11 of the Act, and take possession of the lands after payment of the compensation to the respondent.
On March 25, 1981, the State Government passed an order under section 48 of the Act, withdrawing the lands of the respondent from acquisition, and the respondent was, accordingly, informed of that decision.
The respondent thereupon amended its writ petition to challenge the withdrawal order above said as mala fide and to pray for the quashing of the same.
The writ petition was allowed by a Single Judge of the High Court and his decision was affirmed by a Division Bench of the High Court.
Aggrieved, the State Government appealed to this Court, against the decision of the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The High Court erred in striking down the order under section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act and compelling the State 591 Government to acquire the lands of the respondent.
Under the scheme of the Act, neither the notification under section 4 nor the declaration under section 6 nor the notice under section 9 is sufficient to divest the original owner of, or other person interested in, the land of his rights therein.
Section 16 makes it clear beyond doubt that the title to the land vests in the Government only when possession is taken by the Government, and till that point of time, the land continues to be with the original owner and he is also free (except where there is specific legislation to the contrary) to deal with the land just as he likes.
So long as the possession is not taken over, the mere fact of a notification issued under section 4 or a declaration made under section 6, does not divest the owner of his rights in the land to take care of it and confer on the State Government any right whatsoever to interfere with the ownership of the land or safeguard the interests of the owner.
Section 48 gives liberty to the State Government to withdraw from the acquisition at any stage before the possession of the land is taken by it.
By such withdrawal, no irreparable prejudice is caused to the owner of the land, and, if at all the owner has suffered any damage in consequence of the acquisition proceedings or incurred costs in relation thereto, he will be compensated therefor under section 48(2).
As held in Trustees of Bai Smarth Jain Shvetamber Murtipujak Ganodhaya Trust and Ors.
vs State of Gujarat and another, AIR 1981 Gujarat 107, the State can be permitted to exercise its power of withdrawal unilaterally.
Having regard to the scheme of the Act, it is difficult to see why the State Government should at all be compelled to give any cogent reasons for its decision not to go ahead with the acquisition of any land, as was the view of the High Court.
It is well settled in the field of specific performance of contracts that no person will be compelled to acquire any land, as a breach of a contract can always be compensated for by damages.
That is also the principle of section 48(2) of the Act.
[594D H; 595A D] Even assuming that a withdrawal order under section 48 should be backed by reasons and should be bonafide, in the present case, the order is not vitiated in any manner.
The Government had intended to acquire vacant land for the construction of houses, but his land had been over run by slum dwellers to such an extent that it was not possible for the Government to effectuate the intended purpose of acquisition.
The Government cannot be compelled to go ahead with the acquisition.
Where slum dwellers on a large scale occupy pieces of land, social and human problems of such a magnitude arise, that it is virtually impossible for municipalities, and no mean task for the Government, to get the lands vacated, and in view of these genuine difficulties if the Government is reluctant to go ahead with the acquisition, it can hardly 592 be blamed.
The Court sees no justification to direct the Government to embark upon such a venture to acquire the land.
Section 24 of the acts lays down the rule that the State will, generally speaking, pay for the land only in the condition in which it was on the date of issue f the notification under sec. 4, and that subsequent changes on the land will not be taken into account in the determination of the compensation.
The fact that the Government exercised the power of withdrawal after the writ petition was filed, does not spell mala fides, once, the existence of circumstances, which justified the decision of the Government to withdraw, is acknowledged.
Far from a decision to withdraw in such a case being considered mala fide, the Government would have been acting mala fide if, despite the clear knowledge that the land could not be used for its purpose, it had decided to go ahead with the acquisition.
The State Government has definitely acted in the best interests of the public and public revenues and its decision could not be faulted.
[595D F, H; 596B; F H] Appeal allowed.
Orders impugned of the High Court set aside.
n Rules issued by the High Court discharged.
[597G] M/s. Majas Land Development Corpn.
and another vs State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1983 Bombay 188, referred to.
