% The appellant, a Signal Man in a Signal Regiment of the Armed Services, while serving out a sentence of 28 days ' rigorous imprisonment imposed on him by the Commanding officer of the Regiment respondent No. 4, for violating norms for presenting representations to higher officers, was alleged to have committed another offence by refusing to eat his food on March 29, 1985 when ordered to do so.
He was charged under section 41(2) of the for disobeying a lawful command given by his superior officer.
A sentence of rigorous imprisonment for one year was imposed by a Summary Court Martial consisting of respondent No. 4 and others.
He was removed to the civil prison and he served out the sentence.
The appellant 's representation to the confirming authority under section 164 of the Act was rejected by the General officer Commanding on May 24,1985.
The appellant 's writ petition challenging proceedings of the Summary Court Martial was dismissed in limine by the High Court.
513 In the appeal by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the proceedings of the Court Martial were vitiated (i) by a non affording of an opportunity to challenge the constitution of the Summary Court Martial under section 130(1); (ii) by bias on the part of the respondent No. 4 who participated in and dominated the proceedings; (iii) by awarding a punishment so disproportionate to the offence as to amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias and vindictiveness; and (iv) by ignoring that as the appellant was then serving out an earlier sentence he could not be need to be in active service so as to be amenable to disciplinary jurisdiction and that the appellant 's refusal, while already serving a sentence, to accept food did not amount to disobedience under section 41, of any lawful command of a Superior officer.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The Indian constitutes a special law in force conferring a special jurisdiction on.
the Court Martial prescribing a special procedure for the trial of the offences under the Act.
The Act and Rules constitute a self contained Code specifying offences and the procedure for detention, custody and trial of the offenders by the Court Martial.
[518G H; 519A] 1.2 The procedural safeguards contemplated in the Act must be considered in the context of and corresponding to the plenitude of the Summary jurisdiction of the Court Martial and the severity of the consequences that visit the person subject to that jurisdiction.
The procedural safeguards should be commensurate with the sweep of the powers.
The wider the power, the greater the need for the restraint in its exercise ad correspondingly, more liberal the construction of the procedural safeguards envisaged by the Statute.
[519B C I 1.3 Non compliance with the mandate of section 130 is an infirmity which goes to the root of jurisdiction and without more, vitiates the proceedings.
[519F] Prithvi Pal Singh vs Union of India, AIR 1982 SC 1413 relied on.
Vitarelli vs Seaton, ; referred to.
514 2.1 It is the essence of a judgment that it is made after due observance of the judicial process; that the Court or Tribunal passing it observes, at least the minimal requirements of natural justice, is composed of impartial persons.
acting fairly and without bias and in good faith.
A judgment which is the result of bias or want of impartiality is a nullity and the trial 'coram non judice '.
[520D E] Vassiliades vs Vassiliades, AIR 1945 PC 38 referred to.
2.2 As to the tests of the likelihood of bias what is relevant is the reasonableness of the apprehension in that regard in the mind of the party.
The proper approach for the Judge is not to look at his own mind and ask himself, however, honestly, "Am I biased"? but to look at the mind of the party before him.
[520F] Allinson vs General Council of Medical Education and Registration, at 758; Metropolitan Properties Co. (F.G.C.) Ltd. vs Lannon, ; d 599; Public Utilities Commission of the District of Columbia vs Pollack, ; at 466 and Regina vs Liverpool City Justices, Ex parte Topping, referred to.
Having regard to the antecedent events, the participation of respondent No. 4 in the Courts Martial rendered the proceedings Coram non judice.
[522B] 3.
The mere circumstance 'that the appellant was at the relevant point of time, serving a sentence of imprisonment and could not, therefore, be said to be in 'active service ' does not detract from the fact that he was still a person subject to the Act, as is clear from the second clause of section 41(2) which refers to offences committed when not in 'active service ', the difference being in the lesser punishment contemplated.
[522C D] 4.
Every aspect of life of a soldier is regulated by discipline.
Rejection of food might, under circumstances, amount to an indirect expression of remonstrance and resentment against the higher authority.
To say that a mere refusal to eat food is an innocent, neutral act might be an over simplification of the matter.
Mere in action need not always necessarily be neutral.
Serious acts of calumny could be done in silence.
A disregard of a direction to accept food might assume the 515 complexion of disrespect to, and even defiance of authority.
But an unduly harsh and cruel reaction to the expression of the injured feelings may he counter productive and even by itself be subversive of discipline.
[522E F] In the instant case, appellant was perhaps expressing his anguish at, what he considered, an unjust and disproportionate punishment for airing his grievances before his superior officers.
[522G] 5.
Judicial review generally speaking, is not directed against a decision, but is directed against the "decision making process".
The question of the choice and quantum of punishment is within the jurisdiction and discretion of the Court Martial.
But the sentence has to suit the offence and the offender.
It should not be vindictive or unduly harsh.
It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias.
The doctrine of proportionality, as part of the concept of judicial review, would ensure that even on an aspect which is, otherwise, within the exclusive province of the Court Martial, if the decision of the Court even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, then the sentence would not be immune from correction.
Irrationality and perversity are recognised grounds of judicial review.
All powers have legal limits.
[522G H; 523A C] Council of Civil Service Unions vs Minister for the Civil Service, [1984] 3 Weekly Law Reports 1174 HL and Bhagat Ram vs State of Himachal Pradesh, A.I.R. 1983 SC 454 referred to.
In the instant case, the punishment is so strikingly disproportionate as to call for and justify interference.
[523G] The Court order set aside.
The writ petition in the High Court allowed, and the impugned proceedings of Summary Court Martial and the consequent order and sentence quashed.
Appellant entitled to be reinstated with all monetary and service benefits.
[523H, 524A] (Note: on point 1.3 the finding is to be read with and subject to the subsequent order dated 10.8.88).
