% By a notification issued in 1964 under section l04 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959, the State Government revised the rate of octroi levied on cloth by the municipal board of Abu Road which was challenged by a batch of writ petitions.
A Single Judge of the High Court held that the provisions of section l04(1) of the Act were valid but the notification in respect of the municipal board of Abu Road relating to cloth was bad.
During the pendency of the appeals before the Division Bench sub section
(2) of section l04 was added by section 12 of the Rajasthan Municipalities (Amendment) Act of 1978.
The Division Bench overlooked this amendment and reiterated the reasons of the Single Judge and dismissed the appeals.
By another notification issued in 1976, the State Government revised the levy of octroi on all types of cloth in respect of Sujangarh Municipal Board which was challenged by another batch of writ petitions relying on the decision in the Abu municipal board cases; but the Single Judge, as also a different Division Bench which dealt with the matter did not entertain the challenge in view of the amended provision of section l04 of the Act.
These two groups of appeals arose from the two batches of writ petitions aforesaid.
Allowing the appeals preferred by the Municipal Board of Abu Road and dismissing the appeals relating to Sujangarh Municipality.
^ HELD: There is no dispute as to exigibility of octroi.
Every municipality under section 7 of the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 1959 is a body corporate.
People residing within each municipal area can be classified as one group different from residing in any other municipality since octroi is to be levied by the municipality as provided in section l04(1) subject to the control regarding the rates of levy by the State Government.
The plea of discrimination on the basis of the rates prevalent in another municipality cannot be entertained.
The scheme in section 104 takes note of the position that local conditions and needs varied and accord 585 ingly both in the proviso to sub section
(1) as also in sub section
(2) itself, emphasis on that feature has been put.
It is thus open to the State Government on the basis of local conditions and needs to prescribe different rates in relation to different municipalities in the matter of taxes to be levied, varying duty of octroi is, therefore, not open to challenge.
The Division Bench while dealing with the appeals of Abu Road municipality should have taken note of the amendment of sub section
(2) with retrospective effect.
[588B E] 2.
In some municipalities the levy is on the value of goods while in others it is on the basis of weight.
Here again, the State Government seems to have applied its mind and has authorised charge of octroi on weight basis taking into consideration the special circumstances.
In bigger municipalities where there are wholesale markets particularly of cloth.
a reduced rate of octroi has been prescribed to encourage larger import.
In smaller municipalities where the import is for direct consumption the levy is on ad valorem basis at a higher rate.
The State Government seems to have also taken into consideration that in smaller municipalities there is not much demand for costly and fine cloth which have higher prices while the position is otherwise in bigger municipal areas.
This appears to be the justification for adopting the weight basis in respect of larger municipalities and ad valorem basis for the smaller municipalities.
This seems to be a legitimate basis and we do not think any valid objection is available against this differential treatment.
Law is well settled that if unequals are treated unequally there is no discrimination and article 14 of the Constitution is not available to be invoked.
[588E H]
