% A number of the princely States, situated within the territories of the present State of Orissa, were merged with effect from January 1, 1948, with the Province of orissa as it then existed.
On such merger, the High Schools within the said princely States came under the juries diction of the Province of Orissa.
The Schools belonged to two categories 'A ' type schools which were full fledged High schools sending candidates for the Matriculation examination and `B ' type schools which were incomplete schools, not sending candidates for the Matriculation examination.
On the said schools being taken over by the Province of orissa the teachers of the schools came under the control of the Government of orissa.
The orissa Government issued a letter dated 5.1.1949 to the Director of Public Instruction in connection with the subject of regulation of the services of the teachers.
The appellant was an assistant teacher in one of the 'B ' type schools on June 15, 1q953, after the commencement of the Constitution of India, and continued to work as such in the 'B ' type school till August 1, 1964, when the State Government of Orissa published a rationalisation scheme for integrating the services of the teachers in the different types of High Schools in the State.
Aggrieved by the terms of the Scheme relating to (i) the seniority of the teachers working in the 'B ' type High Schools and (ii).
The contributory Provident Fund, the appellant filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court upheld the validity of the Scheme and dismissed the Petition, while recommending, however, to the Government to modify the terms relating to the Provident Fund Scheme applicable to the teachers of 'B ' type High Schools.
The appellant then moved this Court by special leave against the decision of the High Court.
Disposing of the appeal, the Court, 651 ^ HELD: It is true that till the commencement of the Constitution of India, the position of the 'B ' type High Schools and the teachers working in them was being regulated in accordance with the terms contained in the order dated 5.1.1949.
But on the commencement of the Constitution of India, all the territories which immediately before the commencement of the Constitution were either comprised in the Province of Orissa or were being administrated as if they formed part of that Province, became and constituted the State of Orissa.
The State Government was under obligation to discharge its executive functions with respect to education in respect of all the schools including 'B ' type High Schools.
A High school which once belonged to a princely state became a Government High School with effect from the commencement of the Constitution and it could not be anything else and the teachers working therein became teachers holding posts under the Government.
It is well settled that the doctrine of an "act of State" cannot be pleaded by a State as a defence against its own citizens.
An 'act of State ' is an act done in relation to a foreigner by a Sovereign power of a country.
Such an act cannot be questioned in any court of law, but such a situation would not arise between the State Government and a citizen like the appellant who joined service after the commencement of the Constitution.
The High Court was in error in upholding the plea that the order dated 5.1.1949 could not be questioned by the appellant who had joined service after the commencement of the institution.
[657A E. GH; 658A] There is also no rational basis for refusing to give the benefit of the service rendered by a teacher working in a 'B ' type High school after January 26, 1950, either for purposes of seniority or for purposes of computing the retirement benefits.
It may be open to the State Government, while integrating the services of teachers working in different kinds of institutions, to introduce a scheme of rationalisation which may have the effect of modifying the conditions of service of different groups of government servants.
But the Government cannot by a stroke of pendeny the benefit of the entire past service rendered by one group of such government servants.
The effect of the government scheme was that all the teachers who had been in Government Schools immediately prior to June 1 1964 the date of coversion of the High Schools to government schools became senior to the teachers working in the 'B ' type High Schools, Ex District Board High Schools and Ex Anchal High Schools.
The scheme appears to be an irrational one.
The High Court was in error in upholding the terms of the scheme in so far as the question of the seniority was concerned.
The judgment of the High Court.
in so far as the validity of the terms of the scheme, pertaining to 652 seniority of the teachers in the schools referred to in it, is concerned, is reversed.
the clause in the scheme which reads: "But for the purpose of reckoning their seniority in Government service their services will be counted from the date of conversion of the schools into Government schools" is void.
The State government is directed to treat, on and after January, 26, 1950, the service of the teachers of the 'B ' type High schools, ex District Board High Schools and ex Anchal High Schools as the service under the State Government.
It is open to the State Government to evolve a reasonable formula for integrating the cadres of these teachers with the cadres of the teachers in the High Schools which have been under the Government all along.
Before bringing about such an integration, the government may formulate reasonable principles for equating the posts in the Government High Schools with the posts in the 'B ' type High Schools, ex District Board High Schools and ex Anchal High Schools having regard to the minimum qualification for the posts, pay, responsibilities, etc.
In the light of the said principles, the government shall prepare a seniority list, whereafter it shall proceed to make promotions of the teachers to the higher cadre.
In view of the stand taken by counsel for the appellant and other teachers in 'B ' type High schools, ex District Board High Schools and the ex Anchal High schools, regarding their not insisting upon promotions with retrospective effect, etc., the State government shall promote these teachers to the higher posts as and when the vacancies arise hereafter, on the basis of their rank in the seniority list, if they are found fit for such promotion.
The government is at liberty, if it finds it convenient, to treat, as submitted by the teachers ' counsel, the two groups of teachers as belonging to separate cadres and reserve certain percentage of posts for being filled up only by the teachers of 'B ' type High Schools, ex District Board High Schools and ex Anchal High schools, as was the case in State of Punjab vs Joginder Singh, [1963 (Supp. 2) SCR 169].
The order of the High Court is modified to the above extent and the State Government shall prepare the seniority list and make promotions accordingly within six months in the light of the above observations.
[659C G; 660C H; 661A D] No opinion is expressed on the question of Contributory Provident Fund Scheme, the same having been satisfactorily settled by the state.
[661D E] Johnstone vs Pedlar, ; , referred to.
