There was a dispute between the first respondent and the appellant in respect of Silt Clearance of River Peali from Uttarbhag Canning Road Bridge up to Hobon Sluice.
The matter was referred to the Arbitrator, who made his award.
The respondent was paid a sum of Rs.32,525.62 in terms of the award, and a true copy of the award was forwarded to the Court.
The first respondent filed an application under Sections 14, 15, 16 and 30 of the , for setting aside the award.
A Single Judge of the High Court dismissed the application and passsed a judgment in terms of the award.
The Division Bench having allowed the appeal of the respondent, the matter again came up before the Single Judge, who allowed the application of the respondent under Section 5, 11 and 12 of the Act and appointed a retire Judge of the High Court as arbitrator and later revoked the authority of the said arbitrator and appointed a lawyer of the High Court as arbitrator.
The appellant filed an appeal against the said decision to the Division Bench, which held that as there was an extension of time in making the award and the award having been filed within the extended time, the award was not beyond time.
However, it held that an unsigned award could not be made a rule of the Court.
Disposing of the appeal by special leave, this Court, ^ HELD: Under law, the mandatory rule is that the award should be signed by the Arbitrator.
No doubt an unsigned award cannot be made a rule of the Court.
But it is only a formal defect.
The Court, in such circumstances, can extend time for making the award and direct 70 curing of the formal defect in the award.
So much time and effort should not be allowed to go waste.
Law must subserve justice and endeavour to serve the purpose of law.
[71 F G] In the instant case, the award was handed over to the parties and a letter was sent to the parties concerned and award bore no signature of the Arbitrator.
The parties acted upon the award.
In a situation of this nature, the proper order in the interest of justice would be to remit the award, under Section 16 of the , for enabling the Arbitrator named therein for signing the award and for that purpose if it is necessary under Section 28 of the , the Court has the power to extend the time to the Arbitrator for making the award final.[71F. H; 72A B] Accordingly, the time is extended by four months and the award remitted to the Arbitrator for signature.
