% The Deputy Assessor and Collector of the Assessment and Collection Department of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, issued an order to the petitioners, demanding payment of Rs.14,07,328 as composite arrears of the property tax, fire tax, water tax, scavenging tax and education tax.
The petitioners moved this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for the issuance of a writ of certiorari, quashing the demand order.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, and allowing liberty to the petitioners to file, if so advised, a writ petition before the High Court under Article 226 of the F. Constitution, the Court, ^ HELD: The scope of the powers of the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution is wider than the scope of the powers of this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution.
The relief prayed for in the petition is one which may be granted by the High Court.
Any party aggrieved by the decision of the High Court can appeal to this Court.
That some case involving the same point of law is pending in this Court, is no ground for this Court to entertain a petition, by passing the High Court.
If the parties get relief in the High Court, they need not come to this Court, and, to that extent, the burden on this Court is reduced.
This Court has no time today even to dispose of cases which have to be decided by it alone.
A large number of cases have been pending in this Court for ten to fifteen years.
If no fresh cases are filed in this Court thereafter, this Court, with its present strength of Judges, may take more than 15 years to dispose of all the pending cases.
If the cases, which can be filed in the High Courts, are filed there and not in this Court, the work of this Court in its original Jurisdiction, which is a time consuming process, can be avoided, and the time saved by this 733 Court by not entertaining the case which may be filed in the High Courts, can be utilized to dispose of the old matters, [734E H; 735A E] This Court will also have the benefit of the decisions of the High Courts when it deals with an appeal against such a decision.
The High Courts have judges of eminence, who have initiative, skill and enthusiasm.
Their capacity should be harnessed to deal with every type of cases, arising from their respective areas, which they are competent to dispose of.
If the cases, which may be filed in the High Courts are filed in this Court, this will affect the initiative of the High Courts.
The dignity, majesty and efficiency of the High Courts should be preserved.
The taking over by this Court of the work which the High Courts can handle, may undermine the capacity and efficiency of the High Courts, which should be avoided.
[735E F] The hearing of a case at the level of a High Court is also more convenient from several angles and will be cheaper to the parties.
That saves a lot of time too.
It is easier for the clients to give instructions to the lawyers.
There are eminent lawyers practising in the High Courts, with wide experience in handling different kinds of cases.
The lawyers there are fully aware of every legislation in their States.
[734G]
