% Under a family partition deed (exhibit 1), the properties under 'A ' schedule were allotted to Maharaja Pillai, and after his death, his widow was given the right to take the income from the properties.
One of the sons of Maharaja Pillai filed a suit claiming his right to 1/3rd share in the properties above said.
The trial court held that the widow got absolute right over the properties in dispute under section 14(1) of the .
On appeal, the appellate court held that the widow got only a restricted right under section 14(2) of the Act.
On further appeal, the High Court mainly upheld the view of the first appellate court.
Against the judgment of the High Court, appeal was filed to this Court by special leave.
Allowing the appeal and restoring the judgment of the trial court, the Court, ^ HELD: The question to be decided is whether the widow got an absolute right or a restricted right over the properties in the 'A ' schedule after the coming into force of the .
During the life time of Maharaja Pillai, his wife (The widow in the case) was maintained by him.
After his death, the widow was in exclusive possession of the 'A ' schedule properties and was taking the income from those properties.
She had a right to utilise that income for her maintenance.
That right was conferred on her under exhibit D. 1.
The properties possessed by the widow fairly and squarely fall under Section 14(1) of the Act.
The property mentioned in section 14(1) may be acquired by a female by inheritance or devise or at a partition or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance, etc.
The right to maintenance of a Hindu female is a personal obligation of the husband.
If the wife is put in exclusive possession of property with the right to take 781 income for her maintenance, it must be presumed that the property is given to her in lieu of maintenance.
The property under 'A ' schedule was allotted against the share of Maharaja Pillai.
That property was given to the possession of the widow with a right to take income for her maintenance, and this is sufficient to get the protection of section 14(1) of the Act.
[782B; 783D E; 784C D; 786G] Gulwant Kaur & Anr.
vs Mohinder Singh & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 112 of 1980, date 20.7.87; Bai Vajia vs Thakorbhai Chelabhai & Ors., [19793 3 SCR 291; V. Tulsamma vs Sesha Reddi, ; at 310.
referred to.
