% The respondent, Pollonji Darabshaw Daruwalla, was an appraiser in the Customs Department.
The police searched his residential premises on a suspicion of his complicity in certain offences concerning the export of the Stainless Steel Ware, in the course of the investigation of that case.
Though nothing incriminatory for the purpose of that investigation was discovered, the search revealed that the respondent was in possession of property and pecuniary resources, disproportionate to his known sources of income between 1.4.1958 and 31.12.1968, for which he could not satisfactorily account for.
This led to the suspicion of the commission by the respondent of an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947, and the respondent was charge sheeted for an offence under section 5(1)(e), read with section S(2) of the Act.
In support of the charge, a number of documents pertaining to the respondent 's investments in the banks, in the company deposits and on shares, both in his own name and jointly with his wife, as also the documents pertaining to the salary and emoluments of the respondent between 1.4.1958 and 31.12.1968 were brought on record in evidence.
The defence was that the respondent was in possession of substantial assets even anterior to 1.4.1958.
The Special Judge held the respondent guilty and sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment and fine.
The respondent filed an appeal before the High Court against the Judgment and order of the Special Judge.
The High Court allowed the appeal and acquitted the respondent.
The State appealed to this Court by special leave against the decision of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: In order to establish that a public servant is in possession of pecuniary resources and property disproportionate to his known 907 sources of income, it is not imperative that the period of reckoning be spread out for the entire stretch of anterior service of the public servant.
There can be no general rule or criterion, valid for all cases, in regard to the choice of the period for which accounts are taken to establish criminal misconduct under section S(1)(e) of the Act.
The choice of the period must necessarily be determined by the allegations of fact on which the prosecution is founded and rests.
However, the period must be such as to enable a true and comprehensive picture of the known sources of the income and the pecuniary resources and property in possession of the public servant either by himself or through any other person on his behalf which are alleged to be so disproportionate.
A ten year period cannot be said to be incapable of yielding such a true and comprehensive picture.
The assets spilling over from the anterior period, if their existence is probablised, would, of course, have to be given credit to on the income side and would go to reduce the extent and quantum of the disproportion.
It is for the prosecution to choose what is the period, having regard to the acquisitive activities of the public servant, and characterise and isolate that period for special scrutiny.
In this case, the selection of a ten year period between 1.4.1958 and 31.12.1968, cannot, by reason alone of the choice of the period, be said to detract from the maintainability of the prosecution, and the view of the High Court on these points is erroneous.
[913C F; 914E; 915C D] Once the prosecution establishes the essential ingredients of the offence of criminal misconduct by proving, that the public servant is, or was, at any time during the period of his offence, in possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his sources of income known to the prosecution, the prosecution has discharged its burden of proof and the burden of proof is lifted from the shoulders of the prosecution and descends upon the shoulders of the defence.
It then becomes necessary for the public servant to satisfactorily account for the possession of such properties and pecuniary resources.
It is erroneous to predicate that the prosecution should also disprove the existence of the possible source of the public servant.
[914G H; 915A B] Equally erroneous and unsustainable is the view of the High Court on the proposition that the respondent was not the beneficial owner in the joint bank investments where the respondent 's name was not the first name but his wife 's name occurred first.
The assumption that in all the joint deposits, the depositor first named alone is the beneficial owner and the depositor named second has no such beneficial interest, is erroneous.
The matter is principally guided by the terms of the agreement, inter se between the joint depositors.
If, however, the 908 terms of the acceptance of the deposit by the depositee stipulate that the name of the beneficial owner shall alone be entered first, then the presumptive beneficial interest in favour of the first depositor might be assumed.
There was no such material before the Court in the case.
The respondent virtually acknowledged his beneficial interest in the deposits in the course of his examination under section 342, Cr.
P.C. [915D G] However, though there are errors of approach and of assumption and inference in the judgment under appeal, they did not by themselves detract from the conclusion reached by the High Court that in the ultimate analysis, the prosecution had not established the case against the respondent beyond reasonable doubt.
The conclusion reached by the High Court tends to show that the disproportion of the assets in relation to the known sources of income was such as to entitle the respondent to be given the benefit of doubt, though, however, on a consideration of the matter, it could not be said that there was no disproportion or even a sizeable disproportion; for instance, the acceptance by the High Court of the case of receipt by the respondent of the alleged gift from his mother, was wholly unsupported by the evidence.
There were also other possible errors in the calculations in regard to the carried forward assets, etc.
The finding became inescapable that the assets were in excess of the known sources of income.
But on the question whether the extent of the disproportion was such as to justify a conviction for criminal misconduct under section 5(l)(e) read with section 5(2), the Court thought it should not, in the circumstances of the case, interfere with the verdict of the High Court, as, in the Court 's view, the difference would be considerably reduced in the light of the factors pointed out by the High Court.
A somewhat liberal view was required to be taken of what proportion of assets in excess of the known sources of income constitutes "disproportion" for the purposes of section 5(1)(e) of the Act.
[915G H; 916A D] The respondent should have the benefit of doubt.
State of Maharashtra vs Wasudeo Ramachandra, A.I.R. 1989 S.C 1189, referred to.
[916E]
