Reasonable opportunity to show cause ' in article 311(2) Of the Constitution contemplates not merely the opportunity to do so at the enquiry stage but also when the competent authority, as a result of the enquiry, proposes to inflict one of the three punishments mentioned in the Article on the delinquent servant.
Such reasonable opportunity must, therefore, include, (1) opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence which means that he must be told what the charges against him 1081 are and the allegations on which such charges are based ; (2)opportunity to cross examine the witnesses produced against him and examine himself or other witnesses on his behalf and, (3)opportunity to show that the proposed punishment would not be the proper punishment to inflict, which means that the tentative determination of the competent authority to inflict one of the three punishments must be communicated to him.
High Commissioner for India vs I.M. Lall, L.R. (1948) 75 I.A. 225, explained and relied on.
Secretary of State for India vs I. M. Lall, (1945) F.C.R. I03, not followed.
Parshotam Lal Dhingra vs The Union of India, and Venkata Rao vs Secretary of State for India, L.R. (1936) 64 I.A. 55, referred to.
The procedure followed in such cases must, therefore, include the giving of two notices to the servant, one at the enquiry Stage and the other when the competent authority, as a result of the enquiry, tentatively determines to inflict a particular punishment on him.
Consequently, in a case where the Government Servant sought to be proceeded against for misconduct was served with a charge sheet and appeared before two officers conducting the enquiry, one after the other, but no notice was served upon him when the competent authority accepted the report and confirmed the opinion that the punishment of dismissal should be inflicted on him, and no cause could, therefore, be shown by him, the provision of article 311(2) had not been fully complied with and the order of dismissal passed against him must be declared void and inoperative.
