% The Ist respondent was working in the appellant company as an Internal Auditor on a monthly salary of Rs.1186 60P per month.
The appellant alleged that the respondent started absenting himself from 28th January, 1978 and as such was not entitled to any salary for any period beyond the said date.
The respondent was thereafter placed under suspension on 30th March, 1978.
On 4th May, 1978 the respondent filed an application under section 33C(2) of the claiming a total sum of Rs.4746 40p on account of salary from Ist January, 1978 to 30th April, 1978.
The appellant objected on the ground that the respondent was not a 'workman '.
On 9th November, 1978 there was an order dismissing the respondent from service.
On 2nd January, 1979 the respondent filed an application under section 28A of the Rajasthan Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1958 which was dismissed on 31st July, 1979 on the ground of limitation.
On the 2nd August, 1979 the Labour Court held that the respondent was doing clerical duties and as such was a 'workman ' under the and he was entitled to Rs.2060 98p as salary 986 from 9th March, 1978 to 30th April, 1978.
There was also a reference under section 10 of the on 8th August, 1960 arising out of the dismissal of the respondent.
The appellant filed a writ petition challenging this order.
All the aforesaid writ petitions were disposed of by a Single Judge of the High Court on 16th March, 1982 holding that the respondent was not a 'workman '.
Division Bench of the High Court, however reversed the aforesaid judgment and held that the respondent was a 'workman '.
The two writ petitions of the appellant were dismissed, while the writ petition of the respondent was allowed.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid orders the appellant appealed to this Court.
On the questions: (1) whether the respondent was a 'workman ' or not within the definition of section 2(s) of the and (2) whether the or the Rajasthan Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1958 would apply.
Dismissing the appeals, ^ HELD: 1.(a) Whether a person was performing supervisory or managerial work is a question of fact.
One must, therefore, look into the main work and that must be found out from the main duties.
A supervisor has to take some kind of decision on behalf of the company.
One who was reporting merely as to the affairs of the company and making assessment for the purpose of reporting is not supervisor.
[992A B] (b) There is no controversy in the instant case, that the respondent is not employed in any managerial or administrative capacity.
Distribution of work may easily be the work of a manager or an administrator but "checking" the work so distributed or "keeping an eye" over it is certainly supervision.
A manager or administrator 's work may easily include supervision but that does not mean that supervision is the only function of a manager or an administrator.
Where there is a power of assigning duties and distribution of work there is supervision.
[990C,991A B,991D] Mcleod and Co. vs Sixth Industrial Tribunal West Bengal and others, A.I.R. 1958 Calcutta 273; All India Reserve Bank Employees Association vs Reserve Bank of India, ; ; Llyods Bank 987 Ltd. vs Pannalal Gupta, ; Burmah Shell Oil Storage & Distribution Co.
Of India.
vs Burmah Shell Management Staff Association & Ors. ; ; The Punjab Co operative Bank Ltd. vs R.S. Bhatia (dead) through Lrs, ; Maheshwari vs Delhi Administration Delton Cable India (P) Ltd.; , and Hind Construction and Engineering Company Ltd. vs Their Workmen, referred to.
(c) A checker on behalf of the management or employer is not a supervisor.
[993E] In the instant case, the nature of duties performed by Respondent No. 1 were mainly reporting and checking up on behalf of the management.
A reporter or a checking clerk is not a supervisor.
The respondent does not appear to be doing any kind of supervisory work.
He was undoubtedly checking up on behalf of the employer but he had no independent right or authority to take decision and his decision did not bind the company.
The Division Bench came to the conclusion that the respondent was a 'workman ' within the meaning of section 2(s) of the taking into consideration the evidence recorded before the Labour Court that the respondent is a workman and not a supervisor.
That conclusion on the appreciation of evidence cannot be interfered with under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[993A C] 2.(a) In order to raise the question of repugnancy two conditions must be fulfilled.
The State law and the Union law must operate in the same field and one must be repugnant or inconsistent with the other.
These are two cumulative conditions which are required to be fulfilled.
[995E] Deep Chand vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and others, [1959] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 8 and M/s. Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. and others vs State of Bihar and others; , at page 87 referred to.
(b) In this case there is a good deal of justification to hold that these laws, the and the Rajasthan Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1985 tread on the same field and both laws deal with the rights of a dismissed workman or employee.
But these two laws are not inconsistent or repugnant to each other.
The basic test of repugnancy is that if one prevails the other cannot prevail.
That is not the position in this case.
[995F G] 988 (c) The application under section 28A of the Rajasthan Act was dismissed not on merits but on limitation.
There is a period of limitation provided under the Rajasthan Act and it may be extended for reasonable cause.
But there is no period of limitation as such provided under the .
Therefore, that will be curtailment of the rights of the workmen or employees under the .
In that situation section 37 declares that law should not be construed to curtail any of the rights of the workmen.
[996A B] (d) Social Welfare and labour welfare broadens from legislation to legislation in India.
It will be a well settled principle of interpretation to proceed on that assumption and section 37 of the Rajasthan Act must be so construed.
In no way the Rajasthan Act could be construed to curtail the rights of the workman to seek any relief or to go in for adjudication in case of the termination of the employment.
[996C] (e) There is, therefore, no conflict between the and Rajasthan Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1985 and there is no question of repugnancy.
These two Acts are supplemental to each other.
[994G H; 996D]
