% The husband of the petitioner had been detained by an order dated 15th May, 1987 under Section 3 of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.
The grounds served on the detenu for making the detention order alleged that the detenu had undertaken contract works of various types under the South Central Railway, and indulged in clandestine business of diversion of levy cement meant for use in the Masonary Ballast Wall alongwith the railway track, and had thus acted in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of cement, an essential commodity.
The facts mentioned, that on the receipt of information that levy cement was being transferred into non levy bags for its diversion to works not intended, the Inspector of Police, Vigilance Cell made a surprise visit, and found that the information passed on to him was correct.
He conducted a raid and recovered 400 bags of levy cement.
A criminal case under Clauses 12 and 13 of the Andhra Pradesh Levy Cement Distribution (Licensing and Regulation) Order, 1982 read with 974 Section 7 and 8 of the was commenced and further investigation proceeded.
Both the detenu and his servant absconded and were ultimately arrested on 18th March, 1987 when the detenu confessed before the Inspector of Police.
The detenu was released on bail the following day, i.e. 19th March, 1987.
On the consideration of the aforesaid circumstances, the District Magistrate was of the opinion that the mere launching of a criminal case against the detenu would not effectively prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of cement, and therefore, ordered detention, which order was later confirmed by the Advisory Board The detenu filed his first representation on 20th May, 1987 which was rejected by the State Government as also the Advisory Board later.
writ petition was filed before the High Court on 18th June, 1987 challenging the detention order, while the writ petition in this Court was filed on 13th June, 1987.
second representation on behalf of the detenu was filed by his cousin on 5th June, 1987 for revocation of the detention order.
This representation remained unattended, until the State Government reminded the Central Government in this regard after filing of the writ petition in this Court, and it was only then that the Central Government rejected the same on 2nd September, 1987.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition on 18th July, 1987.
In the Special Leave Petition as also the writ petition under article 32 the order of detention was challenged on the grounds of (1) delay of about 5 months in passing the order, (2) the allegation against the detenu of diverting levy cement for private use was incorrect, (3) the second representation filed by the detenu 's cousin remained undisposed by the Central Government for about 3 months, (4) the sponsoring officer 's default in not placing relevant facts before the detaining authority before the impugned order was passed, and (5) the detention order was passed on the basis of a solitary incident.
Dismissing the Writ Petition and Special Leave Petition, ^ HELD: 1.
Delay cannot by itself vitiate the decision to detain a person.
[980G] 975 Rajendra Prasad vs State of Uttar Pradesh and another, ; Smt.
Hemlata Kantilal Shah vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Malwa Shaw vs The State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1974 SC 957 referred to.
In the instant case, there is no doubt that in the police records the detenu was considered to be an absconder throughout till his arrest on 18th March, 1987.
The affidavit of the District Magistrate filed before the High Court indicates that further investigation in the case continued even after the arrest of the detenu and that other relevant information could be collected only after and thus the investigation was complete on 13th May, 1987.
The matter was placed before the District Magistrate on 14th May, 1987 who passed the impugned order in these circumstances, here is no doubt that the respondents have satisfactorily explained the delay in passing the detention order.
[980E F] 2.
The sufficiency of the materials available to the detaining authority is not to be examined by the Court.
This Court while considering the petitioner 's writ application is not sitting in appeal over the detention order, and it is not to go into and assess the probative value of the evidence available to the detaining authority.
A detention order not supported by any evidence may have to be quashed, but that is not so in the present case.
[982C, 981E] 3.
Section 14 of the Act clothes the authority with the power of revoking the detention order but the duty to exercise it arises only where new and relevant facts and circumstances come to light.
There is no right in favour of the detenu to get his successive representations based on the same grounds rejected earlier to be formally disposed of again.
No period of limitation is fixed for disposal of an application under Section 14.
[982D F] Haradhan Saha and another vs The State of West Bengal and others; , ; Sat Pal vs The State of Punjab, [1982] 1 SSC 12 and State of Uttar Pradesh vs Zavad Zama Khan, [1984] 3 SSC 505, referred to. 4.
It has long been established that the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority as regards the factual existence of the condition on which the order of the detention can be made, namely, the grounds of detention constitute the foundation for the exercise of the power of detention and the court cannot be invited to consider the propriety or sufficiency of the grounds on which the satisfaction of the detaining 976 authority is based.
Nor can the court on a review of the grounds, substitute its own opinion for that of the authority.
[983D] In the instant case, the ground of detention is only one, namely, that the detenu was acting prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodity, i.e., levy cement, essential to the community, by diverting it to the open market.
The grounds of detention served alongwith the order are nothing but a narration of facts.
The question wheher the detentu was acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies essential to the life of the community is a matter of inference to be drawn from facts.
It could not be said that there was no material upon which the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority could be based.
It appears from the grounds i.e. the facts set out that the detenu had made a statement admitting that he had diverted 600 bags of levy cement issued to him for use in the masonary ballast wall along the railway track, and therefore, the District Magistrate was justified in coming to the conclusion that he (the detenu) was acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of the commodity essential to the community.
[983E H] 5.
If `materials and vital facts ' which would influence the mind of the detaining authority one way or the other on the question whether or not to make the detention order, are not placed, it would vitiate the subjective satisfaction rendering the detention order illegal.
That is not so, in the instant case.
There was ample material before the District Magistrate for him to base his subjective satisfaction as to the necessity for passing the detention order.
[984C] Asha Devi vs K. Shiveraj, Addl.
Chief Secretary to the Government of Gujarat and another; , ; Mohd. Shakeel Wahid Ahmed vs State of Maharashtra and others; , ; Kurjibhai Dhanjibhai Patel vs State of Gujarat, and Pushpadevi M. Jatia vs M.L. Wadhawan, Additional Secretary, Government of India and others; , , referred to.
