% The appellant passed the Bachelor 's examination in law with 54.5 per cent marks.
He applied for admission to the Master 's Course in law.
The university had prescribed a minimum of 55 per cent marks for admission to the course.
The appellant claimed weightage on certain grounds on the strength of a precedent.
The admission was, however, refused.
The appellant filed a writ petition.
A Division Bench of the High Court heard the writ petition and dictated the judgment in the open court, allowing the petition and directing the university to admit the appellant, but soon thereafter, before the judgment was signed, the appellant 's matter was again put in the hearing list to be heard afresh.
The Division Bench, which had allowed the writ petition, released the case from its list and directed the same to be listed before another Division Bench.
On the matter being so listed, the Second Division Bench dismissed the petition.
The appellant appealed to this Court by special leave against the order of dismissal passed by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal and directing the university to admit the appellant, the Court, ^ HELD: The provisions of Order 20, rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure give power to the Court to make alterations/additions in a judgment so long as the judgment has not been signed, but that power should be exercised judicially, sparingly and for adequate reasons.
When a judgment is pronounced in the open court, the parties act upon it and conduct their affairs on the basis that it is in judgment of the court and that the signing of the judgment is a formality to follow.
A judgment to be operative does not await the signing thereof by the court.
If what is pronounced in the court is not acted upon, the litigants would be prejudiced; their confidence in the judicial process would be shaken.
A judgment pronounced in the open court should be acted upon unless there be some exceptional feature, like, soon after the judgment 942 is declared in the open court, a feature, not placed for consideration before the court earlier, is brought to its notice by either party to the cause, or the court discovers some new facts from the record or the court notices a feature, which should be taken into account, or a review is asked for, which is granted.
In such a situation the court may take up the matter again for further consideration, and it has to give good reasons if the judgment delivered by it is not to be operative.
[946B, D H; 947A] Since the writ petition of the appellant had first been allowed by pronouncement of the judgment in the open court, and there is nothing on record to justify why it was not acted upon, the appeal succeeds.
[947E F] Surender Singh and others vs The State of Uttar Pradesh, , relied upon.
