% The respondent landlord sought eviction of the appellant tenant on the ground of having sub let without written consent the portion in his occupation in favour of M/s. R.C. Abrol & Co. The appellant resisted the petition for eviction, contending that it was not maintainable in the absence of a notice to quit while determining the tenancy, that there was no sub letting or parting of possession by the appellant in favour of M/s. R.C. Abrol & Co., in view of Clause 14 of the Lease agreement, which provided: "That the lessee undertakes not to sub let the premises to any other party without the written permission of the lessor and that the lessee 's contractors M/s.
R.C. Abrol and Co. will share the premises with the permission of the lessor".
The Rent Control Tribunal ordered eviction of the appellant on the ground of sub letting.
The High Court dismissed the Second Appeal of the appellant and confirmed the decision of the Rent Control Tribunal ordering eviction.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave it was contended for the appellant, that there was no sub letting or parting of possession by the appellant tenant in favour of M/s. R.C. Abrol & Co. (P) Ltd., and that if there was sub letting that had been made with the written consent of the landlord.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Sections 14(1) proviso (b), 16(2) and (3) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 require the tenant to obtain consent of the landlord in writing for sub letting of the premises.
The purpose of such written consent was that it would cut out litigation on this ground.
Mere permission or acquiescence would not do.
The consent must be to the specific sub letting and must be in writing.
There is no implied permission.
[1026A, 1028D] 1024 South Asia Industries Private Ltd. vs section Sarup Singh & others; , ,referred to.
Raja Ram Goyal vs Ashok Kumar and others, ; Kartar Singh vs Shri Vijay Kumar and Another, and M/s. Delhi Vanaspati Syndicate, Delhi vs Bhagwan Dass Faquir Chand, ,approved.
Everyone has a right to waive and to agree to waive the advantage of a law made solely for the benefit and protection of the individual in his individual capacity.
Waiver is a question of fact which has to be decided by facts and evidence.
[1029C] Chaplin vs Smith, [1926) 1 King 's Bench Division 198, referred to.
In the instant case, there was no question of waiver.
There was no conscious relinquishment of the advantage of any statute.
No Court has gone into this fact.
It does not seem to have been urged before the High Court also.
As this requirement of the statute is in the public interest there cannot be any question of waiver of a right, dealing with the rights of the tenants or the landlord.
[1029D] 3.
To constitute sub letting there must be parting of the legal possession.
Parting of the legal possession means possession with the rights to include and also the right to exclude others.
This is a question offact.
[1032B] Mehta Jagjivan Vanechand vs Doshi Vanechand, A.I.R. 1972 Gujarat 6, referred to.
In the instant case, exclusive possession was given to the sublessee, R.C. Abrol & Co. and the tenant has transferred the right to possess in that portion.
It is clear that the sub letting was done wihout the consent in writing of the landlord.
There was, therefore an inevitable breach of the covenant.
The High Court was therefore right in upholding the order of the Rent Control Tribunal and directing eviction of the appellant.
[1032G 1033A]
