% large number of teachers working in the educational institutions governed by the Uttar Pradesh Intermediate Education Act, 1921, were appointed or promoted on an ad hoc basis.
The question of regularisation of their services engaged the attention of the State Government and it was decided to amend the Act by an Ordinance.
Section 16 GG was accordingly introduced on April, 21, 1977.
The Ordinance was replaced by the Uttar Pradesh Education Laws Amendment Act, 1977.
The appellant and respondent No. 1 were both appionted as Assistant Teachers in an Intermediate College with effect from July 8, 1967.
Respondent No. 1 was promoted by the management as Lecturer in Hindi on an ad hoc basis with effect from March 1, 1976.
The District Inspector of Schools approved of it on October 5, 1976.
Subsequently on November 20, 1976 he again made an order promoting both the appellant and respondent No. 1 as Lecturers in Civics and Hindi respectively on an ad hoc basis.
Their services came to be regularised by virtue of the new provision.
section 16 GG, with effect from April 21, 1977.
After their services were so regularised, dispute arose regarding the seniority.
While the first respondent claimed seniority over the appellant on the basis of his appointment/promotion made on March 1, 1976, the appellant claimed that he being older than the first respondent was entitled to be treated as senior by virtue of the second part of clause (b) of regulation 3(1) of the Regulations framed under the Act.
The District Inspector of Schools came to the conclusion that the fortuitous appointment/promotion of the first respondent on March 1, 1976 could not have any effect on the question of seniority between 1050 them, and held that since the appellant and the first respondent had been accepted to be promoted in substantive capacity on the same day, and since the appellant was older than respondent No. 1, the appellant should be considered as senior by virtue of the second sentence in clause (b) of regulation 3(1) of the Regulations.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision the first respondent filed a writ petition before the High Court, which was allowed, the order of the Disctrict Inspector of Schools was set aside and it was declared that the first respondent was senior to the appellant on the ground that the first respondent had been promoted to the post of lecturer on March 1, 1976, pursuant to certain orders issued under the Act which continued to be in operation until section 16GG was brought into force.
Allowing the appeal by Special Leave.
^ HELD: 1.
The appellant is senior to the first respondent.
[1056E] 2.1 What is crucial for the purposes of the case is the date from which the appellant and the first respondent should be deemed to be holding their posts in substantive capacity.
Section 16GG of the Act clearly lays down that any teacher whose services are regularised should be deemed to have been appointed in a substantive capacity with effect from the date of its commencement.
It does any say that the services of such teachers should be deemed to have been regularised with effect from the date from which they were continuously officiating in the post in question.
The date of commencement of the section being April, 21, 1977 both the appellant and the first respondent, who were by then holding the posts of Lecturers on an ad hoc basis are to be deemed to have been appointed in a substantive capacity on the same date, that is, April 21, 1977.
[1055G H; 1056A] 2.2 On the question of seniority, cl.
(b) of Regulation (3)(1) of the Regulations provides that the seniority of teachers in a grade shall be determined on the basis of their substantive appointment in that grade and if two or more teachers were so appointed on the same date seniorty should be determined on the basis of age.
[1056C] In the instant case, the appellant is older in age than the first respondent.
He should, therefore, be treated as senior to the first respondent by reason of the second sentence in cl.
(b) of Regulations 3(1).[1056E F] 1051 3.
The High Court omitted to consider the effect on the words 'with effect from the date of the commencement of this section ' in subs.
(1) of section 16GG of the Act and also sub section
(2) of that section which provides that every teacher deemed to have been appointed in a substantive capacity under sub s.(1) should be deemed to be on probation from the date of the commencement of the section.
[1056B C]
