% The appellant joined the service of a Commercial Bank on July 12, 1974 and was confirmed on October 1, 1974.
His services were terminated by the Bank on February 10, 1975 without assigning any reason.
On an industrial dispute being raised, the Central Government, by its order dated July 9, 1975 referred the dispute, as to whether the Bank was justified in terminating his services and if not, what relief the workman was entitled to, to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal for adjudication.
The claim made by the appellant was disputed by the management.
In the course of the trial, the appellant examined himself and was cross examined.
His evidence was closed on 21.5.76.
On July 25, 1976 the Bank entered into an agreement with the first respondent Bank where under all the assets and liabilities of the erstwhile Bank were taken over by the respondent Bank.
The employees of the erstwhile Bank became the employees of the first respondent Bank by virtue of cl. 20 of the said agreement.
On August 1, 1976 the erstwhile Bank totally merged with the first respondent Bank.
Thereafter, on behalf of the former Bank, five witnesses were examined.
On an application made by the appellant, first respondent Bank was impleaded as a party, in view of the merger which had taken place.
Thereafter, the first respondent Bank examined its Personnel Officer and formally closed the evidence.
On October 3, 1978 the first respondent Bank submitted an application for cross examining the appellant whose evidence had been 1089 closed on May 21, 1976.
The Tribunal dismissed the application on the ground that since no new plea had been taken there was no ground to recall the appellant and subject him to further cross examination.
The Tribunal made the award on January 30, 1981 holding that the termination of the service of the appellant was not justified and was bad, illegal and not enforceable.
The first respondent Bank filed a writ petition before the High Court.
A Single Judge set aside the award on the ground that when once a person was impleaded as a party to the proceedings, principles of natural justice required that he should be given an opportunity to crossexamine those witnesses whose evidence had been recorded earlier and since the Tribunal had rejected first respondent Bank 's prayer to crossexamine the appellant whose evidence had been closed on May 21, 1976, the award was liable to be quashed.
It, however, remanded the case to the Industrial Tribunal to decide the case again after giving an opportunity to the first respondent Bank to cross examine the appellant and other witnesses.
The Letters Patent Appeal filed by the appellant was dismissed by the Division Bench holding that the first respondent Bank had the right to cross examine the appellant on the sole ground that it had been impleaded as a party after the merger of the erstwhile Bank with the first respondent Bank.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD:1.1 There is no express provision, corresponding to Rule 10 Order 22 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 providing that in cases of an assignment, creation or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, the suit may, by leave of the court, be continued by or against the person who or upon whom such interest has come or devolved, which is applicable to the proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal.
[1095B C] 1.2 In every case of transfer, merger, takeover or scheme of amalgamation, the rights and liabilities of the transferee Company or Corporation shall be the same as that of the tansferor company or corporation, and subject to the terms and conditions of the contract of transfer or merger, the scheme of amalgamation and the legal provisions as the case may be under which such a transaction may have taken place, the transferee company or corporation becomes liable to be impleaded or becomes entitled to be impleaded in place of or in addition to the transferor company or corporation in any action, suit or proceeding 1090 filed against or by the transferor company or corporation by or against a third party, and that whatever steps have already taken place in those proceedings will continue to operate against and be binding on such parties in any of the ways mentioned in Rule 10 Order 22 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
[1095F H, 1096A B] 1.3 Generally speaking, an assignee cannot set up a case inconsistent with the one put forward by his assignor and it is only in exceptional cases that an assignee could be permitted to raise any new plea and that too only for avoiding multiplicity of the proceedings.
[1097B] In the instant case, by reason of impleading the first respondent as a party there was no change in the character of the proceedings pending before the Tribunal.
The respondent Bank only stepped into the shoes of the erstwhile Bank and all the proceedings that had gone on till the date on which the respondent Bank was so impleaded were binding on the respondent Bank.
It was bound by the proceedings which had taken place till then and could not go back on the proceedings.
[1096G H; 1097A] The Single Judge was in error in taking the view that the first respondent Bank was appearing before the Tribunal in its own right and was entitled to protect its own interest.
The proceeding pending before the Tribunal on the date of merger could not be considered as a new proceeding instituted against the respondent Bank, on its being impleaded.
It was the same old proceeding to which the erstwhile Bank was a party and the rights of the respondent Bank in the conduct of the proceedings could not be larger than the rights which the erstwhile Bank itself possessed.
[1097D E] There were no such exceptional circumstances which entitled the respondent Bank to put up a plea different from the pleas which had already been taken up by the erstwhile Bank and there was also no need to permit it to reopen the proceedings which had gone on till then.
Therefore, in the absence of any exceptional circumstances which would have entitled the party to a proceeding to recall a witness whose evidence had already been completed for further cross examination, the first respondent Bank could not make such a claim at all.
The Single Judge who set aside the award and the Division Bench, which merely affirmed the decision, have erred in overlooking the true legal position.
[1097B,G] 1091 On the facts and in the circumstances of the case the respondent Bank was, therefore, not entitled to recall any of the witnesses examined on behalf of the appellant for further cross examination, particularly after both the parties had closed their respective cases before the Tribunal.
The dismissal of the application made by the respondent for recalling the appellant for further cross examination, in the absence of any exceptional circumstances, could not be considered as a ground for setting aside the award.
The principles of natural justice had not, therefore, been violated by the Tribunal in passing the award.
[1097H, 1098A B] The judgment of the Division Bench as also of the Single Judge set aside.
However, as the respondent Bank had some other grounds to urge before the Single Judge, the case is remanded to the Single Judge to consider any other relevant ground that may be urged by the respondent Bank and to dispose of the writ petition.
[1098B C]
