% Section 14(1) of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1959 requires dealers to furnish returns within such period and to such authority as may be prescribed.
Rule 10(2) of the Bihar Sales Tax Rules, 1959 requires the assessee to file quarterly returns within one calendar month of the expiry of the period to which they relate.
Sub section (3) of section 14 provides for extension of time for submission of the return.
Subsection (2) of section 20 requires dealers to pay into the Government Treasury the full amount of tax due and furnish a receipt along with the return.
Section 15 entitles the assessee to rebate in tax on returns furnished under sub section
(1) of section 14 or within extended period.
The proviso to sub section (2) of section 20 entitles a dealer to deduct from the amount of tax due from him any amount which may be admissible as rebate under the provisions of section 15.
The assessee filed its quarterly returns under section 14(1) of the Act late by a few days.
There was no application made by it to the prescribed authority for extension of time.
The assessee, however, paid the tax before the due date of the respective returns and availed itself of the rebate by deducting the same while paying the tax due.
The Tribunal held that as the assessee did not file its returns within the prescribed period and had sought no extension, it was not entitled to the rebate.
The High Court upheld the view taken by the Tribunal.
Allowing the appeal, 149 ^ HELD: 1.
The assessee was entitled to the rebate of tax provided for in section 15 of the Bihar Sales Tax Act, 1959.
[156B] 2.
The condition in section 15 referring to a return has a substantive as well as procedural content.
The latter should be construed somewhat liberally and generously so long as the principal object of the provision is not frustrated.
[155H; 156A] C.I.T. vs Kulu Valley Transport Co. Pvt. Ltd., ; Gursahai Saigal vs C.l.
T. [1963] 48 I.T.R. S.C. 1; Allen vs Trehearne, and C.I.T. vs Mahaliram Ramjidas, referred to.
3.1 The object of section 15 of the Act is to confer a benefit on an assessee for prompt payment of the tax.
In the instant case, the assessee had paid the tax before the due dates.
The tax paid accords with the tax due on the basis of returns.
There was short delay only in the filing of the returns.
[153D E] 3.2 The Act does not set out any particular procedure for obtaining extention of time.
It does not prescribe any form of application.
It does not require that the prescribed authority must pass an order recording his satisfaction that the time should be extended and granting time.
it envisages three consequences to the assessee for failure to file a return within the prescribed time, or extended time: (i) loss of rebate under section 15, (ii) risk of a penalty under section 14(4), and (iii) risk of a best judgment assessment under section 16(4).
[154A D] 3.3 In the instant case the assessing authority has neither levied a penalty nor made a best judgment assessment nor recorded a finding that the delay was without reasonable cause.
From these circumstances it is reasonable to infer that the returns, though filed belatedly, have been accepted and acted upon by the prescribed authority.
An extention of time can thus be inferred from the attendant circumstances of the case.
[154D F] 3.4 The condition precedent for the grant of rebate that the assessee should have filed its return within the prescribed or extended period, can, therefore, be said to have been fulfilled in the present case.
[153H; 154A] Jamuna Floor & oil Mills Pvt. Ltd. vs State of Bihar, [1968] 22 S.T.C. 1, approved.
