% The first respondent filed an election petition before the High Court for setting aside the election of the appellant to the State Legislative Assembly under section 100(1)(c) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, contending that the rejection of his nomination papers by the Returning officer was erroneous as he had, in fact, completed 25 years of age on the date of his nomination.
The petition was opposed by the appellant contending that as the first respondent had not completed 25 years of age on the date of scrutiny of nominations, the nomination papers had been rightly rejected, that as the first respondent had not subscribed the oath as required by article 173(a) of the Constitution, he was not qualified to contest the election, and that the first respondent was also disqualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of the State, as on the date of scrutiny of the nominations he had a subsisting contract entered into by him with the Government, under which he had been treated as a lessee of the Ferry for the period between 1.4.85 to 31.3.86.
The High Court framed issues on the basis of pleas raised by parties and, after recording their evidence held that the first respondent had completed the age of 25 years on the date of scrutiny and, therefore, had necessary qualification for being a member of the Legislative 371 Assembly, that the appellant had not proved that the first respondent had not subscribed the oath as required by law, and that as the first respondent had been relieved from the charge of the Government ferry with effect from 21.11.85, there was no subsisting contract between the first respondent and the Government on the date of scrutiny of nominations and, therefore, he was not disqualified under section 9 A of the Act.
It accordingly came to the conclusion that the rejection of the nomination papers filed on behalf of the first respondent was improper and set aside the election of the appellant.
In the appeal before this Court, a further plea was raised on behalf of the appellant that the first respondent was also disqualified from contesting the elections as he held an office of profit under the State Government by virtue of the contract entered into by him with the State Government, even though the contract in question may not be one of those contracts specified in section 9 A of the Act.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The first respondent was not disqualified for being chosen as a member of the State Legislature.
The rejection of his nomination papers was improper.
The election of the appellant was, therefore, rightly set aside by the High Court, on the ground mentioned in Section 100(1)(c) of the Representation of the People Act 1951.
[387G H] 2.1 An analysis of section 9 A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 shows that only in two cases a person would be disqualified if he has entered into a contract with the appropriate Government in the course of his trade or business which is subsisting on the date of scrutiny of nomination.
They are (1) when the contract is one for supply of goods to the appropriate Government and (2) where the contract is for execution of any works undertaken by that Government.
Unless the contract in question is one which clearly falls under section 9 A of the Act it cannot be held that the person who is a party to the contract is disqualified for being chosen as a member of the State Legislature.[382F G] In the instant case, the contract is not one for supply of goods to Government.
The first respondent had acquired in the public auction the right to collect the toll by paying the amount offered by him under the contract and had not undertaken any contract for execution of any works undertaken by the Government.
When a person acquires a right to collect toll at a public ferry under section 8 of the Ferries Act.
it cannot be 372 held that he is performing a contract for execution of works undertaken by the Government.
[385D, G H] Merely because under one of the conditions of the Form of lease prescribed under the Ferries Act, the lessee is under an obligation during the period of lease to mark buoys or in any other suitable manner all submerged obstructions or dangerous rocks in the rivers within half a mile of the landing ghats, and shall be held responsible for any loss or damage caused to the marboats striking against such submerged obstructions or dangerous rocks it cannot be held that the first respondent had undertaken to execute works undertaken by the Government.
[386B C] Having regard to the conditions in the lease and the provisions of the Ferries Act and the rules made thereunder the activity undertaken by the lessee under the agreement cannot be considered as an agreement for execution of works undertaken by the State Government and, therefore, the contract, which the first respondent had entered into with the State Government, even though it was subsisting on the date of the scrutiny of nominations, would not have the effect of disqualifying him for being chosen as a member of the State Legislative Assembly, since section 9 A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 is not at all attracted to such a case.
[386D E] B. Lakshmikantha Rao vs D. Chinna Mallaiah and others, approved.
N. Satyanathan vs K. Subramanyan and others; , explained.
Ram Padarath Mahto vs Mishri Singh & Anr., ; referred to.
2.2 A lessee of tolls under the Ferries Act is only a contractor who under the lease acquires the right to collect whatever toll is paid by persons who use the ferry against payment to Government in advance whatever amount he has agreed to pay at the time of auction.
Whether he makes any profit in that business or not depends ultimately on the amount of toll he is able to realise during the whole period of lease.
Such a contract is essentially in the nature of a business.
It cannot be termed as an office in any sense.
A transaction of lease under the Ferries Act is not a lease of an office.
The first respondent was, therefore, not holding an office of profit when he was a lessee under the Ferries Act just like an 373 Excise Contractor or a fair price shop dealer who sells grains supplied by Government is not such a holder of office of profit.[386H; 387A B, F] State of Uttar Pradesh vs Satya Narain Prasad, ; , referred to.
2.3 The High Court was right in upholding, on the basis of the evidence of the three witnesses examined by the first respondent and the electoral roll and the High School Leaving Certificate, that the first respondent was more than 25 years of age on the date of scrutiny and was thus eligible to be a member of a Legislative Assembly.
[377D]
