% The assessee contended in the gift tax assessment proceedings that the 480 shares in the English Company acquired as gift were not quoted in the stock exchange, that their value be determined on the average break up value indicated by the balance sheets of the Company as on 31.3.1964 and 31.3.1965, and that in view of the decision of the General Body of the Company dated 4.10.1961 to increase its share capital by issue of additional shares the value of the shares constituting the subject matter of the gifts which were transferred "ex right" would stand depreciated.
The Gift Tax officer valued the shares on the basis of the breakup value yielded by and deducible from the balance sheet as on 31.3.1964.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the assessee 's appeal.
In the further appeal before the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, the Tribunal, relying on the ratio laid down in the English Case, Lynall and another, vs Inland Revenue Commissioner, valued the shares at Rs.450 each, said to represent the break up value on the basis of the balance sheet of 31.3.1963, holding that it could not take into consideration any other document except the published information, which was the aforesaid balance sheet.
The Tribunal stated a case and referred the matter to the High Court, for its opinion.
The High Court held that since the only information which was available on the date of the gifts was in the form of the balance sheet as of March 31, 1963, the Tribunal was right in taking the same into consideration, for the purpose of arriving at the value of the shares by the 'break up ' method.
342 In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the Revenue that the principle of valuation relied upon by the High Court was erroneous, and that the case was covered by the decisions of this Court in Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Assam vs Mahadeo Jalan & Ors., and Commissioner of Gift Tax, Bombay vs Smt.
Kusumben .
Mahadevia, On behalf of the assessee it was urged that in view of the consensus between the parties as to the basis of valuation, it was not now open to the Revenue to urge the application of an altogether different principle.
Disposing of the appeal, ^ HELD:1.
The correct principle of valuation applicable to a given case is a question of law.
The parties can agree upon a principle permissible and recognised by law.
If two or more alternative principles arc equally valid and available it might be permissible for the parties to agree upon one of the alternative modes of valuation in preference to another.
[346G H] In the instant case, the Revenue cannot be precluded from urging the correct legal position.
[347A] 2.
When the shares in a public limited company are not quoted on the stock exchange.
Or are in a private limited company the proper method of valuation to be adopted would be the profit earning method.[346B C] Commissioner of Gift Tax, Bombay vs Smt.
Kusumben D. Mahadevia, , relied upon.
Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Assam vs Mahadeo Jalan .
& Ors.
, and, Williams J in Mc.
Cathie vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; , referred to.
In the instant case, the view of the High Court as to the principle of valuation in determining the value of the kinds of shares concerned cannot be held to be correct.
As a logical consequence, the Tribunal would have to go through, over again, the exercise of determination of the value of the shares adopting the correct principle.
But, having regard to the fact that the matter is already two and a half decades old, and that the magnitude of the mechanism for the re fixation of the value of the gifts by adopting the somewhat intricate process inherent in the 343 "profit method" of valuation, and the difference in the quantum of tax that might result in, do not bear a reasonable or senible proportion, the valuation is left undisturbed.[347A D]
