% The respondent, the assessee company, carried on business of manufacture of textiles.
From the year 1949, the respondent started running into losses, resulting in the stoppage of its manufacturing activity from December, 1953.
In May, 1956, one of the creditors of the company filed a winding up petition in the High Court.
One major creditor of the respondent company, in exercise of its powers under an English mortgage of the fixed assets of the company took actual possession of the immovable properties hypothecated to the creditor.
The High Court, with the approval of the assessee company and its creditors, evolved a scheme whereunder the business assets of the company were let out on a rent of Rs.2,50,000 per year.
The lease was for ten years with option of renewal for another ten years.
The intention was that the various creditors would be paid out of the lease money.
The lease money realised by the company for the assessment years 1957 58 to 1959 60 was assessed by the Income Tax Department under section 10 of the Income Tax Act under the head "Profits and gains of business".
But in the subsequent assessment years, the Income Tax officer held that income from the lease rent was liable to be assessed under the head "Income from other sources" under section 12 of the Act.
The assessee company filed an appeal against the order of the Income Tax officer.
The Commissioner upheld the order of the Income Tax officer.
The assessee took the matter to the Income Tax Tribunal.
The Tribunal directed the Income Tax officer to treat the income arising out of the letting out of the assets as 'business income '.
The matter then went to the High Court.
The High Court held that the income derived by the assessee company by way of the lease rent from the letting out of the assets during the years ending 31st December, 1959, 31st December, 1960, 31st December, 1961 and 31st December, 1962, is assessible to tax under the head "profits and gains of business".
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the revenue appealed to this Court.
390 Dismissing the appeal (as also the connected petitions for special leave), the Court, ^ HELD: Whether a particular income received by the assessee as a result of the activities carried on by the assessee is business income or rental income depends upon the manner of the exploitation of the assets of the assessee.
It only varies from the facts and circumstances of each case.
In each case, the intention has to be gathered as to whether the commercial asset was intended to be exploited by the assessee or whether it was intended to be used by letting it out for a temporary period.
From the facts and circumstances of the case, it appears that it was a possible conclusion that the assessee intended that there should be a temporary suspension of the business for the purpose of re construction of the company and for that matter, there must be stopping of the user of the machinery by the assessee.
It was a temporary lease though for 10 or 19 years on renewal, and after the expiry of the period, the property reverted back to the assessee.
It is pre dominantly a matter of intention, which is an inference to be drawn from the relevant facts.
All the relevant facts, it appears, have been considered by the Tribunal from the correct stand point.
The Tribunal found that the intention was not to part with the machine but to lease it out for a temporary period as a part of exploitation.
In such circumstances, it cannot be said that no business was carried on and the income derived from the machine letting out was only a rent income, and in the facts and circumstances of the case, it cannot be said that such a finding was perverse or not sustainable.
The High Court was right in the view it took.
[398F; 399E H; 400A B] Commissioner of Excess Profits Tax, Bombay City vs Shri Lakshmi Silk Mills Ltd., ; Commissioner of Income Tax, West Bengal vs Calcutta National Bank Ltd., ; Narain Swadeshi Weaving Mills vs Commissioner of excess Profits Tax, ; Inland Revenue Commissioner vs Broadway car Ltd, ; Commissioner of Income Tax vs Shaw Wallace & Co., Cal. 1343 and New Savan Sugar and Gur refining Co. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Calcutta, , referred to.
