% The appellants in C.A. Nos. 59 and 60 of 1982, who were appointed as Civil Judges on temporary and officiating basis on probation, were not confirmed after the expiry of the period of probation or the extended period of probation, and their services were terminated by the State Government under Rule 12 of the Madhya Pradesh Government Services (Temporary and Quasi Permanent Service) Rules, 1960.
They filed writ petitions before the High Court, challenging the orders of termination of service as illegal and invalid, contending that in view of Rule 3 A, providing that a Government servant in respect of whom a declaration under cl.
(ii) of Rule 3 had not been issued, but had been in temporary service continuously for five years in a service or post in respect of which such declaration could be made, shall be deemed to be in quasi permanent service unless for reasons to be recorded in writing they should be deemed to be in Quasi Permanent Service, since no declaration under cl.
(ii) of Rule 3 had been issued and they had been in service continuously for five years.
On behalf of the respondents it was contended that the question of confirmation came within the purview of Article 235 of the Constitution vesting in the High Court control over subordinate courts and, consequently, the provision of Rule 3 A had no application to the members of the Subordinate Judicial Service.
Division Bench of the High Court took the view that if in Rule 3 A in place of the words "appointing authority" the words "competent authority" be read it would be consistent with Article 235 of the 493 Constitution, and dismissed the writ petitions holding that the resolution passed in the Court meeting, adjudicating the appellants unfit for confirmation, satisfied the requirement of Rule 3 A as continuance in Quasi Permanent capacity was included within the ambit of confirmation.
The services of the respondent in .A.
No. 2860 of 1985 were also terminated under Rule 12 of the Rules.
In the writ petition filed by him, the Full Bench of the High Court, while approving the aforesaid view expressed by the Division Bench, held that the findings of the High Court in its resolution, considering the respondent unfit for confirmation, could not be regarded as reasons within the meaning of Rule 3 A, and quashed the impugned termination order.
Disposing of the appeals, ^ HELD: Whether a member of Subordinate Judicial Service should be confirmed or not is absolutely the concern of the High Court.
The question of confirmation falls squarely within Article 235 of the Constitution and no rule framed by the State Government can interfere with the control vested in the High Court under Rule 235.
[498A B ] B.S. Yadav vs State of Haryana, ; and High Court of Punjab & Haryana vs State of Haryana, ; relied on.
Both the Full Bench and the Division Bench were wrong in placing reliance upon Rule 3 A of the M.P. Government Service (Temporary and Quasi Permanent) Rules, 1960.
As the High Court did not confirm the omcials, the question of their being deemed to be in Quasi Permanent Service does not arise.
Further, as the question of confirmation was completely within the domain of the control of the High Court under Article 235 of the Constitution, there is no necessity to read the words "competent authority" in place of "appointing authority", for Rule 3 A was inapplicable to the members of the Subordinate Judicial Service.
Moreover, there is a specific provision in the termination of service of a Judicial officer who is found by the High Court to be unfit for confirmation as provided in Rule 16(5) of the Madhya Pradesh Judicial Service (Classification, Requirement
