% Civil Appeal Nos. 2049 and 3129 of 1979 were filed in this Court by special leave against the judgment of the High Court in a Writ Petition filed by respondents 6 to 51 of Civil Appeal No. 2049 of 1979.
One appeal was.
by the employees and the other, by the State of Bihar, etc., against the judgment of the High Court above said.
There were three different wings of Engineers in the Department of Agriculture, viz., Irrigation, minor Irrigation and River Valley Projects.
On January 9, 1969, the State Government amalgamated the cadres of engineers and other employees of the Irrigation and the River Valley departments.
Engineers and other employees of the minor Irrigation wing were not amalgamated.
Later, the Directorate of minor Irrigation was made permanent and a distinct and permanent cadre of overseers termed as Junior Engineers, was created.
191 permanent posts of overseers were sanctioned.
Thereafter, the minor Irrigation wing was also amalgamated with the other two wings, and a combined final gradation list prepared on the basis of the status of the overseers as obtaining on.
January 9, 1969, was issued.
On the Writ Petition of the respondents 6 to 51 above mentioned, the High Court quashed the orders contained in the various annexures viz 11.11/1, 12, 13, 13/1, 15 and 16 directed the State Government to prepare a fresh combined gradation list in accordance with the principles laid down by the High Court.
Allowing the appeals in part, the Court, ^ HELD: The three wings though under the administrative control of the Agricultural Department, were separate before amalgamation.
Permanent posts had been sanctioned in the minor Irrigation wing to 411 which the petitioners before the High Court belonged and they were appointed on permanent basis.
When integration takes place and officers in different cadres are merged into one, there is bound to be some difficulty in the matter of adjustment.
That has occurred in this case.
The approach of the High Court has been that if within the cadre earlier confirmation gives seniority why should that basis be not extended to the combined gradation list.
That may not be applicable in every situation particularly when there is a merger of cadres and the combined gradation list is proposed.
[414C D,FJ] Seniority would ordinarily depend upon the length of service, subject, of course, to the rules holding the field.
This view has been taken by this Court in several cases.
The High Court recorded a finding that there is no applicable rule in the matter of fixing inter se seniority in a situation of this type.
In the absence of rules, the more equitable way of preparing the combined gradation list would be to take the total length of service in the common cadre as the basis for determining the inter se seniority The Court does not agree with the High Court that confirmation should be the basis and would substitute it by the length of service test, but the Court upholds the direction that in fixing the combined gradation list the inter se seniority of incumbents in their respective departments would not be disturbed.
The gradation list as published by the Government has to be modified.
The conclusion of the High Court that Annexures 11, 11/1, 12,13, 1311, 15 and 16 should be quashed and a fresh combined gradation list has to be published, is confirmed.
The test for fixing the seniority inter se generally, is altered, but the direction of inter se seniority in their own departments to be respected is approved.
The respondent State directed to prepare and publish the fresh combined gradation list keeping these directions in view.
[4t4G; 4t5C F] A. Janardhana vs Union of India and Ors., ; and K.S. Vora and Ors.
vs State of Gujarat and Ors.
, ; , referred to.
