^ % Section 3(1)(a) of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 permits eviction of the tenant who is.
in arrears of rent for more than three months and has failed to pay the same to the landlord within one month of the service upon him of a notice of demand.
When a landlord refuses to accept any rent lawfully paid to him, section 7C(l) entitles the tenant to deposit such rent in the court.
Section 7C(4) requires the court to cause a notice of the deposit to be served on the landlord.
Section 7C(6) provides that where a deposit has been made as aforesaid, it shall be deemed that the rent has been duly paid.
The appellant tenant was in arrears of rent of the demised shop from December, 1966 to February, 1971.
The amount remained unpaid despite notices dated March 22, 1971 and April 12, 1971.
In the suit for his ejectment under section 3(1)(a), the tenant took the defence that he had tendered the rent to the plaintiff landlord but the latter had refused to accept it, that even the rent sent by money order was refused, and thereupon he had made the deposit in the court under section 7C(1) of the Act, and there were no arrears of rent due from him.
The trial court and the first appellate court held that statutory conditions requisite for a valid deposit were not fulfilled and, therefore, the default in payment of rent within the meaning of section 3(1)(a) stood established and the tenant was liable to eviction.
The High Court dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal before this Court in addition to the defence taken before the courts below, it was contended that though the landlord was aware that the rent was being deposited in the court ever since August, 1967 he waited for a period of four years before issuing a notice of demand for arrears for rent.
417 Dismissing the appeal, A ^ HELD: 1.
Both in law and equity the appellant had no case.
The ejectment suit was properly decreed by the Courts below.
[429H; 430A] 2.1 The mere fact of a deposit under section 7C.of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 in itself cannot be an answer to an action under section 3(1)(a) for eviction of the tenant for default in payment of rent.
Irrespective of the fact of such deposit the tenant has to show the existence of circumstances justifying the deposit.
[42tG; 423A] Brahmanand vs Kaushalya Devi, ; , referred to.
2.2 Reading section 7C, the rules framed thereunder and the statutory forms together, it cannot be said that a deposit under section 7C is necessarily a valid one preceded by an enquiry or satisfaction of the Court that the condition precedent set out in section 7C(1) is fulfilled.
Though the applicant is asked to indicate briefly the circumstances in which he wants to make a deposit, there is no procedure contemplated for an enquiry into those circumstances.
The statutory provisions do not contemplate transmission of the application to the landlord, the fixing of a date of hearing on which both the tenant and the landlord could be heard or the passing of a considered order by the Court thereafter and being satisfied that there was in fact a tender of rent by the tenant and a refusal by the landlord to receive the rent or a dispute regarding the ownership of the property which rendered it difficult or impossible for the tenant to send money to the landlord straight.
The notice which is sent to the landlord merely sets out that the landlord is at liberty to withdraw it if he so desires.
[424C F] 2.3 In the instant case, the trial court, the first appellate court and the High Court have concurrently found that there was no valid tender of rent by the tenant or refusal thereof by the landlord.
The application filed by the tenant under section 7C gave no details in the space against column 6 of the form prescribed in Appendix 'A ' to the Rules framed under the Act, setting out the circumstances in which it was alleged that the landlord had refused to receive the rent.
The application barely asserted that the landlord had refused to accept the rent. 'Where was no information as to the nature of notice served on the landlord.
[424H; 425B C] There was no enquiry of finding recorded in the proceedings 418 under section 7C which could at all operate as res judicata against the landlord in the suit under section 3(1)(a).
Though the order of the Munsif under section 7C mentioned that the landlord was absent though served succinctly, the order was only that the landlord may withdraw the amount deposited on proper application.
It does not indicate any application of mind by the Munsif as to whether the conditions precedent for a valid deposit under section 7C were satisfied.
There was certainly no finding at that stage on this vital requirement.
The grant of permission to deposit under section 7C, in the case cannot, therefore, be treated as conclusive of the fact that a valid deposit had been made under that section.
[427B; 425D E] Haji Abdul Karim vs Mohd. Ismail, [1978] U.P. Rent Cases 691, referred to.
Fateh Chand, vs Bal Saroop Goel, ; Kaloo and others vs Gauri Shankar, and Kameshwar Singh Srivastava vs IVAddl.
District Judge, Lucknow and others, AIR 1987 S .
138 distinguished.
The contention of the appellant that though the landlord was aware that the rent was being deposited in the court ever since August, 1967 he waited for a period of four years before issuing a notice of demand for arrears of rent was without substance.
The delay was not due to any laches on the part of the respondent but was caused on account of the pendency of the litigation instituted by the tenant claiming refund of a sum of Rs.275 paid towards rent.
[429C D]
