% These appeals and writ petitions involved two questions of law (i) whether Rule 41 A of the Karnataka Cinemas (Regulations) Rules (the Rules) framed by the State Government under section 19 of the Karnataka Cinemas Regulations Act of 1964 (the Act) had been made "for purposes of the Act", and (ii) whether Rule 41 A placed unreasonable restrictions on the appellants ' right to carry on their business of exhibiting cinematograph films, in violation of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
The appellants/petitioners held licences for exhibiting cinematograph films in their cinema theatres under the Act and the Rules in Form prescribed by the Rules.
Normally, the Cinema owners were holding four shows in a day, but later on, they increased the shows to five in a day starting from 10 a.m. and ending at 12 a.m.
This caused a number of problems.
The State Government in exercise of its powers under section 19 of the Act framed Rule 41 A directing that no licensee would exhibit more than four cinematograph shows in a day.
The appellants challenged the validity of the Rule 41 A placing restrictions on their right to exhibit cinematograph films before the High Court by writ petitions.
The appellants contended before the High Court that the restriction imposed by Rule 41 A on the licensees requiring them to exhibit more than four shows in a day was beyond the rule making power, as the Rule did not carry out the purposes of the Act, and that the Rule placed unreasonable restrictions on their fundamental right to carry on the business of exhibiting cinematograph films.
There was difference of opinion between the two learned Judges constituting the Bench of the High Court, which heard the petitions.
K.S. Puttaswamy, J. held infer alia that the impugned rule was ultra 512 vires as it was beyond the rule making power of the Government under section 19 of the Act, and that it placed unreasonable restrictions on the appellants ' right to carry on their business guaranteed under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Narayan Rai Kudoor, J. upheld the validity of the Rule, holding that the impugned Rule carried out the purposes of the Act, viz., the regulation of the exhibition of cinematograph films, and the restriction placed by it was reasonable.
Since there was difference of opinion between the two learned Judges, the matter was placed before M. Rama Jois, J., who agreed with the opinion of N.R. Kudoor, J., holding that the State Government had the power to frame the Rule and the Rule did not place any unreasonable restriction on the appellants ' right to carry on business of exhibiting cinematograph films, and that it was not utlra vires the Act and did not violate appellants ' fundamental rights under Article 19 of the Constitution.
Consequently, all the writ petitions were dismissed.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the appellants filed appeals in this Court.
Some of the aggrieved cinema owners filed writ petitions in this Court, challenging the validity of Rule 41 A. Dismissing the appeals and the writ petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: The question whether Rule 41 A was validly framed to carry out the purposes of the Act could be determined on the analysis of the provisions of Act.
The title of the Act and the preamble clearly indicate that the main purpose of the Act is to regulate the exhibition of the cinematograph films in places in respect of which a licence for that purpose may be issued.
The extent of control and regulation is evidenced by the provisions of the Act.
The ultimate purpose of these provisions is to ensure safety and convenience of the general public visiting the licensed premises for witnessing the cinematograph films exhibited therein.
[518D,H; 519A B; 520F] Section 19 of the Act confers power on the State Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The preamble and the provisions of the Act provide for the regulation of the exhibition of the cinematograph films, which is the primary object of the Act.
The Act confers wide powers on the State Government for the regulation of the exhibition of the cinematograph films which include power to regulate hours during which cinematograph films may be exhibited, the seating arrangements for the members of the public, and any other allied matters pertaining to public safety, health, sanitation and incidental matters.
Rule 41 A which limits the numbers of shows in a day, regulates the exhibition of the cinematograph films and carries out the 513 purposes of the Act.
It was, therefore, referable to the State Government 's general power under section 19(1) of the Act.
Rule 41 A was further referable to clauses (a) and (d) of section 19(2) of the Act.
Clause (a) confers power on the State Government to frame rules prescribing terms, conditions and restrictions subject to which a licence may be granted.
The State Government may lay down conditions and impose restrictions prescribing hours during which the films might be exhibited and also the number of shows in the licensed premises.
Clause (d) confers power on the State Government to frame rules regulating the exhibition of cinematograph films for the purpose of securing public safety.
Any rule regulating the exhibition of the cinematograph films if reasonably connected with public safety would be justified under the said provision.
Rule 41 A adds a condition to the licence that exhibition of films would be limited to four shows in a day.
No licensee could claim to have unrestricted right to exhibit cinematograph films for all the 24 hours of the day.
Such a claim would be against public interest.
The restriction to limit the number of shows to four in a day placed by rule 41 A was regulatory in nature which clearly carried out purposes of the Act.
[520G H;521A F] The provisions of the Act have laid down the policy for regulating the exhibition of the cinematograph films in the licensed premises and also for regulating the construction of the building, auditorium, galleries, balconies, projection rooms, seating accommodation and other allied matters related to public health and safety, etc., and all other matters relating to the exhibition of films.
Validity of none of the other rules has been challenged by the appellants/petitioners although those provisions placed a number of restrictions on their right of exhibiting cinematograph films.
The restrictions placed by Rule 41 A are similar to the restrictions already placed on their right to exhibit cinematograph films.
It is incidental to the general power of regulating the exhibition of cinematograph films, and it is connected with the regulation of the exhibition of the cinematograph films.[522C D,H;523A] The question arises whether rule 41 A placed unreasonable restrictions on the appellants ' right to carry on business of exhibiting cinematograph films in violation of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, The appellants/petitioners have not challenged the validity of the Act.
Therefore, they claim no unrestricted right to exhibit cinematograph films.
They have been carrying on the business exhibiting films under a licence in form which contained the terms and conditions prescribed by the Act and the Rules framed therunder.
Rule 41 A added one more condition to it, requiring the licensee not to exhibit more than four 514 shows in a day.
The freedom to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business, guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g), is not absolute, it is subject to clause (6) of Article 19, which permits imposition of reasonable restrictions by law, if it is necessary in the interest of the general public.
Any law imposing reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g) would be valid if it is in the interest of the general public.
Restriction contemplated in Article 19(6) may in certain circumstances extend to total prohibition, as held by this Court in Narender Kumar vs Union of India, ; The. material placed before the State Government as also this Court, clearly demonstrated the necessity for curtailing the holding of five shows to four to remove the public grievance, as the representation filed on behalf of the public highlighted the hazards to public safety and the inconvenience caused to the members of the public visiting the cinema halls.
Rule 41 A was framed to meet the public need and to secure public safety by placing minimum possible restrictions on the licensees.
The Court found no merit in the contentions of the appellants/petitioners that Rule 41 A was neither necessary nor reasonable as the purpose for which it was framed could have been achieved if the relevant authorities carried out their duties in making inspections and securing the compliance of the existing rules, and that the impugned Rule did not prescribe the duration of four shows or the intervals between them and each one of the reasons set out by the State to justify the impugned Rules, could be fully achieved by the enforcement of the existing Rules.[523B E;525A C] In holding five shows, the licensees did not exhibit approved documentaries and slides and adequate measures could not be taken to ensure public safety and health.
The Court had no doubt that the existing Rules could not meet the situation and the State Government was justified in framing Rule 41 A placing limit on the appellants '/petitioners ' right to exhibit cinematograph films to four shows which was in the public interest.
The appellants/petitioners had no unrestricted fundamental right to carry on business of exhibiting cinematograph films.
Their right to carry on business was regulated by the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
These provisions were necessary to ensure public safety.
Public health and other allied matters.
The Rule 41 A does not prohibit exhibition of the cinematograph films, instead, it regulates it by providing that instead of five shows only four shows should be exhibited in a day.
The Rule does not take away the licensees ' right to carry on business of exhibiting cinematograph films; it merely regulates it.
No rule or law could be declared unreasonable merely because there was reduction in the income of a on account of the regulation of the business.
Rule 41 A does not place any unreason 515 able restriction on the appellants '/petitioners ' fundamental right guaranteed to them under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
It carries out the purpose of the Act in regulating the exhibition of the cinematograph films in the licensed premises.
Rule 41 A is inter vires the Act.
[525G H;526C,527A B] The Court was in agreement with the majority opinion of the High Court.
Narender Kumar vs Union of India, ; , referred to.
Shelvarajan vs State of Mysore, , disapproved.
Vishnu Talkies vs State of Bihar, AIR 1975 Patna 26 and D.K .
V. Prasad Rao vs State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1984 A.P. 75, approved.
