% Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha: Rules 260, 379 and 382 Non publication of resolutions Whether resolutions ineffective Publication in Parliamentary Debates even after delay Adequate publication.
House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976: Whether ultra vires.
Finance Act, 1976: Validity of.
: section 57 Proceedings of Parliament Court to take judicial notice.
The petitioner, an assessee under the Income Tax Act and Wealth Tax Act during the assessment year 1976 77 and liable to pay income tax and wealth tax in accordance with the rates prescribed by the Finance Act, 1976, which was passed by the Lok Sabha during its extended period under the provisions of the House of the People (Extension of duration) Act, 1976, filed a writ petition before this Court, challenging the vires of the two Proclamations of Emergency issued by the President on 3.12.1971 and 26.6.1975 and also of the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976 and the Finance Act, 1976 contending that the duration of the House of People would have been validly extended only when a Proclamation of Emergency was in force under the proviso to cl.
(2) of article 83 of the Constitution and since the two Proclamations of Emergency in question were either ultra vires the Constitution or had ceased to be in operation by the time the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976 was passed by Parliament, that Act had no effect and, consequently all Acts passed by the House of the People during the extended period, including the Finance Act, 1976 432 were ultra vires the Constitution, and that even though the said proclamations had been validly issued, the proclamation dated 3rd December, 1971 and 25th June, 1975 had ceased to be in operation on 3rd February, 1972 and 26th August, 1975 respectively because the Resolutions passed by the two Houses of Parliament approving the said Proclamations of Emergency as required by cl.
(2) of article 352 of the Constitutions it stood during the relevant time had not been published in the official Gazette of the Government of India.
The petition was opposed by the respondent Union of India contending that the two Proclamations had been duly issued by the President and approved by the Resolutions of the two Houses of Parliament as required by law and that actually the Proclamations of 3rd December 1971 and June 25, 1975 had been revoked by the Vice President acting as the President by the Proclamations dated 27th March, 1977 and 21st March, 1977 respectively, that in the month of February, 1976 when the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976 was passed by Parliament both the Proclamations of emergency were in force and, therefore, Parliament was entitled to extend the period of the House of the People for a period not exceeding one year at a time, that the Finance Act, 1976 passed duly in the period so extended had been, therefore, validly passed and that publication of the Resolutions was not necessary and, in any event, since they had been published in the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Debates which were published under the authority of the Speaker of the House of the People and the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha respectively, the Proclamations of Emergency remained in force until they were duly revoked.
Dismissing the writ petition, ^ HELD: 1.
The two Proclamations of Emergency were kept in force by virtue of the resolutions passed by the Houses of Parliament until they were duly revoked by the two Proclamations which were issued by the Vice President acting as President of India in the year 1977.
Since the two Proclamations of Emergency were in force when the House of the People (Extension of Duration) Act, 1976 was passed, its validity cannot be questioned.
[455D E] The Lok Sabha passed the Finance Act, 1976 during the extended period of its duration and, therefore, the validity of Finance Act, 1976 also cannot be questioned.
[455E] 2.
Article 352 of the Constitution does not prescribe that a 433 Proclamation of Emergency should be published in the official Gazette.
A Wherever the Constitution expressly requires a certain notification to be published in the official Gazette, it has stated that the said notification shall be published in the form of a public notification.
[444H; 445C] A Proclamation of Emergency, being a very important event affecting public life, has also to be published in any manner known to modern world and the publication in the official Gazette is one such mode.
If the Constitution requires that a particular mode of publication is necessary then such mode must be followed, but if there is no mode of publication prescribed by the Constitution, then it must be considered that the Constitution has left the method of publication to the authority issuing the proclamation in order t., make it known to the members of the public.
[445G H; 446A B] 3.1 In the instant case, the Proclamations of Emergency have been published in the official Gazette.[446B] In the Constitution and in the Rules of Procedure of the Houses of Parliament and of the State Legislatures there are several provisions which provide for resolutions being passed by the Houses of Parliament or the Houses of State legislatures.
They are not required to be published in the official Gazette, even though in some cases they are published, say, where a certain law is adopted under article 252 or a member is removed on the ground of privilege etc.
They would not be treated as ineffective merely because they are not published in the official Gazette.
They are all, however, published in the Reports of the Houses of Parliament and of the Houses of the State Legislature within a reasonable time.
[446C; 447B C] 3.2 The Lok Sabha Debates and the Rajya Sabha Debates are the journals or the reports of the two Houses of Parliament which are printed and published by them.
The Court has to take judicial notice of the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament under section 57 of the Indian evidence Act, 1872 and it is expected to treat the proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament as proved on the production of the copies of the journals or the reports containing the proceedings of the two Houses of Parliament which are published by them.[450E F ] 3.3 What is essential is that the resolutions approving the Proclamation of Emergency should be passed within the period of two months.
A little delay in publishing the proceedings would not affect the validity of there solutions.
[454B C] 434 3.4 The reports of the proceedings of Parliament and the State Legislatures are widely circulated.
The newspapers, radio and the television are also the other modern means which give publicity to all Acts and Resolutions of Parliament and the Legislatures of the States.
The publication in the Parliamentary Debates, though after some short delay is adequate publication of the resolutions of Parliament as there is no rule which requires that the resolutions should be published in the official Gazette.
Hence, mere non publication of the resolutions approving the Proclamations of Emergency in the offlcial Gazette did not make them ineffective.
[454G H; 455A B] In the instant case, the resolutions of the Lok Sabha, and the Rajya Sabha approving the two resolutions have been duly published in the official reports of the two Houses.
[455B C] Waman Rao & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; ; Harla vs The State of Rajasthan, ; ; State of Punjab vs Sat Pal Dang & Ors., ; and Mharendu Dutt Majumdar vs The King Emperor, , referred to.
