% This Court in M.C. Mehta vs Union of India & ors., had issued certain directions with regard to the industries in which the business of tanning was being carried on near Kanpur on the banks of the River Ganga.
On that occasion, the Court had directed that the case in respect of the municipal bodies and the industries which were responsible for the pollution of the water in the river Ganga would be taken up next, and accordingly, the Court took up for consideration this case against the Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika, since it was found that Kanpur was one of the biggest cities on the banks of the river Ganga.
Under the laws governing the local bodies, the nagar Mahapalikas and Municipal Boards were primarily responsible for the maintenance of cleanliness in the areas under their jurisdiction and the protection of their environments.
Under the water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (the 'Water Act ') provisions had been made for the establishment of Boards for the prevention and control of water pollution, etc.
The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, contained provisions relating to the control, prevention and abatement of pollution of water.
Although Parliament and the State Legislature had thus enacted laws, imposing duties on the Central and State Boards and the municipalities for the prevention and control of pollution of water, no adequate action had been taken pursuant to many of their provisions.
274.50 million litres a day of sewage water was being discharged into the river Ganga from the city of Kanpur, which was the highest in the State of U.P. Sewer cleaning had never been done systematically in Kanpur, and there was mal functioning and choking of the city sewerage.
Pollution of water in the river Ganga was of the highest degree at Kanpur, and a large extent of misery, sickness and death due to infectious diseases arose out of water supplies.
The petitioner filed this writ petition as a Public Interest Litigation against the public nuisance 531 caused by the serious pollution of the river Ganga, for protecting the lives of the people using the Ganga water.
Disposing of the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: The petitioner before the Court was no doubt not a riparian owner.
He was a person interested in protecting the lives of the people who made use of the water flowing in the river Ganga and his right to maintain the petition could not be disputed.
The nuisance caused by the pollution was a public nuisance, wide spread in range and indiscriminate in its effect, and it would not be reasonable to expect any particular person to take proceedings to stop it as distinct from the community at large.
The petition was entertained as a Public Interest Litigation.
On the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Court was of the view that the petitioner was entitled to move the Court in order to enforce the statutory provisions which imposed duties on the municipal authorities and the Boards under the water Act, on account of failure of which to obey the statutory duties for several years, the water in the River Ganga at Kanpur had become so much polluted that it could no longer be used by the people for drinking or bathing.
The Nagar Mahapalika of Kanpur had to bear the major responsibility for the pollution of the river near the Kanpur city.
The construction of certain works, undertaken under the Ganga Action Plan at Kanpur to improve the sewerage system and prevent pollution of the water in the river Ganga, were going on at a snail 's pace.
The Court expected the authorities concerned would complete those works within the target dates mentioned in their counter affidavits.
The Court noticed that the Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika had not yet submitted its proposals for sewage treatment works to the State Board constituted under Water Act, and directed that the mahapalika should submit its proposals to the State Board within six months (from the date of this judgment).
[551H; 552A F] The Court further directed; (i) The Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika should take action under the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 1959, or the relevant bye laws made thereunder to prevent pollution of the water in the river Ganga by waste accumulated at the large number of dairies in Kanpur having about 80,000 cattle.
The dairies might either be shifted outside the city so that the waste at the dairies did not ultimately reach the river Ganga, or, in the alternative, the Mahapalika might arrange for the removal of the waste by motor vehicles, in which 532 event the owners of the diaries could not claim any compensation.
The Mahapalika should immediately take action to prevent collection of manure at private manure pits inside the city; [552G H; 553A] (ii) The Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika should take immediate steps to increase the size of the sewers in the labour colonies, so 13 that sewage might be carried smoothly through the sewerage system, and wherever sewerage line was not yet constructed, steps should be taken to lay it; [553B] (iii) Immediate action should also be taken by the Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika to construct sufficient number of public latrines and urinals to prevent defecation by people on the open land.
The proposal to levy any charge for use of such latrines and urinals shall be dropped as that would be a reason for poor people not to use the public latrines and urinals.
The cost of maintenance of cleanliness of those latrines and urinals had to be borne by the Mahapalika.
[553C] The Court was of the view that since the problem of pollution of the water in the river Ganga had become very acute, the High Court should not ordinarily grant stay of criminal proceedings in cases where the Board constituted under the Water Act initiated any proceedings to prosecute industrialists or other persons who polluted the water in the Ganga, as the stay orders on petitions under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, frustrated the attempt of the Board to enforce the provisions of the Water Act, and further, even if such an order of stay was made in any extraordinary case, the High Court should dispose of the case within a short period, say about two months from the date of the institution of the case, and further, should take up for hearing all the cases where such orders had been issued under section P 482, Cr.
P.C., staying prosecutions under the Water Act.
[553E G] The Court further directed that the practice of throwing corpses and semi burnt corpses into the river Ganga should be immediately brought to an end.
Steps should be taken by the Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika and the police authorities to ensure that the dead bodies or G half burnt bodies were not thrown into the river Ganga.
[553H; 554A] In future j application for licences to establish new industries should be refused unless adequate provision had been made for the treatment of trade effluents flowing out of the factories, and immediate action should be taken against the existing industries found responsible for the pollution of water.
[554B] 533 Having regard to the grave consequences of the Pollution of water and air and need for protecting and improving the natural environment, considered to be one of the fundamental duties under the Constitution, it was the duty of the Central Government to direct all the educational institutions throughout India to teach at least for one hour in a week lessons on the protection and improvement of the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life in the first ten classes.
The Central Government should get the text books written for the said purpose and distributed to the educational institutions free of cost.
Training of teachers, who teach this subject, by the introduction of short term courses for such training shall also be considered.
This should be done throughout India.
[554C E] The above directions of the Court would apply mutatis mutandis to all the other Mahapalikas and Municipalities, having jurisdiction over the areas through which the river Ganga flows.[555C] OBSERVATION: The children should be taught about the need for maintaining cleanliness, of the houses both inside and outside and of the streets in which they live.
Clean surroundings lead to healthy body and healthy mind.
[554E] In order to rouse amongst the people the consciousness of cleanliness of environments, the Government of India and the Governments of the States and the Union Territories may consider the desirability of organising 'keep the city clean ' week (Nagar Nirmalikarana Saptaha) and 'keep the village clean ' week (Gram Nirmalikarana Saptaha) in every city, town and village throughout India at least once a year.
During that week, the entire city, town or village should be kept, as far as possible, clean tidy and free from pollution of land, water and air.
The organisation of the week should be entrusted to the Nagar Mahapalikas, Town Municipalities, Municipal Corporation, Village Panchayats or such other authorities, having jurisdiction over the area in question.
If the authorities decide to organise such a week it may not be celebrated in the same week throughout India but may be staggered depending upon the convenience of the particular city, town or village.
During that week, all the citizens, including the members of the executive, Parliament, State Legislatures and Judiciary may be requested to co operate with the local authorities and take part in the celebrations by rendering free personal service.
This would surely create a national awareness of the problems faced by the people by the appalling allround deterioration of the environment which is witnessed today.
[554FM; 555A B] 534 M.C. Mehta vs Union of India & others, [1987] 4 S.C.C. 463 and Pride of Derby and Derbyshire Angling Association vs British Celanese Limited, [1953] Chancery 149.
