% The defendant respondent No. 1, Ram Prakash as Karta of a Joint Hindu Family executed an agreement to sell the suit property and received a sum of Rs.5,000 as earnest money.
He, however, refused to execute the sale deed.
The defendant No. 2 Jai Bhagwan, instituted a suit in the Court of the Sub Judge for specific performance of the agreement and in the alternative for a decree for recovery of Rs.10,000.
In the said suit, the appellants Nos.
I and 2 and the respondent No. 11, the sons of defendant respondent No. 1, made an application for being impleaded.
The application was dismissed.
Thereupon, the three sons of defendant No. 1 instituted a civil suit in the Court of the Sub Judge for permanent injunction, restraining the defendant No.1 from selling or alienating the property above said to the defendant No.2 or any other person and restraining the defendant No.2 from proceeding with the suit for specific performance aforementioned, as the property in question was a Joint Hindu Family Coparcenary property of the plaintiff and the defendant No. t, and there was no legal necessity for sale of the property, nor was it an act of good management to sell the same to the defendant No.2 without the consent of the plaintiffs.
The trial Court held that the house property in question was the ancestral property of the Joint Hindu Mitakshara Family and the defendant No. 1, the father of the plaintiffs, was not competent to sell the same except for a legal necessity or the benefit of the estate, and that since the plaintiffs ' application for impleading them in the suit for specific performance of the contract of sale had been dismissed and the plaintiffs were coparceners having interest in the property, the present suit was the only remedy available to them, and was maintainable in the present form.
Against this judgment and decree, the defendants, the legal rep 624 resentatives of defendant No. 2 since deceased, preferred an appeal.
The Appellate Courts held that a coparcener had no right to maintain a suit for permanent injunction, restraining the manager or Karta from alienating the coparcenary property and the coparcener had the right only to challenge the alienation of coparcenary property to recover the property after the alienation had come into being.
The judgment and decree of the trial court were set aside.
The appellants, i.e. the sons of the defendant respondent No. 1, appealed to this Court for relief by special leave against the decision of the High Court.
In this appeal the Court was called upon to decide the only question whether the suit for permanent injunction restraining the Karta of the joint Hindu family from alienating house property belonging to the joint Hindu family in pursuance of the agreement to sell executed in favour of the predecessor of the appellants, Jai Bhagwan, since deceased, was maintainable.
It is well settled that in a Joint Hindu Mitakshara family, a son acquires by birth an interest equal to that of the father in the ancestral property.
The father by reason of his paternal relation and his position as the head of the family is its manager and he is entitled to alienate the joint family property so as to bind the interests of both the adult and minor coparceners in the property, provided that the alienation is made for legal necessity or for the benefit of the estate or for meeting an E antecedent debt.
The power of the Manager of a joint Hindu family property is analogous to that of a Manager for an infant heir as observed by the Judicial Committee in Hunoomanpersaud Pandey vs Mussumat Bobooee Munraj Koonweree Moore 's on Indian Appeal ( 1856 Vol.
Vl) 393.
[631C E] In a suit for permanent injunction under section 38 of the Specific Relief Act by a coparcener against the father or Manager of the joint Hindu family property, an in junction cannot be granted as the coparcener has got equally efficacious remedy to get the sale set aside and recover possession of the property.
Sub section (h) of section 38 of the Specific Relief Act bars the grant of such an injunction.
Secondly, the plaintiff respondents brought the suit for permanent injunction restraining their father, the defendant No. t, from selling or alienating the property to defendant No. 2 or any other person, etc.
Thus the relief sought for was to restrain by permanent injunction the Karta of the Joint Hindu Mitakshra family from selling or alienating the property.
The delendant No. 1 as Karta of the joint Hindu family had undoubtedly the power to alienate the joint family property for legal necessity or for 625 the benefit of the estate as well as for meeting antecedent debts.
[632 B E] A The grant of such a relief will have the effect of preventing the father permanently from selling or transferring the property belonging to the joint Hindu family even if there is a genuine legal necessity.
If such a suit for injunction is held maintainable, the effect will be that whenever the father as Karta of the joint Hindu coparcenary property will propose to sell such property owing to a bona fide legal necessity, any coparcener may come up with such a suit for permanent injunction and the father will not be able to sell the property for legal necessity till that suit is decided.
In case of waste or ouster, an injunction may be granted against the manager of the joint Hindu family at the instance of the coparcener, but a blanket injunction restraining the manager permanently from alienating the property of a joint Hindu family even in the case of legal necessity, cannot be granted.
[632G H; 633A, D] It appeared that the defendent No. t entered into the agreement of sale stating that he was the owner of the suit property.
The plaintiffs appellants claimed the suit property was the joint family property and they as coparceners of the joint Hindu Mitakshra family had equal shares with their father in the suit property.
The question whether the suit property was the self acquired property of the father or was the ancestral property, had to be decided before granting any relief.
The suit being for permanent injunction, this question could not be gone into and decided.
[633D E] The appeal was dismissed and the judgment and decree of the High Court were affirmed.
[633F] Per K. Jagannatha Shetty, J. (concurring) The question raised in the appeal was whether interference of the Court could be sought by a coparcener to interdict the Karta of a Hindu undivided family from alienating coparcenary property.
The question was of considerable importance and there seemed to be but little authority in the decided cases.
The facts of the case lay in a narrow compass.
Ram Prakash entered into an agreement for sale of certain house property in favour of Jai Bhagwan, which was described as a self acquired property of Ram Prakash.
Jai Bhagwan paid Rs.5000 as earnest money on the date of the agreement and promised to pay the balance on the date of execution of the sale deed.
Ram Prakash, however, did not execute the sale 626 deed.
Jai Bhagwan instituted a suit for specific performance of the agreement.
In that suit, the sons of Ram Prakash wanted to be impleaded as parties to resist the suit for specific performance, but the court did not permit them.
Thereupon, they instituted a suit for permanent injunction against their father, restraining him from alienating the property to Jai Bhagwan or any body else, on the ground that the said house was their coparcenary property and the proposed sale was neither for legal necessity nor for the benefit of the joint family estate.
The suit for injunction was practically tried as a suit for declaration.
The trial court decreed the suit with the following findings: The suit property was coparcenary property of the joint family of Ram Prakash and his sons.
Jai Bhagwan had failed to prove that the proposed sale was for the legal necessity of the joint family or for the benefit of the estate.
Ram Prakash being the manager of the family could not alienate the coparcenary property in the absence of these two requirements.
The sons could restrain their father from alienating the coparcenary property since the proposed sale was without justification.
The wife and children of Jai Bhagwan, who had died during the pendency of the suit, challenged the decree of the trial court in appeal before the Additional District Judge.
The District Judge reversed the decree of the trial court and dismissed the suit.
The plaintiffs preferred second appeal which was dismissed by the High Court.
The plaintiff appealed to this Court by special leave.
As a preliminary to the consideration of the question involved, it would be necessary to examine the structure of the joint Hindu family, its incidents and the power of its Karta or manager.
[635D] Joint Hindu Family: joint Hindu family consists of male members descended lineally from a common male ancestor, together with their mothers, wives or widows and unmarried daughters.
They are bound together by the fundamental principle of sapindaship or family relationship which is the essential feature of the institution.
The cord that knits the members of the family is not property but the relationship of one another.
[635F] The coparcenary consists of only those persons who have taken by birth an interest in the property of the holder and who can enforce a partition whenever they like.
It is a narrower body than a joint family.
It commences with a common ancestor and includes a holder of joint property 627 and only those males in his male live who are not removed from him by more than three degrees.
Only males can be coparceners.
[635G H; 636A] Managing Member and his powers: In a Hindu family, the Karta or manager occupies a unique position.
He has greater rights and duties.
He must look after the family interests.
He is entitled to possession of the entire joint estate.
He is also entitled to manage the family properties.
In other words, the actual possession and management of the joint family property must vest in him.
[637Bl The managing member or Karta has not only the power to manage but also the power to alienate joint family property.
The alienation may be either for family necessity or for the benefit of the estate.
Such alienation would bind the interests of all the undivided members of the family, adults or minors.
[637E] Remedies against alienations: Although the power of disposition of joint family property has been conceded to the manager of joint Hindu family, the law raises no presumptions as to the validity of his transactions.
His acts could be questioned in the court of law.
The other members of the family have a right to have the transaction declared void, if not justified.
When an alienation is challenged as unjustified or illegal, it would be for the alienee to prove that there was legal necessity in fact or that he made proper and bona fide enquiry as to the existence of such necessity and satisfied himself as to the existence of such necessity.
If the alienation is found to be unjustified, it would be declared void.
Such alienations would be void except to the extent of the manager 's share, in Madras, Bombay and Central provinces.
The purchaser could get only the manager 's share.
In other provinces, the purchaser would not get even that much.
The entire alienation would be void.
[637H; 638A C] In the light of these principles, his Lordship did not think that the submissions of Mr. H.N. Salve were sound.
It is true that a coparcener takes by birth an interest in the ancestral property but he is not entitled to separate possession of the coparcenary estate.
His rights are not independent of the control of the Karta.
It would be for the Karta to consider the actual pressure on the joint family estate and to examine as to how best the joint family estate could be beneficially put into use to subserve the interests of the family.
A coparcener cannot interfere in 628 these acts of management.
A father Karta in addition to the aforesaid powers of alienation has also the special power to sell or mortgage ancestral property to discharge his antecedent debt not tainted with immorality.
If there is no such need or benefit, the purchaser takes risk and the right and interest of the coparcener will ramming unimpaired in the alienated property.
No doubt the law confers a right on the coparcener to challenge the alienation made by Karta, but that right is not inclusive of the right to obstruct aliention.
Nor could the right to obstruct alienation be considered incidental to the right to challenge the alienation.
The coparcener cannot claim the right to interfere with the act of management of the joint family affairs; he is not entitled for it.
Therefore, he cannot move the Court to grant relief by injunction restraining the Karta from alienating the coparcenary property.
[638D E, G H; 639A B] There was one difficulty for the sustainability of the suit for injunction.
Temporary injunction can be granted under sub section (I) of section 37 of the .
A decree for perpetual injunction is made under sub section (2) of section 37.
Such an injunction can be granted upon the merits of the suit.
The injunction would be to restrain the defendant perpetually from commission of an act contrary to the rights of the plaintiff.
Section 38 of the governs the grant of perpetual injunction.
The provisions of section 38 have to be read alongwith section 41, the clause (h) whereof provides that an injunction cannot be granted when a party could obtain an efficacious relief by any other usual mode of proceeding (except in the case of a breach of trust).
The coparcener has adequate remedy to impeach the alienation made by the Karta.
He cannot, therefore, move the court for an injunction restraining the Karta from alienating the coparcenary property.
The decision of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Jujhar Singh vs Giani Talok Singh, , 348 has correctly laid down the law.
[639C D, H; 640A B] From the above discussions of the principles of Hindu Law and in the light of the provisions of the , his Lordship dismissed the appeal.
[640G ] Shiv Kumar vs Mool Chand, CLJ 1971 page 1027; Jujhar Singh vs Giani Talok Singh, , 348; Hunooman Persaud Pandey vs Mussumat Babooee Munraj Koonweree Moore 's on Indian Appeal, [1856] Vol.
VI 393; Shiv Kumar Mool Chand Arora vs Mool Chand Jaswant Singh, A.I.R. 1972 (Punjab & Haryana) 147; Sudarshan Maistri vs Narasimhulu Maistri and Anr., ILR 25 Mad, 149 and Bhagwan Dayal vs Mst.
Reoti Devi, , 477.
