% Five persons were tried for the murder of a widow, out of which one turned approver.
There was no direct evidence in the case.
The only evidence was the evidence of the approver and the other evidence regarding recovery of articles by three witnesses.
The trial court discarded the testimony of two witnesses who had identified some articles.
The third witness, the son of the deceased and who had identified the articles was not examined at the trial.
The court, however, convicted all the accused persons under section 302 read with section 34 lPC.
The High Court maintained the conviction of three persons on the finding that the evidence of identification was sufficient to corroborate the testimony of the approver.
In the appeals by special leave by two of the accused, it was contended for the State that although the son of the deceased had not been examined at the trial, he had identified articles at the test identification and, therefore, that evidence was sufficient to corroborate the testimony of the accomplice.
Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: It is established as a rule of prudence that the testimony of an accomplice if it is thought reliable as a whole conviction could only be based if it is corroborated by independent evidence either direct or circumstantial connecting the accused with the crime.
[603A B] Haroon Haji Abdulla vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Ravinder Singh vs State of Haryana, ; referred to.
In the instant case, the evidence of the son of the deceased could 600 not be looked into because (i) what he identified and stated to the Magistrate, who conducted the identification parade, was only a hearsay evidence and that evidence could only be used to corroborate his testimony if he was examined at the trial, and (ii) what he stated to the Magistrate was not subjected to cross examination and was at the back of the accused.
Further, there is nothing about identification or anything to connect the articles with the crime and in such a situation the evidence of recovery is not at all relevant as it is not connected with the crime.
It could not, therefore, be used as evidence against the accused.
[604C D] The only evidence against the accused was that of the approver.
He has claimed to be a spectator at every moment but has not participated at any stage.
Apart from it, the initial story appears also to be absolutely unnatural, as according to him he did not know anyone of the accused persons but a month before the incident they took him into confidence and told him to join them.
The evidence of the witnesses as a whole does not appear to be natural version and is not such which inspires confidence.
Moreover, there was no corroboration at all from another independent circumstance or source of evidence.
The conviction of the appellant, therefore, could not be maintained.
[604F H]
