% The 1st respondent was appointed as a Lecturer in the appellant College on 26th July, 1971 and was placed under probation for one year.
He was informed by a letter dated 28th March, 1972 that his services were no longer required and would stand terminated with effect from the afternoon of 30th April, 1972.
The 1st respondent challenged the aforesaid termination order by a writ application contending that his appointing authority was "The Managing Committee or the Governing Body" of the College, and as such the order of termination of his services by the Principal of the College was without jurisdiction.
The writ application was contested on behalf of the Appellant by contending that the Principal who was the Ex officio Secretary was the appointing authority and was vested with the power to terminate the appellant 's services.
On behalf of the director of Public Instruction, who was also a party to the writ application, it was stated that both the orders of appointment and termination h ad been passed by the Governing Body and the Principal who communicated the same to the 1st respondent was acting on behalf of the Governing Body, and that the DPI was not concerned with the termination orders passed before 3rd of May, 1972 the date from which 1974 Amendment of the Orissa Education Act, 1969 took effect, and that the DPI had no power to look into the matter.
The High Court rejected the objection to the maintainability of the writ application on the ground that the College was a private institution, and held that in view of the provisions of the orissa Education Berhampur University Act 1966 and the Berhampur university Statutes 1966, the college must be considered to be a statutory body amenable to the writ jurisdiction.
It held that, "undoubtedly until confirmation petitioner had no right to the post and during the period of probation he could be turned out from his service", but in view of the language of the appointment letter and the termination order both the orders have been passed by some authority other than the Principal and the Principal was merely a communicating agent.
It opined that the termination order did not emanate from the Governing Body of the College which alone had the power to terminate the services of a teacher, and as such held that the termination order was issued without jurisdiction.
The writ application was allowed, and the 1st respondent was declared to have continued in service.
Allowing the appeal by the College, this Court, ^ HELD: l.
The writ petition was founded on the assumption that it was the Principal who had passed the termination order by himself and that he had no jurisdiction to do so.
Instead of merely pointing out that it was not so, the affidavit on behalf of the College made a confused statement forgetting that the Principal was only one of the members of the Governing Body.
Both sides, thus, misrepresented the situation before the Court.[711D E] 2.
Although it is permissible for a tribunal to accept part and reject the rest of any witness 's testimony, so far as admission in pleading is concerned, it cannot be so dissected.
It may be accepted as a whole or not at all.
[7l2A B] M.M. Essabhoy vs M. Haridas, AIR 1915 PC 2 referred to.
The case of the College had been that both the appointment and the termination orders were given by the Principal.
This plea is of course incorrect but for that reason the statement by the College cannot be truncated and part of it accepted while rejecting the other part.
It had to be accepted as a whole or not at all.
[711H] 4.
The finding and the assumption made by the High Court that the termination order was passed by an authority other than the appointing authority being not supported by any material whatsoever on the record has to be set aside.
[712B] 5.
The burden of proving the necessary facts for grant of relief 709 was on the writ petitioner which was not discharged.
The writ application was, therefore, bound to fail.
The decision of High Court is set aside, and the writ petition dismissed.
[712B C]
