% A tenant, Mr. Sequeira, wanted to prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court against an order of the High Court, confirming an order of eviction passed against him in respect of his business premises, and engaged the appellant, an Advocate of the Supreme Court, to file the appeal.
The Advocate/Appellant filed a petition for Special Leave in the Supreme Court.
The petition came up for hearing on 22.11.1971 and was dismissed as withdrawn.
The tenant thereupon filed a suit in the Court of the District Munsiff against the appellant for damages and compensation on the allegations that the appellant had been negligent in rendering professional service and had misconducted himself by filing the appeal after considerable delay, giving misleading information about the filing of the appeal, and withdrawing the appeal instead of canvassing for its admission, and that as a result of the withdrawal of the appeal, he was evicted from his business premises in consequence whereof he had incurred loss of income and business, besides suffering mental agony, worry and loss of reputation.
The plaintiff claimed compensation under various heads.
The appellant filed a written statement, refuting the charges levelled against him in the plaint and disputing the plaintiff 's right to seek damages.
During the pendency of the suit, the plaintiff died and his legal representatives, the respondents in this appeal, filed a petition under order XXII Rule 3(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure for their substitution in the suit for prosecuting the suit further.
The appellant opposed the petition on the grounds inter alia that the suit abated on the death of the plaintiff as per ahe maxim Actio Personalis cum moritur persona.
The Trial Court upheld the objection and dismissed the suit as having abated, but the High Court held otherwise and declared the legal representatives to be entitled to be impleaded and continue the suit.
This appeal was filed by special leave against the order of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 607 ^ HElD: The High Court which, in deciding the Revision before it, followed Krishan Behari Sen vs Corporation of Calcutta, I.L.R. 31 Calcutta 993, had not followed the correct ratio.
Section 306 of the , which corresponded to section 89 of the Probate and Administration Act, 1881, set out the rights of the Executors and Administrators to continue actions of or against a deceased person.
Section 306 was almost a re production of section 89.
In so far as the rights of a legal representative to proceed with a suit filed by a deceased plaintiff were concerned, order XXII, Rules I and 3(1) governed the matter.
[611C, F] The maxim 'action personalis cum moritur persona ' had been applied not only to those cases where a plaintiff died during the pendency of a suit filed by him for damages for personal injuries sustained by him but also to cases where a plaintiff died during the pendency of an appeal to the Appellate Court, be it the first Appellate Court or the second Appellate Court against the dismissal of the suit by the Trial Court andlor the first Appellate Court, as the case might be.
This was on the footing that by reason of the dismissal of the suit by the Trial Court or the first Appellate Court, as the case might be, the plaintiff stood relegated to his original position before the Trial Court [614G H; 615A ] Though section 306 spoke only of executors and administrators.
and order XXII, Rule 3, Civil Procedure Code, set out the rights of the legal representatives to continue the proceedings instituted earlier by a deceased plaintiff if the right to sue survived, the Courts had taken the view that the legal representatives stood on par with the executors and administrators regarding their right to seek impleadment to continue the suit.
There was unanimity of view among many High Courts regarding the interpretation to be given to the words "other personal injuries not causing the death of the party", occurring in section 306 of the .
Preponderant view taken by several High Courts found acceptance with this Court in Melepurath Sankumari Ezhu Thassan vs Thekittl Geopalankutty Nair, A.l.
It was on account of these factors, the Court expressed its disapproval of the view taken by the High Court in this case.
[615E F, H; 616A B] What now fell for consideration in this case was whether the suit filed by the plaintiff was founded on torts or contract.
In view of the fact that this aspect of the matter had not been considered by the Trial Court, the Court did not think it proper to express any opinion one way or the other as to whether the suit cause of action was founded on torts 608 or contract.
Having regard to the nature of the claim, the Court was not able to comprehend how without any enquiry and recording of evidence the Trial Court and the High Court had proceeded on the basis that the suit claim was based only on tortious liability though the two courts had reached different conclusions about abatment of the suit.
Since no discussion had been made and no finding, rendered on this question and since the Court could not render any finding on the basis of the materials on record whether the suit was based on the personal injuries sustained by the plaintiff or upon the loss suffered by the estate, the Court thought the proper course would be to allow the judgment under appeal to stand even though the Court did not approve the reasoning of the High Court.
The matter was left upon for the trial Court to decide whether the suit was founded entirely on torts or on contract or partly on torts and partly on contract and deal with the matter according to law.
If the entire suit claim was founded on torts, the suit would undoubtedly abate.
If the action was founded partly on torts and partly on contract, then, such part of the claim as related to torts would stand abated and the other part would survive.
If the suit claim was founded entirely on contract, then, the suit had to proceed to trial in its entirety and be adjudicated upon.
[616C; 617G H; 618B d] A legal practitioner could not claim exemption from liability to be sued in respect of any loss or injury suffered by the client due to any negligence in the conduct of his professional duties merely by reason of his being a legal practitioner.
Whether section 2(b) of the , would afford protection to a legal practitioner from being sued for negligence by a client if he only pleaded or agreed to plead, was a matter for judicial determination in an appropriate case.
For the present, the Court did not express any opinion on the matter except pointing out that there was a specific provision in the , saying that the legal practitioners would also be liable to be sued by their clients if they had been negligent in the performance of their professional duties.
In conclusion, since the Court found that the question whether the suit had abated or not could be answered only after the nature of the suit was determined on the basis of the materials placed and the evidence adduced by the parties, the appeal had to be dismissed.
The suit would stand restored to the file of the trial Court for disposal in accordance with law in the light of the guidelines given by the Court in this Judgment.
[621G H;622A C] Krishna Behari Sen vs Corporation of Calcutta, ILR.
31 Calcutta, 993; Rustomji Dorabji vs W.H. Nurse, ILR 44 Madras 357; Motilal 609 Satyanarayan & Anr.
vs Harnarain Premsukh & Anr, ; Palaniappa Chettiar vs Rajah of Ramnad, I.L.R. 49 Madras 208; Irulappa vs Madhava, A.I.R. 1951 Madras 733; Arnuchalam vs Subramanian, A.I.R. 1958 Madras 142; Gopal vs Ram Chandra, ILR XXVI Bombay 597; Maniramlala vs Mtz.
Chalti Bai & Anr., I.L.R. 1938 Nagpur 280; Baboo vs Subanshi, I.L.R. 1942 Nagpur 650; Baboolal vs Ramlal, A.I.R. 1952 Nagpur 408; Punjab Singh vs Ramautar Singh, A.I.R. 1920 Patna 841; Joginder Kaur vs Jagdish Singh, A.I.R. 1964 Patna 548; Ratanlal vs Baboo lal, A.I.R. 1960 Madhya Pradesh 200; G. Jaya Prakash vs State, A.I.R. 1977 Andhra Pradesh 20; D.K. Cassim & Sons vs Sara Bibi, I.L.R. XIII Rangoon 385; Melepurath Sankunni Ezhuthassan vs Thekittil Geopalakutty Nair, ; Hedley Byrne & Co. Ltd. vs Heller & Partners, ; ; Rondel vs W, ; Rondel vs Worsley, [ 1967] 3 All.
E.R. 993; Heywood vs Wellers, [ ; ; Midland Bank Trust Co. Ltd. & Anr vs Hett, Stubles & Kemp, and Re Bell 's Indenture Bell & Anr.
vs Hickley & ors.
, , referred to.
