% The validity of the appellant 's election to the Legislative Assembly was challenged by two electors, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2, on the ground that improper acceptance by the Returning officer, of the nomination paper of one of the contesting candidates who was not qualified to contest the election under article 173(b) of the Constitution, had materially affected the result of the election of the returned candidate.
The appellant contested the election petitions, contending that there was no improper acceptance of nomination paper of the candidate in question and that the appellant 's election was not materially affected.
The High Court held that there was improper acceptance of the nomination paper, as the candidate in question was not competent to contest election for the reason that he was below 25 years of age.
It also held that the election of the appellant was materially affected, because there was a difference of only 4497 votes between the votes polled by the appellant and the next unsuccessful candidate and if the candidate whose nomination paper had been improperly accepted had not contested, the votes polled by him would have gone in favour of the next unsuccessful candidate and other candidates, in which case the next unsuccessful candidate could have polled the majority of valid votes.
It accordingly declared the appellant 's election void.
In the appeals before this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the finding recorded by the High Court that the improper acceptance of the nomination paper of the candidate in question had materially affected the result of the appellant 's election was based on conjectures and surmises and not on any legal evidence and that none of 714 the two election petitioners had produced by cogent and reliable evidence to discharge the burden that the result of the election was materially affected on account of improper acceptance of the nomination paper of the candidate in question.
On behalf of the respondents, it was urged that on the material on record and having regard to the number of votes polled by the candidate whose nomination was improperly accepted and the difference between the votes polled by the appellant and the next unsuccessful candidate, the findings recorded by the High Court were sustainable in law and the same were in accordance with the law laid down by this Court.
in Chhedi Ram vs Jhilmit Ram & ors.
, [ ; Allowing the appeals, ^ HELD: l.
The election petitioners have failed to prove that the result of the election of the appellant was materially affected on the ground of improper acceptance of nomination paper.
Therefore, the election of the returned candidate could not be declared void.
[717C D] 2.1 Improper acceptance of nomination paper of any contesting candidate (other than the contesting candidate) does not ipso facto render the election.
Of the returned candidate void.
The election can be declared void only if it is found that the result of the election of the returned candidate was materially affected on the ground of such improper acceptance.
The burden of proving the material effect on the result of election is always on the election petitioner challenging the validity of the election of the returned candidate.
Unless this burden is discharged by the election petitioner the result of the returned candidate cannot be declared void.
[719F H] 2.2 The result of the election can be affected only on the proof that the votes polled by the candidate whose nomination paper had wrongly been accepted would have been distributed in such a manner amongst the remaining candidates that some other candidates (other than the returned candidate) would have polled the highest number of valid votes.
In the absence of any such proof, the result cannot be held to have been materially affected.
[732C D] The burden to prove this material effect is difficult and many times it is almost impossible to produce the requisite proof.
But the difficulty in proving this fact does not alter the position of law.
The 715 legislative intent is clear that unless the burden howsoever difficult it may be, is discharged, the election cannot be declared void.
[719G H] 2.3 It is not permissible in law to avoid the election of the returned candidate on speculations or conjectures relating to the manner in which the wasted votes would have been distributed amongst the remaining validly nominated candidates.
[723F] Legislative intent is apparent that the harsh and difficult burden of proving material effect on the result of the election has to be discharged by the person challenging the election and the Courts cannot speculate on the question.
In the absence of positive proof of material effect on the result of the election of the returned candidate, the election must be allowed to stand and the Court should not interfere with the election on speculation and conjectures.
[723F G] Casting of votes by electors depends upon several factors and it is not possible to forecast or guess as to how and in what manner the voters would have exercised their choice in the absence of the improperly nominated candidate.
No inference on the basis of circumstances can successfully be drawn.
[725D El The Courts are ill equipped to speculate as to how the voters could have exercised their right of vote in the absence of improperly nominated candidate.
Any speculation made by the Court in this respect would be arbitrary and contrary to the democratic principles.
[725B C] In the instant case, the election petitioners had failed to discharge the burden of proving the fact that the result of the election of the appellant had been materially by reason of improper acceptance of the nomination paper of the candidate in question.
In the absence of any positive evidence provided by the election petitioners, it was not open to the High Court to record findings that the result of the election was materially affected.
There were ll contesting candidates.
If the candidate whose nomination paper had been improperly accepted was not in the election contest, it is difficult to say in what proportion the voters who had voted for him would have voted for the remaining candidates.
Therefore, the result of the returned candidate could not be declared void on the basis of surmises and conjectures.
[724E; 725E H] Vashist Narain Sharma vs Dev Chandra and others; , and Paokai Haokip vs Rishang & Ors., ; , relied on.
716 Chhedi Ram vs Jhilmit Ram 2 others, [1984] t SCR 966 distinguished and explained.
