% As a result of the order passed by the High Court, proceedings under section 44(2a) of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 were re opened by the Special Revenue officer and final orders were passed on 9.2.1982.
The Ist respondent preferred an appeal against this order before the 9th Additional District Judge, the competent authority to hear an appeal.
On 1.12.83 the Ist respondent obtained an opinion of the Advocate General regarding the aforesaid proceedings, and filed that opinion with an application.
The Additional District Judge passed an order on 25.2.86 rejecting the prayer of the Ist respondent that the appeal be disposed of in accordance with the opinion of the Advocate General, but observed that the opinion of the Advocate General could only be looked into as the ground of appeal on behalf of the Ist respondent.
The date of hearing of the appeal was fixed on 19.4.86 to suit the convenience of the Advocates of the parties.
A petition under article 227 was filed in the High Court against the 818 aforesaid order by the Ist respondent.
The High Court treated this petition as a revision application challenging the order passed by the Additional District Judge on 25.2.86, and held that the Additional District Judge should have disposed of the appeal in accordance with the opinion of the Advocate General, and quashed the proceedings under Section 44(2a) as well as the appeal that was pending hearing before the Additional District Judge.
Allowing the Appeal by the State this Court, ^ HELD: l.
The High Court lost sight of the fact that the only grievance against the order of the 9th Additional District Judge was that he refused to decide the appeal in accordance with the opinion of the Advocate General and that he did not give an early date of hearing.
The question about the suo moto proceedings under section 44(2a) and the validity of the Amendment Act, 1969 and its effect were not considered by the appellate authority and in fact the appeal was still pending before the 9th Additional District Judge which was yet to be heard and disposed of.
[823G H] 2.
The High Court after examining the legal aspect without having been raised before it decided the matter so that neither appeal remains nor any proceedings remain and in doing so the High Court went on without there being proper grounds before it and without giving an opportunity to the appellant State of West Bengal, to have their say in this matter.
[824A B] 3.
The order passed by the High Court dated 20.5.87 is, therefore, completely without jurisdiction and on matters which were not before it and also without giving adequate opportunity of hearing and, therefore, deserves to be quashed, and is quashed.
[824B c] 4.
The appeal that was filed by the Ist respondent before the 9th Additional District Judge was pending when the High Court passed the impugned order, revives.
It could not be said that the appeal is disposed of as observed by the High Court.
It is directed that the appeal which was pending before the 9th Additional District Judge shall be heard by the Additional District Judge in accordance with law.
[824C D]
