% Words and Phrases: 'Similar description ' meaning of.
The appellant, manufacturer of Hospital and Pharmaceutical Appliances and Heavy Duty Industrial Canteen Equipment, classified certain items like cooking range, deep fat fryer, express coffee machine, bread toaster etc.
, numbering 14, under Tariff Item No. 68 of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944.
The Assistant Collector held that products 2 to 14 were classifiable under Tariff Item No. 33C, in view of the Explanation thereof, and demanded differential duty for the period of 1st March, 1979 to 30th June, 1980.
The Collector, on appeal, held that these items were to be classified under Tariff item No. 68 and not under Tariff item 33C .
On appeal by the Revenue, the Central Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, while noting that the equipment in question, some of which were electrically operated machines, were used in industrial canteens, five star hotels, big hospitals, etc.
held that the intention of the Legislature was clear from the Explanation to Tariff Item No. 33C, and the items in question could not be classified under Tariff Item No. 68.
Dismissing the appeal by the manufacturer.
^ HELD: The statute does not contemplate that goods classed under the words of "similar description" shall be in all respects the same.
If it did, these words would be unnecessary.
These were intended to embrace goods but not identical with those goods.
If the items were 732 similar appliances which are normally used in household, these will be taxable under Tariff Item No. 33C. [73CD] It is not necessary, to be a domestic appliance, that it must be actually used in the home or the house.
It must be of a kind that they are generally used for household purposes.
[736B] The types of items concerned in the instant case are generally used for household purposes and that is sufficiently good test for classification in the light of explanation to tariff item No. 33C.
The Tribunal was.
therefore, right in holding that these items could not be classified under Item 68.
[736C] Since the appellant had set out all the details and the Revenue had assessed the appellant under Tariff Item No. 68, the Tribunal was right in holding that there was no intention to evade payment of duty and in directing that the modification of the classification list could only be prospective and not retrospective.
In the absence of any proof of suppression of fact, it was also right in holding that section l 1 A of the Act would not be applicable.
[736D E]
