% The appellant was married to the first respondent by observance of rites under Hindu Law in June, 1974, while the first respondent 's earlier marriage was subsisting and the wife was alive.
After living with the first respondent for a week, she left the house alleging ill treatment.
She filed an application for maintenance in 1976, which was dismissed by the trial Court.
Her appeal to the High Court was dismissed by a Full Bench.
In the appeal to this Court it was urged on behalf of the appellant that a marriage should not be treated as void because such a marriage was earlier recognised in law and custom and in any event, the marriage would be voidable under section 12 of the , that the term "wife" in section 125 of the Cr.
P.C., 1973 should be given a wider and extended meaning so as to include therein not only a lawfully wedded wife but also a woman married, in fact, by performance of necessary rites or following the procedure laid down under the law, that the personal law of the parties to a proceeding under section 125 of the Cr.
P.C. should be excluded from consideration, and since a divorcee has been held to be entitled to the benefits of the section, a woman in the same position as the appellant should also be brought within the sweep of the section, and since the appellant was not informed about the respondent 's earlier marriage, when she married him, who treated her as his wife, her prayer for maintenance should be allowed.
810 It was contended on behalf of the respondent that the term "wife" used in Section 125 of the Cr.
P.C. meant only a legally wedded wife, and as the marriage of the appellant must be held to be null and void by reason of the provisions of the the appellant was not entitled to any relief under the section.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: l.
The marriage of a woman in accordance with the Hindu rites with a man having legal spouse, after coming into force of the is a complete nullity in the eye of law and she is not entitled to the benefit of Sec. 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.
[813D] 2.1 Clause (1)(i) of section 5 of the , lays down, for a lawful marriage, the necessary condition that neither party should have a spouse living at the time of the marriage, and therefore a marriage in contravention of this condition is null and void, under section 11 of the Act.
[813G] 2.2 By reason of the overriding effect of the Act, as mentioned in section 4, no aid can be taken of the earlier Hindu law or any custom or usage as a part of that law, inconsistent with any provisions of the Act.
Section 12 is confined to other categories of marriages, and is not applicable to one solemnized in violation of section 5(1)(i) of the Act.
Cases covered under section 12 are not void ab initio.
[813H; 814A B] 2.3 The marriage covered by section 11 are void ipso jure, that is, void from the very inception, and have to be ignored as not existing in law at all if and when such a question arises.
Although the section permits a formal declaration to be made on the presentation of a petition, it is not essential to obtain in advance such a formal declaration from a court in a proceeding specifically commenced for the purpose.
[814B C] The marriage of the appellant must, therefore, be treated as null and void from its verv inception.
[815C] 3.1 Section 125 has been enacted in the interest of a wife, and one who intends to take benefit under sub section (l)(a) has to establish the necessary condition, namely, that she is the wife of the person concerned.
This issue can be decided only by a reference to the law applicable to the parties.
[815E] 811 3.2 It is only where an applicant establishes her status or relationship with reference to the Personal Law that an application for maintenance can be maintained.
Once the right under the section is established by proof of necessary conditions mentioned therein, it cannot be defeated by further reference to the Personal Law.
[816D E] 3.3 For the purpose of extending the benefit of the section to a divorced woman, and an illegitimate child, the Parliament considered it necessary to include in the section specific provisions to that effect but has not done so with respect to women not lawfully married.
[816F] 3.4 The word "wife" is not defined in the Cr.
P.C. except indicating in the Explanation to section 125 its inclusive character so as to cover a divorcee.
A woman cannot be a divorcee, unless there was a marriage in the eye of law preceding that status.
The expression must, therefore, be given the meaning in which it is understood in law applicable to the parties, subject to the Explanation (b).
A divorcee is included in the section on account of cl.
(b) of the Explanation.
[815D E] 3.5 Principle of estoppel cannot be relied upon to defeat the provisions of the Act.
So far as the first respondent treating her as wife is concerned, it is of no avail, as the issue has to be settled under the law.
It is the intention of the legislature, which is relevant, and not the attitude of the parties.
The prayer of the appellant for maintenance cannot, therefore, be allowed even if the appellant was not informed, at the time of her marriage to the respondent, about his earlier marriage.
[816G H] Mohd. Ahmed Khan vs Skah Bano Beghum, ; , distinguished.
