HELD: The order of detention was passed by the respondent No. 2.
District Magistrate, on the basis of two Criminal Cases in respect of two incidents which had occurred on October 2 and 3, 1986.
So far as the case being G.D. No. 38 was concerned, the report of this incident was made by the picket employed at police station, Kydganj.
It appeared from this report that there were no particulars about the shopkeepers who had been terrorised and threatened for payment of money, as alleged in the grounds of detention, nor were mentioned at all the names of any of the witnesses in whose presence the threat or terror was used and money was demanded.
The report was absolutely vague and it was not possible for the detenu to give an effective representation 127 against the ground, which is one of the Constitutional requirements enjoined in Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
The second ground, which led to crime case No. 248/86 under section 307, I.P.C., and crime case No. 249/86 under section 4/5 of the Explosives Act and which occurred on October 3, 1986, registered on the complaint of Sub/Inspector Yatendra Singh through special court, Allahabad, also did not disclose any particulars as to the shop keepers in whose presence the bombs alleged were thrown by the appellant, and who were terrified and panic stricken, etc., nor were mentioned the names of any witnesses in respect of the said incident.
[133F, 134A D] The question whether a man has only committed a breach of law and order or has acted in a manner likely to cause a disturbance of the public order, is a question of degree and the extent of the reach of the act upon the Society, as held by this Court in Kanu Biswos vs State of West Bengal, ; , while determining the meaning of 'public order '.
Public order is what the French Call "order Publique" and is something more than ordinary maintenance of law and order.
From the observations of this Court made in many cases, it is evident that whether an act amounts to a breach of law and order or a breach of public order, solely depends upon its extent and reach to the society.
If the act is restricted to particular individuals or a group of individuals, it breaches the law and order problem, but if the effect and reach and potentiality of the act are so deep as to affect the community at large and/or the even tempo of the community, then, it becomes a breach of the public order.
An act, which may not at all be objected to in certain situations is capable of totally disturbing the public tranquillity.
When communal tension is high, an indiscreet act of no significance is likely to disturb or dislocate the even tempo of the life of the community.
An order of detention made in such a situation has to take note of the potentiality of the act objected to.
Thus, whether an act relates to law and order or the public order depends upon the impact of the act on the life of the community, or, in other words, the reach and effect and potentiality of the act, if so put as to disturb or dislocate the even tempo of the life of the community, it will be an act which will affect the public order .
[134D E,137A B. 138B D] In this case, so far as the first incident which occurred on 2.10.1986 was concerned, the ground was vague inasmuch as the names of the witnesses in whose presence the threat was given and the incident occurred, had not been mentioned.
As regards the second incident which occurred on 3.
10.1986, the Crime Case No. 248/86 under section 307, I.P.C. and the Crime Case No. 249/86 under section 4/5 of the Explosive Act, were pending trial.
[138E F] 128 A case crime No. 200 of 1985 under sections 323/504/506/426, l.
P.C., read with section 2/3 of the U.P. Gangsters and Anti Social Activities Act No. 4 of 1986 was registered against the appellant by the police.
That case was challenged by an application under section 482 Cr.
P.C. in the High Court.
The said application was admitted on 2.6.1986 and had been pending.
The High Court had, while admitting the case, granted stay of arrest of the appellant.
The appellant had been taken into custody and was in jail as an undertrial prisoner on October 10, 1986, when the impugned order of detention was clamped upon him.
The appellant stated in this Appeal that till date he had not applied for bail in case crime No. 248/86 and case crime No. 249/86 as well as the case registered in report No. 38 dated October 2, 1986 at the police station Kydganj.
The question was whether there was a possibility of the detaining authority to be satisfied that the appellant was likely to indulge in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of public order as there was no likelihood of his being released from the jail custody immediately.
There was nothing in the case to show that in consideration of his previous conduct and acts, there was a likelihood of the appellant 's indulging in activities prejudicial to the maintenance of public order if he was set free and/or released from custody.
[138F H, 139A B, 140B C] The detaining authority District Magistrate respondent No. 2, had not filed an affidavit stating whether he had taken into consideration the fact that the appellant had already been in the judicial custody and on considering his past activities he had been subjectively satisfied that if set free or released from jail custody on bail, there was a likelihood of his indulging in criminal activities endangering public order.
On the other hand, the Station officer of Kydganj police station, had filed a counter stating that the District Magistrate had passed the impugned detention order when the appellant was already in jail, on the p apprehension that the appellant was likely to be released on bail in the near future and if he was bailed out, the public order would become worse.
This clearly showed that the police officer had arrogated to himself the knowledge about the subjective satisfaction of the District Magistrate on whom the power is conferred by the Act.
The affidavit filed by the station officer of police implied that he had access to the file of the District Magistrate or he influenced the decision of the District Magistrate for making the detention order.
There was nothing to show that there was awareness in the mind of the District Magistrate, the detaining authority, of the fact that the appellant was in jail at the time of the clamping of the order of detention, and the detaining authority was satisfied, in considering his antecedents, that there was a likelihood of his indulging in criminal activities, jeopardising public order if he 129 was released on bail and that there was every likelihood of his being A enlarged on bail within a short time.
On this ground alone, the detention order was invalid.
It might be said in this connection that the respondents could very well oppose the bail application when it came up for hearing, and if at all the appellant was released on bail, the respondents were not without a remedy.
They could file an application for cancellation of the bail.
In the circumstances, it could not but be held that the passing of the order of detention of the appellant who was already in custody was fully bad and invalid in law.
The respondents could very well proceed with the criminal case under section 307, I.P.C., and get the appellant punished if the case was proved beyond doubt against him.
The police officers, who witnessed the hurling of the bombs and the Sub Inspector of police who recorded the F.I.R., could come forward to give evidence.
In the circumstances, the open statement in the affidavit of the Sub Inspector that the witnesses were afraid of disclosing their names and giving evidence, was wholly incredulous and could not be accepted.
[141G H, 142A G, 143G 144A] The clamping of the order of detention was not in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
The history sheet did not at all link to the proximity of the two incidents on the basis of which the detention order had been passed.
[144C D] The impugned order of detention was illegal and invalid.
[144G] E Kanu Biswas vs State of West Bengal, [1972] 3 S.C.C. 831; Haradhan Saha vs The State of West Bengal and Anr. ; ; Kanchanlal Maneklal Chokshi vs State of Gujarat & ors.
; , ; Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar & ors.; , ; Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal, ; Nagendra Nath Mondal vs State of West Bengal, 11972] 1 S.C.C. 498; Nand Lal Roy alias Nonda Dulal Roy vs State of West Bengal, ; S.K. Kedar vs State of West Bengal, ; Ashok Kumar vs Delhi Administration, ; State of U.P. vs Hari Shankar Tewari, ; ; Masood Alam vs Union of India, A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 897; Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate Burdwan State of Andhra Pradesh & ors.
; , ; Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah and others, A.I.R. 1986 S.C. 315; Abdul Gaffer vs State of West Bengal, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1496 and Sudhir Kumar Saha vs Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, ;
