% The appellant filed an application under Section 125 Cr.
P.C. before the Judicial Magistrate, claiming maintenance for herself and her son, alleging lawful marriage with the respondent, and that the son was born out of the wedlock.
Respondent, however, denied the marriage and paternity of her son.
He claimed that he was already married twice and both his wives were alive.
The Judicial Magistrate accepted the appellant 's case and granted maintenance at the rate of 100 per month in her favour and Rs.50 per month for her minor son.
The Judicial Magistrate held that appellant No. t and respondent lived together in the same house as husband and wife for a considerable period, and appellant No. 2 was born out of this union.
He did not record a categorical finding as to whether the respondent was already married and his wife or wives were alive on the date of his marriage with appellant No. t. A revision application was filed by the appellant for enhancement of the rate of maintenance.
The respondent also moved the Sessions Judge in revision.
The Sessions Judge reversed the findings of the judicial Magistrate.
The appellant challenged the order by way of a revision application before the Bombay High Court which rejected the same holding that since it was the second revision application, it was not maintainable, being barred by the provisions of section 397(3) Cr.
The High Court also examined the merits of the case and concurred with the view of the Sessions Judge.
This appeal is by Special Leave.
788 Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: t.
The plea that respondent could not have lawfully married a third time in view of the provisions of the was rejected by the Judicial Magistrate by saying that even according to the respondent, his second marriage was null and void as his first wife was then alive.
As regards the first marriage he held that it was not as a fact proved.
He got rid of the effect of both the marriages by adopting a queer logic.
If the story of the first marriage was to be rejected, the second marriage could not have been held to be void on that ground.
It appears that the respondent has satisfactorily provide his case about his earlier marriage by production of good evidence.
Either the respondent 's first marriage was subsisting so as to nullify his second marriage, in which case the appellant 's marriage also was rendered null and void on that ground; or if the respondent 's case of his first marriage is disbelieved the second marriage will have to be held to be legal and effective so as to lead to the same conclusion of the appellant 's marriage being void.
On either hypothesis the appellant 's claim is not covered by Section 125 Cr.
The appellant cannot, therefore, be granted any relief in the present proceedings.
[791D H; 792A B] Smt.
Yamunabhai v Anantrao Shivram Adhav and another; , followed.
Besides holding that the respondent had married the appellant, the Magistrate categorically said that the appellant and the respondent lived together as husband and wife for a number of years and that appellant No. 2 was their child.
If, as a matter of fact, a marriage, although ineffective in the eye of law, took place between the appellant and the respondent, the status of the boy must be held to be that of a legitimate son on account of Section 16(1) of the .
Even if the factum of marriage of his mother is ignored, he must be treated as an illegitimate child of the respondent on the basis of the findings of the Judicial Magistrate and is entitled to relief by reason of clauses (b) and (c) of Section 125(t) Cr.
P.C. specifically referring to an illegitimate child.
The order of the Judicial Magistrate allowing the maintenance to appellant No. 2 was correctly passed.
But the amount of Rs.50 per month was allowed as the maintenance of the child four years back.
In view of the fact that money value has gone down due to inflation and the child has grown in age, the rate of maintenance is increased to Rs.150.[791B C: 793B] 3.
Since the claim for maintenance was granted in favour of the 789 appellant, by the Judicial Magistrate, there was no question of her challenging the same.
Her challenge before the Sessions Judge was confined to that part of the order assessing the amount of maintenance.
and this issue could not have been raised again by her.
Subject to this limitation, she was certainly entitled to invoke the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court.
The decision on the merits of her claim went against her for the first time before the Sessions Judge, and this was the subject matter of her revision before the High Court.
She could not, therefore, be said to be making a second attempt when she challenged the order before the High Court.
The fact that she had moved the Sessions Court against the quantum of maintenance could not be used against her in respect of her right of revision against the Sessions Judge 's order.
[790F H;791A] 4.
No error of law appears to have been discovered in the judgment of the Magistrate and so the revisional courts were not justified in making a reassessment of the evidence and substitute their own views for those of the Magistrate.
[792C] Pathumma vs Mohammad, ; , followed.
