% The suit premises consisting of lands and buildings were originally owned by Dewan Bishen Dass a former Prime Minister of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
The appellants purchased the same from his successor in interest, Purnish Chandra by two sale deeds dated 12.7.1967 and 8.12.1967.
The State Government tried to resume the land for setting up a tonga and lorry stand, and for the purpose of development of the city, and eviction of the appellants was ordered by the Estate Officer under the provision of the Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1959 on January 5, 1968.
The Municipality took forcible possession of the land and demolished the buildings thereon on January 11, 1968.
The appellants filed a Writ Petition in the High Court assailing the action of the Municipality.
The High Court on 19.7.1969 allowed the writ petition and held that the appellants were not unauthorised occupants, possession can be taken only on payment of compensation and that Section 5 of the Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act was ultra vires.
The State appealed to this Court and the judgment of the High Court was confirmed on the sole ground that as the Administrator of the Municipality had not complied with the provisions of section 238 and 239 of the Municipal Act the action taken by the Municipality in the matter of demolishing must be held to be entirely illegal and contrary to law, [State of Jammu and Kashmir vs 854 Haji Wali Mohammad & Ors., ; The Estate Officer thereafter issued a fresh notice under section 4(1) of the amended Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1959 intimating that the appellants were in unauthorised occupation of the public premises mentioned in the Schedule to the notice.
The appellants filed objections stating that they were not in unauthorised occupation of the said land nor have they encroached upon the same, and that the notice was wholly misconceived and illegal.
It was further contended that the land was purchased by the appellants from the legal heirs of Dewan Bishen Dass, that they had been in continuous possession, made various improvements on the land and built houses, and that the Estate Officer could not declare the person in possession as an unauthorised occupants after lapse of more than 80 years.
The Estate Officer rejected the objections and directed the appellants to handover possession of the premises including structures to the Administrator of the Minicipality.
The appellants preferred an appeal to the District Judge but the same was dismissed.
The order of the Estate Officer was also challenged in a writ petition by the appellants, but the same was dismissed by the High Court holding that the land being transferred by the legal heirs of Dewan Bishen Dass without obtaining prior permission of the Government or the competent authority in that behalf, the lease stood determined and that the notice under the Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1959 was in accordance with law.
In the appeal to this Court by Special Leave it was contended on behalf of the appellants: that the lands taken on lease by Dewan Bishen Dass cannot be deemed to have been taken under the provisions of Ailan No. 10 dated 7 Bhadon 1976 and as such section 12(A) and section 6 of the Land Grants Act 1960 are not applicable, that the lands could not be acquired without providing for adequate compensation to be paid to the Wasidar for the buildings, appurtenances and other improvements effected by him, that no compensation in fact was awarded and that the notice under section 4 of the Act was liable to be cancelled and quashed as being not in accordance with law.
855 The appeal was resisted by the State respondents, contending: that the appellants predecessor that is the original lessee was a Wasidar and that the lease was granted under Ailan No. 10 dated 7 Bhadon 1976, that section 12 A of the Jammu and Kashmir Lands Grants Act is applicable, that the transfer of the land had been made by the legal heirs of the original lessee Dewan Bishen Dass without the prior permission of the Government or any authority in that behalf, that the lease stood determined from the date of the transfer, the Government had the right of re entry on the land in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of the Land Grants Act, that the appellants are unauthorised occupants and consequently the notice under section 4(1) of the Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1959 is not illegal but is in accordance with the provisions of the said Act.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
Dewan Bishen Dass predecessor of the appellants was a Wasidar and the lands were wasidari lands leased out to him for the purpose of constructing buildings.
This lease was governed by Ailan No. 10 as well as by the Lands Grants Act, 1960.
[860F] 2.
The land was transferred by Purnish Chandra and others, legal representatives of the original lessee Dewan Bishen Dass, in favour of the appellants in contravention of the provisions of Section 12(A) of the Jammu and Kashmir Land Grants Act, 1960.
[860G] 3.
The notice under section 4(1) of the Jammu and Kashmir (Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act is in accordance with law and as such it is valid.
Under the Act as well as the rule the appellants are entitled to get compensation for the buildings and structures as well as of the improvements made on the land even though they are not entitled to get compensation in respect of the value of the land.
[860G H] 4.
The compensation in the instant case, has not been determined nor the same has been paid.
Appeal allowed.
Judgment and Order of High Court, set aside.
Matter remitted to the District Judge, who would expedite the determination of the compensation after determining the market value of the buildings, structures and all the improvements effected on the land.
[861A B]
