% The respondent landlord filed an application in the Court of the Rent Controller under Section 13 A of the East Punjab Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985, seeking eviction of the appellant tenant on the ground of arrears of rent and for his own use and occupation.
It was contended that the respondent retired from the service of the Government of India, Ministry of Defence on 20th May, 1949 and that his service was thereafter transferred to the Ministry of Rehabilitation from where he was discharged on 30th November, 1965 on the abolition of the Ministry, and that as he had no other house within the municipality he wanted the house in question for residence.
On receiving the summons of the eviction petition the appellant tenant sought leave to contest the application on the ground that he was inducted as a tenant in the premises in the year 1968, and that Section 13 A of the Act did not entitle the landlord to maintain the eviction petition.
The Rent Controller after recording the evidence of the parties negatived the contention of the tenant, allowed the application, and directed the tenant to vacate the premises within one month from the date of the order.
The appellant preferred a revision application under Section 18 A of the Act, but the High Court holding that the respondent being a 'specified landlord ' at the relevant time i.e. within one year of the date of commencement of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985 was entitled to get an order of eviction of the tenant from his house, upheld the eviction order of the Rent Controller and dismissed the revision petition.
The tenant appealed to this Court by special leave.
834 Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The respondent landlord did not satisfy the basic requirement of section 2(hh) of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985 and so he was not competent to maintain the application under section 13 A of the said Act.
[842C] 2.
Section 13 A of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction (Amendment) Act, 1985 in clear terms enjoins that: "Where a specified landlord at any time within one year prior to or within one year after the date of his retirement or after his retirement but within one year of the date of commencement of the said Act makes an application to recover the possession of the building or scheduled building, the Controller will direct the tenant to deliver possession of the said house to him".
Therefore to be entitled to have the benefit of Section 13 A of the Act the landlord respondent will have to fulfil the first qualification i.e. he must be a specified landlord in respect of the house in question on the date of his retirement from the service of the Union i.e. in 1963.
[840F H] 3.
To get the benefit of the summary procedure provided in Section 13 A the ex servicemen must be a specified landlord at the time of his retirement from service of the Union as provided in Section 2(hh).
[842B] 4.
The respondent landlord in the instant case, retired from the service of the Union in 1965, and the house in question was let out to the appellant tenant in 1968.
The respondent was thus not a landlord qua the premises and the tenant, on the date of his discharge from service entitling him to avail of the benefit of the provisions of Section 13 A of the East Punjab Act.
[842C D] 5.
The Rent Controller has not at all considered the question whether the landlord is a specified landlord, but simply held that the landlord was discharged from service on the abolition of the Department of Rehabilitation and so he was covered under the definition of specified landlord as given under section 2(hh) of the Act.
The Single Judge of the High Court without considering the provisions of Section 2(hh) of the Act held that the application under Section 13 A by a specified landlord seeking ejectment of a tenant was competent within one year of the commencement of the amended Act even if there existed no relationship of the landlord and tenant on the date of the retirement of the specified landlord.
This view is on the face of it erroneous.
The 835 judgments and orders of the Courts below are set aside.
[841F H; 842A B, D] A Sohan Singh vs Dhan Raj Sharma, [l983] 2 R.L.R. 465 and Bhanu Aththayya vs Comdr.
Kaushal & Ors., [1979] 2 R.C.J. 338, approved.
Mrs. Winifred Ross and Anr.
vs Mrs. Ivy Fonseca and Ors., A.I.R. 1984 SC 458, distinguished.
