% A piece of land had been purchased for the construction of a five star hotel.
In the sanctioned development plan the said land was shown in the residential zone and a contiguous parcel of land was shown as green belt.
When the plan was submitted to the Municipal Corporation for the construction of a five star hotel, the Commissioner rejected the plan on the ground that it was proposed to earmark the said land as a recreational ground with suitable internal network of roads during the revision of the development plan which was in the offing.
Aggrieved by the rejection, an appeal was preferred to the State Government under sec.
47 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966.
The appeal was heard by the Minister of State for Urban Development.
The appellants herein, members of various ecological groups and rate payers of the Municipal Corporation, appeared and opposed saying that the land should be kept reserved for a green belt or recreational ground in the interest of the general public.
However, the Minister set aside the order of the Municipal Commissioner and directed the sanctioning of the plan on certain conditions.
The Municipal Corporation accepted the appellate order and did not challenge it.
But the appellants filed a Writ Petition challenging the legality of the order.
The writ petition was dismissed by the High Court.
The present appeal by special leave is against this dismissal.
Meanwhile the Municipal Corporation passed a resolution extending the park reservation by including the remaining area of the land in question.
By another resolution the first resolution was modified limiting the reservation for the park to 7,000 sq.
yards out of the dis 920 puted land.
Thereafter the State Government exempted the disputed land under section 20 of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976.
The resolutions and the order were challenged in the High Court.
The petitions were dismissed by a Single Judge of the High Court and later by the Division Bench on appeal.
The Review Petitions also met the same fate.
The petitioners have not challenged the judgment of the High Court passed on the review applications, but filed before this Court the two special leave petitions challenging the legality and validity of the two resolutions and the order of Government giving exemption under section 20 of the Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act.
Dismissing the appeal, and the special leave petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 In allowing the appeal and directing sanction of the development plan, the Minister observed that in view of the clear provisions of sections 46 and 31(6) of the Act and having regard to the position that in the sanctioned plan of 1966, the said land was included in the residential zone and no proposal to exclude it therefrom in the draft revised development plan had been published, the Municipal Commissioner was not justified in rejecting the application for approval of the plan on the ground that the Bombay Municipal Corporation had decided to revise the 1966 Development Plan.
The Minister was of the view that the Planning Authority could only take into consideration any draft or final plan or proposal which had been published by means of notice, or sanctioned under the Act.
When Municipal Commissioner rejected the plan, there was no draft revised development plan in existence.
It was in contemplation.
If there had been such a plan, the Municipal Commissioner would be entitled to rely upon the same in rejecting the plan.
The Commissioner was not justified in merely relying upon a proposal for the preparation of a draft revised plan.
An order rejecting a development plan submitted by the owner of the land should be supported by some concrete material.
In the absence of any such material, it will be improper to reject the plan on the ground that there is a proposal for revision of the draft plan or that such a revision is under contemplation.
Therefore, the ground for rejecting the plan was not tenable and the appellate authority was justified in allowing the appeal.
[923H; 924A B, H; 925A C] 1.2 The Municipal Corporation has, subsequent to the judgment of the High Court, prepared and published a draft revised development plan.
The plan is not inconsistent with the draft revised development plan.
There is no material on record to show that the Municipal Corporation which is the Planning Authority, had prepared the draft revised 921 plan in accordance with the direction of the Minister.
The Minister has acted in public interest by imposing the conditions.
The conditions would show that considerable area out of the disputed land has been reserved for recreational ground or green belt.
The plan, as sanctioned with the conditions imposed, has been shown in the draft revised plan.
It was open to the Municipal Corporation to accept the verdict of the appellate authority and it has done so by not challenging it in the High Court or before this Court.
[926E H] 2.
The contention of the petitioners against the validity of the resolution is no longer tenable, regard being had to the fact that the draft revised development plan has since been published and the plan submitted and conditioned by the Minister is not inconsistent with the draft revised plan.
The petitioners have also not seriously pressed the validity of the said resolution.
[928C D] 3.
This Court is not called upon to decide the legality or otherwise of the order granting exemption.
These have been considered by the High Court in its judgment disposing of the review applications.
The petitioners have not challenged the judgment on review applications.
The petitioners are only interested in seeing that sufficient area is kept reserved for a park or recreation ground for the benefit of the members of the public, and are not concerned with the question as to the legality or otherwise of the exemption granted by the Government.
The question whether or not sufficient quantity of land has been kept reserved for park and recreation ground has been adequately considered and taken into account by the High Court.
[928G H; 929A]
