% These appeals together with a petition for special leave raised a common question of law whether against an order of a District Court in revision under section 20 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease & Rent) Control Act 2 of 1965, a further revision would lie to the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Though the question was not res integra in view of the decision of this Court in Aundal Ammal vs Sadasivan Pillai, , the matters were listed for consideration, by a Bench of three Judges, of the very same question in order to see whether there was any conflict between the views taken in Aundal Ammal 's case above said and a later decision of this Court in Shyamaraju Hegde vs G. Venkatesha Bhatt & Ors., ; , and whether the view taken in the earlier case required reconsideration.
Aundal Ammal 's case arose under the Kerala Act afore mentioned, and the Shyamaraju Hegde 's case was under the karnataka Rent Control Act, and there were essential differences between the two Acts.
The scope and effect of section 20(1) read with section 18(5) of the Kerala Act came to be examined by a full Bench of the Kerala High Court in Vareed vs Mary, A.I.R. 1969 Kerala 103, which held that a decision of a District Court under section 20 of the Kerala Act was undoubtedly amenable to the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The question decided by the full Bench of the Kerala High Court as above mentioned, came to be considered by this Court (a Bench of two Hon. Judges) in Aundal Ammal 's case (supra), and the Court held that the ratio laid down by the Kerala High Court in Vareed 's case (supra) could not be approved because the High Court had not properly construed the sections 18(5) 872 and 20 of the Kerala Act, and was in error.
So far as the Karnataka Act was concerned, this Court held in Shyamaraju Hegde 's case (supra) that an order of a District Judge under section 50(2), though it conferred finality under the Act, was nevertheless open to challenge before the High Court by revision under section 115 C.P.C. by the aggrieved party.
What fell for consideration in the present cases was whether there was any conflict between the decisions in Aundal Ammal 's case (supra) and Shyamaraju Hegde 's case (supra) and whether the ratio in the former case required reconsideration.
Disposing of the Appeals and the Petition for Special Leave, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji & section Natarajan, JJ.
After examining the differences between the two Acts in detail, the Court concluded that there was really no conflict between the two decisions of this Court in Aundal Ammal 's case (supra) and Shyamaraju Hegde 's case (supra), because the provisions in the two Acts were materially different.
As to the question whether a fresh thinking was called for on the scope of section 20 read with section 18(5) of the Kerala Act, the Court did not find any grounds for reconsidering the view taken in the Aundal Ammal 's case; on the contrary, the renewed discussion by the Court of the matter called for a reiteration of the view expressed in Aundal Ammal 's case.
[889C D] The Court was unable to conntenance in the circumstances of the case, the argument advanced that since the decision of the Kerala High Court in Vareed vs Mary aforementioned had been a good law for a number of years in the Kerala State and since the High Court had been entertaining revision petitions under section 115 C.P.C. against the revisional orders of the District Courts under sections 20(1) of the Kerala Act, the decision should have been allowed to stand even though the reasoning therein was not commendable for acceptance by this Court, and the reason therefore, the Court observed, could be set out by referring to certain English decisions and the reasoning adopted therein, in West Ham Union vs Edmonten Union, 13 at 4; Robinson Brothers (Brewers) Ltd. vs Hongton V. Chester i.e. Street Assessment Committee, 12 , affirmed in These decisions had been followed in Brownsee Haven Proper 873 ties Ltd. vs Poole Corporation, On similar lines, this Court deemed it necessary to overrule the ratio in Vareed vs Mary (supra), as the decision suffered from miscontruction of the relevant sections in the Act, and the weakness in the reasoning became manifest in the light of the subsequent decision of this Court such as in Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; = ; = ; ; 890A C] In the light of the conclusion of the Court, all the appeals succeeded in so far as the challenge to the right of the High Court to entertain revision petitions under section 115, C.P.C., was concerned.
In Civil Appeals Nos.
626 of 1981 and 624 of 1985, the High Court allowed the revision petitions under section 115 C.P.C., and ordered the eviction of the tenants.
In Civil Appeal No. 2079 of 1981, the District Judge set aside the order of eviction but the High Court restored the order of eviction.
In the Civil Appeal No. 1619 of 1986, the District Judge allowed the Revision and restored the order of eviction passed by the Rent Controller and the High Court confirmed the said order in revisions.
In the Civil Appeal No. 7505 of 1983, the District Judge reversed the decisions of the Rent Controller and the Appellant Authority and ordered eviction and the High Court confirmed the order of the District Judge.
In the petition for special leave listed with the appeals, the Appellate Authority sustained the claim of the landlord for eviction under section 11(3) of the Act but remanded the case to the Rent Controller for deciding the question whether the tenant was entitled to resist the claim for eviction.
The District Court and the High Court confirmed the order of remand.[890D G] In accordance with the pronouncement of the Court, the order of the High Court under section 115 C.P.C., in each of the appeals above mentioned was set aside and the revisional order of the District Judge in each case, restored to become operative.
The appeals were directed only against the orders of the High Court passed in revision, and they were disposed of with the pronouncement of the Court on the above lines.
[890G H; 891A] In the petition for special leave also, the order of the High Court under section 115 C.P.C., was not sustainable, but even so, the Court did not find any merit in the petition, because the finding of the Appellate Authority and the order of remand passed by it had been confirmed by the District Court 'and as such, there were no merits in the petition.
[891B] 874 Per section Ranganathan, J. (dissenting) While a number of enactments of various States on rent control confer specific jurisdiction on the State High Courts, some others are broadly on the same pattern as the Kerala and Karnataka enactments.
Though the Court was concerned only with Kerala and Karnataka enactments in these matters, a similar question might well arise under the corresponding enactments of some other States as well.[891C D] The Kerala and Karnataka Rent Control Acts vest power of revision in the District Judge against certain orders.
The question in these matters was whether the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115 C.P.C., could be invoked to seek a further revision of the revisional order passed by the District Judge.
This question was answered in the negative in Aundal Ammal vs Sadasivan Pillai, [1987] 1 SCC 133 (a decision under the Kerala Act) but in the affirmative in Shyamaraju Hegde vs Venkatesha Bhat, ; (a decision under the Karnataka Act), and hence this reference to a larger Bench.[891E F] Normally, a revision lies to the High Court under section 115 of the C.P.C. against any order of the District Judge/Court.
The fact that the order might have been passed under a special statute or that the statute contained expressions purporting to confer finality on the order of the District Judge/Court or a subordinate authority or Court, had been held insufficient to take away this jurisdiction.
This was the effect of the decisions in Chhagan Lal vs The Municipal Corporation, Indore, ; and Krishandas Bhatija vs Venkatachala Shetty, S.L.P. No. 913 of 1978 decided on 13.2.1978 and Shyamaraju 's case (supra), which were direct decisions under the Karnataka Act.
In the opinion of his Lordship, there was no vital or material difference between the two enactments in this respect and that the same result should follow under the Kerala Act also.
[891G H; 892A B] Under the Karnataka Act, after its amendments in 1975, the rent control matters are decided, in the first instance, by the District Munsiff or the Civil Judge/Rent Controller.
There is no provision for an appeal from this order but there is one for revision.
This revisional power is bifurcated under section 50 between the High Court and the District Court.
The High Court is empowered to revise the order of the Civil Judge/Rent Controller and the District Judge that of the District Munsiff.
Section 50(2) specifically declares that the order of the District Judge under this provision is final.
The Kerala pattern is the same except that section 18 provides for an appeal from the Rent Controller 875 to an officer or an authority of the rank of a Subordinate Judge or of a superior rank.
Section 20 provides for revision.
The revisional power is to be exercised by the District Court where the appellate authority is the subordinate Judge, and the High Court, in other cases.
Section 20 does not provide, as does section 50 of the Karnataka Act, that the decision of the District Judge would be final.
The much wider and more emphatic language of the Karnataka Act does not exclude the jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115 of the C.P.C., as had been held in the two cases referred to above, and it was difficult to see the justification for reading any such exclusion into the Kerala Act.
[892C H] This led to the question of a choice between the two views of this Court one in Shyamaraju and the other, in Aundal Ammal.
Shyamaraju followed the earlier decisions of this Court in Chhagan Lal vs The Municipal Corporation, Indore, AIR 1977 SC 1955 and Krishnadas Bhatija vs A.S. Venkatachala Shetty, SLP (Civil) No. 913 of 1978, decided on February 13, 1978.
The only other decision of this Court, having relevance in the present context, was Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; , relied upon in Aundal Ammal.
His Lordship was in agreement with the view in Shyamaraju that Vishesh Kumar was rendered in a totally statutory context.
That decision turned largely on legislative history of section 115 of the C.P.C. and section 25 of the Provincial Small Causes Courts Act, in their application to the State of Uttar Pradesh.
His Lordship was, therefore, inclined to lean in favour of the view that had commended itself to this Court as to the interpretation of the Karnataka Act, and to hold that the High Court had a power of revision over the order of the District Judge under the Kerala Act as well.
The result of applying Aundal Ammal would be to completely exclude the High Court in the Rent Control matters, and, this, as the two Acts were in pari materia according to his Lordship 's view, would leave the litigant in Karnataka only a right of revision to the District Court.
It was doubtful whether, in the absence of clear language, the Legislature could be held to have intended to completely exclude the jurisdiction of the High Court in such an important Branch of law.
The provisions did not and could not, in his Lordship 's view, preclude the applicability of section 115 of the C.P.C. to an order passed by the District Court, not as a persona designata, but as a civil court of the land.
Section 18 and 20 had a vital role to pay but their effect was not to eliminate the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court under section 115.
[893A F; 894B C] As a result of the various decisions of the Courts, the position had been that right through in the State of Karnataka and for at least a 876 period of 20 years in the State of Kerala, the prevalent view had been in favour of the maintainability of a second revision by the High Court.
In a matter of procedure, such a long standing practice should not be disturbed unless the statutory indication was quite clear to the contrary.
[894F] The revision petitions before the High Court were maintainable.[894G] Aundal Ammal vs Sadasivan Pillai, [1987] 1 S.C.C. 133; Shyamaraju Hegde vs G. Venkatesha Bhatt & Ors.
, ; ; Balagangadhara Menon vs T.V. Peter, [1984] K.L.T. 845; Vareed vs Mary, AIR 1969 103; Vishesh Kumar vs Shanti Prasad, ; Krishnaji Venkatesh Shirodkar vs Gurupad Shivram Kavalekar & Ors., ILR 1978 Karnataka 1585; Chhaganlal vs The Municipal Corporation, Indore, ; ; Krishnadas Bhatija vs A.S. Venkatachala Shetty, SLP (Civil) No. 913 of 1978, decided on February 13, 1978; M.M. Yaragatti vs Vasant & Ors., AIR 1987 Karnataka 186; S.S. Khanna vs F.J. Dillon, AIR 1954 S.C. 497; West Ham Union vs Domonton Union, 13 at 4; Robinson Brothers (Brewers) Ltd. vs Honghton & Chester_ie_Street Assessment Committee, 12 and and Brownsee Haven Properties Ltd. vs Poole Corporation, referred to.
