% The second respondent in the appeal was detained under subsection (1) of section 3 of the .
The grounds of detention Annexure 'B ' served on the detenu stated that information was received by the custom staff that a notorious smuggler and his gang was likely to land packages of contraband goods on the Saurashtra Coast and that the modus operandi of the smugglers ' gang would be to remove the goods to trucks, cover them with cargo of vegetables and grain, and then to drive away.
Vigilance was stepped up by the authorities.
A Truck, an Ambassador Car in the service of the respondent detenu, and a jeep were stopped by the Officers and several persons travelling therein were detained and interrogated.
Incriminating documents were recovered indicating involvment of other vehicles.
Goods of foreign origin valued at over Rs.68 lakhs were also recovered.
The arrested persons gave vital clues about the clandestine business of smuggling that was being carried on and named the 2nd respondent detenu as being directly involved in the business.
The co conspirators made an application for bail on 2.10.1984 and on the following day i.e. 3.10.1984 they filed an application before the Chief Judicial Magistrate retracting some of their earlier statements.
Though the detention order was passed on October 20, 1984, it could not be served on the detenu earlier than July 4, 1986 as he was absconding.
On his arrest the first respondent his nephew, challenged the detention order in the High Court on several grounds, but the High 904 Court allowed the writ petition and quashed the order of detention only on one ground viz. non application of mind by the detaining authority to a vital document i.e. the second application dated 3.10.1984 whereby the other accused persons retracted their earlier statements, and held that this had vitiated the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State appellant that the second application dated 3.10.1984 was also placed before the detaining authority and that he had applied his mind thereto.
The document was mentioned in the grounds Annexure 'B ', served on the detenu although it was not actually described as a petition containing the retraction.
The original file dealing with the detenu 's case was also produced for the Court 's perusal.
The appeal was contested on behalf of the respondents by stating that the plea of the State that the second application dated 3.10.1984 had been considered by the detaining authority should be rejected in the absence of an affidavit by the detaining authority, and that it was necessary to have mentioned in the grounds Annexure 'B ', served on the detenu that the detaining authority was of the view "that not much credence could be given to the statements made in the petition dated 3.10.1984".
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
It is true that in a given case the detaining authority should personally affirm on oath the stand taken on its behalf, but this cannot be suggested as an inflexible rule applicable to all detention cases irrespective of the circumstances.
[908D E] In the instant case, a further affidavit by the Deputy Secretary, Home Department of the State of Gujarat was filed stating that the Home Minister who was authorised under the Rules of Business to pass orders on behalf of the Government in detention matters, had ceased to be a Minister before the filing of the affidavit in the High Court, and he was, therefore not available.
The then Deputy Secretary, Home Department who was fully conversant with the case had to file the affidavit.
[908E F] 2.
The original file dealing with the detenu 's case produced in Court shows that the Home Minister, State of Gujarat, while passing the order for detention made a detailed note running in several para 905 graphs and in paragraph 2 he pointedly mentioned both the bail application dated 2.10.1984 and the petition dated 3.10.1984.
The notes also show that the detaining authority correctly appreciated the nature and purport of the 3rd October document but was of the view that not much credence could in the circumstances be given to it.
[908B C] 3.
So far as the inference drawn by the detaining authority from the materials on the records and his subjective satisfaction were concerned, they are expressly stated in the grounds and there cannot be any grievance on that score.
[909B C] 4.
It is not necessary to mention in the ground of detention the reaction of the detaining authority in relation to every piece of evidence separately.
[909D E] In the instant case, the recital in Annexure 'B ' that the detaining authority formed his opinion after consideration of the document dated 3.10.1984 by itself clearly implied that he was not impressed by the statement therein.
[909E] 5.
Several other questions were raised in the writ petition which were not considered by the High Court, and since the order of the High Court by which it allowed the writ petition has been set aside, it becomes necessary to decide the other questions.
The matter is remanded for further hearing and disposal to the High Court.
[909G] P.C. Mehta vs Commissioner and Secretary, Govt.
of Kerala and others, [1985] Supp SCC 144, referred to.
