% The respondent was apprehended while taking bribe.
Investigation was held and the respondent was chargesheeted before the Special Judge.
The respondent raised an objection to the framing of charges against him on the ground that the investigation of the case was in contravention of rule 16.38 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The Special Judge overruled the objection and framed charges and posted the case for trial.
The respondent filed a petition before the High Court under section 561(A) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, for quashing the proceedings against him before the Special Judge.
A full bench of the High Court held that rule 16.38 is mandatory and not directory in character and that the mandate would govern criminal prosecution as well as departmental inquiries in equal measure.
The full bench having noticed that the investigation against the respondent had not been done in accordance with rule 16.38 allowed the petition and quashed the charges framed against the respondent.
Hence this appeal filed by certificate issued by the High Court.
Allowing the appeal and setting aside the High Court 's judgment this Court, ^ HELD: The procedure prescribed in rule 16.38 has only a limited field of operation that is applicable only to departmental inquiries and punishments.
This could be seen from the fact that clause 3 of the rule enjoins every Magistrate to whom a complaint against a police officer is referred by the District Magistrate for judicial enquiry to report the details of the case to the District Magistrate in order to enable the District Magistrate to forward the report to the Superintendent of Police.
The clause further says that if the District Magistrate himself takes cognizance of a case he should of his own accord send a report to 937 the Superintendent of Police.
Clause IV of rule 16.38 also throws light on the matter and brings out the objective in greater clarity.
This clause sets out that in order to protect the interest of police officers serving in districts where petition mongering activities are notorious, the District Magistrate can direct that all petitions complaining about police officers shall be presented to him personally so that he can scrutinize them to find out whether the petitions are of a frivolous nature or they have been engineered by factious groups in the districts etc.
In fact, the words used in the clause are of a tell tale nature viz. "complaints against police officers in those districts where abuses of law with the object of victimising such officers or hampering investigation is rife.
" [945F H; 946A B] The purpose underlying the rule is to enable the District Magistrate and the District Superintendent of Police to exercise personal control and supervision over the complaints received against members of the police force in the performance of their duties and enable the District Magistrate to ensure that the complaint is not a baseless or mala fide one and secondly to determine whether the complaint requires investigation by a police officer or by a selected Magistrate.
The procedure envisaged by the rule is for effective check being exercised against victimisation of efficient and honest police officers on the one hand and favouritism being shown to the delinquent police officers on the other.
These rules were not intended to replace and certainly cannot over ride the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.
[946C E] In the instant case the Full Bench was in error in taking the view that the Punjab Police Rules read in conjunction with the Police Act prescribe a different procedure for the investigation and prosecution of offences committed by Police Officer under the I.P.C. or other Acts in connection with their relations with the public and that the rules constitute a special statute and take precedence over the provisions of the Cr.
The Full Bench has failed to note that Rule 16.38 only mandates the investigation of cases pertaining to departmental enquiries and the holding of departmental enquiries in accordance with the procedure prescribed thereunder.[948B C] Raj Kumar, A. section I. vs The State of Punjab, [1976] IV CLR (Pb. & Har.) page 39, overruled.
State of Punjab vs Charan Singh, ; , referred to/agreed to.
Delhi Administration vs Chanan Shah, [1969] 3 S.C.R. 653; 938 Union of India vs Ram Kishan, ; ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Babu Ram Upadhya, ; ; Maulud Ahmad vs State of U.P., [1963] (Supp.) 2 S.C.R. 38; Ajaib Singh vs Joginder Singh, ; and S.N. Sharma vs Bipan Kumar Tiwari & Ors.
,[1970] 1 S.C.C. 653, referred to.
