% The Central Excise Officers during the course of investigations made against M/s Swastik Investment Company, Bombay found that some of the consignments of the material described in documents as 'crimpled uncut waste ' were cleared from M/s Swadeshi Polytex Limited, Ghaziabad during the period from January, 1974 to December, 1977, were purchased by the respondents and utilised by them in the manufacture of 'polyester staple fibre '.
The Collector held that the 'crimpled uncut waste ' purchased by the respondents was in fact 'polyester fibre tow ' and that the respondents had carried on manufacture of 'polyester staple fibre ' from tow and, as such, exigible to duty.
Aggrieved by the Collector 's Order the respondents filed an appeal before the Central Board of Excise and Customs.
This appeal was transferred to the Customs Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal in pursuance of section 35 P of the .
The Tribunal on an examination of the material and the contentions came to the conclusion that what the respondents had purchased was already man made fibre but in running length, and that what they did in relation to it, was to cut it into staple length after some manual sorting and straightening and held that such cutting involved no 1007 manufacture and hence no duty liability could be imposed.
In the Appeal by the revenue to this Court on the question: whether there was exigibility to taxation on the item manufactured by the respondent.
Dismissing the Appeal.
^ HELD: 1.
There is a distinction between 'tow ' and 'staple fibre '.
'Tow ' 'is fibre in running length and 'staple fibre ' is obtained by cutting it into required short length.
[1009B] 2.
The taxable event under the Excise Law is 'manufacture '. 'Manufacture ' means to bring into existence a new substance and does not mean merely to produce some change in a substance.
[1009D] 3.
Etymologically the word 'manufacture ' properly construed would doubtless cover transformation, but the question is whether the transformation in the instant case brings about fundamental change, a new substance is brought into existence, or a new different article having distinctive name, character or use results from a particular process or a particular activity.
[1009D E] In the instant case, it is not disputed that what the respondents did, was to cut the running length fibre (tow) into short length fibre (staple fibre).
It indubitably brought a change in the substance but did not bring into existence a new substance.
The character and use of the substance (man made fibre) remained the same.
By the change in the length of the fibre, the substance acquired a new name.
But since the tariff entry recognised the single description 'man made fibre ' with no further sub division based on length of fibre and even without any distinct enumeration of the various forms of fibre by cutting long fibres into short ones, the respondents did not bring into existence any new product so as to attract any levy under the same tariff entry.
Even by cutting, the respondents obtained man made fibre.
Such cutting, therefore, involved no manufacture and, hence, no duty liability can be imposed upon them.
[1009E H] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, ; ; Empire Industries Ltd. & Ors. etc.
vs Union of India & Ors. etc.
, [1985] Suppl.
1 SCR page 292 and M/s Ujagar Prints vs Union of India, , referred to. 1008
