% The Serial titled "Tamas", based on a book written by Sree Bhisham Sahni, was being screened on the T.V. Four of its episodes had already been shown when the petitioner moved this Court under Article 32 of the Constitution for a writ of prohibition and any other appropriate writ restraining its further screening and to enforce petitioner 's fundamental rights under Articles 21 and 25 and for declaring the screening or televising of "Tamas" as violative of section 5B of the .
Earlier, a writ had been admitted in the High Court of Bombay and a single learned Judge granted interim stay.
On appeal, the Division Bench, after seeing the complete serial, vacated the stay.
Special leave petition has been filed against that judgment.
Serial `Tamas ' takes us to a historical past unpleasant at times, but revealing and instructive.
In those years which `Tamas ' depicts, a human tragedy of great dimension took place in this sub continent though 40 years ago which has left a lasting damage to the Indian psyche.
`Tamas ' depicts the Hindu Muslim and Sikh Muslim tension before the partition of India and the killings and looting that took place.
According to the Division Bench of the High Court, the serial inter alia depicts how communal violence was generated by fundamentalists and extremists in both communities, how innocent persons were duped into serving the ulterior purpose of fundamentalists, and how extremist ele 1012 ments infused tension and hatred for their own ends.
The petitioner 's contentions are: (1) The exhibition of the serial is against public order and is likely to incite the people to indulge in the commission of offences and is therefore violative of section 5B(1) of the and destructive of principles embodied under Article 25; (2) Its presentation is likely to promote feelings of enmity, hatred or ill will among different religious groups and is prejudicial to communal harmony and national integration, and is therefore an offence under section 153A of the Indian Penal Code; (3) Events have been depicted and characters portrayed in a manner that would provoke and instigate people of all ages exposed to it, who will fail to grasp the message if any behind the serial; (4) Truth in its naked form may not always and in all circumstances be desirable to be told or exhibited, and (5) The Judges of the High Court have viewed the film from their own point of view but the average persons in the country are not as sober and experienced as the Judges of the High Court.
The respondents on the other hand, urge that all the appropriate authorities have considered the film suitable for unrestricted public exhibition and the only question is whether the film has been misjudged or wrongly judged and allowed to be exhibited or serialised on a wrong approach.
This film indubitably depicts violence.
That violence between the communities took place before the pre partition days is a fact and it is the truth.
Dismissing the petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The itself contains several provisions to ensure the fulfilment of the conditions laid down in section 5B, and also to ensure that any film which is likely to offend the religious susceptibilities of the people is not screened for public exhibition.
[1021G H] (2) On the aforesaid statute, as it presently stands, the procedure for grant of certificate of exhibition to a film is quite elaborate, and the unanimous approval by the examining committee must be given full weight and the Court would be slow to interfere with the conclusion of a body specially constituted for this purpose.
[1022C D] (3) The correct approach in judging the effect of exhibition of a film or of reading a book is to judge from the standards of ordinary reasonable man.
[1019C D] 1013 (4) The two learned Judges viewed the film from the point of view of "how the average person for whom the film is intended will view it.
" They have found that the message of the picture was good, and have come to the conclusion that the average person will learn from the mistakes of the past and realise the machination of the fundamentalists as the film itself shows how realisation ultimately dawns as to the futility of violence and hatred and how the inherent goodness in human nature triumphs.
In their view, those who forget history are condemned to repeat it.
It is out of tragic experience of the past that we can fashion our present in a rational and reasonable manner and view our future with wisdom and care.
Awareness in proper light is a first step towards the realisation.
[1022F H] (5) The finding of the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court is that the picture viewed in its entirely, is capable of creating a lasting impression of the message of peace and co existence, and that people are not likely to be obsessed, overwhelmed or carried away by the scenes of violence or fanaticism shown in the film.
This Court sees no reason to differ from the conclusion.
[1024D] (6) It is the lesson of history that naked truth in all times will not be beneficial but truth in its proper light indicating the evils and the consequences of those evils is instructive and that message is there in `Tamas '.
[1023D] (7) It is true that a writer or a preacher should cling to truth and right, if the very heavens fall.
This is a universally accepted basis.
Yet in practice all schools alike are forced to admit the necessity of a measure of accommodation in the very interests of truth itself.
[1023B] (8) Judged by all standards of a common man 's point of view of presenting history with a lesson in this film, these boundaries appear to have been kept in mind.
[1023C D] (9) The Court is unable to see any alleged violation of Articles 21 and 25 of the Constitution.
The position that the petitioner has a right to draw attention of this Court to ensure that the communal atmosphere is kept clean and unpolluted, is accepted.
He has done well to draw attention to this danger.
This Court has examined and found that there is no such danger and the respondents have not acted improperly or imprudently.
[1024E F] Bhagwati Charan Shukla vs Provincial Government, A.I.R. 1947 1014 Nagpur 1; K.A. Abbas vs The Union of India and Another, ; ; Ebrahim Sulaiman Sait vs M.C. Muhammad and Anr., ; and Rajkapoor vs Laxman, ; , referred to.
