% The question which arose for determination in this case was whether a Letters Patent Appeal would lie to a Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat from an interlocutory order of a Single Judge of that High Court in the course of the trial of an election petition filed under the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
The appellant and respondents Nos.
1 to 6 were candidates at an election held to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of the Gujarat State.
The appellant was declared elected.
Thereupon, the 1st respondent filed an election petition in the High Court, challenging the validity of the election of the appellant on a number of allegations, and in order to establish his case, he filed an application before the Single Judge who was trying the election petition, to direct the Returning Officer to produce all the records of the election, mentioned in the application, and prayed for permission to inspect the same.
The appellant opposed the prayers made by the 1st respondent.
The Single Judge declined to grant the application made by the Ist respondent.
Against the order of the Single Judge, the Ist respondent preferred an appeal under clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the Gujarat High Court.
The Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal to the extent indicated in its judgment, overruling the contention of the appellant that the appeal was not maintainable as there was no provision in the Act, permitting an appeal to the Division Bench of the High Court against an interlocutory order of a Single Judge hearing an election petition filed under the Act.
Aggrieved by the decision of the Division Bench, the appellant moved this Court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, setting aside the judgment of the Division 1044 Bench of the High Court and dismissing the Letters Patent Appeal while expressing no opinion on the merits of the case, the Court, ^ HELD: The only point urged in this appeal by the appellant was that the appeal filed under clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court against the interlocutory order passed by the Single Judge was not maintainable and, therefore, the judgment of the Division Bench was liable to be set aside.
[1048C D] Under the provisions of the Act as amended and the provisions of the Constitution of India, no Court exercising power under any ordinary law other than the Judge of a High Court who had been assigned the work of trying an election petition under sub section (2) of section 80 A of the Act and the Supreme Court which was empowered to hear an appeal against any order passed by the judge of the High Court under section 98 or section 99 of the Act, could decide any question arising out of an election petition.
The power of the Supreme Court under the provisions of the Constitution was, however, unaffected by any of the provisions of the Act.
It meant that when an election petition was pending in the High Court, only the judge who was asked to try the election petition could deal with the questions arising in it and no other judge or judges of the High Court could deal with them.
When an order was passed under section 98 or section 99 of the Act by a judge of the High Court in an election petition, it was subject to the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under section 116 A of the Act, Article 136 of the Constitution being excluded in view of the express provisions of section 116 A of the Act, and being resorted to by any party aggrieved by any order passed by the judge trying an election petition not falling under section 98 or section 99 of the Act.
It followed that the Division Bench of the High Court, which was entitled to hear an appeal against any order of a Single Judge under clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court, which was an ordinary law, could not hear an appeal against any interlocutory order passed in the course of the trial of an election petition by the Judge trying the election petition, since the Division Bench was not specified in the Act as an appellate authority which could deal with questions arising out of an election petition filed under the Act.
[1053G H; 1054A D] Under clause 15 of the Letters Patent, an appeal no doubt lay from an order of a Single Judge of the High Court exercising Original Jurisdiction to the High Court itself irrespective of the fact that the judgment was preliminary or final or that it was one passed at an interlocutory stage, provided it satisfied certain conditions, but the said 1045 provision could not be extended to an election petition filed under the Act.
Conferment of the power to try an election petition under the Act did not amount to enlargement of the existing jurisdiction of the High Court.
The jurisdiction exercisable by the Single Judge under the Act was a special jurisdiction conferred on the High Court by virtue of Article 329(b) of the Constitution.
In view of the limited nature of the appeal expressly provided in section 116 A of the Act, it should be held that any other right of appeal (excluding that under the Constitution) was taken away by necessary implication.
Therefore, it was difficult to subscribe to the view that when once the jurisdiction to try an election petition was conferred on the High Court, all other powers incidental to the ordinary original jurisdiction exercised by a single Judge of a High Court would become applicable to an election petition under the Act.
If the Parliament had intended that the Division Bench of the High Court should exercise its appellate jurisdiction under clause 15 of the Letters Patent of the High Court, probably, it would not have enacted sub section (7) of section 86 of the Act, having regard to the well known tendency of one or the other party to an election petition preferring appeals against the interlocutory orders to the Division Bench.
If such appeals against the interlocutory orders to the High Court, were permitted, perhaps, no election dispute would be finally settled till the next election became due.
As regards the jurisdiction to try an election petition and the right of appeal of the parties to an election petition, the provisions of the Act (apart from the provisions in the Constitution) constituted a complete code and no Judge or Judges other than the Single Judge of the High Court, who was asked to try an election petition, and the Supreme Court, exercising the appellate powers under section 116 A of the Act in respect of orders passed under section 98 or section 99 of the Act or under Article 136 of the Constitution in respect of other orders, could have any jurisdiction to deal with any matter arising out of an election petition filed under the Act.
The Court disagreed with the view expressed on this question by the Gujarat High Court in Dr. Chotalal Jivabhai Patel vs Vadilal Lallubhai Mehta & Ors., (12 Gujarat Law Reporter 850), and overruled that decision of the High Court.
The Court also overruled the decision of the Madras High Court in Kadiravan alias Shamsudeen vs B. Thirumalaikumar, ILR (1970) 2 Mad.
183 and the decision of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Laxmi Narayan Nayak vs Ramratan Chaturvedi & Ors, AIR 1986 Madhya Pradesh 165 which had taken the same view as in Dr. Chotalal Jivabhai Patel 's Case (supra).
The Court agreed with the view expressed by the Allahabad High Court in Siaram vs Nathuram & Ors., [1968] ALL.
L.J. 576 and by the Rajasthan High Court in Ramdhar vs Shanwar Lal, AIR which held that by necessary 1046 implication an appeal to the High Court from an interlocutory order of the Single Judge of the High Court in the course of trial of an election petition filed under the Act, was excluded.
[1054G H; 1055A H; 1056A H] The Division Bench of the High Court of Gujarat had no jurisdiction to hear the appeal filed by the Ist respondent against the interlocutory order passed by the Single Judge who was trying the election petition.
Judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court set aside, Letters Patent Appeal dismissed.
[1057B] Dr. Chotalal Jivabhai Patel vs Vadilal Lallubhai Mehta Shamsudeen vs B. Thirumalai Kumar, ILR ; and Laxmi Narayan Nayak vs Ramratan Chaturvedi and Ors., A.I.R. 1986 Madhya Pradesh 165, overruled.
Siaram vs Nathuram and Ors., [1968] All.
L.J. 576 and Ramdhan vs Bhanwarlal, A.I.R. approved.
N.P. Ponnuswami vs Returning Officer, Namekkal Constitutency and others; , ; Shah Babulal Khimji vs Jayaban D. Kania & Anr., ; and National Telephone Company Ltd. vs Post Master General, [1913] A.C.546, referred to.
