% The State Government by Circular dated July 23,1957 directed revision of the existing pay scales of various categories of subordinate staff including Teachers in the Education Department.
Paragraph 3 of the said circular provided for revision of pay scales of Teachers and placed them into two distinct categories, Category A and Category B and laid down the requirements of academic qualification with respect to each of them.
Category B was further sub divided into two groups viz: Group I Matric with Basic training (including Junior Teachers).
Group II Junior School Teachers (including Assistant Mistresses with BA/Inter/Matric plus JAV training).
On more occasions than one, this Court intervened on behalf of those Teachers who had improved or acquired higher academic qualifications and were denied higher scales of pay, and issued directions for extending the benefit of para 3 of the aforesaid Circular.
In compliance with the directions of this Court in Avtar Singh vs Manmohan Singh & Anr., the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) 1088 by Order dated June 30, 1986 accorded sanction to payment of arrears of pay to Teachers belonging to Category B Group I, to 3600 JBT Teachers belonging to Category B Group II who had improved their educational qualifications and acquired degrees in B.A., B.T./B.A., B.Sc., B.Ed.
Similar relief was however denied to 6,000 other Teachers falling in Category B Group II on the ground that they did not have requisite professional training of JST/JAV, and were therefore not entitled to the higher grade.
In the Writ Petitions to this Court, by the Matriculate Junior Basic Trained Teachers in Government Schools placed in Category B, Group II of the Circular dated July 23, 1957 it was contended that the State Government was bound to grant the benefit of higher grade of pay to all the Teachers belonging to Category B Group II on their improving or acquiring higher educational qualifications as and from the respective dates of their passing the examination, and that it was not open to the Government on the pretext of verification of claims to confine the relief to some of the teachers and deny the same to the others who were all similarly situated and recruited in the same manner and appointed as Matriculate JBT Teachers and had improved their qualifications by acquiring degrees in B.A., B.T. etc., and that the so called professional training i.e. JST/JAV could not be made a condition pre requisite to the grant of higher pay.
These petitions were contested by the State Government by contending that the petitioners were not entitled to higher pay merely on their acquiring higher educational qualifications as they did not stand the eligibility test on verification of their claims, and that according to paragraph 3 of the Circular, all Teachers according to their qualifications were placed into two broad categories for purposes of revision of pay,Category A consisting of B.A./B.Sc./B.Com./B.Sc.
(Agriculture) and BT, and Category B of whom Group I was 'Matric with basic training (including JBT) '.
On the question: whether JBT Teachers falling under Category B Group II were not entitled to the higher pay merely on their acquiring higher Educational Qualifications of B.A., B.T./B.A., B.Ed.
but that gaining professional experience of JST/JAV training was essential.
Allowing the Writ Petitions, ^ HELD: 1.
Graduate Teachers form a class by themselves and cannot be subjected to the further requirement of having JST/JAV 1089 training.
The words 'plus JAV training ' clearly qualify the work 'Matric ' and relate only two Matriculate JBT Teachers.
Such a classification for revision of pay satisfies the touchstone of Article 14, and would render the action of the State Government in seeking to discriminate between Graduate Teachers with JST/JAV training and Graduate Teachers with or without such training, impermissible as the attempt is to create a class within a class without any rational basis.
[1095D F] 2.
It is regrettable that despite clear pronouncements made by this Court as well as the High Court in a long line of decisions there is no redressal of the wrong done to JBT Teachers belonging to Category B Group II although they had acquired B.A., B.T./B.A., B.Ed. qualifications.
[1095F G] 3.
The petitioners who are Teachers placed in Category B Group II, are entitled to higher pay on acquiring or improving their academic qualifications.
The respondents are directed to give them the higher scale of pay as admissible to Teachers in Category B Group I with effect from the respective dates of their acquiring the qualification.
[1097B C] State of Punjab & Anr.
vs Kirpal Singh Bhatia & Ors.
,[1976] 1 SCR 529; State of Punjab & Ors.
vs Labh Singh Garcha & Ors., (C.A. Nos. 926 27/77 decided on August 7, 1979); and Avtar Singh vs Manmohan Singh & Anr., (C.A. No. 3790/83 decided on September 14, 1984, referred to.
