% The appellant is an advocate.
Pursuant to an oral agreement, he let out to the respondent a part of his residential premises comprising of two rooms above the garage, referred to as "servants 'quarters" and a hall on the ground floor, in July 1976 at Rs.600 p.m.
Since November 1976 the respondent started paying two separate amounts of Rs.250 and Rs.350 the latter amount by means of cheques in the name of Balkunj, a registered trust, of which he was the Secretary.
In January 1980 the landlord filed an eviction petition under proviso (e) to section 14(1) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 on the ground that he required the servants ' quarters for his servants and the hall for his office and library.
The respondent resisted the petition on a number of grounds.
The two grounds with which this Court is concerned are that (1) two separate tenancies came to be created in respect of the premises in dispute and hence the petition as filed was not maintainable and (2) the intended use of the hall as office constituted a non residential use, and therefore outside the purview of proviso (e) to section 14(1).
The Rent Controller held that there was a single tenancy, that the landlord bona fide required the premises for his use, and that setting up his office and library fell within the scope of the relevant statutory provision.
The High Court in the revision petition under sub 1059 section (8) of section 25B of the Act, reversed the findings of the Rent Controller and modified the eviction order passed by him restricting it to the servant 's quarters only.
In regard to the first ground, the respondent submits that the fact that the landlord was aware of the use of the hall by the trust and his acceptance of the cheques on behalf of the trust prove that the trust had been accepted as the tenant in respect of the hall.
In this connection the respondent relies on the appellant 's letter dated 26.11.1978 to the respondent, in which the landlord specifically refers to the fact that five of the dishonoured cheques being returned by him "belong to the trust".
The appellant, on the other hand, submits that acceptance of two cheques alone cannot lead to the conclusion that a separate tenancy had been created in respect of the hall between Balkunj and the petitioner.
The appellant further relies on the two letters dated 5.8.1977 and 15.1.1978 written by him to the respondent categorically denying the tenancy on behalf of Balkunj.
He further submits that the finding of the Rent Controller that there was only a single tenancy was essentially a finding of fact, based on material and circumstances, with which the High Court should not have interfered.
In regard to the second ground the respondent urges that the intended use of the hall by the appellant as office and library could not amount to a residential requirement.
Allowing the appeal this Court, ^ HELD: (1) It is no doubt true that the rent has been paid by two cheques since November 1976 but the mere payment of rent by two cheques, in the circumstances of this case, cannot mean that there were two tenancies.
The landlord was entitled to a rent of Rs.600p.m.
and so long as he got this amount it was immaterial for him whether the amount was paid in a lump sum or by one cheque or more than one cheque and who the makers of the cheques were.
It is not unusual to come across cases where a tenant pays the rent not by a cheque drawn by himself but by a cheque drawn by some other concern in which he has an interest such as a partnership concern, a limited company etc.
It is also true that the landlord might have been aware that certain activities of Balkunj were being carried on in the hall.
But this can only mean that the landlord permitted the tenant to use a portion of the premises for running the activities of the trust.
Even assuming that these two facts might have been sufficient to draw any such inference as is suggested, the two letters of the landlord, dated 5.8.77 and 15.1.78 1060 place the matter beyond all doubt.
The landlord had categorically asserted in these letters that he did not recognize Balkunj as his tenant.
[1063G H; 1064A E] (2) The finding of the Rent Controller that there was only a single tenancy was essentially a finding of fact with which the High Court should not have interfered.
Though under Section 25(B)(8) of the Delhi Rent Control Act the powers of the High Court are somewhat wider than similar powers of revision under section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code, it is well established by a series of decisions of this Court that the power of revision under the Rent Control Act does not entitle the High Court to enter into the merits of the factual controversies between the parties and to reverse findings of fact in this regard.
[1064F H; 1065A] (3) Any professional man of standing would necessarily have to set apart a portion of his residence as a study, office or library and the premises do not cease to be his residence because of that.
In ascertaining the bona fide need of residence, in the case of a lawyer, the fact that a room has to be used as an office cannot be a consideration extraneous to the scope and content of clause(e) of the proviso to section 14(1).
It may be that in a case where a lawyer seeks to evict a tenant on the ground that the entire premises sought to be got vacated are solely needed by him for use as his office and library, his requirement may not satisfy the requirements of clause(e) of the proviso to section 14(1).
[1066A B; 1065F G] (1) Sheodhari Rai vs Suraj Prasad Singh, AIR 1954 S.C. 758; (2) Helper Girdharbhai vs Saiyed Mohmad, ; ; (3) Sushila Devi vs Avinash Chandra Jain, ; (4) Mohanlal vs Kondi, ; ; (5) Subramania Mudaliar vs Kolapur Traders, and (6) Khanna vs Batra, , referred to.
