% The appellant firm imported "special purpose complex machine" and claimed that it was classifiable under item 84.45/48 of the tariff schedule and duty was payable at the rate of 40 per cent.
The Assistant Collector took the view that the imported machine was not manufacturing carburettors and was discharging an individual function of plugging holes in the carburettor body with the help of lead shots, and that the appropriate entry was 84.59(1) of the Customs Tariff and duty was payable at the rate of 60 per cent.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order by preferring an appeal to the Collector (Appeals) who took the view that the imported machine by plugging holes on the carburettor body with the help of lead shots was clearly a machine which was fully conforming to the description of a machine for treating metals inasmuch as it was treating the carburettor body and preparing it for being rivetted, and therefore it was conforming to the description of a machine tool as given under heading 84.45/48 of the Customs Tariff, and allowed the appeal.
On further appeal, the Customs Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal came to the conclusion that the function of the imported machine was to plug the holes of carburettor body, that none of its functions can be considered to be treating metal within the meaning of sub heading (2) of Tariff Heading 84.59, that classification as machine tool under Tariff Heading 84.45/48 has to be ruled out, and that the machine does not fall under any of the Heading of Chapter 84 of the 38 Tariff Schedule.
It accordingly reversed the appellate decision of the Collector of Customs (Appeals).
In the appeal under section 130 E of the to this Court on the question: whether the imported "special purpose complex machine" has to be charged to customs duty under item 84.59(1) as claimed by the Revenue or under 84.45/48 of the tariff schedule as maintained by the appellant.
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: l. Entry 84.59 of Schedule I is a residuary one and indisputably if any other entry applies, application of this entry is ruled out.
[40F G] 2.
Machine tools in general remain classified under entry 84.45 even if specialised for a particular industry Machine tools include slotting machines, drilling and boring machines, tapping machines, reaming machines and rivetting machines.
[41D E] Tool Engineers Handbook Mc Graw Hills: Mc Graw Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms referred to.
The machine in the instant case, is indeed a multi purpose one and keeping its performance in view, the machine has to be held as a "machine tool working on metal" and should legitimately find its way into entry 84.45/48.
Once it is so identified, it does not get into the residuary entry 84.59.
The Collector has reached the correct conclusion.
The order of the Tribunal is vacated and that of the Collector is restored.
[41F G]
