% The constitutional validity of Section 198 Cr.
P.C. has been called into question by a wife by way of the present petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner wife contended that whether or not the law permits a husband to prosecute his disloyal wife, the wife cannot be lawfully disabled from prosecuting her disloyal husband.
The petitioner asserted that in so far as and to the extent Section 198(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure operates as a fetter on the wife in prosecutising her adulterer husband, the relevant provisions is unconstitutional on the ground of abnoxious discrimination, Dismissing the petition, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Admittedly under the law, the aggrieved husband, whose wife has been disloyal to him, has no right under the law to prosecute his wife, inasmuch as by the very definition of the offence, only a man can commit adultery, not a woman.
As between the husband and the wife social good will be promoted by permitting them to 'make up ' or 'break up ' the matrimonial tie rather than to drag each other to the criminal court.
They can either condone the offence in a spirit of 'forgive and forget ' and live together or separate by approaching a matrimonial court and snapping the matrimonial tie by securing divorce.
They are not enabled to send each other to jail.
Perhaps the children are saved from the trauma of one of their parents being jailed 74 at the instance of the other parent.
[77E G] 2.
Section 497 does not confer any right on the wife to prosecute the husband who has committed adultery with another woman.
Section 497 of the Indian Penal Code and section 198(1) read with section 198(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code go hand in hand and constitute a legislative packet to deal with the offence committed by an outsider to the matrimonial unit who invades the peace and privacy of the matrimonial unit and poisons the relationship between the two partners constituting the matrimonial unit.
The community punishes the 'outsider ' who breaks into the matrimonial home and occasions the violation of sanctity of the matrimonial tie by developing an illicit relationship with one of the spouses subject to the rider that the erring 'man ' alone can be punished and not the erring woman.
[77H; 78A B] Sowmithri Vishnu vs Union of India & Anr., ; , referred to.
Section 198 Cr.
P.C. is not vulnerable to the charge of hostile discrimination against a woman.
While the outsider who violates the sanctity of the matrimonial home is punished a rider has been added that if the outsider is a woman she is not punished.
There is thus reverse discrimination in 'favour ' of the woman rather than 'against ' her.
The law does not envisage the punishment of any of the spouses at the instance of each other.
Thus there is no discrimination against the woman in so far as she is not permitted to prosecute her husband.
A husband is not permitted because the wife is not treated an offender in the eye of law.
The wife is not permitted as Section 198(1) read with section 198(2) does not permit her to do so.
The law has meted out even handed justice to both of them in the matter of prosecuting each other or securing the incarceration of each other.
[78C E]
