The respondent was the Ruler of the erstwhile State of Khandapara which merged in the State of Orissa on August 1, 1949.
Article 3 of the Agreement of Merger guaranteed that "the Raja shall be entitled to full ownership, use and enjoyment of all his private properties".
The Orissa Merged States ' (Laws) Act, 1950 extended the Orissa Tenant 's Protection Act, 1948 to the merged areas.
In 1951 the respondents evicted certain tenants.
The tenants applied to the Revenue Officer under the 1948 Act for being restored to possession on the allegations that the respondent was their landlord and that he had unlawfully evicted them.
The Revenue Officer allowed the applications and directed restoration of possession.
The respondent filed a petition under article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court for quashing the orders of the Revenue Officer contending, (1) that the application of the provisions of the 1948 Act to his private properties violated the guarantee given under the Agreement, (2) that article 363 Of the Constitution barred the Court from dealing with any dispute arising out of the Agreement, and (3) that the 1948 Act did not apply to him as he was not a landlord.
The High Court accepted these contentions and quashed the proceedings taken under the 1948 Act: Held, that the extension of the 1948 Act did not affect the full ownership, use and enjoyment of his properties guaranteed to the respondent under the Agreement.
The provisions of the Agreement only protected his rights to the properties declared to be his private properties so that they could not be claimed at anytime thereafter as State properties.
The guarantee given under the Agreement could not be absolute but could only be co extensive with the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property which is guaranteed to all citizens under article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution.
State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of 136 1068 Darbhanga, and Visheshwar Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, , followed.
Held, that the jurisdiction of the Courts to entertain the applications under the 1948 Act, was not barred by article 363 Of the Constitution.
The dispute between the appellants and respondent was not a dispute which arose out of the Agreement of Merger, and so was not covered by article 363.
Held further, that the respondent was a landlord to whom the provisions of the 1948 Act applied.
Whatever may have been the definition of the terms landlord and tenant in SS.
2(C) and (g) of the 1948 Act the definitions contained in section 7(a) of the 1950 Act, made the appellants 'the tenants ' and the respondent 'the landlord ' in regard to the lands in question.
