% The appellant was in Government service.
On a number of charges framed against him, the State government referred his case to the Administrative Tribunal for enquiry.
In respect of the six charges against the appellant, the Tribunal recorded findings that the first charge was not proved but it recorded findings against the appellant in respect of the remaining charges.
The Governor issued notice with a copy of the findings of the Tribunal to the appellant to show cause why he should not be dismissed.
The appellant submitted reply to the showcause notice, which was referred to the Tribunal for its consideration.
The Tribunal submitted a report dated July 7, 1971, recording the finding that there was no convincing evidence to uphold the charges framed against the appellant.
The State Government referred the matter to the Legal Remembrancer for opinion.
The Legal Remembrancer opined that there was sufficient evidence on record to uphold charges 2 to 5 against the appellant, which were of common pattern to the effect that the appellant had claimed travelling allowance at the rate of first class railway fare without having actually travelled in that class on four different occasions.
The Governor thereupon disregarding the findings of the Tribunal issued order dismissing the appellant.
The appellant challenged the order of dismissal by a writ petition in the High Court.
The High Court (Single Judge) allowed the writ petition and quashed the order of dismissal.
The respondent State preferred a Letters Patent appeal.
The Division Bench of the High Court allowed the appeal and set aside the order of the Single Judge of the High Court.
The appellant then moved this Court for relief by this appeal.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, 80 ^ HELD: After scrutiny of the two reports of the Administrative Tribunal and the note of the Legal Remembrancer, the Court found that the view taken by the Tribunal in its subsequent report dated July 7, 1971, was positive in nature that there was no convincing evidence to sustain the charges 2 to 5 against the appellant.
[84B] There was no justification for the view taken by the High Court.
The Tribunal was the inquiring authority.
In its initial report dated May 7, 1970, it had recorded findings against the appellant, but when the Governor referred the appellant 's reply to the show cause notice to the Tribunal for reconsideration of the matter, it recorded a positive finding that there was no convincing evidence to support its earlier findings.
The Tribunal had acted within its jurisdiction in reappraising the evidence in the light of the appellant.
The State Government issued the impugned order of dismissal on the basis of the opinion of the Legal Remembrancer without recording any reasons for disregarding the findings of the Tribunal.
If the State Government chose to pass the order of dismissal, in all fairness, it should have recorded reasons for the same, and in order to afford a reasonable opportunity to the appellant, it was necessary for the Government to communicate to him the reasons for disagreement with the Tribunal 's report.
The report of the legal Remembrancer on the basis of which the Government has passed the impugned order, had never been communicated to the appellant and he was denied opportunity to meet the same.
Article 311(2) before its amendment by the Constitution (forty second Amendment) Act, 1975, contemplated reasonable opportunity of defence even at the stage of show cause notice.
The appellant had been denied opportunity of being heard at the stage of show cause notice.
[84E H; 85A B;F] The Tribunal in its report dated July 7, 1971 had categorically recorded the finding that there was no evidence on record to prove the charge that the appellant had not purchased 1st class tickets in advance relating to the journeys in question.
The Tribunal had observed that the evidence raised suspicion against the appellant but mere suspicion was not sufficient to hold that the charges stood proved.
The Legal Remembrancer, ignoring the findings of the Tribunal, concluded that the evidence on record had proved charges 2 to 5.
The entire approach of the Legal Remembrancer in considering the Tribunal 's findings suffered from errors of law.
He was of the opinion that the Tribunal had no authority to reappraise the evidence or enter into the sufficiency or adequacy of the evidence.
The principles applicable to judicial review of administrative actions or findings recorded in departmental disciplinary proceedings do not apply to a Tribunal which is like an 81 inquiring authority while assessing the evidence on charges against a delinquent officer.
The Tribunal could enter into adequacy, insufficiency or credibility of evidence on record.
The Tribunal was not discharging the functions of a court but was acting as an enquiring authority therefore it had full powers to appraise the evidence and record its findings.
The approach of the Legal Remembrancer was misconceived as a result whereof he had opined that the findings of the Tribunal in appellant 's favour be ignored.
The State Government committed a serious error of law in ignoring the findings of the Tribunal applying the principles of judicial review of administrative actions by a court of law, without giving the appellant an opportunity to show cause against the proposed view of the Government, and in passing the impugned order on the basis of the report of the Legal Remembrancer.
In view of the findings of the Tribunal dated July 7, 1971 aforementioned, the impugned order of dismissal could not legally be sustained against the appellant.
[85F G; 86C H; 87A] There was no evidence on record to sustain the findings of charges 2 to 5 against the appellant, and further, the appellant was denied a reasonable opportunity of defence contemplated by Article 311(2) as it then existed.
The State Government 's order dismissing the appellant from service was illegal and unconstitutional.
The order of the Division Bench of the High Court was set aside, the appellant 's petition was allowed and the order of dismissal was quashed.
The appellant was directed to be treated in service without a break with all the consequential benefits.
[87B C] State of Andhra Pradesh vs S.N. Nizamuddin Ali Khan, ; , referred to.
