% The respondent assessee had purchased fresh frog legs and after removing the skin, washing and removing dirt etc.
and freezing it for the purpose of avoiding decomposition and decay exported the said frog legs and claimed entitlement to benefit of section 5(3) of the .
It was contended on behalf of the State that what was purchased as fresh legs was not exported as such, without freezing them and, therefore, the assessee was not entitled to the benefit of the section.
The Sales Tax Tribunal held that the fresh frog legs purchased by the assessee and exported after freezing for the purpose of avoiding decomposition and decay, were one and the same commodity and the frozen legs did not undergo any material change in character and the identity of the frog legs remained unchanged as such, and, therefore, the assessee was entitled to the benefit of section 5(3) of the Act.
The High Court upheld the view of the Tribunal.
Dismissing the State 's appeal, ^ HELD: Every processing does not bring about a change in the character and identity of the commodity.
The nature and extent of processing may vary from one case to another and indeed there may be several stages of processing and perhaps different kinds of processing at each stage.
With each process suffered, the original commodity experiences change.
But it is only when the change or a series of changes take the commodity to the point where commercially it can no longer be regarded as the original commodity but, instead, is recognised as a new and distinct commodity that it can be said that a new commodity, 99 distinct from the original, has come into being.
The test is whether in the eyes of those dealing in the commodity or in commercial parlance the processed commodity is regarded as distinct in character and identity from the original commodity.
In the instant case, the High Court was right in holding, on the facts found by the Tribunal, that frozen frog legs are same as fresh frog legs, and the process was only to prevent decomposition.
M/s. Sterling foods.
vs State of Karnataka and another, and Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax vs Pio Food Packers, ; . relied on.
East Texas Motor Freight Lines vs Frozen Food Express, ; at 923) referred to.
Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax and others vs A.B. lsmail and others, [1986] Suppl.
SCC 218 distinguished.
