% The appellant No. 1, J.K. Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Limited, has a composite mill wherein it manufactures fabrics of different types, for which yarn is obtained at an intermediate stage, and the yarn is processed in an integrated process in the said composite mill for weaving the same into fabrics.
The Central Board of Excise issued a Circular dated September 24, 1980, purporting to interpret the rules 9 and 49 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944 (the Rules) and directing the subordinate excise authorities to levy and collect excise duty in accordance therewith.
The Board further directed vide the said Circular that the use of the goods in the manufacture of another commodity even within the place premises specified in this behalf by the Central Excise officers in terms of the powers conferred under rule 9 of the Rules, would attract duty.
As the implementation of the Circular worked to the prejudice of the appellants, they filed a writ petition in the High Court, challenging the validity of the Circular.
During the pendency of the said writ petition, the Central Government issued a Notification dated February 20, 1982, amending the rules 9 and 49 of the Rules, with section 51 of the Finance Act, 1982, providing that the amendments in the rules 9 and 49 shall be deemed to have, and to have always had, the effect with retrospective effect from the date on which the Rules came into force i.e. February 28, 1944.
Upon the amendments of the rules 9 and 49, with retrospective effect of the amendments, the appellants amended their writ petition above said to challenge the constitutional validity of Section 51 of the Finance Act abovementioned and the amendments to the rules 9 and 49.
701 The High Court allowed the writ petition in part.
It held (i) that section 51 and the rules 9 and 49 as amended were valid, (ii) the retrospective effect allowed by section 51 would be subject to the provisions of sections 11A and 11B of the (the Act), (iii) the yarn produced at an intermediate stage in the mill of the appellants and subjected to the integrated process of weaving into fabrics, would be liable to payment of excise duty in view of the amended provisions of the rules 9 and 49, but the sized yarn actually put into the integrated process would not again attract excise duty.
The appellants then filed this appeal (Civil Appeal No. 297 of 1983) before this Court by certificate.
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The decisions of various High Courts cited, deal with the rules 9 and 49 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, as they stood before they were amended by the Government Notification dated February 20, 1982.
In this case, what is involved is the interpretation of the said two rules after their amendment and the constitutional validity of the rules as amended.
The amendments to the rules 9 and 49 are quite legal and valid.
Section 51 of the Finance Act, 1982, giving retrospective effect to the said amendments is also legal and valid.
The apprehension of the appellants that the amendments to rules 9 and 49 having been made retrospective from the date the rules were framed, that is, February 28, 1944, the appellants may be called upon to pay enormous amounts of duty in respect of the intermediate goods which have come into existence and again consumed in the integrated process of manufacture of another commodity, is not right.
In view of section 11A of the Finance Act, there is no cause for such an apprehension.
Under Section 11A(1), the excise authorities cannot recover duties not levied or not paid or short levied or short paid or erroneously refunded beyond the period of six months, the proviso to section 11A not being applicable in the present case.
Thus though section 51 has given retrospective effect to the amendments of rules 9 and 49, it must be subject to the provision of section 11A of the Act.
Section 51 does not contain any non obstante clause, nor does it refer to the provision of section 11A, and it is difficult to hold that section 51 overrides the provision of section 11A. [712F H; 714D F] The appellants are liable to pay excise duty on the yarn obtained at an intermediate stage and, thereafter, further processed in an integrated process for weaving the same into fabrics.
Although it has been alleged that the yarn is obtained at an intermediate stage of an 702 integrated process of manufacture of fabrics, it appears to be not so.
After the yarn is produced, it is sized, and thereafter, subjected to a process of weaving the same into fabrics.
As the Court has held that the commodity which is obtained at an intermediate stage of an integrated process of manufacture of another commodity, is liable to the payment of excise duty, the yarn that is produced by the appellants is also liable to payment of excise duty.
[720G H: 721A B] The High Court has rightly held that the appellants are not liable to pay excise duty on the yarn after it is sized for the purpose of weaving the same into fabrics.
No distinction can be made between unsized yarn and sized yarn, for the unsized yarn when converted into sized yarn does not lose its character as yarn.
The judgment of the High Court affirmed.
[721B C] In view of the decision of the Court in the Civil Appeal No. 297 of 1983, the Civil Appeals Nos. 2658 and 4168 of 1983 also dismissed.
[721D] The Province of Madras vs Boddu Paidanna and Sons AIR ; Caltex oil Refining (India) Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors. , Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. vs Joint Secretary, Government of India, ; Modi Carpets Ltd. vs Union of India, ; Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. Bombay vs Government of India, , Devi Dayal Electronics and Wires Ltd. vs Union of India, [1982] E.L.T. 33; Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, [1980] E.L.T. 327, Oudh Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, [1982] E.L.T. 927, Maneklal Harilal Spg. & Mfg. Co. Ltd. vs Union of India, ; Nirlon Synthetic Fibres & Chemicals Ltd. vs Shri R.K. Audim; Assistant Collector & Ors.
In Misc.
491 of 1964, unreported judgment of Bombay High Court, dated April 30, 1970, Jawaharmal vs State of Rajasthan & Ors., ; ; Rai Ramkrishna and Ors.
vs State of Bihar, ; , K.P. Verghese vs The Income Tax officer, Ernakulam; , and Senior Electric Inspector and Ors.
vs Laxmi Narayan Chopra, ; , referred to.
