% The petitioner in this application under Article 136 of the Constitution entered into a contract with the respondent State for construction work.
The contract could not be completed within the stipulated time because of alleged gross delay on the part of the State in allotment of work and discharge of its obligations under the contract.
The petitioner incurred unforeseen expenditure and approached the Superintending Engineer for payment.
Upon refusal of the Superintending Engineer to pay and also to refer the matter to arbitration, the petitioner moved the District Judge under Section 20 of the Arbitration Act, ( 'the Act ') for the filing of the arbitration agreement and for reference of the dispute to arbitration.
The District Judge directed the respondent State to file the agreement, and made a reference for specific question to the arbitration.
The High Court dismissed the State 's appeal against the order of the District Judge.
Thereafter, an arbitrator was appointed, who made an award partly allowing the petitioner 's claim.
The award was filed in the Court of the District judge, who made the award a rule of the court.
The respondent appealed to the High Court.
The High Court remanded the matter to the District Judge for a fresh decision.
The District Judge accepted the respondent 's objections and set aside the award.
The High Court dismissed the appeal of the petitioner.
The petitioner then moved this Court for relief by this petition for special leave.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: The District Judge rightly found that the question regarding extra cost was a general question and not a specific legal question and the decision of the arbitrator was not final.
The arbitrator 104 misconducted himself in allowing the claim without deciding the objection of the State.
In view of the specific clauses, the petitioner was not legally entitled to claim for extra cost.
The decision of this Court in Seth Thawardas vs Union of India, was of no avail on this point.
If no specific question of law is referred, the decision of the arbitrator on that question is not final however much it may be within his jurisdiction and indeed essential for him to decide the question incidentally.
The arbitrator is not a conciliator and cannot ignore the law or mis apply it in order to do what he thinks is just and reasonable.
The arbitrator is a Tribunal selected by the parties to decide their disputes according to law and so he is bound to follow and apply the law, and if he does not, he can be set right by the Court provided his error appears on the face of the award.
In this case, the contractor having contracted, could not go back to the agreement simply because it did not suit him to abide by it.
[111C F] The petitioner had argued that since specific issues had been framed and referred by the District Judge to the arbitrator, the same had been answered by a non speaking award and there was no mistake of law apparent on the face of the record, and the District Judge had erred in setting aside the award by looking into the terms of the contract which neither formed part of the award nor were appended to it.
The Court did not agree.
This being a general question, the District Judge rightly examined the question and found that the petitioner was not entitled to claim for extra cost in view of the terms of the contract, and the arbitrator misdirected himself by not considering this objection of the State before giving the award.
[112B C] The limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to challenge the award are well settled.
While considering the objection under section 30 of the Act, the Court does not act as an appellate Court; it can only interfere with the award if the arbitrator misconducts himself or the proceedings or if the award has been made after the issue of an order by the Court superseding the arbitration or if the arbitration proceedings have become invalid under section 35(c) of the Act, or the award has been improperly procured or is otherwise invalid.
If, a specific question is submitted to the arbitrator and he answers it, the fact that the answer involves an erroneous decision in point of law, does not make the award bad on its face so as to permit it being set aside.
[112E F; 1l3A] The High Court was right that the District Judge was entitled to examine the contract in order to find out the legality of the claim of the petitioner regarding extra cost towards rise in prices of material and 105 labour.
Clauses 2.16 and 2.4 stipulated that the contractor had to complete the work inspite of rise in prices of materials and also rise in labour charges at the rates stipulated in the contract.
There was a clear finding of the arbitrator that the contract was not rendered ineffective in terms of section 56 of the Contract Act due to the abnormal rise in prices of materials and labour.
This being so and the contractor having completed the work, it was not open to him to claim extra cost towards rise in prices of material and labour.
The arbitrator misdirected himself in not deciding this specific objection raised by the State regarding the legality of the extra claims of the petitioner.
It has to be born in mind that there were specific clauses which barred consideration of extra claims in the event of price escalation.
[113D F; 114B] The award was properly set aside by the District Judge and the High Court was right in the view it took and there was no ground to interfere.
[113G] Seth Thawardas vs Union of India, ; M/s Alopi Parshad vs Union of India, ; ; Kapoor Nilokheri Co operative Dairy Farm Society Ltd. vs Union of India, ; Champsey Bhara and Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning and Weaving Co. Ltd., A.I.R. 1923 P.C. 66; Re.
King and Duveen, ; Government of Kelantan vs Duff Development Co. Ltd., ; Bungo Steel Furniture vs Union of India, ; ; Saleh Mohd. vs Nathoo Mal, 54 I.A. 427; Abosalom Ltd. vs Great Western, ; Allen Berry & Co. vs Union of India, ; and Tarapare and Company vs Cochin Shipyard Ltd., Cochin and Anr.
,[1984] 2 S.C.C. 680, referred to.
