% The prosecution alleged that the married life of the appellant, who was said to be 151/2 years of age, was in a serious disarray, that she and the non appealing accused were on terms of illicit intimacy, that she also submitted herself to PW 2 in an extra marital relation, that on 13.11.73 she implored the non appealing accused and PW 2 to free her from a cruel husband by doing away with him, that she agreed that she would, thereafter live with the non appealing accused as his wife, that the three designed and conspired to do away with the deceased, in pursuance of which the appellant persuaded her husband to go to the bus stand at Chandigarh at 9.30 a.m.
On 14th November, 1973, where the non appealing accused and PW 2 were waiting for him as pre arranged, and took him to Pinjore by bus, where they consumed liquor together and the non appealing accused purchased Ghotna, that while all the three were walking back to Chandigarh and climbed the way side hill the non appealing accused gave blows on the head of the unsuspecting deceased with the Ghotna, while PW 2 pinned him down, that they concealed the clothes and body of the deceased in the nearby bushes, that both of them returned to Chandigarh by night fall, and the nonappealing accused informed PW 2 that he, in turn, had informed the appellant of the death of her husband, that the mother of the deceased, PW 19, lodged a complaint on 13.12.73 about her missing son in writing with the Senior Superintendent of Police, Chandigarh, alleging that she had learnt that a certain person of the village Lahor Khoda with his two sons and the Sarpanch with his two other relatives had killed her son, the motive being that her son had developed illicit relations with the daughter of the person, that after coming to know of her husband 's death the appellant misled her mother in law PW 19.
into making a H 746 report to the police containing false and misleading information in an attempt to draw a red herring across the trial.
The non appealing accused was arrested on 3.4.75.
On his information exhibit P8, a pair of shoes, purse, 25 pieces of bones including an incomplete human skull were recovered.
The appellant and PW 2 were arrested on 8.5.75.
After completing the investigation, charges were brought against the appellants and the two accused for conspiracy and murder.
PW 2, who was one of the co accused, turned approver.
The trial court on the basis of the approver 's testimony as corroborated by other evidence held the non appealing accused and the appellant guilty of the offences under sections 302 and 120 B of the I.P.C. and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.
The High Court dismissed their appeals and confirmed the convictions and sentence.
In the appeal to this Court, it was urged that the evidence of the approver insofar as the compicity of the appellant was concerned, lacked corroboration on material particulars and that no conviction could be sustained on such uncorroborated accomplice 's testimony.
On the question as to: (1) the nature and extent of corroboration of an accomplice 's evidence; and (2) the procedure for the trial of offences by a 'child ' under the East Punjab Children 's Act, 1949, ^ HELD: 1.1 An accomplice, by long legal tradition, is a notoriously infamous witness, one who being partipes criminis, purchases his immunity by accepting to accuse others.
Section 114, illustration (b) of the Evidence Act envisages the presumptive uncreditworthiness of an accomplice.
But, then section 133 provides that a conviction is not illegal merely because it rests upon an accomplice 's uncorroborated testimony.
[753C D] 1.2 In indictments, particularly of serious crimes, counsel of caution and the rule of prudence enjoin that it is unsafe to rest a conviction on the evidence of a guilty partner in a crime without independent corroboration on the material particulars.
Judicial experience was, thus, elevated to a rule of law.
lt is a practice which deserves all the reverence of law.
[753D E] l.3 The nature and extent of the corroboration must necessarily 747 vary with the nature and circumstances of each case.
Enunciation of any general rule, valid for all occasions is, at once, unwise and unpractical.
[753F] 1.4 The corroboration has to be of two kinds; first belonging to the area of reassurance of the credit of the approver himself as a trustworthy witness; and the second which arises for conclusion after the court is satisfied about the creditibility of the approver as to the corroboration in material particulars not only of the commission of the crime but also of the complicity of other accused person in the crime.
If on the first area the court is not satisfied, the second does not arise.
However, the two areas of corroboration are not two separate, watertight compartments.
The evidence as a whole will have to be examined to reach conclusions on both aspects.
[757G H; 752C] Sharvana Bhavan vs State of Madras, AIR 1966 SC 1273 referred 1.5 The controversy in the present case in the ultimate analysis, belongs to the second area, whether the approver 's testimony as to appellant 's complicity in the conspiracy could safely be held to have been corroborated by independent evidence on the material particulars.
[758F G] There was a considerable lapse of time between the death of decease and the arrest of the appellant and the non appealing accused.
There is no evidence to show that, in the interregnum, there was any liasion between the two.
The incriminating circumstances in the evidence of the approver appearing against the appellant that on 13.11.1973 appellant wept and implored the non appealing accused and PW 2 to do away with the deceased and that appellant also agreed that she would, thereafter, live with the non appealing accused had had to be put to the appellant m the course of her examination under section 313 Cr.
P.C. but this has not been done.
Appellant was not afforded an opportunity to submit an explanation to it.
That part of the evidence must for that reason, be excluded from consideration.
[759C E] Harijan Magha Jesha vs State of Gujarat, , referred to.
On a consideration of the entire matter, the approver 's evidence in regard to the complicity of the appellant in the conspiracy lacks corroboration on certain material particulars necessary to connect the 748 appellant.
A little more reassurance than is afforded by the state of evidence in the case is perhaps necessary to convict appellant.
The appellant in the circumstances would be entitled to the benefit of doubt.
[759F] At the time of the commission of the offence, the appellant, even on the basis of the observations made by the sessions court, was about 15 years of age and was a 'child ' within the meaning of East Punjab Children 's Act, 1949.
The sessions court invoked the proviso to section 27 of the Act and held that the appellant was so depraved a character that none of the other methods mentioned in the section in which the case could legally be dealt with was suitable in her case.
[759G; 760C] In view of the finding that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt, any examination of the legality or propriety of the procedure adopted in the case in the matter of trial of a 'child ' under the East Punjab Children 's Act, 1949 and the correctness of the view of the sessions court in appealing to the proviso to section 27, and sentencing appellant to imprisonment for life is not necessary .
[760 C D] Appeal allowed.
Conviction and sentence of the appellant set aside and appellant directed to be set at liberty.
However, conviction and sentence of the other non appearing accused left undisturbed.
[760E] Wigmore on Evidence: 3rd Editition Vol.
VII para 2054, Rex vs Bhaskerville, , Rameshwar Kalyan Singh vs State of Rajasthan ; , Director of Public Persecutions vs Kill bourne, [1973] Appeal A.C. 729/All England law reports 1982(1) page 815(g), R. vs Beck, , R. vs Spencer, ; , R. vs Donat, , Attorney General of Hongkong vs Wong Muko Ping and Halsbury 's Laws of England IV Ed.
II p. 268, para 454 referred to.
