% On 21st July, 1981, the Respondent Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board issued a notification exercising power under section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948.
By this notification the Board unilaterally altered the conditions of supply of electricity to high tension power consumers.
This notification stated that the industries will be supplied the power for the contracted demands between 1501 KVA to 5000 KVA, at 33 KV whereas industries whose contracted demand is above 5000 KVA shall avail supply at 132 KV or 220 KV.
To comply with this requirement high tension consumers will either have to replace the existing transformers and high tension control gears or to instal transformers with control gears to step down supply from the now proposed voltage to the existing voltage and these modifications have to be made by the industries concerned within a period of 6 months from the date of this notification.
It was further provided that after the lapse of six months if the consumers have not made arrangements for receiving the supply at the proposed voltage and continue to receive supply at the voltage at which they were receiving on the date of the notification they will have to pay additional surcharge ranging between 2.5% to 13% on their power bills.
The appellants which were consumers of high tension power challenged the validity of this notification by way of filling writ petitions before the High Court.
A Single Judge allowed the writ petitions.
In appeal a Division Bench took the view that section 49 of the Act coupled with section 18(c) of the same Act empower the electricity board to unilaterally alter the terms and conditions of supply, and set aside the judgement of the Single Judge.
Hence these appeals by Special 160 Leave against the Judgment of the Division Bench.
The main controversy was whether the board had power unilaterally to alter the conditions of supply of electricity.
Dismissing the appeals this Court, ^ HELD: The contention of the appellants that under section 49 the respondent board had no authority unilaterally to alter the conditions of supply cannot be accepted.
Sub clause 1 of section 49 of the Electricity Supply Act, 1948 clearly provides that the board could lay down conditions of supply and for purposes of such supply it may also frame uniform tariffs.
Sub clause t therefore clearly authorises the Board to lay down the conditions of supply and have to fix uniform tariffs is provided for in sub clause 2.
If there is any doubt sub clause 4 makes it clear that in exercise of powers under this section Board could fix the conditions of supply and also fix the tariffs.
[l68B C; 167B C] The Division Bench relied on provisions contained in Section 18(c).
It is no doubt true that under these provisions the Board exercises control in relation to generation, distribution and utilisation of electricity and the learned Judges of the Division Bench felt that although specified power is not there under Section 18(c) but it is wide enough to authorise the board to alter the conditions of supply.
It is no doubt true that section 18(c) confers power of control on the board but in our opinion the specific power under section 49 Clause t is clear enough wherein board has been authorised to lay down conditions of supply.
[168C E] The contention that the policy of the Board to change over of supply of power at a high voltage which involves heavy expenditure will fall within the scope of sections 28 and 29 and therefore it could not be done without following the procedure indicated in these provisions has no substance.
A perusal of sections 28 and 29 of the Act indicates that it is altogether a different function rather than what is being done by the Board in exercise of the powers under Section 49 Clause 1.[171G] As regards the imposition of the higher tariff on failure to receive the supply at the voltage indicated in the notification from the date specified therein or not will be open to the Board for consideration and the parties may approach the Board and it will be open to the Board in the facts and circumstances of each case not to levy the surcharge indicated in the notification during a particular period and in so doing the board will take into consideration the facts and circumstances of each particular case [172A B] 161 The contention that the loss incurred in respect of smaller consumers is recovered from the present appellants, the high tension consumer, has no substance.
The transmission loss no doubt is on account of low voltage when it travels Long distance as it is related to distance but the quantum of loss also is proportional to the quantum of power that travels through the transmission lines and it could not be disputed that the power that has to travel to meet the requirements of small agricultural consumers is negligible as compared to the quantum of power that is supplied to these high tension consumers.
[170H; 171A B] The contention that under section 18(A)(I) read alongwith section 18(A)(23) of the Electricity Supply Act it is the duty of the board to establish and maintain sub stations and main transmissions lines and it is not open to the board to transfer this responsibility to the consumers by requiring them to make their own arrangements to step down electricity after taking it at a high voltage has no substance.
Section 2 sub clause 7 of the Act defines the main transmission lines but all this in sub clause 7 of section 2 refere to is about transmission of electricity from a generating station to another generating station or to sub station.
Apparently it refers to all the lines and equipments required to be installed from the generating station to the distributing sub station.
Apparently both being that of the Board itself it has to maintain it and on this basis it could not be contended that if the consumer has to receive powers at a high voltage and if he wants to utilise it at a low voltage it is not his responsibility to instal equipments for stepping down the power from high voltage to low voltage.
[171C E] Maharashtra State Electricity Board vs Kalyan Borough Municipality & Anr., ; ; Bisra Stone Lime Company Ltd. & Anr.
, vs Orissa State Electricity Board and Anr.
, ; and Jagadamba Paper Industries (Pvt.
) Ltd. Etc.
vs Haryana State Electricity Board & Ors.
Etc., [1984] I S.C.R. 165, referred to.
