% It was alleged, in the petition for initiating proceedings for contempt, that despite the fact that this Court passed an order on 19.12.86 directing maintenance of 'status quo as in the High Court ' in the presence of the counsel for respondent No. 4 on December 22, 1986 respondent No. 4 and his son filed a miscellaneous petition before the High Court, deliberately and wilfully suppressing from it the fact that this Court had directed maintenance of status quo, and obtained an order dated January 3, 1987 in their favour, and had thus wilfully and flagrantly disobeyed and violated the status quo order of this Court.
This Court on September 23, 1987 vacated the aforesaid order of the High Court and restrained respondent No. 4 and his son and their agents and servants from lifting sludge/slurry from the lands in question.
This Court was of the view that there was no contempt.
Giving reasons for its decision, ^ HELD: The expression 'status quo ' is undoubtedly a term of ambiguity and at times gives rise to doubt and difficulty.
According to the ordinary legal connotation the term implies existing state of things at any given point of time.
The qualifying words 'as in the High Court ' clearly limit the scope and effect of the status quo order.
[872F G] In the present case, the High Court determined only one question, namely, that slurry was not coal or mineral.
The impugned judgment does not adjudicate upon the rights of the parties.
It is, therefore, 870 obvious that status quo as in the High Court cannot mean anything else except status quo as existing when the matter was pending in the High Court before the judgment was delivered.
Both the parties understood the scope and effect of the status quo order as meaning the state of things existing while the writ petition was still pending i.e. till the delivery of the judgment by the High Court.
[872G H; 873A B] No case for contempt is made out on the plain terms of the status quo order.
The parties were relegated back to the position that obtained while the writ petition was pending.
They were, therefore, subject to the order passed by the High Court dated January 15, 1985.
[873C D] The conduct of respondent No. 4 for having approached the High Court and obtained the impugned order by suppressing the fact that this Court had passed the status quo order, is highly deprecated.
The proper course for him was to have approached this Court for clarification, if he had any doubt as to the meaning and effect of the status quo order.
[873C]
