% A complaint filed in the court of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate by the appellant, Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, against respondents Nos. 1 and 2, a private limited company and its Managing Director for the alleged commission of an offence under section 5 of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947 was subsequently transferred to another court and cognizance of the offence alleged was taken without examining the appellant as proviso (a) of section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure was applicable to this complaint.
An application filed by the accused persons for recall of summons and dismissal of complaint was dismissed by the trial Magistrate.
An appeal against the aforesaid order was dismissed by the High Court.
A special leave application filed against the High Court 's order was dismissed by the Supreme Court.
An application made at the trial stage for the discharge of respondent No. 2, the Managing Director on the plea that there was no allegation of any criminal misconduct against him and the Company respondent No. 1 was prepared to admit its guilt and may be appropriately penalised, was dismissed by the trial court.
On appeal, the High Court quashed the process issued against respondent No. 2 on the ground that the order of issuance of process 297 was clearly as a result of non application of mind by the trial Judge because when the process was issued against the petitioners, the Department and the State had merely filed a complaint case along with list of witnesses and documents, and none of the statements of witnesses or copies of documents was produced before the trial Judge, and that respondent No. 2 could not be prosecuted under section 5 of the Act, as the prosecution intended to charge him as principal offender alongwith respondent No. 1 the Company and there were no allegations in the complaint that respondent No. 2 either aided or abetted in the contravention of the licence conditions by respondent No. 1 Company.
Allowing the Department 's appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The High Court had not cared to look into procedural law applicable to the factual situation before it.
If a reference had been made to section 200, Proviso (a) of Code of Criminal Procedure, the proceedings against respondent No. 2 could not have been quashed.
[299G H] 1.2 Records of investigation are not evidence in the instant case, and a complaint could not be quashed by referring to the investigation records, particularly when the petition of the complainant did allege facts which prima facie show commission of an offence.
[300B] The High Court overlooked the fact that similar objections raised earlier were rejected by the same High Court, and this decision was upheld by the Supreme Court, and drew a distinction between the two situations, by saying that records of investigation were not available on the earlier occasion.
[300A B] 1.3 The licensee was a company and a company by itself could not act, and has to act through someone.
Since there was clear allegation that the Managing Director had committed the offence, acting on behalf of the licensee, there was no justification for quashing the proceedings against respondent No. 2.
[300C] Order of the High Court is vacated.
However, since the offence was committed 20 years back, it would not be in the interest of justice to allow a prosecution to start and the trial to be proceeded with at this belated stage even though respondent No. 2 has no equity in his favour and the delay has been mostly on account of his mala fide move.
Hence the case against respondent No. 2 is directed to be closed forthwith.
[300E,G]
