% The question as to whether "Decoplast" manufactured by the appellant is plastic emulsion paint or not had been determined in the affirmative by the Revenue, and revision application before the Government of India was rejected.
Thereafter the appellant moved the Bombay High Court, which directed the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal to hear the petition and to decide the same as an appeal before it.
On behalf of the appellant, elaborate evidence had been adduced before the Tribunal.
Reference was made to the specifications of plastic emulsion paint and the definition as given by ISI.
The Tribunal addressed itself to the question whether "Decoplast" could be considered as plastic emulsion paint having regard to (i) its composition; (ii) its characteristics; (iii) its uses and (iv) its reputation in trade parlance, and held that "Decoplast" is a plastic emulsion paint.
Aggrieved by the order the appellant appealed under Section 35L of the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 to this Court, which.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The commercial meaning has to be given to the expressions in Tariff items.
Where definition of a word has not been given, it 340 must be construed in its popular sense.
Popular sense means that sense which people conversant with the subject matter with which the statute is dealing, would attribute to it.
[343G] 1.2 In the instant case the use of these two items and their composition, when analysed, revealed that in essence they performed the same functions as plastic emulsion paint does, though there was some difference in them.
The affidavits of traders and others were examined by the Tribunal.
The Revenue did not adduce evidence in rebuttal.
Therefore, in view of the composition, characteristics, uses and how it is known in the trade, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that "Decoplast" was plastic emulsion paint.
This is a finding of fact arrived at on relevant and valid materials.
There was no misdirection in law.
[344C E] 2.
In interpreting items in statutes like the Excise Act or Sales Tax Act, resort should be had, not to the scientific and technical meaning of the terms or expressions used, but to the popular meaning, that is to say, the meaning attached to them by those dealing in them.
[343H; 344A B] C.l. T., Andhra Pradesh vs M/s. Taj Mahal Hotel, Secunderabad and Indo International Industries vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P., ; ,referred to.
King vs Planter 's Co. [1951] CLR (exhibit) 122 and 'Two Hundred Chests of Tea ', [1824]6 L.Ed. 128, referred to.
