% Section 169 of the Bombay Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 empowers the Standing Committee to make rules to charge for the supply of water and by such rules to determine the water charges in lieu of water tax based on a measurement or estimated measurement of the quantity of water supplied.
Section 276 provides for fixing of meters for measurement of water supplied and maintaining the instruments in proper order.
Bye laws framed under section 461 in 1968 empowered the Commissioner to fix a quota.
Rule III(d)(i) of the Water Charges and Sewerage and Waste Removal Rules framed in exercise of the powers given by sections 169 and 276 of the Act which became effective in 1976 provided for charging for the shortfall between the quota and the recorded consumption in respect of industries for which a quota has been fixed.
The respondents were being charged for water upto June, 1977 on the basis of their actual consumption.
In July, 1977 they were sought to be billed for the difference between the charges on the quota basis under the said rule and the actual consumption basis, which was objected to by the respondents.
The writ petition filed by them in the High Court was rejected by a single Judge.
In appeal before the Division Bench it was contended that the Rule lII(d)(i) of the Rules was ultra vires the rule making power of the Standing Committee of the Corporation being inconsistent with section 169 of the Act.
The High Court held that section 169 empowers the Corporation to levy charge only in respect of the water that has in fact been supplied 274 275 to and consumed by the consumer and it is to be levied on the basis of measurement or estimated measurement, and struck down the rule.
Dismissing the special leave petition filed by the Municipal Corporation, ^ HELD: There being no methodology in Rule IlI(d)(i) of the Water Charges Rules for measuring the actual water supplied, that rule is beyond the powers of the Corporation.
The High Court, was, therefore, right in striking it down.
[278H; 279A] The Corporation cannot estimate and charge on the basis of water it makes available for use by a consumer.
The supply referred to in section 169 of the Act, is a supply which is, in fact, supplied to the consumer and consumed by it.
It is only that supply which can be measured.
Where the measuring device has failed to record the correct consumption it might be estimated.
But that must be on sound guidelines otherwise it would be arbitrary and mere ipse dixit of the authorities concerned.
[278D E] The by laws made in 1968 empowering the Commissioner to fix a quota do not indicate any guidelines.
That is bad and unwarranted.
[278E]
