% In these writ petitions and civil appeals, Lalit Narayan Mishra Institute of Economic Development and Social Change, Patna, a registered society, and its Registrar, Dr. Jagadanand Jha, challenged the constitutional validity of Bihar ordinances Nos. 15 of 1986 and 30 of 1986, replaced by the Bihar Private Educational Institutions (Taking over) Act, 1987 ( 'The Act ').
Dr. Jagadanand Jha further challenged the validity of the order of termination of his services as the Registrar of the Institute, dated April 21, 1986 in the writ petition (Civil) No. 439 of 1987.
As disposal of the writ petition (Civil) No. 431 of 1987 wherein the constitutional validity of the Act was challenged and the writ petition (Civil) No. 439 of 1987 above said would virtually mean the disposal of the other writ petitions and appeals, the Court dealt with those two writ petitions.
On April 19, 1986, the State Government of Bihar promulgated ordinance No. 15 of 1986, whereby the Lalit Narayan Mishra Institute of Economic Development and Social Change, Patna ( 'Institute ') was taken over.
On the day the ordinance was promulgated, possession of the Institute was taken over and the services of Dr. Jagadanand Jha, the Registrar of the Institute were terminated by the impugned order dated April 21, 1986.
The petitioners filed Writ Petitions before the High Court, challenging the validity of the said ordinance and the order of termination of the services of Dr. Jagadanand Jha.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions, Both, the Society and Dr. Jagadanand Jha, preferred two appeals by special leave being Civil Appeal No. 4142 of 1986 and Civil Appeal No. 4141 of 1986 respectively.
The Society and Dr. Jagadanand Jha also challenged the ordinance No. 30 of 1986 by Writ Petition (Civil) No. 55 of 1987 and the constitutional validity of the Act replacing the said two ordinances.
312 Allowing the writ petitions (Civil) Nos. 87 of 1987 and 439 of 1987 and Civil Appeal No. 4141 of 1986, in so far as they related to the order of termination of the services of Dr. Jagadanand Jha, and dismissing the writ petitions (Civil) Nos. 55 of 1987 and 431 of 1987 and Civil Appeal No. 4142 of 1986, the Court, ^ HELD: The provisions of the Act are the same as those of the two ordinances Nos. 15 and 30 of 1986.
The first attack on the validity of the Act and the ordinances was founded on the plea of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It was contended that the Act and the ordinances were discriminatory in nature and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and should be struck down.
The contention was wholly misconceived.
The ordinances were not promulgated and the Act was not passed for the purpose of nationalisation of the Institute only.
It was apparent from the provisions of the ordinances and the Act that the private educational institutions as defined therein were to be taken for the purpose as mentioned in the Preambles to the ordinances and the Act in a phased manner.
All the institutions which answered the description given in section 2(a) of the Act were to be nationalised.
It was not correct to say that the Institute had been signled out for nationalisation.
[319E; 321D; 323D F] There can be no doubt that when nationalisation had to be done in a phased manner, all the institutions cannot be taken over at a time.
The nationalisation in a phased manner contemplates that by and by the object of nationalisation will be taken over.
In implementing the nationalisation of the private institutions in phased manner, the Legislature had started with the Institute, and the question of singling out the Institute or treating it as a class by itself did not arise.
It was the legislative decision that the Institute should be taken over in the first phase of nationalisation.
The Legislature had not left it to the discretion of the executive government for the purpose of selecting the private educational institution for the first phase.
It was very difficult to assail a legislative decision.
Of course, a legislative decision can be assailed if it is violative of any provision or part III of the Constitution.
So far as Article 14 was concerned, the Court did not think that it had any manner of application inasmuch as the question of discrimination did not arise as soon ss it was conceded that it was a case of in a phased manner and that for the first phase the Institute had been chosen by the Legislature itself.
The Institute had been chosen by the legislative process.
It was true that the ordinance Were promulgated under Article 213 of the Constitution, bot it could not be characterised as an executive act.
In any even, ultimately, the Legislature itself had 313 passed the Act with the inclusion of the Institute in the Schedule thereto as the only institution to be nationalised in the first phase.
Even assuming that the question of discrimination might arise also for the purpose of selection for the first phase, there were justifiable reasons for selecting the Institute for the first phase of nationalisation; the State had changed the name of the Institute, provided the site for the Institute, got the building constructed through its own agencies and funds and supervised the prescription of syllabi.
The fact could not be excluded that since 1975 it is the State of Bihar nurturing the Institute, spending money and exercising necessary control over it, and these facts fully justified the propriety of legislative wisdom in selecting the Institute for nationalisation in the first phase.
[323G H; 324B C; 325C E] There could be no doubt that on the date the ordinances were promulgated and the Act was passed, the same could not be challenged on the ground of non implementation of the legislative intent in nationalising similar institutes by amending the Schedule.
If a legislative enactment cannot be challenged as discriminatory on the date it is passed, it is difficult to challenge the same as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution on the ground of inaction of the executive in implementing the purposes of the Act, regard being had to the fact that it was the Legislature which had made the selection for the first phase of nationalisation.
If no such selection had been made by the Legislature and the entire thing had been left to the discretion of the Government, it might have been possible to complain of discriminatory treatment.
It is common knowledge that when any litigation ensues and remains pending, the Government generally does not take any step till the final disposal of the litigation.
It was apparent that in view of the pendency of litigations, the State Government had granted approval of only temporary affiliation to the three institutions mentioned in the additional affidavit of the petitioner society and that too on certain conditions.
If the State Government had no intention of taking over other institutions in accordance with the provisions of the Act, it would have sanctioned permanent affiliation to the three institutions.
The Court could not accept the contention of the petitioner society that the professed object of nationalisation in phases was a mere pretence and a colourable device to single out the Institute or that the facts of exclusion of eleven similarly situated Institutes and the subsequent recognition of the three other Institutes imparted vice of discrimination to the impugned Act.
The question of discrimination or discriminatory treatment of the Institute did not arise and the contention of the petitioner society in this regard was rejected.
[325G H; 326A B; F; 327E F] 314 The next attack of the petitioner society to the impugned Act was A founded on violation of the provision of Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
The question was whether the fundamental right of the petitioner society, as conferred by Article 19(1)(c), had been infringed or not, and, further, whether the fundamental right to form association, as contained in Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution, also included within it the concomitants or the activities or the objects or purposes of an association.
[327F; 328E ] Article 19(1)(c) confers a right on the citizens to form association.
In exercise of such a right, the petitioner society had constituted itself into an association.
That right of the Society remained unimpaired and uninterfered with by the impugned Act and ordinances.
There was no doubt that the Institute had been taken over by the provisions of the ordinances and the Act.
It was true that with the taking over of the Institute, the Society had lost its right of management and control of the Institute, but that is the consequence of all acquisitions.
When a property is acquired, the owner loses all control, interest, and ownership of the property.
Similarly, the Society, which was the owner of the Institute, had lost all control and ownership of the Institute.
It might be equally true that the Institute was the only activity of the Society, but what was concerned was the right of the Society to form association.
So long as there was no interference with the Society, its constitution or composition, it was difficult to say that because of the taking over or acquisition of the Institute, which was the only property of activity of the Society, the fundamental right of the Society to form association had been infringed.
The decision of this Court in Damyanti Naranga vs Union of India, , had not manner of application to the present case.
The observations made in the decision of this Court in All India Bank Employees ' Association vs National Industrial Tribunal, ; , supported the view the Court had taken that the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(c) does not extend to or embrace within it the objects or purposes or activities of an association.
It does not carry with it a further guarantee that the objects or purposes or activities of an association so formed shall not be interfered with by law except on grounds as mentioned in Article 19(4).
In the circumstances, the contention of the petitioner society that because of acquisition of the Institute, the Society had lost its right of management over the Institute, and the Institute being the main or the only activity of the Society, the impugned legislations interfered with the right of the society to form and continue the association and, as such, were unconstitutional and void under Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
was unsound and rejected.
[329C D; 330B C, E; 331E G; 332A B] 315 Another ground on which the validity of the Act and the ordinances was assailed was the absence of legislative competence of the State Legislature, Counsel for the petitioner society submitted that having regard to the pith and substance of the Act, the Act fell within Entry 66 of List I and the Entry 25 of List III and Entry 66 of List I must be harmoniously construed, but to the extent of overlapping, the power conferred by Entry 66 must prevail over the power of the State under Entry 25.
[332C, F] By the impugned Act, the Legislature has not laid down any law relating to the subjects mentioned in the Entry 66, List I, or in Entry 25, List III.
The Act only provides for the taking over of private educational institutions in phases and has taken over the Institute to start with for the first phase.
An Entry in any of the Lists of Seventh Schedule will apply when a law is enacted by the Legislature on any of the subjects mentioned in the Entry.
In this case, the impugned Act does not lay down any law touching the subject referred to in Entry 66, List I, or Entry 25, List III.
Therefore, neither of these two Entries applied.
The Entry that applies to the impugned legislation is Entry 42 of List III, pertaining to acquisition and requisition of property.
The taking over of the private educational institutions and the Institute in the first phase is nothing but acquisition of property.
The Institute was the property of the petitioner society and by the impugned Act the property stood transferred to and vested absolutely in the State Government free from all encumbrances.
The only Entry relevant is Entry 42 of List III.
As soon as Entry 66 of List I was excluded, it was irrelevant which of the Entries 25 or 42 of List III was applicable, in either case, the State Legislature was competent to make the enactment.
There was no substance in the contention of the petitioner society that the Act was invalid because the State Legislature had lacked competence in passing the same.
[333B F] As it is held that the impugned Act is really a legislation relating to acquisition of property within the meaning of Entry 42 of list III, the question might arise whether after the repeal of Article 31(2) by the Constitution (Fourty Forth Amendment) Act, 1978, any compensation was compulsorily payable for the acquisition of property.
The point was not ultimately pressed, and the Court was not called upon to decide the point or express any opinion on the same.
[334B D] The Court then dealt with the case of Dr. Jagadanand Jha, Registrar of the Institute, whose services were terminated by an order dt.
April 21, 1986, as a result of the ordinance No. 15 of 1986 promulgated on April 19, 1986.
[334D E] 316 The petitioner Dr. Jagadanand Jha was not a member of the teaching staff; he was the Registrar of the Institute, which comes within the expression "other categories of staff" under sub section (4) of Section 6 of the said ordinance.
It is true that under sub paragraph (4), it has been provided that sub paragraphs (2) and (3) shall apply mutatis mutandis, but such application will be limited to the term of appointment and other conditions of service of a member of non teaching staff of the institution.
In other words, the State Government may appoint a committee for the purpose of considering the term of appointment and other conditions of service of the members of the non teaching staff, and has to decide accordingly.
It was thus apparent that the State Government proceeded on the basis that under sub paragraph (4) of paragraph 6 of the ordinance, it was to consider the question of termination of the services of the members of the non teaching staff as in the case of the members of the non teaching staff, as provided in sub paragraph (3) of paragraph 6 of the ordinance.
Even then, the Court was not impressed with the manner and haste in which the order of termination had been passed.
Although it was alleged that a Committee had been formed and the State Government had terminated the services of the petitioner on the report of the Committee, the Court could not understand the necessity for such haste; in the circumstances, it would not be unreasonable to infer that the Committee or the State Government had not properly applied its mind before the order of termination of the services of Dr. Jha was made.
[336E H; 337A B] There can be no dispute that when there is a legislative direction for termination of the services of employees, the compliance with the principles of natural justice may not be read into such direction and, if such terminations are effected without giving the employees concerned an opportunity of being heard, no exception can be taken on the same.
But in this case, sub paragraph (4) of paragraph 6 of the ordinance does not contain any direction for the termination of the services of the members of non teaching staff.
Even in spite of that, if the State Government wanted to terminate the services of the petitioner Dr. Jha, it could not be done without giving him an opportunity of being heard, for such an act on the part of the State Government would be an administrative act.
It is clear from the provision of sub paragraph (4) of paragraph 6 that the services of the members of the non teaching staff have been intended to be continued.
The services of the petitioner Dr. Jha, who had been working in the post of Registrar of the Institute for a long time, could not be terminated without giving him an opportunity of being heard.
Counsel for the respondents also did not oppose this view.
Therefore as the petitioner had not been given an opportunity of being 317 heard, the impugned order of termination of the services of the petitioner could not be sustained.
[337C G; 338A] Both the Society and Dr. Jha were not able to substantiate the allegation of mala fides against the then Chief Minister of Bihar.
Even assuming although holding to the contrary, that the Chief Minister had acted mala fide, the same could not vitiate the legislative process in the exercise of which the impugned Act and the ordinances had been respectively passed and promulgated.
The respondents also had failed to prove the alleged mismanagement of the Institute by the Society or Dr. Jha; the allegation of mismanagement was not pressed .
[338B C] The impugned order dated April 21, 1986 of termination of the services of the petitioner Dr. Jha was quashed.
Writ Petitions (Civil) Nos. 87 of 1987 and 439 of 1987 and Civil Appeal No. 4141 of 1986 in so far as they related to the said order of termination of the services of Dr. Jagadanand Jha, were allowed.
The State Government would be at liberty to consider the question of termination of the service of Dr. Jha after giving him a reasonable opportunity to make representation.
The Writ Petitions (Civil) Nos.
55 of 1987 and 431 of 1987 and Civil Appeal No 4142 of 1986 were dismissed.
[338D E] State of Rajasthan vs Mukandchand, ; ; Maganlal Chaganlal (P) Ltd. vs Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, ; ; in re The Special Courts Bill, 1978, ; Shri Ram Krishna Dalmia vs Shri Justice S.R. Tendolkar & Ors., [5969] SCR 279; B.S. Reddy vs Chancellor, Osmania University, ; ; Sakal Papers (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, ; ; Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd., ; ; Damyanti Naranga vs Union of India, ; ; All India Bank employees ' Association vs National Industrial Tribunal, ; ; State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhenga, (1009) and K.I Shephard vs Union of India & Ors.
, ; , referred to.
