% The respondents manufactured goods which were assessable under Item 68 of the Central Excise Tariff.
The respondents filed price lists for the sale of the goods through their distributors one of them being M/s. T.I & M Sales Ltd., quoting their price to the distributors as assessable value.
Subsequently the respondents required that the price charged by them from buyers at the factory gate should be accepted as the assessable value and not the price to the distributors.
The Assistant Collector found that the distributors were related persons as per section 4 of the and the price at which the distributors sold the goods should therefore be the assessable value.
On appeal by the appellant revenue, the Appellate Collector held that these could not be held to be the related persons.
The Revenue had found that there was an agreement existing between the respondents and their distributors according to which they were the company 's distributors for the sale of their goods.
Major portion of the sales were effected through M/s. T.I. & M. Sales Ltd. who were the main distributors of M/s. Tube Investments of India Ltd. and its subsidiary companies and rest of the sales through the other two distributors.
M/s. Tube Investment of India was the holding company of M/s. T.I. Millers Ltd. The agreement between the assessee and the T.I Revenue had further found that there was a territorial earmarking for the operation of the distributors, who also undertook advertisements and helped the sub dealers for maintaining show rooms in dealer 's premises.
The distributors did not deal with competitor 's goods.
The Revenue had also noted that the assessee granted mark up to the distributors to cover their establishment expenses, travelling expenses, advertisements and 356 sundry expenses.
In view of this the revenue filed a review petition, but the Appellate Tribunal rejected the review petition and upheld the finding of the Appellate Collector.
Hence these appeals under section 351(b) of the Act.
The question was whether the distributors were related persons of the respondents and secondly whether the expenses incurred for maintaining the show room, advertisements etc.
should also be added to the assessable value.
Dismissing the appeals this Court, ^ HELD: To find out whether the distributors were related persons of the manufacturers it is necessary to find out whether the buyer is holding company or subsidiary company or relative of the manufacturer.
From the explanation of the relationship furnished in this case, such is not the position.
It appears that the link between the respondents T.I. Miller Ltd. Company and T.I. & M. Sales Ltd., is that the latter are the main distributors of M/s. Tube Investments of India Ltd., which is the holding company of the respondents.
This relationship does not satisfy the criteria for establishing the related persons concept.
These were limited companies at the material time, and it will be difficult to say that a limited company has any interest direct or indirect in the business carried on by one of its shareholders.
[362A C] The mark up in the price was allowed in connection with the requirement to display the maximum sale price.
The sales pattern shows also sales to other than distributors and it is not restricted only to the appointed distributors of T.I. India Limited.
In the background of the facts mentioned hereinbefore and in the light of the decisions of this Court in Bombay Tyre International and Atic Industries cases we are of the opinion that the Tribunal was right and there is no cause for interference with the order of the Tribunal.
[362C E] Union of India and others vs Atic Industries Limited, ; and Union of India and Others etc.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd. etc.
, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 347, referred to.
