The appellant advanced various sums of money to the res pondent, in lieu of which the respondent passed a deposit receipt for 12 months from August 1, 1939 to July 31, 1940 On June 16, 1944 the appellant filed a suit to recover the amount with interest on the allegation that the amount became due on May 17, 1941 when the demand for the amount was made and limitation for the suit expired on May 17, 1944 and the suit was filed on the reopening day of the Court thereafter.
The appellant also relied upon the acknowledgments of his debt by the respondent in the resolu tion passed by the Board of Directors on May 2o, 1941 and in the balance sheet of the respondent for the year 1940 41 dated October 10, 1941 : Held, that the suit was barred by limitation as the monies due under the deposit receipt became payable on July 31, 1941 and as no agreement had been proved that the monies due under the deposit receipt were re payable on demand.
Held further, that limitation was not saved by the alleged acknowledgments.
The resolution of the Board of Directors merely proposed a settlement of a claim of the appellant, which, if accepted by the appellant, was to be placed before a general meeting of the shareholders.
The resolution only referred to a past liability of the respondent to the appellant and it could.
not be construed as an 169 1332 acknowledgment of the liability of the respondent under the deposit receipt in question.
A copy of the balance sheet of 1940 41 obtained from the Registrar of Companies which was filed in the case was wrongly rejected by the High Court as inadmissible on the ground that no evidence was adduced to prove it.
This copy was admissible under section 3(b) of the Commercial Documents Evidence Act.
Under that section the Court could also raise a presumption as regards the balance sheet having been duly made by or under the appropriate authority or in rggard to the statements contained therein.
The presumption was not compulsory but was discretionary with the Court.
In the circumstances of this case, where there were factions in the Company and the regularity of the meeting at which the balance sheet was passed was in dispute, the High Court would have been perfectly justified in not raising the presumption.
Consequently, the acknowledgment in the balance sheet was of no avail to the appellant.
