% Bhupinder Singh, appellant, his father Sher Singh and his mother Mukhtiar Kaur, were tried for committing the murder of Bhupinder Singh 's wife, Gian Kaur, by administering poison.
The Trial Court held that the accused had strong motive for the murder as the deceased was unable to satisfy their demand for dowry for which she was being constantly harassed.
The Trial Court further held that the death of Gian Kaur was not accidental or suicidal or by food poisoning.
The Trial Court held that the accused had the opportunity to accomplish their design, and they did administer poison which the deceased must have resisted and thereby suffered injuries on her body.
The Trial Court found all the three accused guilty of the offence under section 302 read with section 34 I.P.C. and sentenced them to imprisonment for life.
It was urged before the High Court that the prosecution has failed to establish by evidence the necessary conditions for the proof of murder by poisoning.
Disagreeing with the contentions and the theory of suicide put forth by the appellant, the High Court confirmed the conviction and sentence on Bhupinder Singh and Sher Singh while acquitting Mukhtiar Kaur.
The present appeal by special leave is only by Bhupinder Singh.
The main contention of the appellant is that in a case of murder by poison there are three main points to be proved; firstly, did the deceased die of the poison in question; secondly, had the accused got the 410 poison in question in his or her possession, and thirdly, had the accused an opportunity to administer the poison in question to the deceased.
It is contended that the evidence falls short of these requirements, and in particular, as to the question of proof of possession of the poison with the accused.
The second contention of the appellant is that it is not enough for the chemical examiner merely to state in his report that the poison Organo phosphorus compound was present in the substance sent for examination; he should have also stated that a lethal dose of the poison was detected.
It is submitted that his report should be full and complete to take the place of evidence which he would have given if he were called to Court as witness.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: (1) Section 293 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides that the report of scientific experts may be used as evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceedings of the Court.
[416D] (2) No hard and fast rule can be laid down as regards the value to be attached to the report of the chemical examiner.
[416D] (3) The chemical examiner does not, as a rule, give an opinion as to the cause of death but merely gives report of the chemical examination.
The report itself is not crucial.
It is a place of evidece.
The only protection to it is that it does not require any formal proof.
It is, however, open to the Court, if it thinks fit, to call the chemical examiner and examine him as to the subject matter of the report.
The report should normally be forwarded to the doctor who conducted the autopsy.
[416D F] (4) In poison murder cases, the accused are not acquitted solely on the failure of the prosecution to establish one or the other requirement.
They are not to be acquitted solely on the ground that the prosecution has failed to prove that the accused had the poison in his possession, and are to be acquitted by the Court taking into account the totality of the circumstances including insufficient motive, weakness in the chain of circumstantial evidence and likelihood of the deceased committing suicide.
[421C E] (5) Murder by poisoning is run like any other murder and the accused cannot have a better chance of being exempted from sanctions 411 than in other kinds of murders.
[422B C] (6) The poison murder cases are not to be put outside the rule of circumstantial evidence.
There may be obvious very many facts and circumstances out of which the Court may be justified in drawing permissible inference that the accused was in possession of the poison in question.
[421H; 422A] (7) The insistence on proof of possession of poison with the accused invariably in every case is neither desirable nor permissible.
It would mean to introduce an extraneous ingredient to the offence of murder by poisoning.
[422B] (8) Murder by poison is invariably committed under the cover and cloak of secrecy.
Nobody will administer poison to another in the presence of others.
The person who administers poison to another in secrecy will not keep a portion of it for the investigating officer to come and collect it.
The person who commits such murder would naturally take care to eliminate and destroy the evidence against him.
In such case, it would be impossible for the prosecution to prove possession of poison with the accused.
The prosecution may, however, establish other circumstances consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
The Court then would not be justified in acquitting the accused on the ground that the prosecution has failed to prove possession of the poison with the accused.
[421E G] Mt. Gajrani and another vs Emperor, A.I.R. 1933 All 394; State vs Fateh Bahadur, A.I.R. 1958 All 1; Chandra Kant Myalchand Seth 's case, (Criminal Appeal No. 120 of 1957 decided on 19.2.1958): Dharambir Singh vs The State of Punjab, Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4.11.1958; Mohan vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; ; Ram Gopal vs State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 656; Sharda B. Chand Sarda vs State of Maharashtra, ; and Ananth Chintaman Lagu vs The State of Bombay, ; , referred to.
