% This petition for special leave was against the judgment and order of the High Court of Bombay, rejecting the application for revocation of the authority of the respondent No. 1, the sole arbitrator under sections 5 and 11 of the ( 'The Act ').
The petitioner invited tenders for the construction of the terminal building of a new international passenger complex (Phase II) at the Bombay Airport.
The respondent No. 2, a partnership firm, submitted a tender which was accepted and a formal agreement followed, with a provision in the agreement for settlement of disputes through a sole arbitrator appointed under clause 25 of the conditions of contract by the competent authority.
Certain disputes arose in which the petitioner sought claims amounting to Rs.85 lakhs.
The respondent No. 2 the contractor approached the petitioner to refer the disputes to arbitration.
The Chief Engineer of the petitioner appointed respondent No. 1 as the arbitrator and made a reference with regard to the claim of Rs.85 lakhs.
The respondent No. 2 asked the Chief Engineer to refer further disputes to the arbitrator and, accordingly, on 16th May, 1986, a second reference was made with regard to 11 further points of dispute with claims amounting to Rs.1.17 crores.
On 23rd December, 1986, the Chief Engineer made reference No. 3 to the Arbitrator with regard to claim amounting to Rs.5.81 crore.
Thereafter, by applications of 8th and 9th June, 1987, the petitioner expressed objections to the references Nos. 2 and 3 made by the Chief Engineer contending that the references were null and void, being irregularly made, and took preliminary objections before the arbitrator to the arbitration proceedings, being lack of jurisdiction of the arbitrator on the ground that he was not validly appointed so far as references Nos. 2 and 3 were concerned.
On 7th 371 August, 1987, the petitioner made an application before the arbitrator under section 13(b) of the Act with the request to state the matter before him for the opinion of the Court as special case.
The arbitrator by his order dt.
3rd October, 1987, rejected the said application and the preliminary objections of the petitioner.
Thereafter, the petitioner alleging that the arbitrator had formed his own opinion regarding the matters in issue, filed an appliction before the High Court for the revocation of the authority of the arbitrator on the ground of apprehension in the petitioner 's mind about bias of the arbitrator.
The High Court by its judgment and order dt.
2nd February, 1988, rejected the application of the petitioner.
The petitioner then moved this Court for relief by special leave.
Dismissing the petition for special leave, the Court, ^ HELD: It was necessary to reiterate first what are the parameters by which an appointed arbitrator can be removed on the appliction of a party.
It is well settled that there must be purity in the administration of justice as well as quasi justice involved in the adjudicatory process before the arbitrator.
Once the arbitrator enters on an arbitration, he must not be guilty of any act which can possibly be construed as indicative of partiality or unfairness.
It is not a question of the effect which a misconduct on his part had in fact upon the result of the proceeding, but of what effect it might possibly have produced.
It is not enough to show that even if there was misconduct on his part, the award was unaffected by it and was in reality just; the arbitrator must not do anything which is not in itself fair and impartial.
In the words of Lord O 'Brien, L.C.J, there must be a real likelihood of bias and not a mere suspicion of bias before proceedings can be quashed on the ground that the person conducting the proceedings is disqualified by interest.
The purity of administration requires that the party to the proceedings should not have apprehension that the authority is biased and is likely to decide against the party, but it is equally true that it is not every suspicion felt by a party which must lead to the conclusion that the authority hearing the proceedings is biased, as held by the High Court.
The apprehension must be judged from a healthy, reasonable and average point of view and not on a mere apprehension of any whimsical person.
It cannot be and should never be in a judicial or quasi judicial proceeding that a party who is a party to the appointment could seek the removal of an appointed authority or an arbitrator on the ground that the appointee being his nominee had not acceded to his prayer about conduct of the proceedings.
It is the reasonableness and apprehension 372 of an average honest man that must be taken note of.
There was no substance found in the alleged grounds of apprehension of bias, examined in this light.
[378D G; 379D H; 380A B] The High Court had examined five circumstances advanced before it.
The first was that the arbitrator did not record the minutes of the meetings after September 29, 1987.
The petitioner insisted that the arbitrator should record the minutes setting out the entire oral arguments advanced on behalf of the petitioner.
This was not a reasonable request and the arbitrator rightly declined to do that.
This was no basis of any reasonable apprehension of bias.
[380C E] The next circumstance urged was that the preliminary objections raised by the petitioner were rejected without a speaking order.
It was not necessary for the arbitrator to record a long reasoned order on the preliminary objections, and indeed the law does not demand writing such a long order.
In any case, it would be open to the petitioner to file a petition under section 33 of the Act if the petitioner felt that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to entertain the reference.
It would be open to the petitioner to challenge the award to be declared by the arbitrator, including on ground of jurisdiction.
[380E H] The third circumstance was that the petitioner had filed an application under section 13(b) of the Act calling upon the arbitrator to state a special case for the opinion of the Court and the failure of the arbitrator to raise the question of law was indicative of bias.
This argument could not be accepted.
Section 13(b) confers power on the arbitrator to state a special case but it does not make it obligatory on the part of the arbitrator to state a special case as soon as the party desires it.
In this case, the petitioner itself agitated the issue of jurisdiction and other questions of law before the arbitrator.
Once having done so, it was not proper for the petitioner to ask the arbitrator to state a special case.
This was no ground for bias.
[381A C] The fourth ground was that the first reference, involving a claim for Rs.85 lakhs, was heard for a considerable time, while the arguments in respect of the second and third references covering claims of Rs.1.17 crores and Rs.5.81 crores were concluded by the respondent No. 2 within one and one fourth of a day.
The length of the time taken is no indication of either speeding up or any abuse of the proceedings.
The Court agreed with the High Court that there is no rule which requires that the length of the argument should depend upon the magnitude of the claim made.
[381D] 373 The other point urged by the petitioner was that the venue of arbitration was changed and this change was without the consent of the petitioner.
Change of venue would in no manner indicate that the arbitrator was prejudiced against the petitioner.
This was solely a fallacious ground to make out a case of alleged bias.
[381E G] The other ground was that as, since 9th June, 1987, the petitioner had not paid for the air ticket of the arbitrator from Delhi to Bombay and for his residential accommodation, the respondent No. 2 must be providing for the air ticket and the hotel accommodation for the arbitrator, and the arbitration was likely to be biased.
As rightly pointed out by the High Court, the petitioner, after the 9th June, 1987, seemed to have decided that the arbitrator should not proceed with the reference and in order to frustrate the arbitration proceedings, started raising all sorts of frivolous and unsustainable contentions.
Having realised that the arbitrator was not willing to submit to its dictates, the petitioner declined to contribute for the air ticket, etc.
No party should be allowed to throw out the arbitration proceedings by such tactics, and if the arbitrator did not surrender to the pressure, he could not be faulted nor could the proceedings of the arbitrator be allowed to be defeated by such a method.
[381G H; 382B D] Another ground made was that there was a loss of confidence.
There was no reasonable ground for such a loss of confidence.
Every fancy of a party cannot be a ground for removal of the arbitrator.
[382D] The Court was in agreement with the learned Judge of the High Court expressing unhappiness over the manner in which attempts had been made to delay the proceedings.
[382G] The Court found no ground to conclude that there could be any ground for reasonable apprehension in the mind of the petitioner for revocation of the authority of the arbitrator appointed by the petitioner itself.
While endorsing and fully maintaining the integrity of the principle 'justice should not only be done, but should manifestly be seen to be done ', it is important to remember that the principle should not be led to the erroneous impression that justice should appear to be done than it should in fact be done.
There was no reasonable ground of any suspicion of bias of the arbitrator.
The conduct of the arbitrator did not fall within the examples given and principles enunciated in the instances of cases where bias could be found in the Commercial Arbitration by Mustill and Boyd, 1982, Edn.
[383A C] 374 Russell on Arbitration, 18th Edition, page 378, Re Brion and Brien, , 89; The King (De Vesci) vs The Justices of Queen 's Country, ; The Queen vs Rand & Ors., [1986] 1 Q.B. 230; Ramnath vs Collector, Darbhanga, ILR 34 Pat. 254; The Queen vs Meyer and Ors., ; Ekersley and Ors.
vs The Messey Docks and Harbour Board, ; Gallapalli Nageswara Rao vs The State of Andhra Pradesh, ; ; Mineral Development Ltd. vs State of Bihar, ; Ranjit Thakur vs Union of India & Ors., ; and R.V. Camborne Justices Ex parte Pearce, , 855 referred to.
