% The respondent assessee carried on business in Tendu leaves.
He contended before the Assessing Authority that there was no inter state sale of Tendu leaves, that the entire sales of Tendu leaves were effected in Uttar Pradesh, and that he did not know if the purchasers had taken these Tendu leaves to places outside Uttar Pradesh, and even if they have so taken the assessee could not be assessed to tax under the , as the contract between him and the purchaser was to purchase goods in U.P.
This contention was not accepted and the Assessing Authority assessed the respondent.
The Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) having dismissed the appeal against the order of the Assessing Authority, the respondent went in Second Appeal to the Sales Tax Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal took notice of T.P. Form IV which was a transport permit issued by the Forest department, regarding the validity of Nikasi of Tendu leaves from the forest, and came to the conclusion that merely because T.P. Form had been issued, it does not follow that there were inter state sales.
The Tribunal allowed the appeal and quashed the order passed by the assessing authority as well as First Appellate Authority.
The Revenue went up in appeal to the High Court, which held that the goods were moved out of U.P. in pursuance of an agreement of sale entered into between the assessee and their customers and that the condition precedent for imposing sales tax under the Central Sales Tax 447 Act was not present and dismissed the appeal.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petitions of the Department, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
Sale could be said to be in the course of inter state trade only if two conditions concur, viz. (1) a sale of goods, and (2) transport of those goods from one State to another.
Unless both these conditions are satisfied, there could be no sale in the course of interstate trade.
There must be evidence that the transportation was occasioned by the contract, and as a result goods moved out of the bargain between the parties from one State to another.
[448H; 449A] Bengal Immunity Co. vs State of Bihar, 6 STC 446 referred to 2.
The condition precedent for imposing sales tax under the , is that the goods must move out of the State in pursuance of some contract entered into between the seller and the purchaser.
[449F G] 3.
T.P. Form IV is a transport permit issued by the Forest Department.
The Forest Department has given in writing that this permit did not relate to sale but was a certificate regarding the validity of Nikasi of Tendu Leaves from the forest.
Merely because T.P. Form has been issued, it does not follow that there were inter state sales.
[448F G] 4.
The onus lies on the Revenue to disprove the contention of the assessee, that a sale is a local sale and to show that it is an inter state sale.
[449C]
