% The respondent assessee a P.W.D. contractor had undertaken certain contract works on behalf of the Public Works Department for repair of roads.
The assessee was assessed on the purchased turnover of sand, bricks etc.
which were used for the execution of the work.
The assessment was upheld by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner.
In the second appeal preferred by the assessee the Tribunal found that it was necessary under section 5A of the Kerala General Sales Tax Act, 1963 to have consumption of the commodity in the manufacture of another commodity, the goods purchased should be consumed, the consumption should be in the process of manufacture and the result must be the manufacture of other goods, and held that when a P.W.D. contractor was using articles for constructing a sea wall or repairing public roads there was consumption of a commodity for the manufacture of another commodity and allowed the appeal.
The High Court upheld the decision of the Tribunal and rejected the revision preferred by the Revenue.
In the Special Leave Petitions to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the Petitioner Revenue, that if no manufacturing process was involved, the case would fall within the scope of section 5A(1)(a) of the Act because the statutory provisions spoke not only of goods consumed in the manufacture of other goods for sale but also goods 'consumed otherwise '.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petitions. ^ HELD: Section 5 A (1)(a) speaks of goods consumed in the 490 manufacture of other goods for purposes other than sale.
[493F] In the instant case, the user must be in the other commodity and the expression 'consumed otherwise ' must be so construed.
When a P.W.D. contractor is using articles for constructing or repairing a public road there was consumption of a commodity for the manufacture of another commodity.
[493F] Deputy Commissioner, Sales Tax (Law) Board of Revenue (Taxes) Ernakulam vs Pio Food Packers, ; ; Ganesh Prasad Dixit vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh, ; and Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax (Law), Board of Revenue (Taxes), Ernakulam vs Thomas Stephen & Ors.
Ltd., SLP(C) Nos.8747 49/1987, referred to.
