These petitions on behalf of certain newspaper establishments challenged the constitutional validity of the Working journalists (Conditions of Service) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955, and the legality of the decision of the Wage Board, constituted thereunder, purporting to act under section 9 of the Act.
The impugned Act, which was passed in order to implement the recommendations of the Press Commission and had for its object the regulation of the conditions of service of working journalists and other persons employed in newspaper establishments, provided, inter alia, for the payment of gratuity to a working journalist who had been in continuous service, whether before or after the commencement of the Act, for not less than three years, even when he voluntarily resigned from service, regulated hours of work and leave, provided for the payment of retrenchment compensation with retrospective effect in certain cases and by section 9(1) laid down the principles that the Wage Board was to follow in fixing the rates of wages of working journalists.
Under those principles the Wage Board was to have regard to the cost of living, the prevalent rates of wages for comparable employments, the circumstances relating to the newspaper industry in different regions of the country and to any other circumstances which it might consider relevant.
The petitioners contended on various grounds that the provisions of the impugned Act violated their fundamental rights under articles 19(1)(a), 19(1)(g), 14 and 32 Of the Constitution and that the decision of the Wage Board fixing the rates and scales of wages, which was arrived at without any consideration whatsoever as to the capacity of the newspaper industry to pay the same, imposed too heavy a financial burden on the industry and spelled its total ruin, was vitiated by a wrong approach and non application of the proper criteria and transgressed the principles of natural justice and was, therefore, illegal and void: Held, that the constitutional validity of the impugned Act, with the sole exception of section 5(1)(a)(iii) of the Act which infringed 13 article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, was beyond question and as that section, severable as it was from the rest of the Act, must alone be declared ultra vires.
Section 9(1) of the Act, properly construed, made it incum bent on the Wage Board to take into consideration the capacity of the newspaper industry to pay the rates and scales of wages recommended by it and as there was nothing to indicate that it bad done so, its decision was void and inoperative.
Held, further, that there could be no doubt, in view of the interpretation put upon article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution by this Court, that liberty of the press was an essential part of the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by that Article and the press had thereunder the right of free propagation and free circulation without any previous restraint on publication.
Ramesh Thaper vs The State of Madras, ; and Brij Bhushan vs The State of Delhi, ; , referred to.
It was legitimate and proper to refer in this connection to the decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States of America, since article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution was based on Amendment 1 of the Constitution of that country, and the rules that could be deduced therefrom made it clear that although freedom of the press included freedom from restriction in respect of employment in the editorial staff, the press was not immune from ordinary forms of taxation or from the application of general laws relating to industrial relations or laws regulating payment of wages.
Case law reviewed.
But if a law were to single out the press for laying prohibitive burdens on it that would restrict the circulation, penalise its freedom of choice as to personnel, prevent newspapers from being started and compel the press to seek Government aid, it would be violative of article 19(1)(a) and would fall outside the protection afforded by article 19(2) of the Constitution.
The impugned Act, judged by its provisions, was not such a law but was a beneficent legislation intended to regulate the conditions of service of the working journalists and the consequences aforesaid could not be the direct and inevitable result of it.
Although there could be no doubt that it directly affected the press and fell outside the categories of protection mentioned in article 19(2), it had not the effect of taking away or abridging the freedom of speech and expression of the petitioners and did not, therefore, infringe article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
A.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras, ; , Ram Singh vs The State of Delhi, Minnesota Ex Rel.
Olson, ; ; and Dwarkadas Shrinivas of Bombay vs The Sholapur Spinning and Weaving Co., Ltd., ; , considered.
14 Nor could the impugned Act be held to be violative of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution in view of the test of reason ableness laid down by this Court.
Chintaman Rao vs The State of Madhya Pradesh, [1950] S.C.R. 759, The State of Madras vs V. G. Rao, ; , a State of West Bengal vs Subodh Gopal Bose, [1954] section C. R. 587 and Virendra vs State of Punjab, ; , referred to.
It was not correct to say that section 9(i) of the Act did not lay down the relevant criteria for the fixation of rates of wages.
On a true construction of that section it must be held that the criterion of prevalent rates of wages for comparable employment could be consistent only with the wages higher than the bare subsistence or minimum wages and, since rates of wages must be held to include scales of wages as well, it was essential that the Wage Board should take into consideration the capacity of the newspaper industry to pay before it could fix the rates of wages.
Although the Act did not specifically say so, it was possible to hold that the third criterion laid down by the section, namely, the circumstances relating to the newspaper industry in different regions of the country, included such a consideration.
The provisions of the section were not, therefore, unreasonable and violative of article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
The provisions of section 9(1) of the impugned Act did not vest uncontrolled power in the Wage Board.
The last criterion of that section which empowered the Board to take into consideration any other circumstances that it might think relevant, must be read ejusdem generis with the other criteria that preceded it and as they laid down with sufficient clarity and particularity the principles for the guidance of the Board, the Legislature was perfectly justified in leaving such considerations as might arise in course of the enquiry to the subjective satisfaction of the Board constituted, as it was, of equal number of representatives of both the employers and employees.
Thakur Raghbir Singh vs Court of Wards, Ajmer, [1953] S.C.R. 1049, considered.
It was not correct to say, having regard to the provisions of sections 11 and 20(2)(d) of the impugned Act, that the Act did not lay down any procedure for the Board to follow or that it was open to the Board to follow any arbitrary procedure violating the principles of natural justice.
There could be no substance in the contention of the peti tioners that the provisions of the impugned Act relating to proofreaders, whom it included within the definition of working journalists, period of notice under section 3(2), retrospective operation in cases specified by section 4 and hours of work, imposed unreasonable restrictions on their fundamental right to carry on business.
Gratuity, however, was a reward for good, efficient and faithful service rendered for a considerable period and there could be 15 no justification for awarding the same when an employee voluntarily resigned, except in certain exceptional circumstances.
The award of gratuity, therefore, to an employee who voluntarily resigned from service after a period of only three years, under section 5(1)(a)(iii) of the Act, must be held to be unreasonable and wholly unjustified.
The impugned Act was not discriminatory in character and did not violate article 14 of the Constitution.
Working journalists formed a separate class by themselves and could be classified apart from the rest of the newspaper employees on a perfectly intelligible differentia rationally related to the object which the Act had in view.
Nor could the provisions of either section 12 or section 17 of the Act, therefore, be said to be discriminatory in character.
Budhan Choudhary vs The State of Bihar, [1955] 1 S.C.R. 1045, applied.
The impugned Act contained no prohibition nor did it in any way prevent the Wage Board from giving reasons for its decision and thus passing a speaking order where it chose to do so, and it could not, therefore, be said to have violated the fundamental right of a citizen to move the Supreme Court for a writ of certiorari under article 32 of the Constitution.
Rex vs Northumberland Com.
Appeal Tribunal, Ex Parte Shaw, and Rex vs Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal, Ex Parte Shaw, ; , held inapplicable.
A.K. Gopalan vs The State of Madras, ; , relied on.
The question whether a particular body was exercising legislative, administrative or judicial or quasi judicial functions has to be determined in the light of the statute under which it was constituted and an administrative body functioning as such can also be acting in a quasi judicial capacity.
The test would be whether it had to decide on evidence and decide judicially.
So judged, there could be no doubt that the Wage Board under the impugned Act was functioning in a quasi judicial capacity.
Nagendra Nath Bora vs Commissioner of Hills Division and Appeals, Assam, ; , referred to.
Case law reviewed.
Although this Court would not normally enter into questions of fact, in this case the Wage Board had wholly ignored an essential condition for the exercise of its function and imposed a very heavy financial burden on the newspaper industry.
Although the Classification of the newspaper industry on the basis of grossrevenue, fixation of scales of wages, provisions as to the, hours of work, leave, retrospective operation in specified cases, and grouping of newspapers into chains or multiple units could not be said to be improper or unjustified, they made the burden heavier still.
16 The Board made no enquiry whatsoever as to the ability of the industry to pay either as a whole or region wise and did not call for or hear representations from them before finalising its decision.
Its decision was, therefore, ultra vires the Act and contrary to the principles of natural justice.
