% These petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution India challenge the constitutional validity of the Bihar Non Government Secondary Schools (taking over of Management and Control) Act, 1981 (Bihar Act No. 33 of 1982) as violative of Article 30 of the Constitution.
The petitioner No. 1, the All Bihar Christian Schools ' Association, is a religious minority registered society, and the petitioner No. 2, the Secretary cum Treasurer of the petitioner No. 1.
The petitioner association had set up a number of secondary schools in Bihar, which were managed by the Christian dioceases societies and these institutions were recognised by the Education Department Development of the State of Bihar.
In Bihar, a number of private secondary schools were established and managed by private individuals or societies.
The State Government considered it necessary to take over the management and Control of the Non Government Secondary Schools for better organisation and development of the Secondary Education in the State, and it enacted the Bihar Non Government Secondary Schools (Taking over of Management and Control) Act, 1981.
The Act provides for the taking over of the management and control of the Non Government Secondary Schools by the State Government for improvement, better organisation and development of the secondary education in Bihar.
The scheme of the Act shows that after the take over of the nongovernment secondary Schools by the State Government, the management and control of such schools would be carried on in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
While the impugned Act provides for taking over the management and control of the Non Government Secondary Schools, the 50 management and control of the remaining categories of schools have not been taken over.
Although the Act contained provisions for the taking over of other secondary schools, yet so far as the minority secondary schools are concerned, the Act does not provide for any compulsory acquisition or taking over of the management and control of such schools.
The petitioners contended that (i) the provisions of the Act directly interfere with the management and control of the Christian minority schools, (ii) section 3(2) of the Act which provides for the taking over of minority secondary schools by the Government interferes with the petitioners ' fundamental right under Article 30(i) of the Constitution, (iii) the provisions of section 18(2) are violative of Articles 30 and 14 of the Constitution of India and (iv) the clauses (a) to (k) of section 18(3) of the Act interfere with the management of the minority secondary schools in violation of Article 30(i) of the Constitution.
The respondent urged inter alia that the Government has no intention to interfere with fundamental rights of the minority community to establish schools of its choice; the provisions of the impugned Act are directed to ensure academic excellence and good management; the management of the minority institutions had been given free hand in managing their institutions, but in order to maintain education excellence and discipline, regulatory provisions have been made in section 18 of the Act, the purpose of which is to ensure that the minority schools are managed by the properly constituted managing committees; security of the services of the staff is ensured, and in the matter of taking disciplinary action, the managing committees should conform to the principles of natural justice, etc.
Dismissing the writ petitions, the Court, ^ HELD: By the various decisions of this Court, it is now well settled that the minorities based on religion or language, have fundamental freedom to establish and manage educational institutions of their own choice, but the State has the right to provide regulatory provisions for ensuring educational excellence, conditions of employment of the teachers, ensuring health, hygiene and discipline and allied matters.
Such regulatory provisions do not interfere with the minorities ' fundamental right of administering their educational institutions; instead, they seek to ensure that such institutions are administered efficiently and that students who come out of the 51 minority institutions after completion of their studies are well equipped with knowledge and training so as to stand at par in their avocation in life without any handicap.
If the regulatory provisions indirectly impinge upon minorities ' right of administration of their institutions, it would not amount to interference with the fundamental freedom of the minorities as the regulatory provisions are in the interest of the minority institutions themselves.
If the minority institution seeks affiliation or recognition from the State or the Education Board, the State has the right to prescribe syllabi and terms and conditions for giving such affiliation or recognition or extending the grants in aid.
On the one hand, the State is under an obligation to ensure that educational standards in the recognised institutions must be according to the need of the society and according to the standards which ensure the development of personality of the students turning out to be civilised, useful members of the society and to ensure that the public funds disbursed to the minority institutions are properly utilised for the given purpose.
On the other hand, the State has to respect and honour minority rights under Article 30(1) of the Constitution in the matter of establishing and carrying the administration of institution of their choice.
In order to reconcile these two conflicting, the State has to strike a balance; the statutory provisions should serve both the objects and such statutory provisions have to withstand the test of Article 30(l) of the Constitution.
These principles have to be borne in mind in considering the question of the validity of the statutory provisions relating to the minority educational institutions.
[63D G; 64E G] The petitioners challenged the constitutional validity of sections 3 and 18 of the Act on the ground of interfering with their fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 30(1) of the Constitution.
Section 3 provides inter alia for the compulsory taking over of the management and control of the recognised non government secondary schools.
After elaborately going through the provisions of the said two sections, dealing with the various aspects of the management, administration and working of a minority institution; the conclusion was that the two sections were not violative of Article 30(1) of the Constitution and do not encroach upon the fundamental rights of a minority institution guaranteed under Article 30(i) of the Constitution.
[53D; 68E; 69G] Guarantee of freedom to a minority institution under Article 30(l) of the Constitution does not permit the minority institution to act contrary to law and order, law of contract, industrial laws or other general laws enacted for the welfare of the society.
If the minorities ' 52 claim for immunity from the law of the land is upheld, that would be unreasonable and against the interest of the minority institutions themselves.
[79D E] The impugned Act does not violate the petitioners ' rights guaranteed under Article 30(I) of the Constitution.
[80G] In Re.
The Kerala Education Bill, 1957(1959)SCR 995; Rev. Sidhajbhai Sabhai and others vs State of Bombay, ; ; State of Kerala vs Very Rev. Mother Provincial, ; ; The Ahmedabad St. Xavier 's College Society Lilly Kurian vs Sr. Lewine & Ors., ; ; Frank Anthony Public School Employees ' Association case; , ; Mrs. Y. Theclamma 's Case, and All Saints High School, Hyderabad vs Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; , referred to.
