The Respondent had shipped plywood panels for tea chests to be delivered at Colombo under claim for drawback under Section 75 of the , against shipping bill.
The ship developed engine trouble on the way and returned back and ran aground in Indian territorial waters at the port of Paradeep.
The fitting, stores and cargo vessel had been salvaged into India under the supervision of Port Trust Paradeep.
Respondent claimed drawback on the said goods.
The claim was rejected by the Assistant Collector under Section 75 of the read with Section 2(18) and rule 2(c) of the Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1971.
On appeal, the Appellate Collector also rejected the claim on the ground that the ship ran a ground in territorial waters of India, and so the said goods could not be deemed to have been exported.
A Revision Petition preferred under Section 131 by the Respondent was transferred to the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal found that the ship had passed beyond the territorial waters of India and the engine trouble developed while the ship was in the high seas and, thus, by reason of the ship having passed beyond territorial waters with the goods on board, the export of the goods out of India had been completed; that subsequently the ship decided to sail into the territorial waters was of no relevance, and held that under the scheme of Section 75 of the Act, export having been completed, Respondent was entitled to the benefit of the drawback scheme.
501 In the appeal by Revenue, under section 130 E(B) it was contended that proof must be given that the goods had reached a place outside India in view of section 2(18) and that taking out to a place outside India meant delivery of goods to a place outside India.
Rejecting the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.1 The Tribunal was right in the view it took that the Respondent was entitled to the benefit of section 75 of the .
[506B] 1.2 When the ship got clearance and moved out of the territorial waters the export was complete.
The title to the goods passed to the exporters.
The goods reached a place in the high seas which is outside India and the title of the goods also passed to the purchasers.
It is true that the goods did not land in any place because of the defect in the ship.
But the expression "taking out to a place outside India" would also mean a place in high seas.
It is beyond the territorial waters of India.
High seas would also mean a place outside India, if it is beyond the territorial waters of India.
Indubitably the goods has been taken out of India.
[505B C, D] Lucas TVS vs Assistant Collector, [1987] vol.
28 E.L.T. 266, referred to.
2.2 The word "place" is generally found in conjunction with other words which give it a colour, and is usually controlled by its context.
[505H] 2.2 In the clause of charter party requiring charterer to procure safe "place" for discharge of cargo, it meant spot selected to drop anchor plus area over which tanker might swing on tide and charter 's duty was not fulfilled merely by selecting area containing both safe and unsafe berths.
[505F G] 2.3 The word "place" as used in a statute relating to searching for stolen goods in any store, shop, wherehouse, or other building or place in a town, includes a steam boat or vessel moored at the wharf.
[505G] Webster Comprehensive Dictionary, International Edition page 964, Words and Phrases, Permanent Edition, Volume 32 A page 128, Stroud 's Judicial Dictionary, 3rd Edition, Vol.
3, pp 2199, 2208, referred to 502
