% One hundred seats out of the total seats available in the M.B.B.S./B.D.S. courses were reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates, for whom the Indian Medical Council had prescribed by its Regulation II a minimum of 40 per cent marks for eligibility of admission.
The Government of Punjab by a notification (dated May 8, 1987) lowered the percentage of the pass marks for the said candidates from 40 per cent to 35 per cent as against a minimum of SO per cent marks for the general category candidates.
on the basis of selection test held, only 32 qualified candidates of the reserved category were available.
The prospectus published by the university for the competitive examinations provided that the seats left vacant in any reserved category owing to the non availability of the eligible candidates may be filled up from the eligible candidates of the general category.
Accordingly, the remaining seats (out of 100) should have reverted to the general pool of the eligible candidates.
But the government issued an order (dated July 28, 1987) whereby the percentage of pass marks for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates was lowered from 35 per cent to 25 per cent (for the 1987 session only).
The appellants challenged the above said orders of the government before the High Court which dismissed the Writ Petition filed by them.
The appellants appealed this Court by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, 245 ^ HELD: If the Regulation 11 of the Indian Medical Council is found to be binding, then the impugned orders of the government would be bad, but the Regulation is merely in the nature of a recommendation and the language used in the Regulation is deliberate, intended to indicate the intention of the Council, as inter alia held by a three Judge Bench of this Court in The State of M.P. and Anr.
vs Kumari Nivedita Jain and Ors., ; That was a similar case as this one, and the appellants are not entitled to make any grievance on this score.[249D: 250] The State Government had intended that 100 seats should go to the candidates of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
When that number of the candidates has not available, reduction in the qualifying marks had to be effected, and the government 's action cannot be said to be arbitrary.
[251 D E] After the percentage in the qualifying standard was reduced, all the remaining 68 seats have been filled up by the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes candidates and teaching has begun.
These 68 candidates are not before the Court, not having been impleaded.
It is not open to the Court to cancel their admission behind their back, nor would it be possible to require the State Government to create additional seats to accommodate the appellants.
[251F] OBSERVATION: The standard of medical profession should not be compromised in the national interest.
There has been a perceptible fall in the national standards and general efficiency of the professional men.
While it is not necessary to say anything against reservation, the Court approves of the concern shown by the Indian Medical Council that high standards of efficiency should be maintained, and that can only be possible if the State and the Council cooperate to maintain a high standard.
This aspect should be kept in view when the guidelines are prescribed for the selection of the students for the medical courses.
The impugned notification of the State Government shows that the reduction is confined to one year 1987 only.
It is hoped there would be no necessity for a repetition of this action.
[251G H; 252A B] State of M.P. and Anr.
vs Kumari Nivedita lain and Ors.
; , ; State of Kerala vs Kumari T.P. Roshana & Anr. ; and Krishna Priya Ganguly etc.
vs University of Lucknow & 246 Ors.
; , , referred to.
