In response to a notice issued under Section 10(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960, the appellant contended that he was not in possession of 23.61 acres of surplus agricultural land as set out in the said notice, and that the authorities had failed to notice that he had transferred by means of a registered deed of gift dated January 7, 1972 an extent of 12.35 acres of land to his invalid daughter who remained unmarried inspite of being 30 years old because she was born a crippled child, and that the lands were part of Abadi and, therefore, stood excluded from the operation of the said Ceiling Act.
The Prescribed Authority as well as the Appellate Authority did not find favour with the aforesaid contentions, and held that the appellant had failed to establish that the transfer of land in favour of his daughter was made in good faith, and was not intended for the immediate or deferred benefit of the appellant and other members of his family, and furthermore the transfer appeared to be a device to defeat the provisions of the Act.
Being aggrieved with the order of the Prescribed Authority, that was affirmed by the Appellate Authority the appellant approached the High Court by way of Writ Petition to quash the said orders.
The High Court, however, dismissed the Writ Petition.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the 541 appellant: ( 1 ) though the registered deed of gift had been executed after the prescribed date viz. January 21, 1971, the transfer was in pursuance of an earlier family arrangement to provide maintenance for the invalid daughter and, therefore, the transfer falls outside the purview of Section 5(6) of the Act; (2) if the transfer attracted the operation of Section 5(6) and did not constitute an excepted transfer under Clause (b) of the proviso to Section 5(6), then Section 5(6) should be held ultra vires Article 31 A of the Constitution; (3) the Ceiling Act is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution in that it discriminates between major unmarried daughter and minor unmarried daughter by excluding the former from the definition of family ' under Section 3(7) of the Act.
Dismissing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1(i) From the definition of 'family ' in Section 3(7) it can be seen that a major daughter of a tenure holder, even if she is unmarried.
is undoubtedly not treated as a member of the family.
[544D] (ii) The Legislature has provided by section 5(6) that any extent of land transferred after 24.1.197l has also to be included in the total extent of holding of the tenure holder for the purposes of calculation of the ceiling area, unless the transfer falls within the category of excepted transfers under clauses (a) or (b) of the proviso.
[544E] In the instant case, the finding of the Prescribed Authority and the Appellate Authority, which has found acceptance with the High Court, is a finding of fact and as such its correctness cannot be canvassed in an appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution.
Even otherwise, the appellant had failed to prove that there was an earlier family arrangement and if there was one, to explain why he had delayed the execution of gift till after the Ceiling Act came into force, especially when the purported gift would only result in himself and his sons being in possession of the land and enjoying the income therefrom.
[544F G] 2.
There is, no scope for the appellant to raise any contention that section 5(6) is ultra vires Article 31 A.
Its constitutionality cannot be assailed by reason of the immunity enacted in Article 31 B. [545A,B] 3.
The provisions of the Ceiling Act do not discriminate between man and woman qua man and woman but merely organise a scheme where life 's realism is legislatively pragmatised.
[545E] D.G. Mahajan vs Maharashtra, ; and Ambika 542 Prasad vs U.P. State, ; , referred to.
