The respondents who imported 'Sancticizer 429 ', contested the levy of duty by the Department and filed a claim for refund, which was rejected by the Assistant Collector on the ground, that on ted the product was found to be organic compound (easter type) of colourless viscose liquid and as per 7.0.046 should be considered a polymeric plasticizer.
On appeal, the Appellate Collector came to the conclusion that Chapter 38 of the was residuary in nature and that if the item was not covered by any other Chapter of the Tariff Act only then it would fall under the said Chapter.
He also found that linear polysters were covered by CCCN 39.01(E) and that the goods in question are formed by the condensation of diabasic acid within dihydric alcohols and were similar to the polycondensation products of terphthalic acid or adipic acid with ethanediel covered by the aforesaid CCCN headings, which corresponds to 39.01/06 of the .
The Appellate Collector upheld the decision of the Assistant Collector.
The respondent appealed to the Customs Excise and Gold Control Appellate Tribunal which allowed the appeals taking the view that plasticizers were not resins, but are added to resins to impart better flexibility of plastic properties to the latter, that 'Sancticizer 429 ' is admittedly a plasticizer and would therefore not have fallen for classification under Heading No. 39.01/06 of the Customs Tariff Schedule as it stood before amendment in 1978 and that the product was classifiable 642 under heading 38.01/19(6) of the Tariff Act.
Dismissing the Appeals of the Revenue, this Court, ^ HELD: 1.
As per various technical authorities, plasticizers are not resins.
These are added to resins to impart better flexibility or plastic properties to them.
These are not plastic materials by themselves either.
[644H] 2.
The goods under reference in the instant case, are not similar to resols or polysiobutylenes.
Their classification under Heading 39.01/06 of the , prior to and even after its amendment in 1978, should not be applicable.
Not being separately defined chemical compounds, these would also not fall within Chapter 28 or 29 of the Act.
Since these are not specified elsewhere their appropriate classification would be under Heading No. 38.01/19(6) as "Plasticizers, not elsewhere specified".
[645C] 3.
In these matters how a good is known in the trade and treated in the trade literature is relevant and significant and often decisive factor.
[645D] "Encyclopaedia of Chemical Technology" 3rd Edition page 111 referred to.
Bhor Industries Ltd. vs Collector of Customs, Bombay, and Collector of Customs, Bombay vs Bhor Industries Ltd. and another, approved.
