The plaintiff appellant filed a suit for ejectment of the tenant defendant No. 1 for default in payment of rent and also to have wrongfully sublet the flat to the second defendant.
None of the defendants appeared.
At the ex parte trial the plaintiff examined one witness and tendered certain documents in evidence.
The Single Judge decreed the suit.
Subsequently to the decree the two defendants are alleged to have inducted the third defendant (respondent No. 1) to occupy the demised flat.
The plaintiff filed an application for modification of the decree.
The respondent No. 1 first filed an application for setting aside the ex parte decree, but later withdrew it and assailed the decree in appeal.
The Letters Patent Bench allowed the appeal and set aside the decree on the ground that the plaintiff 's sole witness did not disclose his concern with the suit property or his relationship with the plaintiff and that on the basis of the meagre evidence led by her, she had failed to establish her case.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the witness was the husband of the plaintiff appellant and thus he was fully conversant with the relevant facts and that the criticism by the High Court was not justified.
Reliance was placed on an affidavit filed in this Court.
It was further contended that even ignoring the relationship of the witness with the plaintiff, his evidence was adequate to prove the plaintiff 's case which has not been rebutted by any of the defendants either by filing a written statement or by cross examining the witness.
757 Allowing the appeals and remanding the suit for retrial.
^ HELD: 1.
The plaintiff cannot be allowed a decree on the evidence led by her in the suit founded on the plaint as it is.
Even in absence of a defence the Court cannot pass an ex parte decree without reliable relevant evidence.
The fact that the plaintiff chose to examine some evidence in the case cannot by itself entitle her to a decree.
The Letters Patent Bench was, therefore, justified in scrutinising the evidence from that angle.
[760B D] 2.
The suit was filed and the relief was claimed on the basis that the third defendant was inducted in the flat in question by the other two defendants after they had suffered a decree.
There is not an iota of evidence led by the plaintiff to prove this story.
On the other hand, the evidence of the sole witness, who positively stated that the defendant No. 3 was in possession of the flat in question from before the date of the decree passed in the earlier suit, disproves this part of the case.
If the defendant No. 3 is assumed to be in possession from before the earlier decree several other issues would arise for consideration on which the plaintiff will be required to lead further evidence necessitating retrial.
[760D E] 3.
Affidavits are not included in the definition of 'evidence ' in section 3 of the Evidence Act and can be used as evidence only if for sufficient reasons Court passes an order under Order XIX, Rules 1 or 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The plaintiff appellant cannot be allowed to fill up the lacuna in the evidence belatedly at the Supreme Court stage.
[759E F] 4.
In view of the prayer made by the plaintiff in the High Court and in C.A. No. 4145 of 1986 before this Court for remanding the suit for retrial and the concession of defendant No. 3 before this Court, the judgments of the High Court are set aside and the suit is remanded to the Single Judge for retrial and disposal in accordance with law expeditiously.
[761B]
