A suit for redemption of two mortgages was filed in the Court of Subordinate Judge by the respondents, the successors in interest of the original mortgages.
A preliminary decree for redemption was passed with a declaration of the amount due from the mortgagors to the mortgagee.
The mortgagors were directed to pay the amount within six months to get the property redeemed, failing which the mortgagee could apply for a final decree for sale.
On failure of the mortgagors to make the payment, a final decree for sale was passed.
Although the final decree for sale of the mortgaged property had been passed, the mortgagee did not execute the decree which became time barred.
The mortgagee and after him his heirs and legal representatives, however, continued to be in possession of the mortgaged property.
The respondents filed a second suit for redemption of the mortgages in the Court of the Joint Civil Judge against the appellants the heirs and legal representatives of the original mortgagee.
The Joint Civil Judge came to the findings that notwithstanding the preliminary decree or final decree passed in the previous suit, the mortgagors ' right of redemption was not extinguished and the respondents were entitled to redeem the mortgages.
The plea of protected tenancy of the appellants was negatived by the Judge.
The Joint Civil Judge held that the respondents were entitled to redeem the mortgages on payment to the appellants of a sum including interest calculated by application of the rule of Damdupat, and a preliminary decree for redemption was passed under Order XXXIV, rule 7 of the Code of Civil Procedure in respect of both the mortgages, with directions regarding payment of the amount and delivery of actual possession of the mortgaged property, etc to the respondents as also for a final decree for foreclosure in case of default of payment, etc.
690 Aggrieved by the judgment of the Joint Civil Judge, the appellants preferred an appeal to the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the appeal with a modification.
Aggrieved by the decision of High Court appellants appealed to this Court for relief by Special leave.
The appellants challenged the findings of the High Court as to the maintainability of the second suit for redemption out of which this appeal arose and the applicability of the rule of Damdupat.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Sec.
60 of the Transfer of Property Act confers a right of redemption on the mortgagor.
The right of redemption will be extinguished (1) by the act of the parties or (2) by the decree of a Court.
The Court was concerned in this case with the question whether by the preliminary decree or final decree passed in the earlier suit, the right of the respondents to redeem the mortgages had been extinguished.
The decree referred to in the proviso to section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act is a final decree in a suit for foreclosure, as provided in sub rule (2) of Rule 3 of Order XXXIV and a final decree in a redemption suit as provided in Order XXXIV, Rule 8(3)(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Sub rule (2) of rule 3 inter alia provides that where payment in accordance with Sub rule (1) has not been made, the Court shall on an application made by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree declaring that the defendant and all persons claiming through or under him are debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and also, if necessary, ordering the defendant to put the plaintiff in possession of the property.
Thus, in a final decree in a suit for foreclosure on the failure of the defendant to pay all amounts due, the extinguishment of the right of redemption has to be specifically declared.
Again, in a final decree in a suit for redemption of mortgage by conditional sale or for redemption of an anomalous mortgage, the extinguishment of the right of redemption has to be specifically declared, as provided in clause (a) of sub rule (3) of Rule 8 of Order XXXIV of the Code of Civil Procedure.
These are the two circumstances (1) a final decree in a suit for foreclosure under Order XXXIV Rule 3(2) and (2) a final decree in a suit for redemption under Order XXXIV, Rule 8(3)(a) of the Code of Civil Procedure when the right of redemption is extinguished.
[696A G] In this case, the earlier suit was not a suit for foreclosure nor was either of the mortgages a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage and, accordingly, there was no declaration in the final decree 691 passed in the earlier suit for redemption that the respondents would be debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property.
In a suit for redemption, a mortgage other than a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage, the mortgagor has a right of redemption even after the sale has taken place pursuant to the final decree but before the confirmation of such sale.
In view of the provisions of Order XXXIV, the question of merger of mortgage debt in the decretal debt does not arise at all.
The decision of the Patna High Court in Sheo Narain Sah vs Mt. Deolochan Kuer, AIR 1948 Patna 208, relied upon by the appellants, is erroneous in so far as it laid down the merger of the mortgage debt in the decreta debt and the consequent extinguishment of the right of redemption of the mortgagor after the passing of the final decree in a suit for redemption.
The right of redemption will stand extinguished only under the circumstances mentioned in the proviso to section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, that is, (1) by the Act of party of (2) by a decree of Court, as aforementioned.
The contention of the appellants that as a final decree was passed in the earlier redemption suit, there was a merger of the mortgage debt in the decretal debt and as such the second suit for redemption was barred, was without any substance.
[696G H;697A D] The appellants contended that the rule of Damdupat was applicable only to a simple loan transaction and not a transaction of mortgage.
The Court could not appreciate this contention.
[698D] It is an equitable rule debarring the creditor to recover at any given time the amount of interest which is in excess of the principal amount due at that time.
In every mortgage, there are two aspects, namely, (1) loan and (2) transfer of interest in immovable property.
As mortgage is principally a loan transaction there is no reason why the rule of Damdupat, which is an equitable rule should not apply also to a mortgage.
On the application of the rule of Damdupat, law was not correctly laid down in Madhwas Sidhanta Onahini Nidhi vs Venkataramanjulu Naidu, ILR 26 Madras 662.
The decisions in Kunja Lal Banerji vs Narsamba Debi, ILR ; Jeewan Bai vs Monordas Lachmondas, ILR and Bapurao vs Anant Kashinath, AIR 1946 Nagpur 210, rightly held that the rule of Damdupat is applicable to mortgages.
[698C E;699F G] The Judgment and decree of the High Court were affirmed.
[699G] Raghunath Singh vs Mt. Hansraj Kunwar, AIR 1934 P.C. 205 referred to.
692 Madhwa Sidhanta Onahini Nidhi vs Venkataramanjulu Naidu, I.L.R. 26 Madras 662, disapproved.
Sheo Narain Sah vs Mt. Deolochan Kuer, A.I.R. 1948 Patna 208, held erroneous on the question of merger of the mortgage debt in decretal debt and the consequent extinguishment of the right of redemption of mortgagor after the final decree.
[697D] Kunja Lal Banerji vs Narsamba Debi, I.L.R. ; Jeewanbai vs Monordas Lachmondas, I.L.R. and Baburao vs Anant Kashinath, A.I.R. 1946 Nagpur 210, approved.
