This writ petition challenged the constitutional validity of the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Ltd. (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1986.
The Central Government had passed an order for taking over the management of six undertakings of the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, in respect whereof there were proceedings in the High Court, and this Court by its judgment dated the 12th February, 1988, in M/s. Doyarpack Systems Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors.
SLPs (Civil) Nos. 4826 & 7405 of 1987 had disposed of the matter.
The petitioners, claiming to be shareholders of the respondent No. 4 Swadeshi Cotton Mills Co. Ltd. and to have interest in its business, affairs and properties, filed this writ petition, contending that the effect of the decision of this Court above said was to take away valuable assets of the respondent No. 4, without paying any compensation therefor and to impose on respondent No. 4 liabilities without any corresponding assets available to discharge the liabilities, and further, that the acquisition virtually amounted to confiscation of the shares of respondent No. 5 and respondent No. 6 held by respondent No. 4, and that the rights of the shareholders of the respondent No. 4 were substantially damaged.
The petitioners challenged the vires and constitutional validity of sections 3 and 4 of the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Ltd. (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1986 ( 'The Act ') in so far as those sought to divest respondent No. 4 of the shares in respondent No. 5 and respondent No. 6 and certain excluded assets, contending that the Act was violative of Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Dismissing the petition, the Court, ^ HELD: The petitioners ' contentions were not tenable because all the contentions had been directly or indirectly dealt with in the judgment of this Court afore said.
It was not correct that no public 739 purpose was served by acquisition.
It was held that section 8 provides for payment of compensation in lumpsum and the transfer and vesting of whatever is comprised in section 3.
It was incorrect to state that there was no compensation for taking over of the shares.
It was found by the said judgment that the net wealth of the company was negative and, therefore, sections 3 and 4 could be meaningfully read if all the assets including the shares were considered to be taken over by the acquisition.
That was the only irresistible conclusion that followed from the construction of the documents and the history of the Act.
The Act in question was passed to ensure the principles enunciated in clauses (b) and (c) of Article 39 of the Constitution.
In that context, it was held that to leave a company, the net wealth of which was negative at the time of take over of the management with the shares held by it as investment in other company, was not only to defeat the principles of Article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution but it would permit the company to reap the fruits of its mismanagement.
That would be as absurd situation.
In this context, the contentions now sought to be urged were no longer open to the petitioners.
It was held by the judgment of this Court aforementioned that there was a public purpose which was analysed and spelled out from the different provisions of the Act.
There was compensation for the acquisition of the property.
The contentions of the petitioners had been dealt with and repelled by the said judgment of this Court.
The Court reiterated the reasoning of that judgment.
[744B;746B;747F H] The acceptance of the petitioner 's case would mean that the State would pump in Rs.15 crores of public money to release the shares from its liabilities and then hand over the shares free from such liability back to the company when the net worth of the company at the time of take over of management was negative, and in the teeth of the present financial liabilities built up by the company the shares would inevitably have been sold in discharge of its liabilities and in any event the shares stood charged with the very liabilities which related to the undertakings of the company which were taken over by the Government.
Therefore, it was incorrect to say that there was no public purpose for taking over these shares.
It would be absurd to say that there was no compensation paid for the acquisition.
The law as declared by this Court in Doypack Systems Pvt.
Ltd. (supra) is binding on the petitioners and the question was no longer res integra in view of Article 141 of the Constitution.
See the observations of this Court in M/s. Shenoy and Co. represented by its partner Bele Srinivasa Rao Street, Bangalore, and others vs The Commercial Tax Officer, Circle II, Bangalore and Ors., ; [752C E;753B C] 740 In view of the preamble of the Act which states and proclaims that the Act was passed to carry out the object of Article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution, and in view of the scheme of the Act as analysed before the Court and as apparent from the judgment of this Court aforesaid, it is clearly manifest that the Act was passed for a public purpose, and for the acquisition of shares there was a public purpose.
The acquisition subserved the object of the Act.
Compensation for such acquisition has been provided for.
No separate compensation need be provided for in the circumstances of the case for these shares.
The factual basis for the legal challenge made in this writ petition was incorrect in the facts of this case.
It was too late to contend that there was no compensation for the shares or that the acquisition of the shares amounted to confiscation or there was no public purpose in the Act.
The petition was wholly devoid of any merit.
[754G H; 755A B] M/s.
Doypack Systems Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors.
, SLPs (Civil) Nos. 4826 and 7045 of 1987 decided by Supreme Court on 12.2.88; The State of Bihar vs Maharajadhiraja Sir Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga and Ors., ; ; State of West Bengal vs Union of India, [1964] 1 SCR 371; Smt.
Somvanti & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab and Ors., ; M/s. Shenoy and Co. represented by its partner Bele Srinivasa Rao Street, Bangalore and Ors.
vs The Commercial Tax Officer, Circle II Bangalore and Ors., ; and T. Govindraja Mudalier, etc. etc.
vs The State of Tamil Nadu and Ors., ; , referred to.
