The respondent No. 1, Shri P. Shiv Shankar, Minister of Law, Justice and Company Affairs at the relevant time, delivered a speech at a meeting of the Bar Council of Hyderabad.
The petitioner alleged that in that speech the respondent No. 1 had made statements derogatory to the dignity of the Supreme Court, attributing to the Court partiality towards affluent people and using extremely intemperate and undignified language, and that the speech contained slander cast on this Court both in respect of the Judges and the working of the Court.
He stated that he had approached the Attorney General for India and the Solicitor General of India to give their consent for initiating Contempt proceedings.
The Attorney General and the Solicitor General having declined to deal with this prayer of the petitioner, an application for initiation of Contempt under section 15(1)(a) and (b) of the Act read with Explanation (1) and Rule 3(a), (b) and (c) of the contempt of Supreme Court Rules, 1975, was made, wherein Shri P. Shiv Shankar, the Attorney General, the Solicitor General were made parties.
The Court issued notice.
In response, Shri P. Shiv Shankar filed an affidavit, stating that he had delivered the speech on the subject of accountability of the Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and had made comments on the accountability of the three organs and the theoretical implications thereof, and that he had intended no disrespect to any of the institutions or its functionaries much less the Supreme Court.
It was further stated that the Contempt petition was not maintainable without the consent of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General.
In the meantime, Shri R.N. Trivedi, Advocate, filed an application, claiming right to be impleaded as a party, stating that the Attorney General and the Solicitor General should not have been made parties to the comtempt petition and that the alleged non exercise of the jurisdiction by the Attorney General and the Solicitor General had 548 not constituted contempt within the meaning of section 2(c) of the Act.
Declining to initiate the contempt proceeding and dismissing the petition and disposing of the application filed by Shri R.N. Trivedi, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.: Before deciding the question whether this application was maintainable without the consent of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General, as contended by Dr. Chitale on behalf of Shri Shiv Shankar, and the question whether the Attorney General and the Solicitor General could be made parties to the Contempt application and whether their action or inaction was justiciable at all in any proceeding and, if so, in what proceedings it was necessary to decide the basic question whether the speech made by Shri P. Shiv Shankar had amounted to contempt of this Court, or in other words, whether the speech had the effect of bringing this Court into disrepute.
[562H; 563A B] Administration of justice and Judges are open to public criticism and public scrutiny.
Judges have their accountability to the society and their accountability must be judged by their conscience and oath of their office, that is to defend and uphold the Constitution and the laws without fear and favour.
This the Judges must do in the light given to them to determine what is right.
Any criticism about the judicial system or the Judges which hampers the administration of justice or which erodes the faith in the objective approach of Judges and brings administration of justice into ridicule must be prevented.
The contempt of Court proceedings arise out of that attempt.
Judgments can be criticised, motives of the Judges need not be attributed.
It brings the administration of Justice into deep disrepute.
Faith in the administration of justice is one of the pillars through which democratic institution functions and sustains.
In the free market place of ideas, criticism about the judicial system or Judges should be welcomed, so long as such criticisms do not impair or hamper the administration of justice.
This is how the courts should approach the powers vested in them as judges to punish a person for an alleged contempt, be it by taking notice of the matter suo motu or at the behest of the litigant or lawyer.
[563C F] In this case, the Court had examined the entire speech.
Shri P. Shiv Shankar had examined the class composition of the Supreme Court.
His view was that the class composition of any instrument indi 549 cated its predisposition, prejudices.
This is inevitable.
The intuition more subtle than major premise, on which the decision will depend, is the pride and the prejudice of a human instrument of a Judge through which objectively the Judge seeks to administer justice according to law.
So, in a study of accountability, if class composition of the people manning the institution is analysed, there has to be forewarning about certain inclination and it cannot be said that an expression or view or propagation of that view hampers the dignity of the Courts or impairs the administration of Justice.
[565F H; 566A] It has to be admitted frankly and fairly that there has been erosion of faith in the dignity of the Court and in the majesty of law and that has been caused not so much by scandalising remarks made by politicians or ministers but the inability of the courts of law to deliver quick and substantial justice to the needy.
It is a criticism which judges and lawyers must make about themselves.
We must turn the search light inwards.
At the same time, the Court cannot be oblivious of the attempts made to decry or denigrate the judicial process, if it is seriously done.
This question was examined in Rama Dayal Markarha vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; , where it was held that fair and reasonable criticism of a judgment which is a public document or which is a public act of a Judge concerned with administration of justice would not constitute contempt.
In fact, such a fair and reasonable criticism must be encouraged because after all no one, much less Judges, can claim infallibility.
Such a criticism may fairly assert that the judgment is incorrect or an error has been committed with regard to law or established facts.
But when it is said that the Judge had a predisposition to convict or deliberately took a turn in discussion of evidence because he had already made up his mind to convict the accused or has a wayward bend of mind, is attributing motives, lack of dispassionate and objective approach and analysis and prejudging of issues, that would bring administration of justice into ridicule.
Such criticism sometime interferes with the administration of justice and that must be judged by the yardstick whether it brings the administration of justice into ridicule or hampers administration of justice.
After all, it cannot be denied that pre disposition or subtle prejudice or unconscious prejudice or what in Indian language is called "Sanskar" are inarticulate major premises in decision making process.
That element in decision making process cannot be denied, it should be taken note of.
[569B G] It has to be borne in mind, as has been said by Banjamin N. Cardozo in "The Nature of the Judicial Process" that the judge as the 550 interpreter for the community of its sense of law and order must supply omissions, correct uncertainties and harmonize results with justice through a method of free decision.
Courts are to "search for light among the social elements of every kind that are the living force behind the facts they deal with".
[569G H; 570A] Though at places, intemperate, the statement of the Minister in this case cannot be said to amount to interference with the administration of justice and to amount to contempt of court.
The Administration of justice in this country stands on surer foundation.
In the speech, it appears that Shri P. Shiv Shankar was making a study of the attitude of this Court.
It was stated that the Supreme Court was composed of the element from the elite class.
Whether it is factually correct or not is another matter.
In public life, where the champions of the down trodden and the politicians are mostly from the so called elite class, if the class composition is analysed, it may reveal interesting factor as to whether elite class is dominant as the champions ' of the oppressed or of the social legislations and the same is the position in the judiciary.
But the Minister went on to say that because the Judges had their 'unconcealed sympathy for the haves ' they interpreted the expression 'compensation ' in the manner they did.
The expression 'unconcealed ' was unfortunate.
But this was also an expression of opinion about an institutional pattern.
Then, the Minister went on to say that because of this the word 'compensation ' in Article 31 was interpreted contrary to the spirit and intendment of the Constitution.
The Constitution had to be amended to remove this 'oligarchic ' approach of the Supreme Court with little or no help.
The inter action of the decisions of this Court and the constitutional amendments had been viewed by the Minister in his speech, but that was nothing new.
This by itself does not affect the administration of justice.
On the other hand, such a study is perhaps important for the understanding of the evolution of the constitutional development.
Criticisms of judgments is permissible in a free society.
[573C D; 575E H; 576A B,F] There was one paragraph which appeared to be rather intemperate, it read thus: "Anti social elements i.e. FERA violators, bride burners and whole hordes of reactionaries have found their heaven in the Supreme Court".
[576F G] That, if true, is a criticism of the laws.
The Supreme Court, as it is bound to do, has implemented the laws and in implementing the laws it 551 is a tribute to the Supreme Court that it has not discriminated between persons and persons.
Criminals are entitled to be judged in accordance with law.
If anti social elements and criminals have benefited by decisions of the Supreme Court, the fault rests with the laws and the loopholes in the legislation.
The Courts are not deterred by such criticisms.
[576G H] Bearing in mind the trend in the law of contempt as noticed before, as well as in some of the decisions noticed by Krishna Iyer, J. in the case of Re: section Mulgaokar; , , the speech of the Minister read in its proper perspective, did not bring the administration of justice into disrepute or impair administration of justice.
In some portions of the speech, the language used could have been avoided by the Minister.
The Minister perhaps could have achieved his purpose by making his language mild but his facts deadly.
With these observations, it must be held that there was no imminent danger of interference with the administration of justice, nor of bringing administration of justice into disrepute.
In that view, it must be held that the Minister was not guilty of contempt of Court.
[577A C] Another question of law of some importance had arisen in this matter.
Under the Act, in case of criminal contempt other than a contempt referred to in section 14 which was not this case, namely a contempt of this Court or a High Court, this Court or the High Court may take action either on its own motion or on a motion made by the Advocate General, which in relation to this Court means the Attorney General or the Solicitor General or any other person with the consent of the Attorney General in terms of section 15 of the Act.
Cognizance for criminal contempt could be taken by the Court by three methods, namely on its own motion, or on the motion of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General, or on the motion of any other person with the consent of the Attorney General.
The only course open to a citizen for initiating proceedings for contempt is to move for consent of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General.
The question is, does it cast a duty upon the Attorney General or the Solicitor General to consent to application for grant of such consent and whether the granting or non granting of such consent is justiciable by the Court and if so whether the question of non granting can be brought up in a rolled application moved by a person to bring it to the notice of the Court to take action suo motu and at the same time to consider whether in the same proceedings the action of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General in granting or not granting consent can be challenged or it must be always by an independent proceeding.
The consent certainly is linked up with 552 contempt proceedings.
In this case, the Minister had taken the plea that consideration of this case could not be taken up because there was no consent of the law officers.
Did it or did it not tend to interfere with the due course of judicial proceedings in terms of clause (ii) of section 3(c) of the Act? The Attorney General and the Solicitor General, in respect of this Court, occupy positions of great importance and relevance.
The Attorney General is a friend, philosopher, and guide of the Court (Article 76 of the Constitution).
Yet, the Act, vests him with certain discretions.
All statutory discretions are justiciable in a society governed by the rule of law.
This Court is the finder and interpreter of law in cases of this nature with the assistance of Attorney General, and, in his absence or inability, the Solicitor General.
[577C H; 578A C] The petitioner in this case had approached the Attorney General and the Solicitor General to look into the matter and accord sanction.
The conduct of the respondents Nos. 2 and 3 according to the petitioner, amounted to refusal to exercise jurisdiction vested in them by law, and, therefore, they were impleaded as parties in the present proceedings (as necessary and/or proper parties) in order that they might get an opportunity to justify the stand they had taken in the matter flowing fr m their refusal to exercise jurisdiction.
[580E G] The question is whether there is a duty cast upon the Attorney General or the Solicitor General to consider the question of granting consent in terms of clause (b) of section 15(1) of the Act, and if in fact such consent is not granted, that question can be considered by the Court.
It was not a question of making the Attorney General or the Solicitor General a party to a contempt proceeding in the sense that they were liable for contempt, but if the hearing of the contempt proceedings is better proceeded with by obtaining the consent of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General and the question of justiciability of giving the consent is inter linked on the analogy of order II, Rule I of the Code of Civil Procedure, which has application to a civil proceeding and not to a criminal proceeding, it is permissible to go into this question.
In the case of Conscientious Group vs Mohammed Yunus and others, , this Court went into the reasons given by the Solicitor General declining consent, and held on examination that such consent was properly refused.
This is a complete answer to the contention that in a contempt petition the grounds for either giving consent or not giving consent or for not considering the application for consent are justiciable and that question cannot be gone into in that proceeding though it must be emphasised in that proceeding that 11 the Solicitor General was not made a party to the proceeding.
In his 553 Lordship 's opinion, it will be more appropriate for an officer of the Court whose action is being investigated to be made a party in the proceedings, otherwise it would be violative of the rule of audi alteram partem.
Discretion vested in the law officers of this Court to be used for a public purpose in a society governed by rule of law is justiciable.
It would be more appropriate that it should be gone into upon notice to the law officer concerned.
It is a case where appropriate ground for refusal to act can be looked into by the Court.
It cannot be said that the refusal to grant consent decides no right and it is not reviewable.
Refusal to give consent closes one channel of initiation of contempt out of the three different channels, namely, (1) the Court taking cognizance on its own motion; (2) on the motion by the Attorney General or the Solicitor General; and (3) by any other person with the consent in writing of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General.
In this case, apparently the Attorney General and the Solicitor General had not moved on their own.
The petitioner could not move in accordance with law without the consent of the Attorney General and the Solicitor General, though he has a right to move and the third is the Court taking notice suo motu.
But irrespective of that there was the right granted to the citizen of the country to move a motion with the consent.
Indubitably, cognizance could be taken suo motu by the Court but the members of the public have also the right to move the Court.
That right of bringing to the notice of the Court is dependent upon consent being given either by the Attorney General or the Solicitor General, and if that consent is withheld without reasons or without consideration of that right granted to any other person under section 15 of the Act, that could be investigated in an application made to the Court.
[581B H; 582A C; 584C D] Where an appeal comes to this Court, which is a judicial decision, the judges who rendered the decision are not necessary parties.
There is no lis between a suitor and a judge in a judicial adjudication.
But the position is entirely different where there is a suitor claiming the exercise of a statutory right in his favour which he alleges is hampered by an official act of a named official in the Act.
In respect of justiciability of that act of the official there is a lis and if that lis is inter linked with the proceeding for contempt, there is warrant for making him party in that proceeding though the prayers and the notice must be issued differently.
The statute gives a right to a suitor to move the Court in one of the contingencies for contempt or bring to the notice of the Court the contempt with the advice and assistance of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General.
If such right is not considered on relevant materials, then, that action is justiciable in the appropriate proceeding for contempt.
[585C G] 554 Having considered the peculiar facts and circumstances of this A case and the allegations of bias made against the Attorney general and the Solicitor General, it appeared that the Attorney General and the Solicitor General acted properly in declining to deal with the matter and the Court could deal with the matter on attention being drawn to this Court.
In that view of the matter, the petition failed and the application of Shri Trivedi was accordingly disposed of.
[588D E] Per section Ranganathan, J. (Concurring) The impugned comments were made by the respondent No. 1 in the course of his key note address at a seminar on 'Accountability of the Legislature, Executive and Judiciary under the Constitution of India '.
The speech, and, in particular, some 'sevoury ' passages therefrom were highlighted in the Press.
The speech had been made before an audience comprising essentially lawyers, Jurists and Judges.
It represented primarily an exercise by the speaker to evaluate the roles of the executive, legislature and judiciary in the country since its independence and to put forward the theory that, like the executive and the legislature, the judiciary must also be accountable to the people.
[588F H; 589A] The petitioner contended that certain passages in the speech seemed to attribute a sub conscious partiality, bias or predeliction in the Judges in disposing of various matters before them and that those comments fell within the scope of the decision of this Court in the case of E.M. Sankaran Namboodripad vs T. Narayanan Nambiar, ; [589A B] It was true, as pointed out by Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. that there were passages in the speech which torn out of context might be liable to be misunderstood, but reading the speech as a whole and bearing in mind the select audience to which it was addressed, his Lordship agreed with Sabyasachi Mukharji, J., that no contempt had been committed.
The affidavit of the respondent No. 1 should be accepted at its face value that the speech was only a theoretical dissertation and that he intended no disrespect to this Court or its functioning.
[589D E] The second aspect of the case on which arguments were addressed before the Court, related to the procedure to be followed in such matters.
This aspect raised some important issues.
[589E F] The criminal miscellaneous petition filed by the petitioner purported to be only "information" u/s 15 (1)(a) and (b) of the 555 ( 'the Act ').
The petitioner stated that he came to know from a report in the newspaper that the respondent No. 1, in the course of his speech, had made certain statements which randered him liable to be proceeded against for contempt of court, and, appending what was stated to be a full text of the said speech published in the "Newstime", prayed for initiation of contempt of court proceedings suo motu under section 15(1) of the , read with rule 3(a) of the Supreme Court (Contempt of Court) Rules, 1975.
Though the respondent No. 1 only, according to the petitioner, was to be charged with contempt, the petitioner had added three more respondents to the criminal miscellaneous petition, namely, the Attorney General for India (by name), the Solicitor General of India (by name) and Sri Ramji Rao, Editor of "Newstime".
The petition raised certain questions of general importance for consideration to evolve a proper procedure for future guidance in these matters.
[589F H; 590A B] The petitioner sought to charge respondent No. 1 with "Criminal Contempt" under Section 15 of the .
A conjoint perusal of the Act and the rules of the Supreme Court to regulate proceedings for Contempt of Supreme Court makes it clear that so far as this Court is concerned, action for contempt may be taken by the Court on its own motion or on the motion of the Attorney General (or the Solicitor General) or of any other person with his consent in writing.
There is no difficulty where the Court or the Attorney General chooses to move in the matter.
When a private person desires that such action should be taken, he may place the information in his possession before the Court, requesting the Court to take action; or he may place the information before the Attorney General requesting him to take action; or he may place the information before the Attorney General requesting him to permit him to move the Court.
In this case, the petitioner alleged that he had failed in the letter two courses, and he had moved this 'petition ' praying that this Court should take suo motu action.
On this 'petition ', no proceedings could commence until and unless the Court considered the information before it and decided to initiate proceedings.
[592F H;593A B The form of a criminal miscellaneous petition styling the informant as the petitioner and certain persons as respondents is inappropriate for merely lodging the relevant information before the Court under rule 3(a) of the Supreme Court (Contempt of Court) Rules.
The proper title of such a proceeding should be "In re . (the alleged contempt)".
The direction given by the Delhi High Court in 556 Anil Kumar Gupta vs K. Subba Rao, ILR 1974 Delhi 1 that " . . if any information is lodged even in the form of a petition inviting this Court to take action u/s 15 of the or Article 212 of the Constitution, where the informant is not one of the persons named in section 15 of the said Act, it should not be styled as a petition and should not be placed before the judicial side.
Such a petition should be placed before the Chief Justice for orders m chambers and the Chief Justice may decide either by himself or in consultation with the other judges of the Court whether to take any cognizance of the information . . " sets out the proper procedure in such cases and may be adopted in future as a practice direction or as a rule, by this Court and the High Court.
However, this petition having been filed and similar petitions having been perhaps entertained earlier in several courts, his Lordship did not suggest that this petition should be dismissed on this ground.
[593C H; 594A B] In this case, apart from filing his information in the form of a petition, the petitioner had added as respondents to the petition not only the alleged contemner but three more persons i.e. the Attorney General, the Solicitor General and Shri Ramoji Rao, Editor of "Newstime".
The Attorney General and Solicitor General were stated to be impleaded in order that they might get an opportunity to justify their stand in refusing to exercise their jurisdiction to grant consent to him to enable him to file a petition under section 15(1) read with rule 3(c), and the fourth respondent was only a possible witness, stated to be impleaded only to prove the authenticity of the speech reported in the "Newstime" in the event of a disclaimer of the respondent No. 1.
This could not be done.
This petition, as filed, was for initiating proceeding for contempt only against respondent No. 1.
If the petitioner had any cause of action against the other persons, such persons were neither necessary nor even proper parties to this petition, because such cause of action was of a purely civil nature.
At best, the petitioner could say that he was entitled to a writ of mandamus directing the Attorney General and Solicitor General to discharge their statutory obligation or a writ of certiorari to quash their decision in case they had unreasonably withheld their consent to the petitioner 's filing a petition.
This remedy was to be sought independently against these persons by a separate writ petition.
He could not seek relief against the Attorney General and the Solicitor General by a petition mixing up his criminal charge against respondent No. 1 and his civil grievance against the Attorney General and the Solicitor General.
He could not get over the objection to the maintainability of a petition, i.e. want of cousent of the Attorney General or the Solicitor General, merely by the device of adding them as respondents 557 to the petition; no relief was sought against the Attorney or the Solicitor A General.
This petition, if treated as one under rule 3(c) was not maintainable for want of consent by the Attorney General and the Solicitor General and had to be dismissed as such.
The inclusion of respondents 2 to 4 as respondents to the petition was totally unjustified, and if the petition was to be taken as merely laying of information under rule 3(a), the names of respondents 2 to 4 must be struck off from the array of parties.
His Lordship directed accordingly.
Notice of the petition should not have been issued in the form it was issued, to the Attorney General and the Solicitor General since there was no allegation of contempt and no relief had been sought against them.
[594B H; 595A D] The petitioner had submitted that the Attorney General and the Solicitor General had acted unreasonably in declining to act in this case.
In addition to merely placing the information with him before the Attorney General/Solicitor General and seeking their consent to his filing a petition before the Court, he had written a letter containing a lot of irrelevant matter, whereby while purporting to seek the consent of the Attorney General Solicitor General, he had simultaneously expressed his lack of confidence in their judgment and ability to discharge their duties objectively and impartially.
In this situation, the Attorney General/Solicitor General decided not to exercise their statutory powers at all one way or the other.
the Attorney General/Solicitor General acted rightly and in the best traditions of their office by declining to deal with the petitioner 's request.
The petitioner had cast aspersions against both the law officers, doubting their ability to act objectively and this stultified by his conduct this course indicated by the Statute.
[598G H; 599A C,F] As to the question whether, in a case where neither the Attorney General nor the Solicitor General was in a position to consider a request under section 15(1)(c), the petitioner could seek the consent of some other law officers, as the Additional Solicitor General, it was not open to him to seek such consent, as under section 15, the written consent of only those officers as have been specifically authorised by the section would be taken note of for entertaining a petition under the section.
[599G H; 600A B] Summing up the conclusion (a) This petition, if treated as and filed under section 15(1) read with rule 3(a) was not in proper form, and if treated as one filed under rules 3(b) and 3(c), was not maintainable as it was not filed by the 558 Attorney General/Solicitor General or any other person with his consent; [600C] (b) In either event, the petitioner should not have added to the petition respondents other than the person, alleged to be guilty of Contempt of Court, and their names should be deleted from the array of the Parties; [600D] (c) In case the Attorney General/Solicitor General refuse consent or decline to act, their decision is not judicially reviewable and a petitioner 's remedy is to approach the Court for action under rule 3(a); [600E] (d) In this case, the Attorney General/Solicitor General acted properly in declining to deal with the petitioner 's application either way, and [600F] (e) This petition was nothing more than information under rule 3(a) on which this Court might or might not take suo motu action and there was no need to initiate proceeding against the respondent No. I for Contempt of Court.
[600F G] Ambard vs Attorney General for Trinidad and Tobago, , 325; E.M. Sankaran Namboodiripad vs T. Narayanan Nambiar; , 2 SCC 325; Joseph Loohner vs People of the State of New York, 49 Lawyers ' Edition ; Re: Shri section Mulgaokar, ; New York Times Company vs L.B. Sullivan, ; ; Regina vs Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, Ex Parte Blackburn, ; Special Reference No. I of 1964; , ; Shri Baradakanta Mishra vs The Registrar of Orissa High Court and another; , ; Ram Dayal Markarha vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; ; Conscientious Group vs Mohammed Yunus and others, J.T. 1987 (2) 377; National Anthem case; , ; Vassiliades vs Vassiliades and others, AIR 1945 P.C. 38; S.K. Sarkar vs V.C. Misra, ; ; C.K. Daphtary and others vs O.P. Gupta, and another, ; G.N. Verma vs Hargovind Dayal and others, AIR 1975 Allahabad 52; B. K. Kar vs The Chief Justice and his Companion Judges of the Orissa High Court and others; , ; Attorney General vs Iyimes Newspapers Ltd., ; Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. and others etc.
vs Union of India & others; , ; Gouriet and others vs H.M. Attorney General, [1978] Appeal Cases 435; Gouriet vs Union of Post office Workers, [1978] Appeal cases 435; 559 Gouriet vs Union of Post offices Workers & Ors., to 752; Rajagopal vs Murtza Mutjahdi, [1974] 1 Andhra Law Times 170; N. Venkataramanappa vs D.K. Naikar, A.I.R. 1978 Karnataka 57; Anil Kumar Gupta vs K. Subba Rao, ILR 1974 Delhi 1 and A.G. vs Times Newspapers, , referred to.
