By availing of its powers under sub section
(2) of section 49 of the Gujarat Sales Tax Act, 1969 to exempt, in the public interest, any specified class of sales from payment of the whole or any part of the tax payable under the Act, the Government of Gujarat issued two notifications prescribing a lower rate of tax for goods manufactured within the State as compared to similar goods imported from outside the State.
The petitioners, who are manufacturing electronic goods, including television sets etc., in factories located outside the State, challenged the validity of these notifications as violative of article 301 of the Constitution.
The State Government contended that the rate of tax was reduced in order to provide as incentive for encouraging local manufacturing units and sought to draw support for its action from clauses (b) and (c) of article 39.
Allowing the Petition and quashing the notifications aforesaid, ^ HELD: article 301 declares that subject to the provisions of Part XIII, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of India shall be free.
Clause (1) of article 303 prohibits the legislature of a State from making any law giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference to one State or another, or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination between one State and another.
The terms of the prohibition are subject to article 304.
Clause (a) of article 304 provides that the legislature of a State may, by law, impose on goods imported from other States any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in that State are subject so, however, as not to discriminate between goods so imported and goods so manufactured or produced.
It is apparent that while a State Legislature may enact a law 769 imposing a tax on goods imported from other States, as is levied on similar goods manufactured in that State, the imposition must not be such as to discriminate between goods so imported and goods so manufactured.
We do not think any support can be derived from the two clauses of article 39 to justify the reduction in the rate of tax in the case of goods manufactured locally.
Clause (a) of article 304 is clear in meaning.
An exception to the mandate declared in article 301 and the prohibition contained in cl.
(1) of article 303 can be sustained on the basis of cl.
(a) of article 304 only if the conditions contained in the latter provision are satisfied.
[770H;771A B,772F G] Firm A.T.B. Mehtab Majid & Co. vs State of Madras & Anr., [1963] Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 435; Atiabari Tea Co. Ltd. vs The State of Assam and Ors.
, ; ; The Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. vs The State of Rajasthan & Ors., [1963] 1 S.C.R. 491 and H. Anraj etc.
vs Government of Tamil Nadu etc., , relied on.
(ii) The next question is whether, for the purpose of ensuring the same rate of tax between the petitioners and the local manufacturers, the levy of the higher rate of tax suffered by the petitioners should be quashed and they be held entitled to the levy of the lower rate applied to the local manufacturers, or, should the higher rate imposed on the petitioners be maintained and the notifications imposing the lower rate on local manufacturers be quashed.
The grievance of the petitioners has arisen only because the local manufacturers have been favoured by a lower rate of tax.
The rate levied on the petitioners is the rate prescribed under section 7 of the Act.
That is the rate applied generally.
It represents the normal standard of levy.
The lower rate applied to local manufacturers has been applied by invoking sub section
(2) of section 49 of the Act.
It represents a departure from, or exception to, the general norm.
In cases such as this, the Court should, when granting relief, choose the alternative which would give effect to the statutory intention.
And, therefore, in this case what is called for is the quashing of the impugned notifications reserving a lower rate of tax for local manufacturers.
[772H; 773A E]
