These appeals raised an identical question.
Civil Appeals Nos 4291 and 4292 of 1984 were preferred against the judgment of the Madras High Court in Writ Appeals Nos.
561 and 562 of 1983.
The appellant in these two appeals, an employee in the Bank of India, which is a Nationalised Bank, was dismissed.
Aggrieved, he preferred an appeal under section 41(2) of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act, 1947 (the Tamil Nadu Shops Act).
A preliminary objection was raised by the Bank to the effect that the Tamil Nadu Shops Act was not applicable to the Bank in view of the exemption contained in Section 4(1)(c) thereof.
The Appellate Authority held that the preliminary objection might be decided along with the appeal.
The bank thereupon filed two writ petitions in the High Court, one for a direction to the Appellate Authority to dispose of the preliminary objection before disposing of the appeal on merits, and the other, for a direction to the Appellate Authority not to proceed with the appeal.
Both the Writ Petitions were allowed by a Single Judge of the High Court on the ground that the Bank was an establishment under the Central Government and consequently the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Shops Act were not applicable to it in view of the exemption contained in this behalf in section 4(1)(c).
Against that decision, two writ appeals aforementioned were filed, which were dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court by the Judgment under appeal in these two appeals.
The same judgment of the High Court had disposed of Writ Petition No. 1550 of 1981 also, which had arisen out of an application under section 51 of the Tamil Nadu Shops Act made by the employees of the State Bank of India before the Commissioner of Labour for a direction that all the provisions of that Act would apply to them, being employed in the State Bank.
The State Rank had contended that it was an establishment under the Central 663 Government within the meaning of Section 4(1)(c) of the Tamil Nadu Shops Act and consequently the provisions of that Act were not applicable to it.
The Commissioner of labour had rejected the plea of the State Bank and held that the provisions of the Act were applicable to it.
Civil Appeal No. 4329 of 1984 was preferred against the said Judgment by the State Bank 's Staff Union and Civil Appeal No. 4735 of 1984 was preferred by the employees concerned.
Civil Appeal No. 1120 of 1976 was preferred by Syndicate Bank, a Nationalised Bank, against the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court (Division Bench), dismissing the Writ Appeal No. 268 of 1975 and upholding the order of a Single Judge dismissing the Writ Petition No. 5973 of 1973 filed by the appellant Syndicate Bank.
The services of Respondent No. 3 in the appeal had been terminated by the appellant Syndicate Bank.
An appeal was preferred by the said respondent before the Labour officer under the Andhra Pradesh Shops and Establishment Act, 1966 (the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act).
The Labour officer allowed the appeal which was confirmed in a second appeal by the Labour Court.
Aggrieved by these orders, the Bank filed the Writ Petition above said.
It was urged by the appellant Bank that it being an establishment under the Central Government within the meaning of Section 64(1)(b) of the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act, the provisions of that Act including the provisions of appeal were not applicable to it in view of the exemption contained in this behalf.
Civil Appeal No. 1042 was preferred by the Syndicate Bank against the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, dismissing the Writ Petition No. 86 of 1979.
Respondent No. 3 in the appeal had been dismissed by the appellant bank.
He preferred an appeal which was allowed.
The Bank preferred a second appeal before the Labour Court, which was dismissed.
The Bank filed the aforesaid writ Petition before the High Court and urged that it being an establishment under the Central Government within the meaning of Section 64(1)(b) of the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act, the provisions of that Act were not applicable to it in view of the exemption contained in this behalf.
The High Court dismissed the Writ Petition.
Civil Appeal No. 837 of 1984 was preferred by the Bank of India a nationalised bank, against the judgment of the Kerala High Court dismissing the Writ Petition No. 1419 of 1978.
Respondent No. 1 in the appeal had preferred an appeal under section 18 of the Kerala Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1960 (the Kerala shops Act) against an order passed by the appellant Bank, discharging him from service.
A preliminary objection was raised by the Bank with regard to the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that it being an establish 664 ment under the Central Government within the meaning of section 3(1)(c) of that Act, the provisions thereof including section 18 above said were not applicable to it.
The objection was overruled by the appellate authority.
The Bank filed the original Petition abovementioned in the High Court which dismissed the same.
Dismissing the Civil Appeals Nos . 4291 and 4292 of 1984, 4329 of 1984 and 4735 of 1984, and allowing the Civil Appeal Nos. 1120 of 1976, 1042 of 1979 and 837 of 1984, the Court, ^ HELD: The common question which arose for consideration in all these appeals was as to whether the Nationalised Banks and the State Bank of India were establishments under the Central Government within the meaning of the Acts above said and consequently the provisions of the said Acts were not applicable to these Banks in view of the exemption contained therein in this behalf.
[670E] In view of the definition of the term "establishment" read with that of "commercial establishment" contained in the said Acts, it was not disputed even by counsel for the banks, that a bank is an establishment.
Consequently, unless exempted, the provisions of the said Acts would apply to the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks also.
[670F G] A conspectus of the provisions of the (Act No. 23 of 1955) and the (Act No. 5 of 1970), read with the dictionary meaning of the term "under" leaves no manner of doubt that the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks are clearly establishments under the Central Government.[677D] For the employees of these banks, it was urged that these banks were autonomous corporations having distinct juristic entity with a corporate structure of their own and could not as such be treated to be owned by the Central Government.
According to counsel, the word "under" used in the expression "under the Central Government" con noted complete control in the sense of being owned by the Central Government.
Disagreeing with that submission it was held that the mere fact that the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks are different entities as corporate bodies for certain purposes cannot by itself be a circumstance from which it may be deduced that they cannot be establishments under the Central Government.
[677E F; 678A] 665 If the criteria laid down in Ajay Hasia, etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & Ors. etc.
; , decided by a Constitution Bench of this Court, was applied to the facts of these cases, it is obvious that even though the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks may not be owned as such by the Central Government and their employees may not be the employees of the Central Government, they certainly will fall within the purview of the expression "under the Central Government", in view of the existence of deep and pervasive control of the Central Government over these banks.
As pointed out by this Court in Biharilal Dobray vs Roshan Lal Dobray; , , the true test of determination of the question whether a statutory corporation is independent of the Government depends upon the degree of control.
[679G H;682E F] In view of these considerations, no exception could be taken to the view of the Madras High Court in its judgments which were the subjectmatter of the Civil Appeal Nos. 4291 and 4292 of 1984, 4375 of 1984 and 4329 of 1984.
As regards the judgment of the Kerala High Court and the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court under appeal even if the decisions dealing with Article 12 of the Constitution are not made the foundation for deciding the point in issue, the principles enumerated therein particularly with regard to deep and pervasive control are relevant for deciding the point in issue, and also it was sufficient to point out that for holding that the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks are establishments under the Central Government which have a corporate structure and have freedom in the matter of day to day administration, it is not necessary that these banks should be owned by the Central Government or be under its absolute control in the sense of a department of the Government.
As regards the circumstances that even though the Reserve Bank of India is mentioned specifically in the relevant clause containing exemption, neither the State Bank of India nor the nationalised banks are so mentioned, it is to be pointed out that the Reserve Bank of India was established as shareholders ' Bank under Act 2 of 1934.
The Kerala Shops Act and the Andhra Pradesh shops Act, of the years 1960 and 1966, were modelled almost on the pattern of the Tamil Nadu Shops Act, which is of the year 1947.
When section 4(1)(c) of this Act referred to the Reserve Bank of India in 1947, it obviously referred to it as the Shareholders ' Bank.
The Reserve Bank Transfer to Public ownership Act (Act 82 of 1948) came into force on 1st January, 1949, and it was thereafter that the shares in the capital of the Reserve Bank came to belong to the Central Government.
In this background, no undue emphasis could be placed on the circumstances that the State Bank of India or the nationalised banks did 666 not find mention in the provision containing exemption even though the Reserve Bank of India was specially mentioned therein.
For the response stated above, the aforesaid decisions of the Kerala High Court and the Andhra Pradesh High Court deserved to be set aside.[683C H] On the view the Court had taken that the State Bank of India and the nationalised banks are establishments under the Central Government, the Court did not consider the question as to whether these banks were establishment, which not being factories within the meaning of the , were, in respect of matters deal with in the Tamil Nadu Shops Act, governed by a separate law for the time being in force in the State so as to be entitled to claim exemption under clause (f) of sub section (1) of section 4 of the said Act or of the corresponding provisions in the Kerala Shops Act and the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act.
[684A B] Civil Appeals Nos.
4291 and 4292 of 1984, 4329 of 1984 and 4735 of 1984 were dismissed.
Civil Appeal No. 1120 of 1976 was allowed and the judgment of the High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 1975 as also the Judgment of the Single judgement the Writ Petition No. 5973 of 1973 as well as the orders of the Labour officer in the appeal filed by respondent No. 3 and of the Second Appellate Authority m the second appeal filed by the appellant Bank under the provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act were set aside.
Civil Appeal No. 1042 of 1979 was allowed and the judgment of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the Writ Petition No. 86 of 1979 as also the orders passed by the first and second appellate authorities in the appeals preferred by respondent No. 3 and the bank under the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act were set aside.
Civil Appeal No. 837 of 1984 was allowed and the judgment of the Kerala High Court in Writ Petition No. 1419 of 1978 was set aside.
The preliminary objection raised by the bank before the Appellate Authority in the appeal filed by respondent No. I under section 18 of the Kerala Shops Act to the effect that the said appeal was not maintainable was upheld, with the result that if the said appeal was still pending would be disposed of as not maintainable and in case it had been decided, the said decision should be treated as without jurisdiction.[684C F] The various employees whose appeals preferred under the Kerala Shops Act or the Andhra Pradesh Shops Act referred to above had been held to be not maintainable and the orders passed therein had been set aside, would be at liberty to take recourse to such other remedies as might be available to them in law.
[684G] 667 Ajay Hasia, etc.
vs Khalid Mujib Sehravardi & etc.
; , ; Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs The State of Bihar & Ors., ; Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. vs The Workmen and Ors., ; ; Graham vs Public Works Commissioner, ; Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Karnataka vs Workmen represented by the General Secretary, Karnataka Provident Fund Employees ' Union and Another, [1984] II L.L.J. 503; Western Coalfields Ltd. vs Special Area Development Authority, Korba and Anr., ; ; Rashriva Mill Mazdoor Sangh, Nagpur vs The Model Mills, Nagpur and Anr., ; ; Union of India & Ors.
vs N. Hargopal and Ors., ; Thote Bhaskara Rao vs The A.P. Public Service Commission and Ors., Judgment Today and Biharilal Dobray vs Roshan Lal Dobray, ; , referred to.
