On or about 12th May, 1973 the Superintendent of Central Excise issued search warrant under section 105 of the authorising an Inspector of Central Excise to search the residential premises of the petitioner.
A search was made and 565 foreign wrist watches were recovered from the premises.
The petitioner was given a notice to showcause why the period of six months fixed by section 110(2) should not be extended.
On December 26, 1975 the Collector of Central Excise passed an order directing confiscation of 565 wrist watches seized from the petitioner 's possession on May 12, 1973 under Section 111, and the imposition of penalty of Rs.2 lacs under section 112 of the Act.
The petitioner 's appeal to the Central Board of Excise and Customs, and revision to the Government of India having been dismissed, the petitioner challenged the order of the Collector in a writ petition to the High Court.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition, on the ground that the Collector was justified in passing the order of confiscation of the watches and imposing a penalty of Rs.2 lacs, as the petitioner had not refuted the facts alleged in the show cause notice by availing of the opportunity given to him at the enquiry.
In the Special Leave Petition to this Court it was contended that: (1) the notice dated May 4, 1974 issued under section 124 of the Act was issued beyond the period of six months of the seizure of the goods and as such the entire proceedings were invalid for this reason; and that the 798 extension of the period of six months by another period of six months in accordance with the proviso to section 110(2) could not be made ex parte without notice to the petitioner, (2) there was no evidence to determine the value of watches, so the quantum of penalty could not be determined for want of such evidence, and (3) the quantification of the penalty was very high.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, this Court, ^ HELD: 1(i) Extension of time takes away a valuable right of a party whose goods are proposed to be seized.
Such deprivation of the valuable right must be upon notice, otherwise it violates the principles of natural justice.[802D E] (ii) An ex parte determination by the Collector would expose his decision to be one sided and perhaps one based on an incorrect statement of facts.
[802F] (iii) Whether a notice was given or not within a stipulated time for extension as contemplated under section 110(2) is a question of fact.
The onus that the order was passed without notice is on the person who asserts it to be so and this is a question of fact.
[802H;803A] In the instant case, a notice has been given.
There was an assertion to this effect in the Collector 's order.
The assertion remained uncontroverted by any specific evidence and also by failure to urge this point.
In that view of the matter, the inference drawn by the High Court that such notice was given as contemplated under section 110(2), was not unwarranted.
[803A B] 2.
The value of the watches was mentioned as one of the particulars in the show cause notice given to the petitioner and this value was not refuted by the petitioner in his reply.
The petitioner did not avail himself of the opportunity at any stage to oppose the extension of time or to refute the allegations made in the show cause notice given thereafter.
The petitioner thus failed to discharge the burden of proof cast on him by section 123 of the Act.
[803C D] 3.
The quantum of penalty should not be arbitrary or excessive.
[804E] In the instant case, the value of the smuggled goods was Rs.87,455.
The penalty permissible is upto five times the value of the goods.
The Collector imposed the penalty of Rs.2 lacs by his order in 799 1975.
Admittedly, for about ten years, the amount of penalty had not been paid by the petitioner.
The High Court noted that the benefit derived by the petitioner by non payment of the penalty for ten years indicates that the penalty could not be treated as arbitrary.
That by itself is not always a safe guide.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, the penalty was not heavy.
[804C E] Asstt.
Collector of Customs vs Charan Das Malhotra ; , referred to.
