After levy of the property tax by the Kalyan Municipal Council ( 'the Municipal Council ') on the immovable properties of the Respondent No. 1 ( 'the company ') in respect of certain years, the Municipal Council detected certain new construction and alterations in the existing properties of the Company, and on October 3, 1973 a resolution was passed by the Standing Committee increasing the rateable value of the said immovable property from 1.4.70 to 31.3.74.
A demand notice, demanding additional property tax, Educational cess and Health Tax, was issued thereafter to the Company.
The Company challenged the notice of demand before the High Court.
The High Court decided in favour of the Company, holding that alteration made in the assessment list after following the procedure under section 123(1) of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act (the 'said Act ') did not become effective for any period prior to the commencement of the official year in which the alteration in the assessment list was made and the Municipality was not entitled to levy tax for an official year or any part thereof which was already expired.
This appeal was filed in this Court against that decision of the High Court.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: The ratio of the decision of the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in Sholapur Municipal Corporation vs Ram Chandra Ramappa Madgundi, [1972] 74 Bombay Law Reporter 469, upon which the judgment of the High Court impugned in this case was based, applied to this case.
The appellants contended that the said case before the Full Bench had been wrongly decided and the judgment under appeal based on that decision was also erroneous.
this contention must be negatived in view of the decision of this Court in Municipal Corpora 833 tion of City of Hubli vs Subba Rao Hanumatharao Prayag & Ors.
,[1976] 3 S.C.R. p. 883, which approved the said decision of the Full Bench of the High Court, and which is binding on the Court and clearly applicable to this case.
In that judgment, this Court had pointed out that once it was accepted that the process of levying the tax was complete only when the assessment list was authenticated and it was only then that the tax was levied on the rate payers, the authentication must be made within the official year.
The tax, being a tax for the official year, must be levied during the official year and since the levy of the tax is complete only when the assessment list is authenticated, it must follow that the authentication must take place in the official year.
The official year is the unit of taxation as far as Municipal property taxes are concerned.
[836D,G,837A B] If an assessment list could be altered at any time if the conditions set out in Section 123 of the said Act are satisfied, the result would be that there would be complete uncertainty in the field of taxation of property and unwary purchasers of immovable property might be put to the difficulty of having to discharge the liabilities for property taxes for years long prior to the time when they had purchased the immovable property in order to save the property from being sold in recovery proceedings.
[837B C] Sholapur Municipal Corporation vs Ramchandra Ramappa Madgundi, [1972] 74 Bombay Law Reporter 469 and Municipal Corporation of City of Hubli vs Subha Rao Hanumatharao Prayag & Ors., ; , referred to.
