In a suit for ejectment filed by the landlord respondent a decree for eviction from a shop was passed against the tenant appellant on 19th August, 1971.
The Trial Court however directed the parties to bear their own costs.
During the pendency of the tenant 's appeal, the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act, 1972 was enforced with effect from 15th July, 1972.
The appellant made the deposit contemplated by section 39 read with section 40 of the Act within one month in the lower appellate court and asserted that in view of the deposit so made he was entitled to be absolved from his liability for eviction.
The deposit, however, did not include the costs of the suit.
The landlord contested the tenant 's claim on the ground that since the costs of the suit had not been deposited within time, the tenant was not entitled to the benefit of section 39 read with section 40.
In defence, the tenant urged that since the trial Court had directed the parties to bear their own costs the benefit of the aforesaid sections could not be denied to him.
In the alternative, it was asserted that the delay in the deposit of costs was liable to be condoned.
These contentions did not find favour with the lower appellate court and it dismissed the appeal with costs.
The tenant 's second appeal was also dismissed by the High Court.
The High Court held that the costs of the suit had to be deposited notwithstanding the fact that the trial court had directed the parties to bear their own costs.
According to the High Court, the words 'landlord 's full costs of the suit ' were not the same thing as the costs awarded to the plaintiff in a suit but really meant all those taxable costs which were capable of being ascertained on the date of the deposit.
In this Court the appellant reiterated the pleas raised in the courts below.
Allowing the appeal, it was, 821 ^ HELD: (1) Irrespective of the actual amount of costs that may have been incurred by the landlord in prosecuting a suit, he is entitled to recover from the tenant only such costs which in law are known as taxable costs and are made payable to the landlord.
[824E] (2) Non deposit of such costs which, either on account of the relevant rules or some specific order of the court are not payable by the tenant to the landlord on the date of deposit contemplated by section 39 or 40, cannot deprive the tenant of the benefit of these two sections.
The fact that in appeal there was a possibility of costs of the suit also being awarded to the landlord by reversing the decree of the trial court in this behalf will not be material.
[824H;825A] (3) In cases falling under this category, the appellate or revisional court in order to safeguard the interests of the landlord and to give effect to the intention of the legislature expressed in section 39 read with section 40 of the Act, will require the tenant to deposit such costs also in supersession of the decree or order of the subordinate court in this behalf before passing an order giving him the benefit of these sections.
[825E] (4) The appellant was entitled to the benefit of section 39 read with Section 40 of the Act and to be absolved from his liability to be evicted from the shop in question.
[826G H] Krishna Kumar Gupta vs Additional District Judge IV, ;R.D. Ram Nath & Co. vs Girdhari Lal, and Smt.
Phoolwati vs Gyan Chand Verma, [1985] All L.J. 1, referred to.
