The appellant was the Chief Minister of Maharashtra between June 9, 1980 and January 12, 1982, when he resigned that office in deference to the judgment of High Court in a writ petition filed against him, but continued as an MLA.
On August 9, 1982, respondent No. 1, a member of a political party filed a complaint before a Special Judge against the appellant and others for offences under sections 161 and 165 of the Indian Penal Code and section 5 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 and also under sections 384 and 420 read with sections 109 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code.
The Special Judge issued process to the appellant.
Later, the Special Judge over ruled the objection of the appellant to take cognizance of the offences on a private complaint, and to issue process, in the absence of notification under section 7(2) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, specifying as to which of the three special Judges of the area should try such cases.
Against this, the appellant filed a revision application in the High Court, which dismissed it subsequently.
The appellant 's Special Leave Petition against this was dismissed by the Supreme Court which held that the complaint filed by respondent No. 1 was clearly maintainable and cognizance was properly taken of it.
During the pendency of the revision application in the High Court, the State Government notified the Special Judge to try the off 3 ences specified under section 6(1) of the Act and appointed another Special Judge, who discharged the appellant, holding that a member of the Legislative Assembly was a public servant and there was no valid sanction for prosecuting the appellant.
Against this order of discharge.
respondent No. 1 filed a Criminal Revision Application in the High Court, which was subsequently withdrawn to this Court.
On an appeal filed by respondent No. 1 directly under Article 136 of the Constitution against the order of discharge, the Supreme Court held on 16.2.1984, that a member of the Legislative Assembly was not a public servant, and set aside the order of the Special judge.
The Court observed that though nearly 2 1/2 years had rolled by since prosecution against the accused, who was Chief Minister of a State, was launched and his character and integrity came under cloud, the case had not moved an inch further and that an expeditious trial was primarily in the interest of the accused and mandate of Article 21.
It further observed that expeditious disposal of a criminal case was in the interest of both the prosecution and the accused.
It, therefore, suo motu withdrew this special case and another one filed against the appellant by another person and transferred them to the High Court, with the request to the Chief Justice to assign these two cases to a sitting Judge of the High Court, who should proceed to expeditiously dispose of the cases, preferably by holding trial from day to day.
Pursuant to the directions of this Court dated February 16, 1984 the Chief Justice of the High Court assigned the cases to one of the Judges of that Court.
The appellant appeared before him and raised an objection that the case could be tried only by a Special Judge appointed by the Government under the 1952 Act.
The Judge rejected this and other objections holding that he was bound by the order of the Supreme Court .
Special Leave Petitions as well as a writ petition filed by the appellant against the aforesaid decision were dismissed by this Court on April 17, 1984, holding that the Judge was perfectly justified, and indeed it was his duty to follow the decision of this Court which was binding on him.
It also observed that the writ petition challenging the validity of the order and judgment of this Court as nullity or otherwise could not be entertained, and that the dismissal of the writ petition would not prejudice the petitioner 's right to approach this Court, with an appropriate review petition or any other application, which he may be entitled to in law.
4 Thereafter, the cases were transferred to another Special Judge, who framed 21 charges and declined to frame 22 other charges proposed by respondent No. 1.
This Court allowed respondent No.1`s appeal by special leave except in regard to three draft charges under section 384 IPC, and requested the High Court to nominate another Judge to try the cases.
The Judge, to whom the cases were transferred, framed 79 charges against the appellant, and refused to proceed against the other named conspirators.
Against the aforesaid order, the appellant filed a Special Leave Petition before this Court questioning the jurisdiction of the Special Judge to try the case in violation of the appellant 's fundamental rights conferred by Articles 14 and 21 and the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 1952.
The appellant also filed a Special Leave Petition against the decision of the Judge, holding that none of the 79 charges framed against the accused required sanction under section 197(1) of the Cr.
P.C., and a writ petition challenging a portion of section 197(1) as ultra vires Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
This Court granted special leave in the Special Leave Petition questioning the jurisdiction of the Special Judge to try the case and stayed further proceedings in the High Court.
It also issued notice in the other Special Leave Petition and the writ petition, and directed these to be tagged on to the appeal.
An application filed by respondent No. 1 for revocation of the Special Leave was dismissed and the appeal was referred to a Bench of seven Judges.
The other Special Leave Petition and the writ petition were delinked, to be heard after the disposal of the appeal.
In the appeal, two questions arose, namely, (1) whether the directions given by this Court on 16th February, 1984, withdrawing the special cases pending in the Court of Special Judge and transferring the same to the High Court with the request to the Chief Justice to assign these cases to a sitting Judge of that High Court in breach of section 7(1) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 which mandated that the offences, as in this case, should be tried only by a Special Judge, thereby denying at least one right of appeal to the appellant was violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution and whether such direction were at all valid or legal and (2) if such directions were not at all valid or legal in view of the Court 's order of April 17, 1984, whether the present 5 appeal was sustainable or the grounds therein justiciable in these proceedings.
In other words, whether the said directions in a proceeding inter parties were binding even if bad in law or violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution and as such, immune from correction by this Court even though they caused prejudice and injury.
Allowing the appeal, and setting aside and quashing all the proceedings subsequent to the directions of the Court on 16.2.1984 and directing that the trial should proceed in accordance with law, i.e. Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952.
^ HELD: Majority: Sabyasachi Mukharji, Oza and Natarajan, JJ.
Per Sabyasachi Mukharji.
Section 7(1) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 creates a condition which is sine qua non for the trial of offences under section 6(1) of the said Act.
The condition is that notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure or any other law, the said offences shall be triable by Special Judges only.
The offences specified under section 6(1) of the 1952 Act are those punishable under sections 161, 162, 163, 164 and 165A of the Indian Penal Code and section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
[44B C,49H,A] Gurcharan Das Chadha vs State of Rajasthan, ; referred to.
Therefore, the order of this Court transferring the cases to the High Court on 16th February, 1984 was not authorised by law.
This Court, by its directions could not confer jurisdiction on the High Court to try any case, when it did not possess such jurisdiction under the scheme of the 1952 Act.
[49A B] Kiran Singh and others vs Chaman Paswan & Others, ; at 121 and M. L. Sethi vs R. P. Kapur, ; relied on.
2.1 The power to create or enlarge jurisdiction is legislative in character, so also the power to confer a right of appeal or to take away a right of appeal.
Parliament alone can do it by law.
No Court, whether superior or inferior or both combined can enlarge the jurisdiction of the Court or divest a person of his rights of revision and appeal.
[50E] 6 M.L. Sethi vs R.P. Kapur, ; and Raja Soap Factory vs section P. Shantara;, ; referred to.
Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Vol.10 page at para 720 and Ammon Rubinstein 's Jurisdiction and Illegality, [1965] Edn.
16 50 referred to.
2.2 Want of jurisdiction can be established solely by superior court and in practice, no decision can be impeached collaterally by any interior court, but the superior court can always correct its own error brought to its notice either by way of petition or ex debito justitiae.[50G] Rubinstein 's jurisdiction and illegality(1965 Edn.) referred to.
2.3 The distinction between an error which entails absence of jurisdiction and an error made within the jurisdiction is so fine that it is rapidly being eroded.
[69H.70A] Anismatic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commissioner, [1969] 1 All E.R.208 at 241 referred to.
This is not a case of collateral attack on judicial proceedings; it is a case where the Court having no court superior to it rectifies its own order.
[69] The impugned directions were void because power was not there for this Court to transfer a proceeding under the Act of 1952 from one Special Judge to the High Court.
[69G] The singling out of the appellant for a speedier trial by the High Court for an offence which the High Court had no jurisdiction to try under the Act of 1952 was unwarranted, unprecedented and directions given by this Court for the said purposes were not warranted.
When that fact is brought to the notice of the court, it must remedy the situation.
[51D E] 2.4 In rectifying the error, no personal inhibitions should debar this Court because no person should suffer by reason of any mistake of this Court.
Here no rule of res judicata would apply to prevent this Court from entertaining the grievance and giving appropriate directions.[51E F] Soni Vrajlal Jethalal vs Soni Jadavji and Govindji & Ors.
AIR 1972 Gujarat 148 approved.
7 In the earlier judgment, the points for setting aside the decision did not include the question of withdrawal of the case from the Court of Special Judge to the Supreme Court and transfer of it to the High Court.
Unless a plea in question is taken it cannot operate as res judicata.[62G H] Shivshankar Prasad Shah and others v Baikunth Nath Singh and others; , ; Bikan Mahuri and others vs Mst.
Bibi Walian and others, A.I.R. 1939 Patna 633; S.L. Kapoor vs Jagmohan and others, [1981] 1 S.C.C. 746; Maneka Gandhi vs Union of India, [1978] 2 S.C.R. 621 at pages 674 681 and Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs The State of Bihar and others, and 623 referred to.
3.1 Section 407 of the Criminal Procedure Code was subject to over riding mandate of section 7(1) of the 1952 Act and, hence it does not permit the High Court to withdraw a case for trial to itself from the Court of Special Judge.[60D E] 3.2 Article 134(1)(b) of the Constitution does not recognise in every High Court power to withdraw for trial cases from any Court subordinate to its authority.
At least this Article cannot be construed to mean that where power to withdraw is restricted, it can be widened by virtue of Article 134(1)(b) of the Constitution.
[67B C] 3.3 Where by a specific clause of a specific statute the power is given for trial by the Special Judge only and transfer can be from one such Judge to another Special Judge, there is no warrant to suggest that the High Court has power to transfer Such a case from a Judge under section 6 of the Act of 1952 to itself.
It is not a case of exclusion of the superior Courts.
[67C] In the facts of the instant case, the criminal revision application which was pending before the High Court even if it was deemed to be transferred to this Court under Article 139A of the Constitution, it would not have vested this Court with power larger than what is contained in section 407 of Criminal Procedure Code.
Under section 407 of the Criminal Procedure Code read with the Criminal Law Amendment Act, the High Court could not transfer to itself proceedings under sections 6 and 7 of the said Act.
This Court, by transferring the proceedings tb itself, could not have acquired larger jurisdiction.
The fact that the objection was not raised before this Court gave directions on 16th February, 1984 cannot amount to any waiver.
[161F G] 8 Ledgard vs Bull, 131 A 134, Meenakshi Naidoo vs Subramaniya A Sastri, 141 A 160 referred to.
3.4 The Parliament did not grant to the Court the jurisdiction to transfer a case to the High Court.
However, as the superior Court is deemed to have a general jurisdiction, the law presumes that the Court acted within jurisdiction.
[60G] In the instant case, the presumption cannot be taken, firstly, because the question of jurisdiction was not agitated before the Court; secondly, these directions were given per incuriam and thirdly, the superior Court alone can set aside an error in its directions when attention is drawn to that error.
This view is warranted only because of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case.
Here the trial of a citizen in a Special Court under special jurisdiction is involved; hence the liberty of the subject is involved.
[60H,61A B] Kuchenmeister vs Home office, ; Attorney General vs Herman James Sillam, [1864] 10 H.L.C. 703 and Issacs vs
Robertson, [1984] 3 A.I.R. 140 referred to.
Jurisdiction and Illegality by Amnon Rubinstein, [1965] Edn.
referred to.
4.1 Per incuriam are those decisions given in ignorance or forget fulness of some inconsistent statutory provision or some authority binding on the Court concerned so that in such cases some part of the decision or some step in the reasoning on which it is based is found, on that account to be demonstrably wrong.
If a decision is given per in curiam, the Court can ignore it.
[52A B, 53G] Morelle vs Wakeling, ; ; State of Orissa vs The Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd., ; and Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs State of Bihar , 623 referred to.
In the instant case, when this Court gave directions on 16th February 1984, for disposal of the case against the appellant by the High Court, it was oblivious of the relevant provisions of the law and the decision in Anwar Ali Sarkar 's case, which is a binding precedent [51G H] 4.2 A Full Bench or a Constitution Bench decision was binding on the Constitution Bench because it was a Bench of seven Judges.
There is 9 a hierarchy in this Court itself where larger Benches over rule smaller Benches which is the crystallised rule of law.
[52E,F] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; ; Nattulal vs Radhe Lal, ; ; Union of lndia and Anr.
vs KS.
Subramaniam, ; at p. 92; State of U.P. vs Ram Chandra Trivedi, ; at 473; Halsbury 's Laws of England, 4th Edn.
26 page 297, para 578 and page 300, relevant notes on 8.11 and 15; Dias on Jurisprudence, 5th Edn.
pages 128 and 130; Young vs Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd. at 300; Moore vs Hewitt at 272A; Penny vs Mcholas, and Javed Ahmed Abdul Hamid Pawala vs State of Maharashtra, ; referred to.
It was manifest to the Bench that exclusive jurisdiction created under section 7(1) of the 1952 Act read with section 6 of the said Act, when brought to the notice of the Court, precluded the exercise of power under section 407 of the Code.
There was no argument, no submission and no decision on this appeal at all.
There was no prayer in the appeal which was pending before this Court for such directions.
[59D E] The order of this Court was clearly per incuriam.
The Court was not called upon to and did not, decide the express limitation on the power conferred by section 407 of the Code.
which includes offences by public servants mentioned in the 1952 Act to be over ridden in the manner sought to be followed as a consequential direction of this Court.
This Court did not have jurisdiction to transfer the case to itself.
That will be evident from an analysis of different provisions of the Code as well as the 1952 Act [50C D] Therefore, in view of the clear provisions of section 7(2) of the Act of 1952 and Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution these directions were legally wrong.
[52C] 4.3 Though the previous statute is referred to in the other judgment delivered on the same date, in connection with other contentions, section 7(1) was not referred to in respect of the impugned directions.
Hence these observations were indubitably per incuriam.
[66A] Miliangos vs George Frank (Textiles) Ltd, at 821 referred to.
This Court is not powerless to correct its error which has the 10 effect of depriving a citizen of his fundamental rights and more so, the A right to life and liberty.
It can do so in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction in any proceeding pending before it without insisting on the formalities of a review application.
[54A B] Powers of review can be exercised in a petition file under Article 136 or Article 32 or under any other provision of the Constitution if the Court is satisfied that its directions have resulted in the deprivation of the fundamental rights of a citizen or any legal right of the petitioner.
[54B C] The Supreme Court has the power to review either under Article 137 or suo motu the directions given by this Court.
[62E] Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, U.P. Allahabad, [1963] Suppl.1 SCR 885; Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and others vs State of Maharashtra and another; , and Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of U.P., [1963] 1 S.C.R. 778; Kailash Nath vs State of U.P. AIR 1957 (SC) 790; P.S.R. Sadhananatham vs Arunachalam, ; ; Suk Das vs Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh, [1986] 2 S.C.C. 401; Asrumati Devi vs Kumar Rupendra Deb Raikot and others; , ; Satyadhyan Ghosal and others vs Smt.
Deorajin Debi and another; , ; Sukhrani (dead) by L.Rs.
and others vs Hari Shanker and others; , and Bejoy Gopal Mukherji vs Pratul Chandra Ghose, ; referred to.
It is also well settled that an elementary rule of justice is that no party should suffer by mistake of the Court.
[63B] Sastri Yagnapurushadji and others vs Muldas Bhudardas Vaishya and another; , ; Jang Singh vs Brijlal ; ;Bhajahari Mondal vs
The State of West Bengal; , at 1284 1286 and Asgarali N. Singaporawalle vs The State of Bombay ; at 692 referred to.
It was a mistake of so great a magnitude that it deprives a man by being treated differently of his fundamental right for defending himself in a criminal trial in accordance with law.
Therefore, when the attention of the Court is drawn, the Court has always the power and the obligation to correct it ex debito justitiae and treat the second application by its inherent power, as a power of review to correct the original mistake.
[56C D] The directions have been issued without observing the principle of audi alteram partem.[53D] 11 This Court is not debarred from re opening this question and giving proper directions and correcting the error in the present appeal.
[53C] The appellant should not suffer on account of the direction of this Court based upon an error leading to conferment of jurisdiction.
[53B] 7.
The principle of finality on which Article 145(e) proceeds applies to both judgments and orders made by the Supreme Court.
But directions given per incuriam in violation of certain constitutional limitations and in derogation of the principles of natural justice can always be remedied by the court ex debite justitiae.
[68F G] In the instant case, this Court is correcting an irregularity committed by the Court not on construction or misconstruction of a statute but on non perception of certain provisions and certain authorities which would amount to derogation of the constitutional rights of the citizen.
[69C D] Issacs vs Robertson, and Re Recal Communications Ltd. Case, ; referred to.
No prejudice need be proved for enforcing the fundamental rights.
Violation of a fundamental right itself renders the impugned action void.
So also, the violation of the principles of natural justice renders the act a nullity.[59H] 9.1 Four valuable rights of the appellant have been taken away by the impugned directions.
i) The right to be tried by a Special Judge in accordance with the procedure established by law and enacted by Parliament.
ii) The right of revision to the High Court under section 9 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act.
iii) The right of first appeal to the High Court under the same section iv) The right to move the Supreme Court under Article 136 thereafter by way of a second appeal, if necessary.
The right of the appellant under Article 14 regarding equality 12 before the law and equal protection of law has been violated.
The appellant has also a right not to be singled out for special treatment by a Special Court created for him alone.
This right is implicit in the right to equality.
[60A C,62A B] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; relied on.
The appellant has a further right under Article 21 of the Constitution a right to trial by a Special Judge under section 7(1) of the 1952 Act which is the procedure established by law made by the Parliament and a further right to move the High Court by way of revision or first appeal under section 9 of the said Act.
He has also a right not to suffer any order passed behind his back by a Court in violation of the basic principles of natural justice.
Directions having been given in this case without hearing the appellant, though the order was passed in the presence of the counsel for the appellant, these are bad.
[62B Dl It is proper for this Court to act ex debito justitiae, in favour of the fundamental rights of the appellant.
[62E] Nawabkhan Abbas Khan vs The State of Gujarat, ; referred to.
9.2 There was prejudice to the accused in being singled out as a special class of accused for a special dispensation witbout any room for any appeal as of right and without power of revision to the High Court.
[67G] Romesh Chandra Arora vs The State, at 927 distinguished.
9.3 The trial even of person holding public office though to be made speedily must be done in accordance with the procedure estab lished by law.
The provisions of section 6 read with section 7 of the Act of 1952 in the facts and circumstances of this case is the procedure established by law, and any deviation even by a judicial direction will be negation of the rule of law.
[68D E] By judicial direction, the rights and previliges of the accused have been curtailed without any justification in law.
[ 68B] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; relied on.
13 Re: Special Courts Bill, [1978] referred to.
9.4 The right of appeal under section 374 of the Cr.
P.C. is confined only to cases decided by the High Court in its Letters Patent jurisdiction which in terms is extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction ' under clause 27 of Letters Patent.
[63F] Kavasji Pestonji Dalal vs Rustomji Sorabji Jamadar & Anr., AIR 1949 Bom.
42, Sunil Chandra Roy & Anr.
vs The State AIR 1954 Cal. 305; Sasadhar Acharjya & Anr.
vs Sir Charles Tegart & Ors., [1935] Cal.
Weekly Notes1089;People insurance Co. Ltd. vs Sardul Singh Caveeshgar & Ors.
J AIR 1961 Punj.
87 and P.P. Front, New Delhi vs K. K Birla.
referred to.
9.5 By the time the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 was framed, Article 21 had not been interpreted so as to include one right of appeal both on facts and law.
[64C] 10.
Words should normally be given their ordinary meaning bearing in mind the context.
It is only where the literal meaning is not clear that one resorts to the golden rule of interpretation or the mischief rule of interpretation.
[66C] Sussex Peerage Claim, ; at 143 referred to.
Cross: Statutory Interpretation, p. 36.
In view of the specific language used in section 7 of the 1952 Act, it is not necessary to consider whether the procedure for trial by Special Judges under the Code has stood repealed or not.
The concept of repeal may have no application in this case.
[66B] 11.
No man is above the law, but at the same time, no man can be denied his rights under the Constitution and the laws.
He has a right to be dealt with in accordance with the law and not in derogation of it.
[71B] This Court, in its anxiety to facilitate the parties to have a speedy trial, gave direction on 16th February, 1984 without conscious awareness of the exclusive jurisdiction of the Special Courts under the 1952 Act and that being the only procedure established by law, there can be no deviation from the terms of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
That is the only procedure under which it should have been guided.
[71B C] 14 By reason of giving the impugned directions, this Court had also unintentionally caused the appellant the denial of rights under Article 14 of the Constitution by denying him the equal protection of law by being singled out for a special procedure not provided for by law.
[71C D] When these factors are brought to the notice of this Court, even if there are any technicalities, this Court should not feel shackled and decline to rectify that injustice; or otherwise, the injustice noticed will remain forever a blot on justice.
[71D] 12.1 The basic fundamentals of the administration of justice are simple.
No man should suffer because of the mistake of Court.
No man should suffer a wrong by technical procedure of irregularities.
Rules or procedures are the hand maids of justice and not the mistress of the justice.
If a man has been wronged so long as it lies within the human machinery of administration of justice that wrong must be remedied.
[72B C] 12.2 The maxim "Actus Curiae Neminem Gravabit" An act of the Court shall prejudice no man is founded upon justice and good sense and affords a safe and certain guide for the administration of the law.
[71E] Alaxander Rodger vs The Comptoir Dlescompte De Paris Cham Reports, Vol.
III 1869 71 p. 465 at 475 referred to. 13.
Purity of public life is one of the cardinal principles which t. must be upheld as a matter of public policy.
Allegations of legal infractions and criminal infractions must be investigated in accordance with law and procedure established under the Constitution.
[73B] Even if the accused has been wronged, if he is allowed to be left in doubt that would cause more serious damage to him.
Public confidence in public administration should not be eroded any further.
One wrong cannot be remedied by another wrong.
[73B] The legal wrong that has been done to the appellant should be remedied and right should be done.
In doing so, no more further injury should be caused to the public purpose.
[73C] The impugned directions were in deprival of the Constitutional rights and contrary to the express provisions of the Criminal Law 15 Amendment Act, 1952, in violation of the principles of natural justice, and without precedent in the background of the Act of 1952.
The directions definitely deprived the appellant of certain rights of appeal and revision and his rights under the Constitution.
[69F] Having regard to the enormity of the consequences of the error to the appellant and by reason of the fact that the directions were given suo motu, there is nothing which detracts the power of the Court to review its judgment ex debito justitiae in case injustice has been caused.
No Court however high has jurisdiction to give an order unwarranted by the Constitution.
[70A B] Ittavira Mathai vs Varke,P Varkey and others; , referred to.
Bhatia Cooperative Housing Society Ltd. vs D.C. Patel, ; at 190 distinguished.
Since this Court infringed the Constitutional safeguards granted to a citizen or to an accused, in giving the directions and injustice results therefrom, it is just and proper for the Court to rectify and recall that injustice in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case.
Therefore, all the proceedings in the matter subsequent to the directions of this Court on February 16, 1984, are set aside and quashed and the trial should proceed in accordance with law, that is to say, under the Act of 1952.
[70C,73D E] R.S. Nayak vs A.R. Antulay, ; ; A.R. Antulay vs Ramdas Sriniwas Nayak and another; , ; Abdul Rehman Antulay vs Union of India and others etc. ; at 483; Kailash Nath vs State of U.P., AIR 1957 SC 790; Sukdas vs Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh Discretion to Disobey by Mortimer R. Kadish and Sanford H. Kadish pages 111 and 112 referred to.
Per Ranganath Misra, J. (Concurring) 14.
Section 7(1) has clearly provided that offences specified in sub section (1) of section 6 shall be triable by the Special Judge only and has taken away the power of the courts established under the Code of Criminal Procedure to try those offences.
As long as section 7 of the Amending Act of 1952 holds the field it was not open to any court including the Apex Court to act contrary to section 7(1) of the Amending Act.[81E F] 16 State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; referred to.
The power to transfer a case conferred by the Constitution or by section 406 of the Code of Criminal Procedure does not specifically relate to the Special Court.
Section 406 of the Code could be applied on the principle that the Special Judge was a subordinate court for transferring a case from one Special Judge to another Special Judge because such a transfer would not contravene the mandate of section 7(1) of the Amending Act of 1952.
While that may be so, the provisions for transfer, do not authorise transfer of a case pending in the court of a Special Judge first to the Supreme Court and then to the High Court for trial.
This Court did not possess the power to transfer the proceedings from the Special Judge to the High Court.
[81G H,82A] Raja Soap Factory vs S.P. Santharaj, ; referred to.
16.1 It is the settled position in law that jurisdiction of courts comes solely from the law of the land and cannot be exercised other wise.
[77E] 16.2 Jurisdiction can be exercised only when provided for either in the Constitution or in the laws made by the Legislature.
Jurisdiction is thus the authority or power of the court to deal with a matter and make an order carrying binding force in the facts.
[77G] 17.
By the change of forum of trial the accused has been pre judiced.
By this process he misses a forum of appeal because if the trial was handled by a Special Judge, the first appeal would lie to the High Court and a further appeal by special leave could come before this Court.
If the matter is tried by the High Court there would be only one forum of appeal being this Court, whether as of right or by way of special leave.
[83H, 84A B] 18.
The transfer was a suo motu direction of the court.
Since this particular aspect of the matter had not been argued and counsel did not have an opportunity of pointing out the legal bar against transfer, the Judges of this Court obviously did not take note of the special provisions In section 7(1) of the 1952 Act.
If this position had been appropriately placed, the direction for transfer from the court of exclusive jurisdiction to the High Court would not have been made by the Constitution Bench.
It is appropriate to presume that this Court never intends to act contrary to law.
[82E F] 17 19.
One of the well known principles of law is that decision made by a competent court should be taken as final subject to further proceedings contemplated by the law of procedure.
In the absence of any further proceedings, the direction of the Constitution Bench on 16th of February, 1984 became final and it is the obligation of everyone to implement the direction of the apex Court.
Such an order of this Court should by all canons of judicial discipline he binding on this Court as well and cannot be interfered with after attaining finality.
[84C D] 20.1 It is a well settled position in law that an act of the court should not injure any of the suitors.
[84F] Alexander Rodger vs The Comptori D 'Escompte De Paris, [1871] 3 PC 465 referred to.
Once it is found that the order of transfer by this Court was not within jurisdiction by the direction of the transfer of the proceedings made by this Court, the appellant should not suffer.
[85B] 20.3 This being the apex Court, no litigant has any opportunity of approaching any higher forum to question its decisions.
Once judicial satisfaction is reached that the direction was not open to be made and it is accepted as a mistake of the court, it is not only appropriate but also the duty of the Court to rectify the mistake by exercising inherent powers.
A mistake of the Court can be corrected by the Court itself without any fetters.
In the present situation, the Court 's inherent powers can be exercised to remedy the mistake.
[87F,88B C] Gujarat vs Ram Prakash ; Alexander Rodger vs The Comptori D 'Escompte De Paris, [1871] 3 PC 465 and Krishna Deo vs Radha Kissan, ; ; Debi vs Habib lLR 35 All 331 and Murtaza vs Yasin.
AIR 191 PC 857 referred to.
20.4 The injustice done should be corrected by applying the principle actus curiae neminem gravabit, an act of the court shall prejudice no one.[88H] 20.5 To err is human.
Courts including the apex one are no exception.
To own up the mistake when judicial satisfaction is reached does not militate against its status or authority.
Perhaps it would enhance both.
[89B] 21.
If a mistake is detected and the apex Court is not able to 18 correct it with a view to doing justice for fear of being misunderstood, the cause of justice is bound to suffer and for the apex Court the apprehension would not be a valid consideration.
This Court, while administering justice, does not take into consideration as to who is before it.
Every litigant is entitled to the same consideration and if an order is warranted in the interest of justice, the status or influence of the accused cannot stand in the way as a bar to the making of that order.
[89F G] 22.
Finality of the orders is the rule.
By directing recall of an order, the well settled propositions of law would not be set at naught.
Such a situation may not recur in the ordinary course of judicial functioning and if there be one, certainly the Bench before which it comes would appropriately deal with it.
Nn strait jacket formula can be laid down for judicial functioning particularly for the apex Court.
The apprehension that the decision to recall the earlier decision may be used as a precedent to challenge judicial orders of this Court is perhaps misplaced because those who are familiar with the judicial functioning are aware of the limits and they would not seek support from this case as a precedent.
This Court is sure that if precedent value is sought to be derived out of this decision, the Court which is asked to use this as an instrument would be alive to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case in which this order is being made.
[87H, 90A B] 23.
Under the Rules of the Court a review petition was not to be heard in Court and was liable to be disposed of by circulation.
In these circumstances, the petition of appeal could not be taken as a review petition.
[87E] 24.
Benches of this Court are not subordinate to larger Benches thereof and certiorari is, therefore, not admissible for quashing of the orders made on the judicial side of the Court.
[85C] Naresh Chandra Mirajkar & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, U.P., Allahabad referred to.
Apart from the fact that the petition of review had to be filed within 30 days and here there has been inordinate delay the petition for review had to be placed before the same Bench and now that two of the learned judges of that Constitution Bench are still available, 19 it must have gone only before a Bench of five with those two learned Judges.
[87D E] 26.
It is time to sound a note of caution.
This Court under its Rules of Business ordinarily sits in divisions and not as a whole one.
Each Bench, whether small or large, exercises the powers vested in the Court and decisions rendered by the Benches irrespective of their size are considered as decisions of the Court.
The practice has developed that a larger Bench is entitled to overrule the decision of a smaller Bench notwithstanding the fact that each of the decisions is that of the Court.
That principle, however, would not apply in the present situation, and since this Court is sitting as a Bench of Seven this Court is not entitled to reverse the decision of the Constituffon Bench.
[89B C] 27.
Overruling when made by a larger Bench of an earlier decision of a smaller one is intended to take away the precedent value of the decision without affecting the binding effect of the decision in the particular case.
[89C] In the instant case, the appellant is, therefore, not entitled to take advantage of the matter being before a larger Bench.
In fact, if it is a case of exercise of inherent powers to rectify a mistake it was open even to a five Judge Bench to do that and it did not require a Bench larger than the Constitution Bench for that purpose.
[89D] Per Oza, J. (Supplementing) 28.
The jurisdiction to try a case could only be conferred by law enacted by the legislature and this Court could not confer jurisdiction if it does not exist in law.
[90F] 29.
No doubt a judgment or an order passed by this Court will not be open to a writ of certiorari even if an error is apparent.
But at the same time, there should be no hesitation in correcting an error in exercise of inherent jurisdiction if it comes to the notice of the Court.
[90D E] In the instant case, it is this error which is sought to be corrected, although it is being corrected after long lapse of time.
[90F] Per Ray,J.(Concurring) 20 30.
The Jurisdiction or power to try and decide a cause is conferred on the courts by the Law of the Lands enacted by the Legislature or by the provisions of the Constitution and the court cannot confer a jurisdiction on itself which is not provided in the law and judicial order of this Court is not Emenable to a writ of certiorari tor correcting any error in the judgment.
However, since the act of the court should not injure any of the suitors, the error in question is sought to be corrected.
after a lapse of more than three years.
[90H,91A B] Per Venkatachaliah, J. (Dissenting) 31.1 The exclusiveness of jurisdiction uf the special judge under section 7(1) of 1952 Act depends on the construction to be placed on the relevant statutory provision.
If on such a construction, however erroneous it may be, the court holds that the operation of section 407 Cr.
P.C. is not excluded, that interpretation will denude the plenitude of the exclusivity claimed for the forum.
To say that the court usurped legislative powers and created a new jurisdiction and a new forum ignores the basic concept of functioning of courts.
The power to interpret laws is the domain and function of courts.
[108D E] Thomas vs Collins, ; referred to.
31.2 The earlier decision proceeded on a construction of section 7(1) of the Act and section 407 of Cr.
This bench does not sit in appeal over what the five Judge Bench said and proclaim how wrong they were.
This Bench is simply not entitled to embark, at a later stage, upon an investigation of the correctness of the very decision.
The same bench can, of course, reconsider the matter under Article 137.
32.1 The expression "jurisdiction" or the power to determine is a verbal cast of many colours.
In the case of a Tribunal, an error of law might become not merely an error m jurisdiction but might partake of the character of an error of jurisdiction.
But, otherwise jurisdiction is a 'legal shelter ', a power to bind despite a possible error in the decision.
[102C] 32.2.
In relation to the powers of superior courts, the familiar distinction between jurisdictional issues and adjudicatory issues approts priate to Tribunals of limited jurisdiction has no place.
[102A] 32.3 Before a superior court there is no distinction in the quality of the decision making process respecting jurisdictional questions on the one hand and adjudicatory issues or issues pertaining to the merits, on the other.
[102B] 21 32.4 The existence of jurisdiction does not depend on the correctness of its exercise.
The authority to decide embodies a privilege to bind despite error, a privilege which is inherent in and indispensable to every judicial function.
The characteristic attribute of a judicial act is that it binds whether it be right or it be wrong.
[102D] Mallikarjun vs Narhari, [1900] 27 I.A. 2 10 referred to.
Anismatic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commission, ; distinguished.
32.5 A finding of a superior court even on a question of its own jurisdiction, however grossly erroneous it may otherwise be, is not a nullity nor one which could at all be said to have been reached without jurisdiction, susceptible to be ignored or to admit of any collateral attack.
Otherwise, the adjudications of superior courts would be held up to ridicule and the remedies generally arising from and considered concomitants of such classification of judicial errors would be so seriously abused and expanded as to make a mockery of those foundational principles essential to the stability of administration of justice.
[102G,103A] 32.6 The superior court has jurisdiction to determine its own jurisdiction and an error in that determination does not make it an error of jurisdiction.
[103B] Holdsworth (History of English Law) Vol.
6 page 239 and Rubinstein: Jurisdiction and Illegality referred to.
Re Racal Communications Ltd. ; and Issac vs Robertson, referred to.
32.7 Superior courts apart, even the ordinary civil courts of the land have jurisdiction to decide questions of their own jurisdiction.
[105H] It would be wholly erroneous to characterise the directions issued by the five Judge Bench as a nullity, amenable to be ignored or so declared in a collateral attack.
[106E] 33.
A judgment, inter parties, is final and concludes the parties.
[106F] Re Hastings (No. 3) ; Daryao vs State of UP; , ; Trilok Chand vs H.B. Munshi, and 22 Shiv Nandan Paswan vs State of Bihar, [ ; at 343 relied on 34.1 All accused persons cannot claim to be tried by the same Judge.
The discriminations inherent in the choice of one of the concurrent jurisdictions are not brought about by an inanimate statutory rule or by executive fiat.
The withdrawal of a case under section 407 is made by a conscious judicial act and is the result of judicial discernment.
If the law permits the withdrawal of the trial to the High Court from a Special Judge, such a law enabling withdrawal would not, prima facie, be bad as violation of Article 14.
[114G H, 115A] 34.2 No doubt, the fundamental right under Article 14 has a very high place in constitutional scale of values.
Before a person is deprived of his personal liberty, not only that the procedure established by law must strictly be complied with and not departed from to the disadvantage or detriment of the person but also that the procedure for such deprivation of personal liberty must be reasonable, fair and just.
Article 21 imposes limitations upon the procedure and requires it to conform to such standards of reasonableness, fairness and justness as the Court acting as sentinel of fundamental rights would in the context, consider necessary and requisite.
The Court will be the arbiter of the question whether the procedure is reasonable, fair and just.
[114D F] 34.3 The five judge bench in the earlier case has held that such a transfer is permissible under law.
That decision had assumed finality.
The appeal to the principle in Anwar Ali 's Sarcar 's case, in such a context would be out of place.
[115A] State of West Bengal vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; distinguished.
That a trial by a Judge of the High Court makes for added re assurance of justice, has been recognised in a number of judicial pronouncements.
The argument that a Judge of the High Court may not necessarily possess the statutory qualifications requisite for being appointed as a Special Judge appears to be specious.
A judge of the High Court hears appeals arising from the decisions of the Special Judge and exercises a jurisdiction which includes powers co extensive with that of the trial court.
[115C D] 36.
The plea that transfer of the case to the High Court involves the elimination of the appellant 's right of appeal to the High Court 23 which he would otherwise have and that the appeal under Article 136 of the Constitution as of right cannot be accepted in view of section 374, Cr. P.C. which provides such an appeal, as of right, when the trial is held by the High Court.
[117A B] 37.
Directions for transfer were issued on 16.2.1984 in the open court in the presence of appellant 's counsel at the time of pronouncement of the judgment and counsel had the right and the opportunity of making submission to the court as to the permissibility or otherwise of the transfer.
After the directions were pronounced and before the order was signed, though there was opportunity for the appellant 's counsel to make submission in regard to the alleged illegality or impropriety of the directions, appellant did not utilise the same.
That apart, even after being told by two judicial orders that appellant, if aggrieved, may seek a review, he did not do so.
Even the grounds urged in the many subsequent proceedings appellant took to get rid of the effect of the direction do not appear to include the grievance that he had no opportunity of being heard.
[115F, G H,116A B] Therefore, where a party having had an opportunity to raise a grievance in the earlier proceedings does not do so and makes it a technicality later, he cannot be heard to complain.
[116B] Rules of natural justice embodies fairness in action.
By all standards, they are great assurances of justice and fairness.
But they should not be Pushed to a breaking point.
[116F] R. vs Secretary of State for Home Deptt.
ex parte Mughal, , referred to.
38.1 The circumstance that a decision is reached per incuriam, merely serves to denude the decision of its precedent value.
Such a decision would not be binding as a judicial precedent.
A co ordinate bench can discharge with it and decline to follow it.
A larger bench can over rule such decision.
When a previous decision is so overruled it does not happen nor has the overruling bench any jurisdiction so to do that the finality of the operative order, inter parties, in the previous decision is over turned.
In this context the word 'decision ' means only the reason for the previous order and not the operative order in the previous decision, binding inter parties.
Even if a previous decision is over 24 ruled by a larger bench, the efficacy and binding nature, of the adjudication expressed in the operative order remains undisturbed interparties.
[119B D] 38.2 Even if the earlier decision of the five judge bench is perincuriam the operative part of the order cannot be interfered with in the manner now sought to be done.
That apart, the five judge bench gave its reason.
The reason may or may not be sufficient.
There is advertence to section 7(1) of the 1952 Act and to exclusive jurisdiction created thereunder.
There is also reference to section 407 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
[119D E] 39.1 An erroneous decision must be as binding as a correct one.
It would be an unattainable ideal to require the binding effect of a judgment to depend on its being correct in the absolute, for the test of correctness would be resort to another Court the infallibility of which is again subject to a similar further investigation.
[101D E] 39.2 However, motions to set aside the judgments are permitted where a judgment was rendered in ignorance of the fact that u necessary party had not been served at all, and was wrongly shown as served or in ignorance of the fact that a necessary party had died and the estate was not represented, or where a judgment was obtained by fraud, and it tended to prejudice a non party, as in the case of judgments in rem such as for divorce, or jactitation or probate etc.
even a person, not eo nomine a party to the proceedings, or where a party has had no notice and a decree is made against him in which case, the party is said to become entitled to relief ex debito justitiae, on proof of the fact that there was no service, since there is no trial at all and the judgment is for default.
[110C F] Cases of such frank failure of natural justice are obvious cases where relief is granted as of right.
[111A] Where a person is not actually served out but is held erroneously, to have been served, he can agitate that grievance only in that forum or in any further proceeding therefrom.
[111A] Issac vs Robertson, distinguished.
Rajunder Narain Rae vs Bijai Govind Singh, 2 MIA 181, referred to.
25 D.M. Gordan: Actions to set aside judgment, [1961] 77 Law quarterly Review 358 In the present case by the order dated 5.4.1984 a five judge bench set out, what according to it was the legal basis and source of jurisdiction to order transfer.
On 17.4.1984 appellant 's writ petition challenging that transfer as a nullity was dismissed.
These orders are not which appellant is entitled to have set aside ex debito justitiae by another Bench.
[111C D] 40.
The pronouncements of every Division Bench of this Court are pronouncements of the Court itself.
A larger bench, merely on the strength of its numbers, cannot un do the finality of the decisions of Other division benches.
[108H] 41.1 The power to alter a decision by review must be expressly conferred or necessarily inferred.
The power of review and the limitations on the power under Article 137 are implict recognitions of what would, otherwise, be final and irrevocable.
No appeal could be made to the doctrine of inherent powers of the Court either.
Inherent powers do not confer, or constitute a source of jurisdiction :.
They are to be exercised in aid of a e that is already invested.
[120F G] 41.2 If the decision suffers from an error, the only way to correct it, is to go in Review under Article 137 read with order 40 Rule 1 framed under Article 145 before "as far as is practicable" the same judges.
This is not a matter merely of some dispensable procedural 'form ' but the requirement of substance.
[109A] In the instant case, the remedy of the appellant is recourse to Article 137, no where else.
This is both in good sense and good law.
[120G] Judicial proceedings of this Court are not subject to writ jurisdiction thereof.
[118H] Naresh Sridhar Mirajkar & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Anr., followed.
Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, UP, , referred to.
Kadesh & Kadesh: Discretion to Disobey, [1973] edn.
P. 111, referred to.
26 42.
The maxim Actus Curiae Neminem Gravabid had no application to conscious conclusions reached in a judicial decision.
The maxim is not a source of a general power to reopen and rehear adjudication which have otherwise assumed finality.
The maximum operates in a different and narrow area.
The best illustration of the operation of the maxim is provided by the application of the rule of nunc pro tunc.
For instance, if owing to the delay in what the court should, otherwise, have done earlier but did later, a party suffers owing to events occurring in the interrugnum, the Court has the power to remedy it.
The area of operation of the maxim is, generally, procedural.
Errors in judicial findings, either of facts or law or operative decisions consciously arrived at as a part of the judicial exercise cannot be interfered with by resort to this maxim.
[120B C] 43.
Those who do not put the teachings of experience and the lessons of logic out of consideration would tell what inspires confidence in the judiciary and what does not.
Judicial vacillations fall in the latter category and undermine respect of the judiciary and judicial institutions, denuding thereby respect for law and the confidence in the even handedness in the administration of justice by Courts.
[120E] This Court had, therefore, the jurisdiction and power to with draw and transfer the cases from Special Judge to the High Court, and the directions for trial of the offences by a Special Judge are not void and these directions could not be challenged in a collateral attack.
This Court had not created a new jurisdiction and usurped legislative power violating the basic tenet of doctrine of separation of powers.
[99C F, 114D, 106E] 44.
An accused person cannot assert any right to a joint trial with his co accused.
Normally it is the right of the prosecution to decide whom it prosecutes.
It can decline to array a person as a co accused and, instead examine him as a witness for the prosecution.
What weight is to be attached to that evidence, as it may smack of the testimony of a guilty partner in crime, is a different matter.
Prosecution can enter Nolle proseque against any accused person.
It can seek to withdraw a charge against an accused person.
These propositions are too well settled to require any further elaboration.
[98B D] Choraria vs Maharashtra, , referred to.
In the instant case, the appellant cannot be heard to complain.
Of the so called co conspirators some have been examined already as pro 27 secution witnesses; some others proposed to be so examined; and two others, had died in the interregnum.
The appeal, on the point, has no substance and would require to be dismissed.
[98G] Per Ranganathan, J. (partly concurring/dissenting) 45.1 The language of section 7(1) of the 1952 Act places a definite hurdle in the way of construing section 407 of the Cr.
P.C. as overriding its provisions.
In view of non obstante clause also, it cannot be held that the provisions of section 407 of the 1973 Cr.
P.C. will override, or even operate consistently with, the provisions of the 1952 Act.
Similarly, the power of transfer contained m clause 29 of the letters Patent of the High Court cannot be exercised in a manner not contemplated by section 7(1) of the 1952 Act.
[131D E] 45.2 A power of transfer postulates that the court to which transfer or withdrawal is sought is competent to exercise jurisdiction over the case.
[130F] Raja Soap Factory vs Shantaraj, [ 1965] 2 SCR, relied on.
45.3 The power of transfer contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure cannot be availed of to transfer a criminal case from a Special Judge to any other criminal court or even to the High Court.
The case can be transferred only from one special judge to another special judge; it cannot be transferred even to a High Court Judge except where a High Court Judge is appointed as a Special Judge.
[130E F] Gurcharan Das Chadha vs State of Rajasthan, [1966] 2 SCR, referred to.
45.4 Not all the judges of the High Court (but only those elevated from the State subordinate judiciary) would fulfil the qualifications prescribed under section 6(2) of the 1952 Act.
Though there is nothing in sections 6 and 7 read together to preclude altogether the appointment of a judge of the High Court fulfilling the above qualifications as a special judge such is not the (atleast not the normal) contemplation of the Act.
The scheme of the Act, in particular the provisions contained in sections 8(3A) and 9, militate against this concept.
[126C, E] Hence, in the instant case apart from the fact that no appointment of a High Court Judge, as a Special Judge, has in fact been made, it is not possible to take the view that the statutory provisions permit the 28 conferment of a jurisdiction to try this case on a High Court Judge as a Special Judge.
[126F] 45.5 The 1952 Act sought to expedite the trial of cases involving public servants by the creation of courts presided over by experienced special judges to be appointed by the State (government.
Effect is only 13 being given to the express and specific words used in section 7(1) and no question arises of any construction being encouraged that is repugnant to the Cr.
P.C. Or involves an implied repeal, pro tanto, of its provisions.
[132D. E] 46.1 The word "jurisdiction is a verbal coat of many colours.
" It is used in a wide and broad sense while dealing with administrative or quasi judicial tribunals and subordinate courts over which the superior courts exercise a power of judicial review and superintendence.
Then it is only a question of "how much latitude the court is prepared to allow" and "there is no yardstick to determine the magnitude of the error other than the opinion of the court. " [158A B] M. L. Sethi vs Kapur, [ 1973] I SCR 697, referred to.
46.2 The Superior Courts, with unlimited jurisdiction are always presumed to act with jurisdiction and unless it is clearly shown that any particular order is patently one which could not, on any conceivable view of its jurisdiction, have been passed by such court, such an order can neither be ignored nor even recalled, annulled, revoked or set aside in subsequent proceedings by the same court.
[158B C ] Dhirendera Kumar vs Superintendent, [1955] I SCR 224; Kiran Singh vs Chaman Paswan, AIK ; ; Anisminic Ltd. vs Foreign Compensation Commissioner, [1969] 2 A.C. 147; Badri Prasad vs Nagarmal, [1959] 1 Supp.
S.C.R. 769; Surajmul Nagarmul vs Triton Insurance Co. Ltd., [1924] L.R. 52 I.A. 126; Balai Chandra Hazra vs Shewdhari Jadhav, ; ; Ledgard vs Bull, L.R. 13 I.A. 134; Meenakshi Naidu vs Subramaniya Sastri, L.R. 14 I.A. 140; Sukhrani vs Hari Shankar; , ; Re: Recal Communications Ltd.; , and lssacs vs Robertson, referred to.
In the present case, the order passed is not one of patent lack of jurisdiction.
Though the direction in the order dated 16.2.1984 cannot be justified by reference to Article 142 of the Constitution of section 407 of the 1973 Cr.
P.C., that is not an incontrovertible position.
It was 29 possible for another court to give a wider interpretation to these provisions and come to the conclusion that such an order could be made under those provisions.
If this Court had discussed the relevant provisions and specifically expressed such a conclusion, it could not have been modified in subsequent proceedings by this Bench merely because it was inclined to hold differently.
The mere fact that the direction was given, without an elaborate discussion, cannot render it vulnerable to such review .
[158D F] 47.
Unless the earlier order is vitiated by a patent lack of jurisdiction or has resulted in grave injustice or has clearly abridged the fundamental rights of the appellant, this Court should not declare that an order passed by a five Judge Bench is wrong, and annul it.
The present case cannot be brought within the narrow range of exceptions which calls for such interference.
[166E] The direction issued by this Court in the impugned order cannot be said to be based on a view which is manifestly incorrect, palpably absurd or patently without jurisdiction.
Whether it will be considered right or wrong by a different Bench having a second look at the issue is a totally different thing.
[167E] 48.1 The powers of the Supreme Court to transfer cases from one court to another are to be found in Article 139 A of the Constitution and section 406 of the Cr.
The provisions envisage either inter state transfers of cases i.e. from a court in one State to a court in another State or the withdrawal of a case by the Supreme Court to itself.
Intra State transfer among courts subordinate to a High Court to inter se or from a court subordinate to a High Court to the High Court is within the jurisdiction of the appropriate High Court.
[133F G] 48.2 The powers of the Supreme Court, in disposing of an appeal or revision, are circumscribed by the scope of the proceedings before it.
[133H] In the instant case, the question of transfer was not put in issue before the Supreme Court.
The Court was hearing an appeal from the order of discharge and connected matters.
There was no issue or controversy or discussion before it as to the comparative merits of a trial before a special judge vis a vis one before the High Court.
There was only an oral request said to have been made, admittedly after the judgment was announced.
Wide as the powers under Article 141 are, they do not envisage an order of the type presently in question.
[134A, C D] K.M. Nanavati vs The State of Bombay, ; distinguished.
30 48.3 If the provisions of the 1952 Act read with Article 139 A and sections 406 407 of the Cr.
P.C. do not permit the transfer of the case from a special judge to the High Court, that effect cannot be achieved indirectly.
In the circumstances of the case, the Supreme Court cannot issue the impugned direction in exercise of the powers under Article 142 or under section 407 available to it as an appellate court.
[l34F] Hari vs Emperor, AIR 1935 PC 122, referred to.
The direction that the trial should be shifted to the High Court can hardly be described as a consequential or incidental order.
Such a direction did not flow, as a necessary consequence of the conclusion of the court on the issues and points debated before it.
Therefore, this Court was in error when it directed that the trial of the case should be before a High Court Judge, in consequence of which the appellant is being tried by a Court which has no jurisdiction and which cannot be empowered by the Supreme Court to try him.
The continued trial before the High Court, therefore, infringes Article 21 of the Constitution.
[135E GI 49.1 Section 407 cannot be challenged under Article 14 as it is based on a reasonable classification having relation to the objects sought to be achieved.
Though, in general, the trial of cases will be by courts having the normal jurisdiction over them, the exigencies of the situation may require that they be dealt with by some other court for various reasons.
Likewise, the nature of a case, the nature of issues involved and other circumstances may render it more expedient, effective, expeditious or desirable that the case should be tried by a superior court or the High Court itself.
[136E F3] 49.2 The power of transfer and withdrawal contained in section 407 of the Cr.
P.C. is one dictated by the requirements of justice and is, indeed, but an aspect of the supervisory powers of a superior Court over courts subordinate to it.
[136FJ] 49.3 A judicial discretion to transfer or withdraw is vested in the highest court of the State and is made exercisable only in the circumstances set out in the section.
Such a power is not only necessary and desirable but indispensable in the cause of the administration of justice.
The accused will continue to be tried by a or equal or superior jurisdiction.
[136G] The accused will, therefore, suffer no prejudice by reason of the 31 application of section 407.
Even if there is a differential treatment which causes prejudice, it is based on logical and acceptable considerations with a view to promote the interests of justice.
The transfer or withdrawal of a case to another court or the High Court, in such circumstances, can hardly be said to result in hostile discrimination against the accused in such a case.
[137A B] 49.4 only a power of transfer is being exercised by the supreme Court which is sought to be traced back to the power of the High Court under section 407.
[137E] State vs Anwar Ali Sarkar, ; , distinguished.
Kathi Raning Rawat vs The State of Saurashtra, , Re: Special Courts Bill, [1978] and Shukla vs Delhi Administration, ; , referred to.
l Where a case is withdrawn and tried by the Court, the High Court will be conducting the trial in the exercise of its extraordinary original criminal jurisdiction.
Here though the ordinary original criminal jurisdiction is vested in a subordinate criminal court or special judge, a case is withdrawn by the High Court to itself for trial.
[139F, H] Madura Tirupparankundram etc.
vs Nikhan Sahib, ; Kavasji Pestonji vs Rustomji Sorabji, AIR 1949 Bombay 42; Sunil Chandra Roy and another vs The State, AIR 1954 Calcutta 305; Peoples Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Sardul Singh Caveeshar and others, AIR 1961 Punjab 87 and People 's Patriotic Front vs K. K. Birla and others, [ 1984] Crl.
L.J. 545, referred to.
50.2 In a withdrawn case, right of first appeal to the Supreme Court against the order passed by the High Court will be available to the accused under section 374 of the 1973 Cr. P.C., and the accused has the privilege of being tried in the first instance by the High Court itself with a right to approach the apex Court by way of appeal.
The apprehension that the judgment in the trial by the High Court, will be final, with only a chance of obtaining special leave under Article 136 is totally unfounded.
The Supreme Court will consider any petition presented under Article 136 in the light of the in built requirements of Article 21 and dispose it of as if it were itself a petition of appeal from the judgment.
Therefore an accused tried directly by the High Court by withdrawal of his case from a subordinate court, has a right of appeal to the Supreme Court under section 374 of the Cr.
The allegation of an in 32 fringement of Article 21 in such cases is, therefore, unfounded.
[140B F] Sadanathan vs Arunachalam, , distinguished.
50.3 The court to which the case has been transferred is a superior court and in fact the High Court.
However, the High Court Judge is not a person to whom the trial of the case can be assigned under s.7(1) of the 1952 Act.
The circumstances that a much superior forum is assigned to try a case than the one normally available cannot by itself be treated as a "sufficient safeguard and a good Substitute" for the normal forum and the rights available under the normal procedure.
[131G H] Surajmal Mohta vs Vishwanath Sastry, [1955] 1 SCR, referred to.
50.4 The accused here loses his right of coming up in revision or appeal to the High Court from the interlocutory and final orders of the trial court, and the right of having two courts subordinate court and the High Court adjudicate upon his contentions before bringing the matter up in the Supreme Court.
Though these are not such caps as violate the fundamental rights of such an accused, they are circumstances which create prejudice to the accused and may not be Overlooked in adopting one construction of the statue in preference to the other.
[132A B] 51.1 t It is true that the audi altarem partem rule is a basic requirement of the rule of law.
But the degree of compliance with this rule and the extent or consequences flowing from failure to do so will vary from case to case.
[168B] Nawabkhan Abbaskhan vs State, ; , referred to.
In the instant case the appellant had been given no chance of being heard before the impugned direction was given and it cannot be said whether the Bench would have acted in the same way even if he had been given such opportunity.
However, in the circumstances of the case.
this is not a fit case to interfere with the earlier order on that ground.
[167H, 168A] 51.2 The rules of natural justice must not be stretched too far.
They should not be allowed to be exploited as a purely technical weapon to undo a decision which does not in reality cause substantial injustice and which, had the party been really aggrieved thereby, could live been set right by immediate action.
[169C] 33 R. vs Secretary of State for Home Department ex parte Mughal, , referred to.
The direction of 16.2.1984 cannot be said to have infringed the fundamental rights of the appellant or caused any miscarriage of justice.
The appellant did know on 16.2.1984 that the judges were giving such a direction and yet he did not protest.
Perhaps he did think that being tried by a High Court Judge would be more beneficial to him, as indeed it was likely to be.
That apart, several opportunities were available for the appellant to set this right.
He did not move his little finger to obtain a variation of this direction from this Court.
He is approaching the Court nearly after two years of his trial by the learned judge in the High Court.
Volumes of testimony have been recorded and numerous exhibits have been admitted as evidence.
Though the trial is only at the stage of the framing of charges, the trial being according to the warrant procedure, a lot of evidence has already gone in and if the directions of this Court are re called, it would wipe the slate clean.
To take the entire matter back at this stage to square No. 1 would be the very negation of the purpose of the 1952 Act to speed up all such trials and would result in more injustice than justice from an objective point of view.
[168G H, 169A B] 52.1 Situations can and do arise where this Court may be constrained to recall or modify an order which has been passed by it earlier and that when ex facie there is something radically wrong with the earlier order, this Court may have to exercise its plenary and inherent powers to recall the earlier order without considering itself bound by the nice technicalities of the procedure for getting this done.
[163C] 52.2 Where a mlstake is committed by a subordinate court or a High Court, there are ample powers in this Court to remedy the situation.
But where the mistake is in an earlier order of this Court, there is no way of having it corrected except by approaching this Court.
Sometimes, the remedy sought can be brought within the four corners of the procedural law in which event there can be hurdle in the way of achieving the desired result.
But the mere fact that, for some reason, the conventional remedies are not available should not render this Court powerless to give relief.
[163D E] Ghulam Sarwar vs Union of India, ; Soni Vrijlal Jethalal vs Soni Jadavji Govindji, AIR 1972 Guj.
148; Jang Singh vs Brij Lal ; at p. 159; Bhagat Ram vs State, ; and State vs Tara Chand, [1973] S.C.C. Cr. 774, referred to.
34 52.3 lt may not be possible or prudent to lay down comprehensive list of defects that will attract the ex debito justiae relief.
[163E] 52.4 Suffice it to say that the court can grant relief where there is some manifest illegality or want of jurisdiction in the earlier order or some palpable in Justice is shown to have resulted.
Such a power can be traced either to Article 142 of the Constitution or to the powers inherent in this Court as the apex Court and the guardian of the Constitution.
[163F] Issac vs Robertson, referred to.
52.5 However, such power has to be exercised in the "rarest of rare" cases and there is great need for judicial discipline of the highest order in exercising such a power, as any laxity in this regard may not only impair the eminence, dignity and integrity of this Court but may also lead to chaotic consequences.
Nothing should be done to create an impression that this Court can be easily persuaded to alter its views on any matter and that a larger Bench of the Court will not only be able to reverse the precedential effect of an earlier ruling but may also be inclined to go back on it and render it ineffective in its application and binding nature even in regard to subsequent proceedings in the same case.
[163G H 164A] Bengal Immunity Company Ltd. vs The State of Bihar and ors., and Sheonandan Paswan vs State of Bihar & Ors., ; , referred to.
The power of review is conferred on this Court by Article 137 of the Constitution.
It is subject not on to the provisions of any law made by Parliament but also to rules made by this Court under article 145.
[142H] The order dated 16.2.1984 does not suffer from any error apparent on the face of the record which can be rectified on a review application.
The prayer for review has been made beyond the period mentioned in Rule 2 of order XL of the Supreme Court Rules.
No doubt this Court has power to extend the time within which a review petition may be filed.
But having regard to the circumstances of the case there is hardly any reason to condone the delay in the prayer for review.
[144A B,143B,147H] The appellant was alive to all his present contentions.
At least when the writ petition was dismissed as an inappropriate remedy, he should have at once moved this Court for review.
[148A] 35 That apart even if the Court is inclined to condone the delay, the application will have to be heard as far as possible by the same Judges who disposed of the earlier matter.
[148B] 54.
It will not behove the prestige and glory of this Court as envisaged under the Constitution if earlier decisions are revised or recalled solely because a later Bench takes a different view of the issues involved.
Granting that the power of review is available, it is one to be sparingly exercised only in extraordinary or emergent situations when there can be no two opinions about the error or lack of jurisdiction in the earlier order and there are adequate reasons to invoke a resort to an unconventional method of recalling or revoking the same.
Such a situation is not present in the instant case.
[167F G] 55.
Prem Chand Garg cannot be treated as an authority for the proposition that an earlier order of this Court could be quashed by the issue of a writ on the ground that it violated the fundamental rights.
Mirajkar clearly precludes such a course.
[155G H] Prem Chand Garg vs Excise Commissioner, [1963] Supp. 1 SCR 885, explained and distinguished.
Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and others vs State of Maharashtra and another.
relied on.
