The appellants were facing prosecution for several charges under the Indian Penal Code in different trials.
By different notifications the State of Maharashtra appointed some advocates as Assistant Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutors in exercise of powers under section 25(1) and 24(8) respectively of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for conducting the prosecution.
The notifications were challenged in a group of writ petitions before the High Court.
A Division Bench of the High Court by a common judgment negatived the plea advanced by the appellants, rejected the writ petitions and upheld the appointments.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
The appellants contended that the Code confers a special status on the public prosecutor whenever it has been considered necessary, law has prescribed the interest to be represented by the public prosecutor and it would not be in proper exercise of power by the State Government to make appointment of a Special Public Prosecutor to support a private transaction and provide for his remuneration from private source.
Allowing the appeals this Court, ^ HELD: In most of the States, the Remembrancer of Legal Affairs looks after the State litigations.
He is a responsible officer and normally 869 with judicial experience.
When an application for the services of a Special Public Prosecutor or an Assistant Public Prosecutor is made in a given case the power would be vested in him to examine the facts and take decision as to whether the case merits the appointment of a Special Public Prosecutor or an Assistant Public Prosecutor.
It would not be appropriate to accept the position that whenever an application is made it should be allowed and a Special Public Prosecutor should be appointed would be contrary to the spirit of the scheme of the Code.
There may be cases where a powerful complainant may have begun a proceeding to victimize his opponent.
If in such a case the State concedes to the request for appointment of a Special Public Prosecutor there will be traversity of justice.
Without screening on the basis of guidelines prescribed or to be prescribed, the services of a Special Public Prosecutor should not be made available to a private complainant.
The primacy given to the Public Prosecutor under the scheme of the Code has a social purpose and the same would be lost if the procedure adopted by Rule 22 of Maharashtra Rules is accepted or what the High Court has indicated is adopted.
[876F H;877A B] Rule 22 of the Maharashtra Rules is bad and the State Government should properly modify the same keeping our conclusions in view.
[877H;878A] The next question would be whether the Special Public Prosecutor should be permitted to be paid by the private complainant.
The Remembrancer of Legal Affairs should scrutinise every request, keeping a prescribed guideline in view and decide in which cases such request should be accepted, keeping the facts of such case in view.
Ordinarily the Special Public Prosecutor should be paid out of the State funds even when he appears in support of a private complainant but there may be some special case where the Special Public Prosecutor 's remuneration may be collected from the private source.
In such cases the fees should either be deposited in advance or paid to a prescribed State agency from where the Special Public Prosecutor could collect the same.
[877D,F H] In the instant cases the Rememberancer of Legal Affairs of the Maharashtra Government will now decide as to whether the services of a Special Public Prosecutor, a Public Prosecutor or an Assistant Public Prosecutor should be provided and in case he comes to the conclusion that such provision should be made, he should decide as to whether the State Administration should pay for such Public Prosecutor or the private complainant should bear the same.
[878A B] 870 K.C. Sood vs S.C. Gudimani, [1981] Crl.
L.J. Vol.
II, 1779;P.G.
Narayanankutty vs State of Kerala and Ors., [1982] Crl.
L.J. Vol. 88, 2085 and Dilipbhai Chhotalal Dave vs State of Gujarat & Ors., [1971] Guj.
L.R. Vol.
12, 999, referred to.
