An agreement was entered into by Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. (Chemical Company) for the sale of all its products to the respondent (Trading Company).
The agreement contained general terms; and the actual quantity sold, the sale price, the booking station and the destination stations were to be determined in the actual contracts for sale in respect of definite or specified quantities.
The mode in which sales were effected was that the respondent Trading Company used to obtain orders from out of State buyers, and enter into agreements of purchase with the Chemical Company for these specified quantities.
All the goods sold under these contracts of sale were booked at a particular railway station in the State to the various places outside the State, where buyers from the respondent Trading Company required the goods and then the railway receipts and invoices concerned were endorsed and handed over to the respondent Trading Company.
In the assessment order for the assessment year 1980 81 the assessing authority treated the sales effected by the Chemical Company to the respondent Trading Company as intra State sales and those by the respondent Trading Company to the out of State buyers as inter State sales falling under section 3 of the .
The assessees, namely, the Chemical Company and the respondent Trading Company filed appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner contending that sales by the Chemical Company to the respondent Trading Company were also inter State sales as these sales were completed by the delivery of railway receipts and invoices only after the inter State journey of the goods had commenced.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner dismissed the appeals.
Both the assessees filed appeals to the Tribunal.
After considering 806 the manner in which the sales were effected and despatches made by the Chemical Company and examining some specimen orders placed by respondent Trading Company with the Chemical Company, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that delivery was effected by the Chemical Company to the respondent Trading Company by delivery of documents of title, namely, the receipts of invoices and the railway receipts and allowed the appeals.
The High Court upheld the views of the Tribunal and dismissed the revision petitions filed by the State.
In the appeals by the State it was contended that the first set of sales by the Chemical Company to the respondent Company were local or intra State sales, because under the agreement the delivery was to be effected at the booking stations.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: The orders were placed for booking specified goods to out of State buyers and the Chemical Company never gave physical delivery of the goods to the respondent Trading Company but booked the goods to the destinations as required by the out of State buyers and merely handed over documents of title to the respondent Trading Company.
The movement of the goods from the State to the outside State was occasioned by the terms of the contract themselves and the sales were inter State sales falling under sub section
(a) of section 3 of the .
Alternatively, since the deliveries of goods sold were effected by the transfer of documents after the movement of the goods from the State to the other States had commenced, the sales could be regarded as covered under sub section
(b) of section 3 of the Act.
[809GH; 810A B] The agreement entered into by the Chemical Company with the respondent Trading Company is merely a general agreement.
The actual terms of the contracts of sales as well as the instructions of the out of State buyers have to be taken into account in determining the nature of the sales in question.
[810E F] The conclusion arrived at by the Tribunal as well as the High Court that the sales by the Chemical Company to the respondent Trading Company were inter State sales cannot therefore be faulted.
[810F] Union of India & Anr.
vs K.G. Khosla & Co. (P) Ltd. & Ors., [1979] 3 S.C.R. 453 at p. 460, relied on. 807
