The appellants entered into a contract with the respondent mills for the purchase of certain goods in which the time for delivery was fixed for the months of September and October, 1942.
Before the expiry of the time fixed there was a strike in the mills and the respondent wrote a letter to the appellants on August 15, 1942, that in view of the strike and the political situation, the delivery time of all the pending contracts should be automatically understood as extended for the period the working of the mills was stopped and until the normal state of affairs recurred.
Though the strike came to an end the respondent declined to give delivery of the goods on the ground that the contracts were void.
In the suit filed by the appellants on January 9, 1946, for damages for breach of the contract the respondent pleaded that there was no agreement between the parties with regard to the extension of time and so the suit was barred by limitation.
The appellants ' case and their evidence which was consistent with the conduct of the parties at the relevant time only showed definitely that they had orally agreed to the proposal made by the respondent for extension of time for the period during which the mills would remain closed, and as regards the second condition referred to in the respondent 's letter dated August 15, 1942, " till the normal state of affairs recurs (which was vague and uncertain), the evidence did not show that there was an acceptance by the appellants of the said condition.
The question was whether there was an enforceable agreement for extension of time for performance of the contract within the meaning of the Indian Contract Act : Held, (1) An extension of time for the performance of the contract Under section 63 of the Indian Contract Act must be based upon an agreement between the parties, and it would not be open to the promise by his unilateral act to extend the time for performance of his own accord for his own benefit.
Such an agreement need not necessarily be reduced to writing and can be proved by oral evidence or by evidence of conduct.
(2) The respondent 's proposal for extension of time contained in the letter dated August 15, 1942, was subject to two conditions, and the fact that the second condition was vague and 214 uncertain does not necessarily show that it was intended to be treated as a meaningless surpluses.
As there was no acceptance by the appellants of the second condition there was no valid or binding agreement for extension of time under section 63 of the Indian Contract Act.
Nicolene Ld.
vs Simmonds, , distinguished.
(3) In any event as the conditions were so vague and uncer tain that it was not possible to ascertain definitely the period for which the time for the performance of the contract was really intended to be extended, the agreement for extension was void under section 29 Of the Indian Contract Act.
Scammel (G.) and Nephew, Ld.
vs Oustom (H. C. and 1.
G.) Queston, , relied on.
