Shri Markandey Singh, the appellant in the first appeal had joined the U.P. State Service as Deputy Superintendent of Police by passing a competitive examination.
In November, 1953, he joined on deputation the Union Territory of Delhi which at that time had no police service of its own.
While on deputation and again in 1959 60, he officiated as Superintendent of Police but was reverted back for administrative reasons.
In July, 1960, Himachal Pradesh Indian Police Service was created and thereafter, the Delhi Himachal Pradesh Police Service, in March 1961.
On 6th December, 1961, Shri Singh was again promoted to officiate as Superintendent of Police.
During the period of his officiation, his request for being absorbed in the Himachal Pradesh State Police Service was accepted and he was absorbed in the State Service with effect from 27th November, 1962.
He was confirmed in the Union Territory Cadre of I.P.S. with effect from 14th May, 1964.
He was assigned 1958 as the year of allotment.
He made a representation against the order of allotment to the Central Government, claiming the benefit of officiation from 6th December, 1961 to 13th May, 1963 in the matter of fixation of his year of allotment.
The Central Government rejected the representation by order dt.
23rd April, 1970, which stated that in accordance with the orders contained in letter NO.
1/2/62 Delhi IDH(S) dated 23.8.1963 of the Home Ministry, all cadre posts held by non cadre officers not on the Select List were deemed to have been kept in abeyance with effect from 27th September, 1961 onwards, and according to the seniority rules, the service rendered by an officer prior to his inclusion in the Select List could not be counted for seniority 848 unless approved by the Central Government in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission under the Second Proviso to rule 3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules.
The requisite approval was not there.
Shri Singh made a second representation on 23rd June, 1970.
The Central Government by order dt.
21st June, 1973, accepted the second representation, gave the benefit of officiation in question and assigned to him 1956 as the year of allotment.
The reason why the second representation was accepted was that in November, 1972, the Union Public Service Commission had approved of the officiation of Shri Singh in the I.P.S. cadre for the relevant period under the second proviso to rule 3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules "as they stood in May, 1963.
" In consequence, he was placed above Shri M.L. Bhanot, respondent, in the gradation list of Union Territory of I.P.S. Feeling aggrieved by the order of the Central Government, Shri Bhanot filed a writ petition before the High Court.
A Single Judge allowed the same, and quashed the order dt.
21st June, 1973.
Against the judgment of the Single Judge, two appeals were filed before the Division Bench of the High Court one by Shri Singh, and the second, by the Union of India.
Both the appeals were dismissed by the Division Bench.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, Shri Singh and the Union of India filed these two appeals for relief in this Court.
Dismissing the appeals with directions, the Court, ^ HELD: The question involved in the appeals was whether the year of allotment given to Shri Singh as 1958 was correct or not and whether the order of the High Court, quashing the year of allotment given to Shri Singh as 1956 was bad or not.
This depended upon the interpretation of the various rules and provisions and the determination of the question whether an officer was entitled to the benefit of the service rendered by him in a senior post in the I.P.S. cadre of a particulare State while he was on deputation to the State Police Service of that State from another State, for the purpose of working out the year of allotment in accordance with the second proviso to unamended rule 3(3)(b) of the Indian Police Service (Regulation of Seniority) Rules (The 'Seniority Rules ').
[855D F] Rule 3(3)(b) of the Seniority Rules and the provisos thereto should not be read in isolation.
This rule is in the setting of other rules.
The Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules (The 'Cadre Rules ') read with the Indian Police Service (Fixation of Cadre Strength) Regulations of 1955 849 fixed the strength of the Indian Police cadre of the Union Territories at a particular figure.
Out of them not more than 25% officers eligible for recruitment to the I.P.S. cadre had to be substantive members of the State (U.P.) Police Service at that time.
The scheme, as it stood, fixed the strength of the I.P.S. cadre State wise.
Recruitment by promotion thereto could only be from the substantive members of the Police Service of that particular State.
So long as Shri Singh remained as a substantive member of the U.P. State Police Service, he could not possibly be promoted to the joint I.P.S. Cadre of the Union Territories of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh.
He became eligible to his promotion to the Union Territory, I.P.S. cadre only after he had been absorbed in the Delhi Himachal Pradesh State Police Service.
Proviso (1) to Rule 3(3)(b) of the Recruitment Rules gives a clear indication that for determining the year of allotment ad hoc the Central Government consulted the State Government concerned.
In Explanation (2) again there is a reference to a certificate by the State Government concerned that an officer would have officiated in a senior post but for his absence on leave or appointment to any special post.
It is apparent, therefore, that the State Government is the Government of the Police Service of which the officer concerned is a substantive member.
In this case, as found by the Division Bench of the High Court, Shri Singh had not chosen to be absorbed in the Delhi Himachal Pradesh State Police Service and he had gone back to his parent State of U.P.
In case Shri Singh had not chosen to be absorbed in the Delhi Himachal Pradesh State Service and had gone back to his parent State of U.P., then according the Explanation (2), the U.P. State Government might have issued the certificate to facilitate his promotion to the I.P.S. Cadre of the U.P. State.
The Promotion Regulations of 1955 laid down the determination of the eligibility of a substantive member of the State Police Service.
Thereafter, the names of the eligible officers were brought on the Select List, who were to be approved by the Public Service Commission.
Appointments by promotion to the I.P.S. cadre are made from the Select List.
In the event of promotion, but for the second proviso, the benefit of continuous officiation on a senior post for fixing his year of allotment is given to an officer from the date after his being nominated on the State List.
In Explanation (1) of rule 3(3), there is no mention that deputationist before his absorption in the State Police Service can get the benefit of such officiation.
Therefore, it was not possible to accept the position that before his absorption Shri Singh was entitled to the benefit of his officiation.
The Division Bench of the High Court so held.
The Division Bench was right on this aspect of the matter.
[861D H;862A D] The Seniority Rules 1954 including rule 3(3)(b) were amended with 850 effect from 22nd April, 1967.
Before the amendment, the appellant Shri Singh had been confirmed in the Union Territory cadre of the Indian Police Service with effect from 14th May, 1964, and had been allotted 1958 as the year.
The question of allotment of Shri Singh in accordance with the Seniority Rules had ripened before the amendment of 1967.
There is no rule vitiating the operation of the old seniority rules.
Reliance was placed by the appellant Shri Singh on the decision of this Court in Arun Ranjan Mukharjee vs Union of India & Ors., , and the appellant submitted that Division Bench was in error in not following the ratio of the decision in that case.
The Court could not accept this submission.
[862D E;863C] In this case, the Central Government had not fixed the date of appellant 's absorption in the Select List as 1958 out of the hat, so to say.
It had relevance as it appeared from the basis of the order of the Central Government.
The appellant, who was a deputationist before the absorption in the State Police Service could not be entitled to get such officiation.
In case, Shri Singh had not chosen to be absorbed in the Delhi Himachal Pradesh State Police Service and had gone back to his parent State of U.P., then, according to explanation (2) the U.P. State Government might have issued the certificate to facilitate his promotion to the I.P.S. cadre of the U.P. State.
But so long as Shri Singh remained a substantive member of the U.P. State Police Service, he could not possibly be permitted to join I.P.S. cadre of the Union Territories of Delhi and Himachal Pradesh.
In accordance with the rules, he became eligible to his promotion to the Union Territory I.P.S. cadre only after he had been absorbed in the Delhi Himachal Pradesh Police Service.
[864F H] The rules with which the Court was concerned, which state that certain year should be assigned by the Government in consultation with the Public Service Commission, must be interpreted in the light of the well established rule of construction that if the words of a statute are in themselves precise and unambiguous no more is necessary than to expound these words in their natural and ordinary sense, the words themselves in such a case best declaring the intention of the legislature.
See in this connection the observations of this Court in The Collector of Customs, Baroda vs Digvijaysinhji Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd., ; , 899.
[865A B] The officiation in a senior post is one of the indispensable ingredients in the application of rule 3(3)(b).
But it must be borne in mind that this was not a sine qua non.
In this case, before the absorption of 851 the appellant in the Himachal Pradesh Delhi I.P.S. cadre, his officiation had not been taken by the Central Government into consideration.
The Court could not say that the Central Government had not acted properly.
[865E F] This appeal was not concerned with the assignment of year 1958 to Shri Singh but rule 16, clause (1)(iii) of the Service Rules provides for certain penalties and one of the penalties, inter alia, is the effect of superseding him in promotion to a selection post and such is appealable.
The High Court was right that appeal does not necessarily lie only against the order imposing penalty and it is also open to entertain appeal when the service rule was interpreted to the disadvantage of member of the service but rule 17 bars the filing of appeal after the expiry of 45 days.
Proviso to the said rule, however, gives discretion to the appellate authority to condone the delay if sufficient cause is shown.
Rule 24 of All India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1969 provides for review within different periods.
Under that rule since Shri Singh could have filed an application for review within one year, in this case remedy of review by Shri Singh had also become barred when the second order was passed.
[865G H;866A B] It appeared that there is provision for appeal in the order of this nature.
Failure to prefer an appeal or apply for review was no bar to the submission of memorials to the President.
In December, 1963, in this case, the year of allotment was assigned to Shri Singh.
Shri Singh made the first representation in August, 1969, after the period of limitation had expired.
It was contended by the appellant relying on the full Bench decision of the Punjab & Haryana High Court in Sunder Lal & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, that in a case of bona fide mistake, there was always the power to rectify.
It was emphasized that every Administrative authority has an inherent right to rectify its own mistakes.
It was doubtful that inherent power could be invoked if there was no reason for re fixing the appellant 's year.
If belated claims are allowed arbitrarily, an atmosphere of uncertainty would prevail.
There should be no sense of uncertainty among public service.
Furthermore, it was clear that if the fixation of year 1958 was a mistake, the first representation was rejected with the order dated 23rd April, 1970.
There, the Government 's order reiterated that in accordance with the order contained in the Home Ministry 's letter to which reference was made, all cadre posts held by the non cadre officers not on Select List were deemed to have been kept in abeyance with effect from 27th September, 1961, onwards.
As such Shri Singh could not have claimed that he had been officiating in the cadre post prior to coming on the Select List.
In 852 those circumstances, Shri Singh could not be deemed to have officiated in cadre post during the period 6th December, 1961 to 14th May, 1963.
The Central Government was of the view that the decision taken by it in 1963, fixing the year of allotment was correct.
It is true that Home Ministry 's letter referred to in Annexure R 4, had been quashed by the High Court but the same had no bearing on the correctness of the decision taken by the Central Government in 1963, because at the relevant time, the letter was there and the Central Government was bound to act in accordance therewith.
The contention of the appellant that there was no period of limitation for the grant of the approval was not relevant.
It was, therefore, clear that there was no scope of acceptance of the second representation.
In the said order, there was no mention of any mistake.
[866C H;867A C] When the second order was made, it affected Shri Bhanot adversely because he in the meantime had been absorbed in the I.P.S. in 1957.
It was not that the constitutionality of any provision was challenged as was the case in A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; , 967.
In this case, seniority of Shri Bhanot would be adversely affected as he had acquired a year of allotment.
In the opinion of the Court, it should have been done upon notice to Shri Bhanot.
[867C E] The High Court was right in dismissing the writ petition of the appellant.
Having regard to the facts of the case, the Central Government was directed to refix the salary scale of the appellant, taking into consideration the appellant 's service in U.P. and Himachal Pradesh cadre in the senior position as a deputationist.
[867G] Arun Ranjan Mukherjee vs Union of India & Ors., ;Madan Gopal Singh vs Union of India, ;D.R. Nim, I.P.S. vs Union of India, ; ;Government of India and Anr.
vs C.A. Balakrishnana & Ors., ;The Collector of Customs, Baroda vs Digvijaysinhji Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd., ; , 899;Ram Prakash Khanna & Ors., etc.
vs S.A.F. Abbas & Ors., etc.; , ;Sunder Lal & Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, ;A. Janardhana vs Union of India & Ors., ; ,967 and General Manager, South Central Railway Secundrabad & Anr., etc.
vs A.V.R. Siddhanti & Ors., etc.; , , referred to.
