The appellant filed an application for contempt against the respondent in the High Court complaining of interference by the respondent with the due course of judicial proceedings.
A Single Judge of the High Court after considering the application, affidavits and submissions made on behalf of the parties took the view that it was not a fit case in which the court should exercise its jurisdiction under the contempt of Courts Act and dismissed the application.
The appellant filed the instant appeal under section 19(1) of the Act.
The respondent took a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the appeal under section 19(1).
While upholding the objection and dismissing the Appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: The High Court derives its jurisdiction to punish for contempt from Article 215 of the Constitution.
The appeal will lie under Section 19(1) of the Act only when the High Court makes an order or decision in exercise of its jurisdiction to punish for contempt.
The High Court exercises its jurisdiction or power as conferred on it by Article 215 of the Constitution when it imposes a punishment for contempt.
When the High Court does not impose any punishment on the alleged 889 contemnor the High court does not exercise its jurisdiction or power to punish for contempt.
The jurisdiction of the High Court is to punish.
When no punishment is imposed by the High Court, it is difficult to say that the High Court has exercised its jurisdiction or power as conferred on it by Article 215 of the Constitution.
[892C E] Whenever a court, tribunal or authority is vested with a jurisdiction to decide a matter, such jurisdiction can be exercised in deciding the matter in favour or against a person.
For example, a civil court is conferred with the jurisdiction to decide a suit; the civil court will have undoubtedly the jurisdiction to decree the suit or dismiss the same.
But when a court is conferred with the power or jurisdiction to act in a particular manner, the exercise of jurisdiction or the power will involve the acting in that particular manner and in no other.
Article 215 confers jurisdiction or power on the High court to punish for contempt.
The High Court can exercise its jurisdiction only by punishing for contempt.[893F G] The contention of the appellant that there would be no remedy against the erroneous or perverse decision of the High Court in not exercising its jurisdiction to punish for contempt, is not correct.
When the High Court erroneously acquits a contemnor guilty of criminal contempt, the petitioner who is interested in maintaining the dignity of the Court will not be without any remedy.
Even though no appeal is maintainable under section 19(1) of the Act, the petitioner in such a case can move this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution.
[894B C] Right of appeal is a creature of the statute and the question whether there is a right of appeal or not will have to be considered on an interpretation of the provision of the statute and not on the ground of propriety or any other consideration.
[894D E] A contempt is a matter between the court and the alleged contemnor.
Any person who moves the machinery of the court for contempt only brings to the notice of the court certain facts constituting contempt of court.
After furnishing such information he may still assist the court, but the aggrieved party under section 19(1) can only be the contemnor who has been punished for contempt of court.
[894E G] Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963] 1 S.C.R. 778 and Paradakanta Mishra vs Mr. Justice Gatikrushna Mishra, [1975]1 S.C.R. 524, referred to. 890
