The suit premises consisted of four rooms in the ground floor where the appellant tenant was running his office.
One room in the first floor was in the possession of the landlord respondent.
The roof of one room in the rear side of the leased portion had fallen down, and it has been replaced by the appellant after obtaining orders of the Rent Controller under Section 12 of the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949.
The landlord filed a petition for eviction on the ground of bona fide requirement of the premises for his own use and occupation, and change of user of the premises by the tenant.
As he failed before the Rent Controller, he preferred an appeal and during the pendency of the appeal he obtained the court 's order and amended the petition and raised an additional ground under Section 13(3)(a)(iii) of the Act, seeking eviction of the tenant on the ground that the leased premises had become unsafe and unfit for human habitation.
The Appellate Authority called for a findings on this additional ground from the Rent Controller and the finding went against the landlord.
The Appellate Authority concurred with the Rent Controller on the said finding and dismissed the appeal.
The respondent preferred a Civil Revision Petition before the High Court which sustained the case, and ordered the eviction of the appellant under Section 13(3)(a)(iii) of the Act.
The High Court came to the finding that the falling down of the roof of one of the rooms afforded by itself a cause of action to the landlord to seek eviction of the tenant under the said section, and the said cause of action would subsist even if the tenant had repaired the roof under orders of the Rent Controller under Section 12 of the Act.
203 In the appeal to this Court by the tenant it was contended that the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority had concurrently found that the building was neither unsafe nor unfit for human habitation and as such the High Court was not justified in interferring with those findings especially when they were findings of fact.
On behalf of the respondent, the appeal was contested on the ground that the falling down of the roof in a room was indicative of the damage condition of the building and, therefore, the High Court was fully justified in ordering eviction, and that the replacement of the roof by the appellant would not extinguish the right which had accrued to the respondent under Section 13(3)(a)(iii) to seek recovery of the possession of the leased premises.
Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was not justified in allowing the revision and directing eviction of the appellant under Section 13(3)(a)(iii).
[206H] 2.
The High Court proceeded on the erroneous assumption that the falling down of the roof in one room was itself sufficient to warrant a finding that the entire building had become unfit and unsafe for human habitation and called for a declaration to that effect.
[207F] In the instant case, the admitted position was except for the roof in one of the rooms falling down, no other damage to the building was noticed and in such circumstances, there is no scope for holding that a substantial or major part of the building had become unfit and unsafe for human habitation and hence an order of eviction was called for.
[208G H] 3.
The High Court had wrongly assumed that besides the falling down of the roof, one of the walls has also crumbled.
This assumption was a mistaken one because the expert witnesses examined during the trial by the parties have spoken about the good condition of three walls alone of the room and not the fourth because they are the outer walls of the room while the fourth wall was a common wall for the room in question, and the adjoining room and hence there was no need to certify its good condition.
[205E F] 4.
The High Court had also failed to notice two factors of relevance: viz. (1) that the respondent had given his consent to the Rent Controller granting permission under Section 12 of the Act to the appel 204 lant to replace the roof, and (2) that in spite of the alleged cause of action having arisen due to the falling down of the roof, the respondent did not seek amendment of the petition so as to seek eviction of the appellant on the additional ground under Section 13(3)(a)(iii) but instead he chose to prosecute his petition only on the original ground for eviction set forth therein and only after falling before the Rent Controller and preferring an appeal to the Appellate Authority, he deemed it necessary to amend the petition and ask for eviction of the appellant on the additional ground.
[207C E] 5.
The aforesaid conduct of the respondent clearly reveals that he himself has not attached any significance to the falling down of the roof in one of the rooms and has not seriously considered the sustainable cause of action that had arisen to him under Section 13(3)(a)(iii) for seeking eviction of the appellant.
[207E F] Balbir Singh vs Hari Ram, AIR 1983 Punjab and Haryana 132; Chander Mohini vs Jiva Singh, and Sardarni Sampurna Kaur vs Sant Singh & Anr., , distinguished.
