One Motilal Sanghi made a gift of Rs.25,000 each to his four sons, on September 1, 1955.
These amounts were invested by the sons in the firm known as Sanghi Brothers which was constituted by the said Motilal soon after the gifts were made.
Motilal Sanghi had an 8 annas share in the firm; the four sons had a share of 2 annas each.
Motilal Sanghi died on July 21, 1961.
The Assistant Controller of Estate Duty took the view that the sum of Rs.1 lac was liable to be included in the estate of Motilal Sanghi in view of the provisions of Section 10 of the Estate Duty Act as that amount was not retained by the donees to the entire exclusion of the donor.
The Appellate Controller, however, held that section 10 was not attracted to the circumstances of the case.
the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in a reference made to it held that section 10 was attracted.
It took the view (1) that the said amount was brought back into the partnership business of the donor and the donees and hence it was difficult to say that during the continuance of the partnership the donees enjoyed the amounts gifted to the entire exclusion of the donor and (2) that the donor, in one sense or the other, had dominion over that property, and the property was utilised both for the benefit of the donor and the donees.
Before this Court it was contended by the appellant that when the amounts were invested by the donees in the said firm, the interest which the deceased got in the amounts invested by the donees, as a partner of the firm, was in no way related to the gifts and hence, merely by reason of that investment, it could not be said that the donees had not retained the said amount to the entire exclusion of the donor for the purposes of section 10.
It was, on the other hand, contended on behalf of the respondent that as the said amounts were immediately thereafter invested in the firm, it could not be said that the amounts were retained by the donees 211 to the entire exclusion of the donor who had a certain dominion over that property as a partner.
Allowing the appeal, this Court, ^ HELD: (1) The interest which the deceased father retained or obtained in the aggregate sum of Rs.1 lac invested by the said four sons in the said firm, was an interest merely as a partner in the said firm and was not related to the gifts made by him to his sons.
[220D E] (2) It cannot be said that by reason of constitution of the said partnership and the investment of the said amount by the sons in the partnership, the sons had not assumed bona fide possession and the enjoyment of the amounts gifted to them or that they had not retained the same to the entire exclusion of their father.
[220E F] (3) The said amount of Rs.1 lac could not be included in the estate of the said deceased under the provisions of section 10 of the Estate Duty Act.
[220G] George Da Costa vs CED, ; H.R. Munro vs Commissioner of Stamp Duties, ; ; 2 EDC 462; Clifford John Chick vs Commissioner of Stamp Duties, ; (1959) 37 ITR (ED) 89; ; CED vs C.R. Ramachandra Gounder, ; CED vs N.R. Ramarathnam, ; CED vs Kamlavati and CED vs Jai Gopal Mehra, ; CED vs R.V. Viswanathan, and CED vs Godavari Bai, referred to.
