This was an appeal on a certificate of fitness granted by the High Court against its judgment on a reference made under Section 66(1) of the Indian Income tax Act ("the said Act").
The appellant/assessee owned some agricultural land, which the assessee developed into building sites.
The assessee leased out the building sites to various parties.
The leases were for 99 years.
The assessee received amounts of 'salami ' or premium for the said leases.
Question arose whether the assessee was liable to pay capital gains tax on the amounts of 'salami ' or premium received.
The assessee contended before the Income tax Officer that no capital gains tax could be levied on the said leases as the land was agricultural and that Section 12 B of the said Act did not come into play as only lease hold rights had been conveyed by the assessee to the lessees under the leases in question.
Both these contentions were rejected by the Income tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal.
Arising from the decision of the Tribunal, two questions were referred to the High Court, viz. (1) Whether the land sold by the assessee constituted a capital asset within the meaning of Section 12 B of the said Act or was agricultural land as defined in Section 2(4A) of the Act, and (2) Whether the transaction of lease effected by the assessee amounted to a transfer within the meaning of Section 12 B of the said Act so as to attract liability for capital gains tax.
The High Court answered both the questions in the affirmative and against the assessee.
Leave was granted by the High Court to the assessee to appeal to this Court only in respect of the second question.
990 The appellant assessee had contended that Section 12 B of the said Act could have no application as the land in question was Inam land which must have been granted as a pure gift., to the ancestor of the assessee, and that Section 12 B was applicable only in the case of assets where there was a cost of acquisition.
The respondent had urged that the assessee could not raise this contention as it did not arise out of the decision of the Tribunal and was not reflected in the questions referred by the Tribunal particularly in the question in respect of which the certificate of appeal had been granted.
The Court dismissed the appeal upholding the submissions of the respondent.
It was, ^ HELD:that the question in respect of which certificate of fitness had been granted, clearly related to one controversy, namely, whether the provisions of Section 12 B could be brought into play in this case as the transfer was of lease hold interest in immovable property for 99 years and not an outright sale or transfer of the complete interest of the transferor in the immovable property.
The question as to whether Section 12 B could be brought into play where the property sold had not cost anything to acquire as it was gifted, had not been urged before the income tax authorities, the Tribunal or the High Court and was not covered by the decision of the Tribunal or the High Court.
This case fell within the category of cases where the question of law concerned is neither raised before the Tribunal nor considered by it, and in such a case the question would not be a question arising out of the order of the Tribunal notwithstanding that it may arise on the findings given by it, as held by this Court in Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd., ; Merely because a question of law might arise on the facts found by the Tribunal, this would not render it a question arising out of the decision of the Tribunal.
[995B C,G] As regards the question whether the provisions of Section 12 B could be brought into play, although what was transferred was only lease hold interest in the lands in question, it was significant that the leases were for a long period of 99 years and in all the transactions of lease, premium had been charged by the assessee for the grant of the lease concerned.
Under the leases, the assessee had parted with an asset of an enduring nature, namely, the rights to possession and enjoyment to the properties leased for 99 years subject to certain conditions regarding termination of the leases.
It could not be said that the provisions of Section 12 B of the said Act could not be brought into play.
The grant of the leases amounted to a transfer of capital assets as contemplated under Section 12 B of the said Act.
[996G H;997A B] 991 C.I.T. vs Srinivasa & Setty, ; ; Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay vs Scindia Steam Navigation Co. Ltd., [1961] 42 ITR p. 589 and Traders and Miners Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar and Orissa, , referred to.
