Civil Appeal No. 563 of 1975 filed in the Court was directed against the Judgment of the High Court in an Income tax Reference.
The respondent (assessee) was a registered co operative Society, carrying on business of manufacture and sale of sugar.
The respondent had established a fund called "Loss Equalisation and Capital Redemption Reserve Fund" to which it added, during the relevant accounting year, a sum of Rs.5,15,863 by deduction from the price payable by the respondent to its members for the supply of sugarcane received from the members.
The deductions were made under bye law 50 of the Byelaws of the society, which was amended later.
The Income tax Officer in assessing the respondent for the relevant assessment year held that the sum above mentioned represented a revenue receipt and was liable to be included in the taxable income of the assessee.
On appeal, the Assistant Commissioner affirmed the view of the Income tax Officer, holding that the case had to be decided on the basis of the bye law as it stood during the relevant accounting year.
The respondent assessee appealed to the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, which held that the amended bye law was operative even during the relevant previous year in view of the retrospective amendment thereof and that in view of the said amended bye law 50 the deposits made by the members by way of deductions from the price as contemplated in the bye law 50 were in the nature of permanent liabilities and hence they were capital receipts and not liable to be included in the taxable income of the assessee.
The Tribunal directed that the said amount of Rs. 5,15,863 be deducted 1035 from the taxable income of the assessee.
At the instance of the appellant, a reference was made to the High Court for the determination of the question whether the Income tax Appellate Tribunal was right in holding that the amount of Rs.5,15,863 was not a revenue receipt liable to tax.
The High Court answered the question in the affirmative and in favour of the assessee.
The Commissioner of Income tax moved this Court by this appeal against the decision of the High Court.
The appellant contended that the amendment of the bye law 50, which was purported to be made with retrospective effect, could have no retrospective effect in law.
There was no delegation of power to the respondent society to make bye laws with retrospective effect.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD:The respondent society had no authority in law to amend its bye law 50 with retrospective effect.
The amendment of bye law 50 could not have any retrospective effect and the amounts deducted from the amounts payable to members for the supply of sugarcane, would have to be dealt with as if they were deducted under the provisions of bye law 50 as it stood in the relevant accounting period.
If the provisions of the unamended bye law were applied, it was clear that the amounts deducted by the respondent from the price payable to its members on account of supply of sugarcane were deducted in the course of the trading operations of the respondent and these deductions were a part of its trading operations.
The receipts by way of these deductions must be regarded as revenue receipts and were liable to be included in the taxable income of the respondent.
Those receipts could not be regarded as deposits.
The receipts constituted by the deductions were really trading receipts of the assessee society and were liable to be included in its taxable income.
The High Court was in error and the question referred must be answered in favour of the revenue.
[1042A, G H;1044D E] Civil Appeal No. 564 of 1975 was filed against the judgment of the High Court in an income tax reference in which the question referred for determination was whether a sum credited during the year of account to the loss equalisation and capital redemption reserve fund by deposits received from producer members of the society under clause 50 of its bye laws was in the nature of a revenue receipt assessable to tax.
Allowing the appeal, the Court, 1036 HELD:In view of its decision in Civil Appeal No. 563 of 1975, the Court answered the question referred in the affirmative and in favour of the revenue.
[1045A] Income tax Officer, Alleppey vs M.C. Poonnoose and Ors., ; ; Hukam Chand etc.
vs Union of India & others; , ; Co operative Central Bank Ltd. & Ors.
vs Additional Industrial Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh & Ors., ; Dr. Indramani Pyarelal Gupta vs W.R. Nathu and others; , ; Chowringhee Sales Bureau P. Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax West Bengal, and Punjab Distilling Industries Ltd. vs Commissioner of Income tax Simla, , referred to.
