These appeals were directed against the common judgment of the High Court in Writ applications filed by different petitioners, challenging the termination of the mining leases granted to them.
The State of Haryana which had executed the mining leases in favour of the writ petitioners for ten years under the provisions of the Mines & Minerals (Regulation & Development) Act (the Act), terminated the said leases prematurely in the purported exercise of powers under Section 4A of the Act without prior notice to the writ petitioners or any opportunity to them to defend their cases.
The leases were so terminated on the ground that the Haryana Minerals limited a public sector undertaking had fully equipped itself to undertake the mining operations.
The High Court allowed the writ petitions.
The State of Haryana and Haryana Minerals Limited appealed to this Court by Special leave against the decision of the High Court.
According to the appellant, the necessary consultation between the Central Government and the State Government was held, fulfilling the conditions under Section 4A of the Act and the decision impugned was taken.
The appellant contended that the writ petitioners lessees had no locus standi to place their view point and it was not necessary to give them notice, and that there was no violation of the principles of natural justice.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: The language of Section 4A indicates that the Section by itself does not permaturely terminate any mining lease.
A decision in this regard has to be taken by the Central Government.
The question of the State Government granting a fresh mining lease in favour of a 1016 Government Company or a Corporation arises only after the existing mining lease is terminated, the section does not direct termination of all mining leases merely for the reason that a Government Company or a Corporation has equipped itself for the purpose.
It is not correct to say that an existing mining lease can be terminated for the reason that a Government Company or a Corporation is ready to undertake the work.
Viewed thus, the section must be interpreted to imply that a person who may be affected by such a decision should be afforded an opportunity to prove that the proposed step would not advance the interest of mines and mineral development.
Not to do so will be violative of the principles of natural justice.
Since there is no suggestion in the section to deny the right of the affected persons to be heard, the provisions have to be interpreted as implying to preserve such a right.
A final decision to prematurely terminate a lease can be taken only after notice to the lessee.[1019C H;1020E] The Writ Petitioners respondents before the Court were never given an opportunity to be heard.
If such an opportunity had been afforded, they would have shown that their standard of mining operations was very high and favourably measured against the expected standard and was superior to that of the Haryana Minerals Limited.
[1021G] There was no effective consultation between the Union of India and the State Government, and the Central Government did not form any opinion as required under Section 4A of the Act.
The respondents before the Court were entitled to be heard before a decision to prematurely terminate their leases was taken but they were not given any opportunity to place their cases.
The respondents must succeed.
[1022A B] Baldev Singh and others vs State of Himachal Pradesh and others, ; Union of India and another vs Cynamide India Ltd. and another, AIR 1987 SC 1802; D. C. Saxena vs State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 1463 and State of Tamil Nadu vs Hind Stone, etc.
; , , referred to.
