The Government of Karnataka issued an order dated the 30th June, 1969, sanctioning in centives and concessions in the matter of sales tax to the entrepreneurs for starting new industries in the Mysore State.
On the 12th January, 1977, the Government issued another order, presecribing ceiling limits on the quantum of the sales tax or concession to be granted.
Thereupon several persons filed writ petitions before the High Court, claiming that they had started new industries in the State because of the concessions granted to them under the order dated the 30th June, 1969 and they could not be deprived of the concessions given to them by the former order as the said grant of concessions constituted a promissory estoppel against the Government and the Government was not entitled to go back on the promise.
The High Court upheld the contention of the petitioners and allowed the writ petitions.
Against the decision of the High Court, these appeals were filed in this Court by the Assistant Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and others.
Dismissing the appeals, the Court, ^ HELD: The contention of the appellants that the doctrine of Promissory Estoppel was not applicable in this case because the concessions granted under the order dated 30th June, 1969 were being misused, could not be accepted.
There was nothing to show that any misuse was made of the concessions.
A recital in the order dated 12th January, 1977, regarding misuse of the concessions, could not by itself establish that the concessions were misused.
[949F G] There was no substance in the appellants ' contention that the 947 concessions granted by the order dated 30th June, 1969, were of no legal effect of the contention that the said order was ultra vires and bad in law, as there was no provision in the Kranataka Sales Tax Act ("the said Act") under which any refund could be granted, and the State Government had no authority to provide for refunds.
Though the benefit regarding sales tax granted to the new industries was by way of refunds of sales tax paid to the extent provided in the order, in effect, the benefit granted was in the nature of an exemption from the payment of the sales tax or reduction in the sales tax liability to the extent stated in the Order.
The mere fact that the order of 30th June, 1969 did not specify the power under which it was issued would make no difference because such a power was there in Section 8A of the said Act.
Where the source of power under which an order is issued is not stated in the order but can be found on the examination of the relevant Act, the exercise of the power must be attributed to that source.
The appeals were dismissed.
[951C E] Union of India vs M/s Indo Afghan Agencies Limited, ; ; Century Spinning and Manufacturing Company Limited & Anr.
vs The Ulhasnagar Municipal Council and Anr., [1970] 3 S.C.R. 854; M s Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Company Pvt. Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors., A.I.R. 1979 S.C.621 and State of Bihar and Anr.
vs Usha Martin Industries Ltd., [1987] 65 STC 430, referred to.
