A car owned by a firm was entrusted to Guru, proprietor of M/s Auto Electrical Works, for electrical repairs.
The car was insured with M/s. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. as required under the ( 'The Act ').
When Momad Donttach an employee of the repairer, was repairing the car, the respondent No. 1 was knocked down when the car dashed against the said respondent as a result whereof she had to be hospitalised and treated for injuries.
The respondent No. 1 instituted a claim petition under section 110 A of the Act before the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, impleading the firm the owner of the car Guru, the repairer, Momad Donttach, the mechanic, and the insurer M/s.
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. as respondents.
The respondents contested the petition.
The Tribunal passed its award, allowing a compensation of Rs.90,000 to the respondent No. 1 for the injuries suffered by her, payable jointly and severally by the insurer and all the other respondents.
Aggrieved by the decision of the Tribunal, the insurer and Guru filed appeals before the High Court, which allowed the appeal of the insurer, however, holding that under section 92 A of the Act, the insurer was liable to pay to the extent of Rs.7,500.
Guru 's appeal was dismissed, holding that he and his mechanic Momad Donttach alone were jointly and severally liable to pay the compensation, i.e. the entire sum awarded minus Rs.7,500 above said.
Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court.
Guru moved this Court for relief by special leave.
Allowing the appeal and modifying the order of the High Court, the Court, 171 ^ HELD: The only question of law arising for consideration was whether the insurer was liable to pay the compensation to the claimant, which has to be resolved in the light of the provisions of the Act.
[175 B, C] If a policy is taken in respect of a motor vehicle from an insurer in compliance with the requirements of Chapter VIII of the Act, the insurer is under an obligation to pay the compensation payable to a third party on account of any injury to his/her person, property or to a legal representative of the third party in case of death of the third party caused by use of the vehicle at a public place.
The liability to pay the said compensation arises when the insured is using the vehicle in a public place.
It also arises when the insured has caused or allowed any other person (including an independent contractor) to use his vehicle in a public place and the death of or injury to the person or property of a third party is caused on account of the use of the said vehicle during such period, unless such other person has himself taken out a policy of insurance to cover the liability arising out of such an accident.
[176E ] In this case, neither Guru Govekar, the repairer, nor his mechanic Momad Donttach had taken a policy of insurance covering the liability to pay compensation payable to a third party, when a motor vehicle taken for repairs from its owner has caused the death of or injury to a third party.
When the owner of a Motor vehicle entrusts his vehicle to a repairer to carry out repairs, he is allowing the repairer to use his vehicle in that connection.
It is also implicit in the said transaction that unless there is any contract to the contrary, the owner of the vehicle also causes or allows any servant of the repairer, engaged in the work of repairs to use the vehicle in connection with the work of repairs and when such work of repair is being carried out in a public place, if on account of the negligence of either the repairer or his employee engaged in the repair work, a third party dies or suffers injury to his person or property, the insurer becomes liable to pay the compensation under the provisions of the Act.
While it may be true that under the Law of Torts, the owner may not be liable on the principle of vicarious liability, the insurer would be liable to pay the compensation by virtue of the provisions of sections 94 and 95 of the Act.
On the facts of the case, the insurer was liable to pay the compensation found due to the claimant as a consequence of the injuries suffered by her due to the negligence of the mechanic engaged by the repairer who had undertaken to repair the vehicle, by virtue of the provisions contained in section 94 of the Act.
Any other view will expose the innocent third 172 parties to go without compensation when they suffer injuries on account of such motor accidents and will defeat the very object of introducing the necessity for taking out insurance policy under the Act.
[176H; 177A C; 180F; 181F] The Court allowed the appeal, modified the order of the High Court and directed the insurer to pay to the claimant the sum of Rs.90,000, etc.
[181G] Monk vs Warbey and others, ; McLeod (or Houston) vs Buchanan, ; Vijaynagaram Narasimha Rao and others vs Chanashyam Das Tapadia and others, ; Shantibai and others vs The Principal Govindram C. Sakseria Technological Institute, Indore and others, ; D. Rajapathi vs University of Madurai and others, ; New Asiatic Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Pessumal Dhanamal Aswani and Ors., , referred to.
