A person during his lifetime executed trust deeds, dated 21.9.53 and 4.10.1959 respectively.
Under the Deed dated 21.9.1953 that person as settlor, transferred upon trust to himself as trustees four items of immovable property.
The objects and purposes of the trust broadly stated were the conduct of the daily worship of the deity, carrying out of certain charitable acts and making of provisions for the maintenance of the settlor and some other persons.
The trustee was required after defraying taxes etc.
to accumulate 1/4th of the net income to be set apart for purposes of effecting certain additions and alterations to the properties; to make over another 1/4th of the net income to the shebait for the conduct of the daily pooja; another 1/4th for the charities and the remaining 1/4th for the personal benefit of the settlor during his lifetime and to his heirs thereafter.
Later on the share of the settlor was changed to 5/16.
Under the deed dated 4.10.1959 the settlor transferred upon trust to himself and his son, the appellant in Civil Appeal No. 946 of 1975, as trustees six other properties, almost for the same purposes and kept a fixed share for the benefit of the settlor during his lifetime and thereafter to his heirs.
In the proceedings of assessment to Estate Duty the question arose whether the trust deeds attracted and fell within 270 section 12(1) of the Estate Duty Act.
The Deputy Controller of Estate Duty, the Appellate Controller of Estate Duty in the first appeal and the Income tax Appellate Tribunal, Calcutta, in the second appeal held that the entire subject matter of the deeds must be held, or deemed, to pass on death and the value of the properties should be included in the principal value of the Estate passing on death.
At the instance of the accountable person, a reference was made to the High Court for opinion as to whether the properties comprised in both the trust deeds were dutiable under section 12(1) of the Act.
The High Court held that properties comprised in the deed dated 21.9.1953 were settled property within the meaning of section 2(19) and that section 12(1) was attracted.
In relation to the properties covered by the deed dated 4.10.1959, the High Court held that Section 12(1) was not applicable to them as they were not settled properties.
Feeling aggrieved, both the accountable person and the Deputy Controller of Estate Duty filed these cross appeals.
Dismissing the appeal of the accountable person, allowing that of the Revenue, and answering the question referred to by the High Court for opinion in the affirmative and against the assesee, this Court, ^ HELD: The first contention of the accountable persons that the interest in the property corresponding to the benefit retained by the settlor was not a subject matter of the disposition at all is essentially a matter of construction of the deeds.
There is, no doubt, a discernible difference between a case of settlement of property with reservation of a benefit to the settlor on the one hand and the case where what is settled is only a share or interest or part of the property, excluding the part or the share corresponding to the benefit that the settlor has chosen to retain.
There is, indeed, no transfer at all in the latter case.
The accountable person contends that there is really no transfer of the share corresponding to the benefit reserved in both the cases.
[278F G] In the present case, any possibilities of such an argument are ruled out by the explicit terms of the deeds.
The subject matter of the deeds are not 11/16 share and 1/2 share in the properties respectively.
The whole of the properties are conveyed upon trust.
There is, therefore, no scope for this submission.
[280C D] St. Aubyn vs Attorney General, [1951] 2 All England Reports 496; Controller of Estate Duty, A.P. Hyderabad vs Smt.
Godavari Bai; , at 635 and Controller of Estate Duty, Kerala vs M/s. R.V. Vishwanathan and Ors., ; at 97 and 99, referred to.
271 The second contention of the accountable person that provisions of section 12(1) are not attracted as the properties did not fill the bill as "Settled Properties" within the meaning of Section 2(19) has no substance.
Section 12(1) refers to and deals with a case of property passing under a "settlement" in which the settlor had reserved to himself an interest in such property either expressly or by implication.
Apparently, on its language, the section does not draw upon the incidents and implications of "Settled Property" for the satisfaction of its requirements.
The passing of property under a "settlement" which means "any disposition including a dedication or endowment whereby property is settled" coupled with a reservation of an interest in the property would suffice.
The further incident that the properties covered by the settlement must in addition partake of the character of "Settled property" and accordingly, should stand "limited in trust for any person, natural or juridical, by way of succession" etc.
are not to be held as part of the requirements of section 12(1).
Those incidents of "Settled Property" need not be imported to the ingredients of section 12(1) which would be satisfied if there is a "Settlement" as defined under the second part of section 2(19) and if, there is reservation of an interest by the settlor in addition.
[280D; 281C E] In the instant case, the two deeds clearly answer the description of "Settlement" as defined under Section 2(19) viz. that there is a "disposition including a dedication, whereby property is settled".
Indeed under both the deads, the reservations of the benefit of the income from the trust properties were made in favour of the settlor.
These reservations by themselves, in our opinion, bring the properties within the net of section 12(1).
In addition, the settlor in this case constituted himself during his life time and thereafter constituted his heirs as the shebaits of the two deities.
Indeed where while endowing properties to a deity, the settlor stipulates that he shall during his left time and thereafter his heirs be the shebaits of the deity, the settlor can possibly be said to provide not only for certain duties to be vested in connection with the endowment but also secures a beneficial interest in the property.
[281F H; 282A] Angurbala Mullick vs Debabrata Mullick, at 1132 and Kalipada Chakraborti & Anr.
vs Palani Bala Devi The reservation "interest", so as to attract Section 12(1), must be in the property as such and that mere collateral benefits reserved by the settlor emanating from some other property or some other source, inde 272 pendent of the property so settled, will not attract the section.
The distinction between a case of a benefit arising "collaterally" and a case of the benefit being reserved by "implication" would require to be kept clearly distinguished.
[282H; 283A, C] Controller of Estate Duty vs R. Kanakasabai & Ors., at 257, referred to.
The terms of the two documents satisfy even the extended requirement that for purposes of section 12(1) the settled property must be by way of succession.
[284E] Attorney General vs Owen, [1899] 2 Queen 's Bench Division 253 at 266 and Hamid Hussain vs Controller of Estate Duty, at 315, referred to.
There is no substance in the 3rd contention also of the accountable person that all the properties covered by the two settlements cannot be held to pass under section 12(1) but only the value of the share of the properties corresponding to the benefit reserved must be held to pass.
There are certain fallacies in some of the assumptions basic to this contention.
The quantum of the interest reserved does not determine the extent of the property passing under Section 12(1).
This is not a case where several distinct properties or parcels are settled and a beneficial interest is reserved out of one alone when it might be possible to predicate that all properties comprised in such settlement, which must be held to be a composite deed dealing with several items do not attract section 12(1) but only the parcel out of which an interest is carved out and reserved for the settlor 's benefit.
Under Section 12(1) if the deceased makes a settlement and reserves for himself an interest therein for life or for any period determinable with reference to death, the whole of the property so settled would be deemed to pass.
The interest reserved might be very small indeed; but however small the interest, when by virtue of such a reservation a settlement falls within the purview of section 12, the whole property would be deemed to pass.
[284F H; 285A B] Attorney General vs Earl.
Grey, at 325, referred to.
The expression 'interst ' in section 12(1) is also not used in a restrictive sense.
[285D] Attorney General vs Heywood, and Attorney 273 General vs Farrel, , referred to.
