The prosecution case was: The appellant, who was working under P.W.1, developed intimacy with P.W.1 's wife.
However, on being found out by her daughter, P.W.2, the wife was forced to terminate this relationship.
Then, on 20.7.1985, the appellant saw a late night film containing murder scenes of four women and told his friend, P.W.5, that he would take revenge for the betrayal by a lady.
Thereafter he went to the house of P.W.1 and attacked the wife with knife, and killed her son when he intervened.
He also caused grievous injury to the daughter.
The appellant was convicted by the trial court under section 302 IPC for double murder of the woman and her son and also under section 307 IPC for attempting to kill her daughter and for house trespass in order to commit the aforesaid offences, and sentenced to death and life imprisonment respectively.
The High Court dismissed the appeal, and confirmed the death sentence.
In the appeal by special leave, it was contended that although the appellant was not in such a mental state as to attract section 84 of the IPC, he was certainly so agitated on account of the circumstances beyond his control that he should be spared from the extreme penalty of death.
Allowing the appeal, 223 ^ HELD: The deceased was an elderly lady with two children who took a defiant attitude, defending her conduct when she was first confronted by her own daughter, which suggests that the unfortunate relationship between her and the appellant, in his mid 20s, had developed with her encouragement.
When suddenly spurned by his partner, the appellant must have experienced the disappointment of a discarded lover.
His mental agitation was further fuelled by the movie, showing murder after murder.
And when this upsets a youngman, already vulnerably disturbed, the society cannot be completely absolved of sharing the responsibility for the tragedy resulting from the vicious effect of films picturising violence.
[225F H; 226A B] Considering all these circumstances, and having regard to the fact that when commanded by P.W.16, the appellant stopped immediately, thereby resulting in the life of the daughter being saved, and that he did not attempt to escape, the sentence of death passed against the appellant under section 302 Indian Penal Code is converted to imprisonment for life.
[226B C]
