Mainavati, who had purchased the premises in question at a court sale, conveyed the same by sale in favour of Gopinath.
The appellant who was in occupation attorned his tenancy in favour of Gopinath.
Gopinath, in turn, sold the property in favour of Chhaya Gupta, the third respondent.
The appellant tenant on being asked to attorn the tenancy in favour of Chhaya Gupta, declined to do so and assailed not only the derivative title of the third respondent to the property but also the validity of the sale in favour of Gopinath himself on the ground that Mainavati had not acquired the totality of all rights and interests in the property and, as such, her title was defective.
This act of disclaimer of the title of Gopinath to whom the appellant had attorned was the foundation of proceedings in ejectment.
The High Court, dismissing the appellant 's writ petition, upheld the order of ejectment made by the Courts below.
Before this Court it was contended by the appellant: (1) that the High Court was in error in its view that the stand taken by the appellant amounted in law to a denial of title of the landlord, and (2) that the view of the High Court on the scope of a tenant 's estoppel was erroneous.
Dismissing the appeal, it was ^ HELD: (1) The law as to the estoppel of a tenant under Section 116 of the Evidence Act was a recognition, and statutory assimilation, of the equitable principles underlying the doctrine of estoppel in rela 248 tion to tenants.
The Section was not exhaustive of the law of estoppel.
The section inter alia, predicated that no tenant of immovable property during the continuance of the tenancy, would be permitted to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, title to such property.
[251B C] (2) There could be a denial of the title of his landlord without the tenant renouncing his own character as a tenant, where, for instance, he had set up a plea of Jus tertii.
[254B] (3) The derivative title of the third respondent was not denied on any other ground than the one that the vendor, Gopinath to whom appellant had attorned had himself no title, the implication of which was that if appellant could not have denied Gopinath 's title by virtue of the inhibitions of the attornment, he could not question third respondent 's title either.
What appellant did, indeed, amounted to a denial of title which appellant was precluded from doing on the general principles of estoppel between landlord and tenant.
[254C D] (4) Having regard to the findings of fact recorded by the High Court, it appeared to be a clear case which attracted the grounds for eviction under section 3 (1) of the Uttar Pradesh (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947.
[254E F] Kumar Krishna Prasad Lal Singha Das vs Baraboni Coal Concern Ltd., , referred to.
