The appellant sued his wife for dissolution of marriage on the ground of her adultery.
On the evidence the trial court found that it was not possible to hold that adultery had been committed, though it found that one of the letters contained "a large substratum of truth".
The High Court in appeal concurred with the decision.
On appeal to the Supreme Court it was contended for the appellant that the finding of the courts below was vitiated because certain pieces of evidence had been misread, and some others ignored.
As a matter of legitimate and proper inference the Court should not have arrived at any other conclusion, but that the wife was guilty of adultery with respondent NO. 2.
The evidence showed that the wife went to Patna and stayed in a hotel with respondent NO. 2 under an assumed name, that they occupied the same room in the hotel, that the conduct of the respondent indicated a guilty inclination, and that so far as the wife was concerned, her conduct was entirely consistent with her guilt : Held, that, the nature of the evidence adduced was such as would satisfy the requirements of section 14 of the Divorce Act, and that the finding of the Courts below that an inference of adultery could not be drawn therefrom must be set aside.
Although it is not usual for the Supreme Court to interfere 1411 on questions of fact, where, however, the courts below ignore or misconstrue important pieces of evidence in arriving at their finding, and this Court is of the opinion that no tribunal could have come to such a finding oil the evidence taken as a whole, such finding was liable to be interfered with by this Court.
Held, further, that the words "satisfied on the evidence" in section 14 Of the Divorce Act, 1869, imply that it is the duty of the (Court to pronounce a decree only when it is satisfied that the case lhas been proved beyond reasonable doubt as to the commission of a matrimonial offence.
The evidence must be clear and satisfactory beyond mere balance of probabilities.
It is not neccessary and rarely possible, to prove the issue by any direct evidence.
The rule laid down in Preston Jones vs Preston Jones, , lays down the principle that should be followed by tile courts under section 7 Of the Divorce Act.
State of Madras vs A. vaidanatha Iyer; , , Purvez Ardeshir Poonawala vs The State of Bombay, Cr. A. 122 Of 1954, decided on December 20, 1957, Stephen Seneviratne vs The A.I.R. 1936 P.C. 289, Mordaunt vs Moncrieffe, (1874) 30 649 and Gower vs Gower [1950] 1 All.
E.R. 804, referred to.
Loveden vs Loveden, ; (1810) 2 Hag.
1,3, referred to.
Preston Jones vs Preston Jones, , relied upon.
