In April, 1986, the Selection Committee constituted by the Chief Justice of Allahabad High Court recommended the grant of super time scale to the appellant, a member of the U.P. Higher Judicial Services, under Rule 27A of the U.P. Higher Judicial Services Rules, 1975.
The Full Court of the High Court considered the recommendation on two occasions, but no decision could be taken as each time the Administrative Judge made certain new allegations against the appellant.
Finally, on January 17, 1987, the Full Court found the appellant unfit for a post in the super time scale.
On the eve of the Full Court Meeting the Administrative Judge was stated to have written a secret letter to the Chief Justice.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed a writ petition before the Division Bench.
Meanwhile, the appellant made a representation to the High Court on its Administrative side for reconsideration of the resolution of the Full Court.
While no decision was taken by the Full Court at its meeting held on May 16, 1987, an adverse entry for the year 1986 87 was recorded by the Administrative Judge.
The Chief Justice enquired into the allegations contained in the adverse entry and found that the allegations had no foundation whatsoever.
He recorded in his minutes that he regarded the appellant as a very good, able and competent administrator with an unblemished integrity.
318 The Division Bench, after noticing the remarks of the Chief Justice, quashed the resolution of the Full Court, and referred back the matter to the Full Court for reconsideration.
It also directed that the appellant be given an opportunity of explaining the imputations made against him in the letter written by the Administrative Judge on the eve of the Full Court meeting! of January 17, 1988. Dissatisfied with the above decision, the appellant filed an appeal by special leave in this Court.
Meanwhile, the Full Court at its meeting held on February 20, 1988, again rejected the recommendation of the Selection Committee for the grant of super time scale to the appellant.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: 1.1 Whether a member of the Higher Judicial Service should be granted the selection grade or the super time scale is a matter exclusively within the administrative jurisdiction of the High Court.
This Court will not ordinarily interfere with any decision of the High Court in such a matter.
However, if the High Court acts in violation of any rule framed by it or of the principles of natural justice or comes to any finding not supported by any reliable material, this Court has to examine the matter for ends of justice.
But, interference does not mean granting of relief which the High Court is entrusted to grant in its administrative jurisdiction.
The Court will ordinarily refer back the matter for reconsideration of the High Court.
[322F H] However, in the instant case ends of justice would require interference by disposing of the matter finally, without referring it again to the High Court.
[323A] 1.2 Proviso to Rule 4(B) of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules requires that before an adverse remark is communicated to the concerned judicial officer; it must be placed before the Chief Justice.
By necessary implication, therefore, the rule requires concurrence of the Chief Justice for taking necessary action on the adverse remark by communicating to the judicial officer concerned.
[324A B] In the instant case, although the Chief Justice did not agree with the adverse remarks, action was taken by communicating them to the appellant in utter violation of the proviso to Rule 4B and also in disregard of the minutes of enquiry of the Chief Justice.
[324B C] 319 The appellant had denied the allegations contained in the letter of the Administrative Judge but no attempt was made by the Full Court to have the comments of the retired Judge who orally made the allegations.
Further, the allegations which were made from time to time against the appellant resulting in the postponement of consideration by the Full Court were all found to be untrue.
[324C D] An enquiry was made by the Chief Justice and the allegations contained in the adverse entry for 1986 87 have been found to be without foundation.
Indeed, the Chief Justice recorded that he regarded the appellant as a very good, able and competent administrator with an unblemished integrity.
[323E F] Therefore, in the absence of any material on record to form the foundation in support of the allegations and in view of the minutes of the Chief Justice, the Full Court was not at all justified in acting on the allegations contained in the letter of the Administrative Judge and depriving the appellant of the grant of super time scale.
[323F] The appellant was, therefore, entitled to a posting in the supertime scale.
Since the appellant has already retired he shall be paid the monetary benefit with effect from January 1, 1987 and his pension suitably altered.
[324F G]
