The two respondents, R. Rajiah and R. Rajeswaran, who were members of the Tamil Nadu State Judicial Service, were functioning as District Munsifs when orders of their compulsory retirement from service were passed by the High Court of Madras in its administrative jurisdiction under Rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules.
Both the respondents moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the validity of the impugned orders on the grounds:(1) that the High Court had no power to pass an order of compulsory retirement of a member of the State Judicial Service as such an order could be passed only by the Appointing Authority i.e., the Governor; (2) that there was no material on record which could justify their premature retirement; and (3) that the Review Committees of the High Court that passed the impugned orders were not properly constituted.
Two Judges of the Division Bench of the High Court delivered separate judgments and differed on the question of the power of the High Court to pass the impugned orders.
One of the learned Judges took the view that though it was within the jurisdiction of the High Court to take a decision whether a member of the State Judicial service should be compulsorily retired or not, the formal order of compulsory retirement was to be passed by the Governor acting on the recommen 333 dation of the High Court.
According to the other learned Judge, it was the High Court which was competent to pass an order of compulsory retirement of a member of the State Judicial Service without any formal order by the Governor under rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules.
On merits, both the Judges came to the conclusion that there was no material on record to justify the impugned order.
It was also held that in the case of Mr. Rajeswaran, the irregular or illegal constitution of the Review Committee vitiated the impugned order, while in the case of Mr. Rajiah, the manner in which the Reivew Committee considered the question of compulsory retirement was illegal.
The High Court further pointed out that although Mr. Rajeswaran was confirmed as a District Munsif on 1.1.1976, in coming to a decision that Mr. Rajeswaran should be compulsorily retired, the third Judge of the Review Committee relied upon events that happened in 1954.
It was contended on behalf of the appellant that the High Court alone has the power to pass an order of compulsory retirement of a member of the State judicial Service, and unless it is so held it would be in derogation of High Court 's control over subordinate courts as conferred on it by Article 235 of the Constitution.
It was also urged that rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules should be declared ultra vires in so far as it confers power on the Governor to compulsorily retire members of the Subordinate judicial service.
On merits, it was contended that the High Court was not at all justified in considering the question of adequacy or otherwise of the material on record in respect of the impugned orders of compulsory retirement.
Dismissing the appeals, it was, ^ HELD: (Per M.M. Dutt, J.) (C.J.I. agreeing with him) (1) article 235 vests in the High Court control over Districts Courts and Courts subordinate thereto.
The vesting of such control is consistent with the idea of preservation of the independence of the judiciary.
If any authority other than the High Court is conferred with the absolute right to take action against a member of the subordinate judicial service, such conferment of power will impinge upon the power of control that is vested in the High Court under Article 235 of the Constitution.
[339C D] (2) Rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules under which a member 334 of subordinate judicial service can be compulsorily retired has to be A read subject to and in harmony with the power of control vested in the High Court under Article 235 of the Constitutioin.
[339E] (3) The test of control is not the passing of an order against a member of the subordinate judicial service, but the decision to take such action.
Passing or signing of such orders by the Governor will not necessarily take away the control of the High Court vested in it under Article 235 of the Constitution.
[339G H; 340A B] (4) An action against any Government servant consists of two parts.
Under the first part, a decision will have to be made whether action will he taken against the Government servant.
Under the second part, the decision will be carried out by a formal order.
The power of control envisaged under Article 235 of the Constitution relates to the power of making a decision by the High Court against a member of the subordinate judicial service.
[340B C] (5) The control of the High Court, as understood, will be applicable in the case of compulsory retirement in that the High Court will, upon an enquiry, come to a conclusion whether a member of the subordinate judicial service should be retired prematurely or not.
If the High Court comes to the conclusion that such a member should be prematurely retired, it will make a recommendation in that regard to the Governor inasmuch as the Governor is the appointing authority.
The Governor will make a formal order or compulsory retirement in accordance with the recommendation of the High Court.
The Governor cannot take any action against any member of a subordinate judicial service without, and contrary to, the recommendation of the High Court.
[342B C] (6) It may be that the power of the Governor under rule 56(d) of the Fundamental Rules is very formal in nature, for the Governor merely acts on the recommendation of the High Court.
In the instant cases, as there is no formal order by the Governor under rule 56(d), the impugned orders of the High Court are ineffective.
[343D E] (7) In that view of the matter, the contention made on behalf of the High Court that rule 56(d) should be declared ultra vires in so far as it confers power on the Governor to compulsorily retire a member of.
the subordinate judicial service is without any substance whatsoever.
[343E F] (8) When the High Court takes the view that an order of com 335 pulsory retirement should be made against a member of the subordinate judicial service, the adequacy or sufficiency of such materials cannot be questioned, unless the materials are absolutely irrelevant.
But such a conclusion must be based on materials.
If there be no material to justify the conclusion, it will be an arbitrary exercise of power by the High Court.
As there is absence of any material to justify the impugned orders of compulsory retirement, these must be held to be illegal and invalid.
[344C E] (9) It is true that the members of the Review Committee should sit together, but simply because one of them did not participate in the meeting, and subsequently agreed with the view expressed by the other two Judges, it would not vitiate the decision of the Committee.
The third Judge might be justified in correcting the date with effect from which Mr. Rajiah would retire but that is a very minor issue and would not make the decision invalid.
[344H; 345A B] (10) This Court failed to understand why the Chief Justice could not appoint a Review Committee.
But the decision of the Review Committee should have been placed before a meeting of the Judges.
In that sense, the recommendation of the Riview Committee was not strictly legal.
[345C D] (11) The decision to compulsory retire Mr. Rajeswaran is vitiated as the Review Committee had relied upon some adverse incidents against him that took place in 1954, although the respondent was appointed to the post of District Munsif in 1976.
[346E F] Per Sharma, J.: Since there is no material on record in support of the impugned orders of compulsory retirement of the two respondents they were rightly quashed by the High Court.
No opinion is expressed on the other questions raised in these cases.
[347B] State of West Bengal vs Nripendra Nath Bagchi, ; ; State of Haryana vs Inder Prakash Anand, ; State of Uttar Pradesh vs Batuk Deo Pati Tripathi, ; High Court of Punjab & Haryana vs State of Haryana, ; ; Shamsher Singh vs State of Punjab, ; B. Misra vs Orissa High Court, ; ; Baldev Raj Chadha vs Union of India, ; and Brij Bihari Lal Aggarwal vs High Court of M.P., ; , referred to. 336
