The appellant Coffee Board filed writ petitions in the High Court praying for a declaration that the mandatory delivery of the Coffee under section 25(i) of the , was not sale and that section 2(t) of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 required to be struck down if the same encompassed compulsory acquisition also, and challenging the show cause notice, proposing to re open the tax assessment and the pre assessment notice proposing to assess the Board to purchase tax on the Coffee transferred from Karnataka to outside the State.
The Coffee Board has also filed in the High Court writ petitions, challenging the assessments and the demands for the purchase tax.
The appellant Coffee Board had contended that the compulsory delivery of Coffee under the extinguishing all the marketing rights of the growers was 'compulsory acquisition ' and not sale or purchase to attract levy of purchase tax and that the appellant was only a 'trustee ' or agent of the growers not exigible to purchase tax and that all the export sales were in the course of export immune to tax under Article 286 of the Constitution.
It was held by the High Court that an element of consensuality subsisted even in compulsory sales governed by law and once there was an element of consensuality even though minimal, that would be sale or purchase for purposes of Sale of Goods Act and the same would be exigible to sales or purchase tax under the relevant Sales Tax law of the country.
On an analysis of all the provisions of the in general and sections 17 and 25 in particular, the High Court held that on the true principles of compulsory acquisition or eminent domain, it was difficult to hold that on compulsory delivery by growers to the Board, there would be compulsory acquisition of coffee by the Coffee Board.
The High Court dismissed all the writ petitions by a common judgment.
The Coffee Board filed appeals in this Court by 349 certificate against the decision of the High Court.
The writ petitions filed in this Court were for the determination of the rights, obligations and liability between the petitioners and the Coffee Board in respect of the sales tax due and payable on the transactions between the parties.
Dismissing the appeals and the Writ Petitions Nos. 358 and 37 of 1986 and disposing of the Writ Petitions Nos. 36 and 39 of 1986, the Court.
^ HELD: The question involved in these appeals and the writ petitions was the exigibility of tax on sale, if any, by the growers of the coffee to the Coffee Board.
Basically, it must depend upon what is sale in the general context as also in the context of the relevant provisions of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act 1957 as amended from time to time, and the .
These, however, must be examined in the context of general law, namely, the and the concept of sale in general.
[358F G] Coffee Board is a 'dealer ' registered as such under the and the Sales Tax Acts of all the States in which it holds auctions/maintains depots runs coffee houses.
It collects and remits sales tax on all the coffee sold by it to the State in which the sale takes place.
It transfers coffee from one State to another.
[360B,E] This Court (Bench of Five Judges) in the case of State of Kerala vs Bhavani Tea Produce Co., ; , which arose under the Madras Plantations Agricultural Income Tax Act, held that when growers delivered coffee to the Board, all their rights therein were extinguished and the Coffee vested in the Board.
The Court, however did not hold that there was a taxable 'sale ' by the grower to the Board in the year in question.
The Court in this case was bound by the clear ratio of that decision and it could not by pass the same.
That decision concludes all the issues in this case.
Several questions were canvassed in these appeals in view of the decision of the High Court, and all the questions were answered by this Court in the Bhavani Tea Produce Co. 's case (supra) against the appellant.
[360F G; 364B] All the four essential elements of sale (1) parties competent of contract, (2) mutual consent, though minimal, by growing coffee under the conditions imposed by the (The Act), (3) transfer of property in the goods and (4) payment of price though deferred were present in the transaction in question.
As regards the provision under section 26(2) empowering the Coffee Board to purchase additional 350 coffee not delivered for inclusion in the surplus pool, it is only a supplementary provision enabling the Coffee Board to have a second avenue of purchase, the first avenue being the right to purchase coffee under a compulsory delivery system formulated under section 25(1) of the Act.
The scheme of the Act is to provide for a single channel for sale of coffee grown in the registered estates.
The Act directs the entire coffee produced except the quantity allotted for internal sale quota, if any, to be sold to the Coffee Board through the modality of compulsory delivery and imposes a corresponding obligation on the Coffee Board to compulsorily purchase the coffee delivered to the pool, except (1) where the coffee delivered is found to be unfit for human consumption, and (2) where the coffee estate is situated in a far off and remote place or the coffee grown in an estate is so negligible as to make the sale of coffee through compulsory delivery an arduous task and an uneconomical provision.
[367E H; 368A B] In the nature of transactions contemplated under the Act, mutual assent either express or implied is not totally absent in this case in the transactions under the Act.
Coffee growers have a volition or option, though minimal or nominal to enter into the coffee growing trade.
If any one decides to grow coffee, he must transact in terms of the regulation imposed for the benefit of the coffee growing industry.
Section 25 of the Act provides the Board with the right to reject coffee if it is not upto the standard.
Value to be paid as contemplated by the Act is the price of the coffee.
There is no time fixed for delivery of coffee either to the Board or the curer.
These indicate consensuality not totally absent in the transaction.
[368C E] The scheme contemplated under the Act was not an exercise of eminent domain power.
The Act was to regulate the development of coffee industry in the country.
The object was not to acquire coffee grown and vest the same in the Coffee Board.
The Board is only an instrument to implement the Act.
The High Court had rightly observed that the Board has been chosen as the instrumentality for the administration of the Act.
It cannot be said in the Act, there is any compulsory acquisition.
In essence, the scheme envisages sale and not compulsory acquisition.
The terms 'sale ' and 'purchase ' have been used in some of the provisions and that is indicative that no compulsory acquisition was intended.
The levy of duties of excise and customs under sections 11 and 12 of the are inconsistent with the concept of compulsory acquisition.
Section 13(4) of the clearly fixes the liability for 351 payment of duty of excise on the registered owner of the estate producing coffee.
The Board is required to deduct the amount of duty payable by such owner from the payment to the grower under section 34 of the Act.
The duty payable by the grower is a first charge on such pool payment becoming due to the grower from the Board.
Section 11 of the Act provides for levy of duty of customs on coffee exported out of India.
This duty is payable to the Customs Authorities at the time of actual export.
The levy and collection of this duty are not unrelated to the delivery of coffee by the growers to the Board of the payments made by the Board to the growers.
The duty of excise as also the duty of customs are duties levied by Parliament.
It is not a levy imposed by the Board.
The revenue realised from levy of these duties forms part of the Consolidated Fund of India, which may be utilised for the purpose of the only if the Parliament by law so provides.
The true principle or basis in Vishnu Agencies (Pvt.) Ltd. vs Commercial Tax officer and others, etc.
; , , applies to this case.
Offer and acceptance need not always be in an elementary form, nor does the law of contract or sale of goods require that consent to a contract must be express.
Offer and acceptance can be spelt out from the conduct of the parties which cover not only their acts but omissions as well.
The limitations imposed by the Control order on the normal right of the dealers and consumers to supply and obtain goods, the obligation imposed on the parties and the penalties prescribed by the order do not militate against the position that eventually, the parties must be deemed to have completed the transaction under an agreement by which one party binds itself to supply the stated quantity of goods to the other at a price not higher than the notified price and the other party consents to accept the goods on the terms and conditions mentioned in the permit or the order of allotment issued in its favour by the concerned authority.
[375C H; 376A B] A contract, express or implied, for the transfer of the property in the goods for a price paid or promised is an essential requirement for a 'sale '.
In the absence of a contract, express or implied, there cannot be any sale in law; however, in this case, as the scheme of the Act is, there was contract contemplated between the growers and the Coffee Board.
In law, there cannot be a sale whether or not compulsory in the absence of a contract express or implied.
[376B C] The imposition of tax in the manner done by the Sales Tax Authorities upheld by the High Court was correct and the High Court was right.
The appeals failed.
[378D] 352 Civil Writ Petition No. 358 of 1986 was dismissed.
Writ Petition No. 36 of 1986, the Court could not go into the contentions in this petition.
The rights and obligations of the parties inter se between the petitioners and the Coffee Board might be agitated in appropriate proceedings.
Writ Petition 37 of 1986 was dismissed without prejudice to the rights of the petitioners to agitate the question of liability of the petitioner vis a vis the Coffee Board in respect of the Sales Tax due and payable on the transactions between the parties in appropriate proceedings.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 39 of 1986, the Court passed no order; this was without prejudice to the right of the parties taking appropriate proceedings if necessary for the determination of the liabilities inter se between the petitioners and the Coffee Board for the amount of the Sales Tax payable.
[378E G] Indian Coffee Board vs State of Madras, 5 S.T.C. 292; C.E.B. Draper & Sons Ltd. vs Edward Turner & Son Ltd., ; State of Kerala vs Bhavani Tea Produce Co., ; ; Consolidated Coffee Ltd. & Anr.
vs Coffee Board, Bangalore, etc.
; , ; Peanuts Board vs The Rockhampton Harbour Board, 48 Commonwealth Law Reports 266; Vishnu Agencies (Pvt.) Ltd. etc.
vs Commercial Tax officer and others etc.
; , ; Indian Steel and Wire Products Ltd., Andhra Sugar Ltd. and Karam Chand Thapar, ; ; State of Madras vs Gannon Dunkerley & Co. Ltd., ; ; New India Sugar Mills vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, Bihar, [ 19631 Suppl.
2 S.C.R. 459; Charanjit Lal Choudhury vs The Union of India & Ors., ; ; State of Karnataka and another etc.
vs Ranganatha Reddy and Anr.
; , ; Milk Board (New South Wales) vs Metropolitan Cream Pty. Ltd., ; and State of Tamil Nadu vs N. K. Kamaleshwara, 119761 1 S.C.R. 38, referred to.
