The appellant engaged as 'C ' Grade Fitters in a Central Government Undertaking filed applications under section 33 C(2) of the for computation of wages payable to them for certain periods.
Their case before the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court was that since they were doing the same duties which were performed by a 'B ' Grade Fitter, they were entitled to claim wages payable to 'B ' Grade Fitters.
The Management contended that since the principal question involved in all the applications related to re classification of the workmen concerned, a relief which could not be claimed under section 33 C(2) of the Act, these were not maintainable.
The Tribunal rejected the applications by a common order.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the workmen that they should be classified as 'B ' Grade Fitters even though they had been appointed as 'C ' Grade Fitters because they had been performing the duties which were similar to the duties of 'B ' Grade Fitters.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD:1.1 A workman cannot put forward a claim in an application filed under section 33 C(2) of the in respect of the relief which is not based on an existing right and which can be appropriately the subject matter of an industrial dispute requiring a reference under section 10 of the Act.
[475C D] 1.2 By merely doing the same kind of work which is done by a senior grade workman, a junior grade workman will not be entitled to claim the wages of senior grade unless he is duly promoted.
Such a workman cannot complain that he is not being paid the salary and allowances due to a senior grade workman, since he does not possess an 472 existing right to claim it.
If on an adjudication made on the said question on a reference made under section 10(1) of the Act, it is held that he should be deemed to be a member of the senior cadre, then only he would be able to claim the salary and allowances payable to senior grade workmen.
[474G H;475A B] Central Rank of India Ltd. vs P.S,.
Rajagopalan etc.
; , ; State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur vs Khandelwal (R.L.).
[1968] I L.L.J. 589 and State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur vs Gopal Sahal Pareek.
[1968] 1 L.L.J. 593, referred to.
R. B. Bansilal Abirchand Mills Co. Ltd. vs Labour Court, Nagpur & Ors., ; and V.M Vankar (Macwana) vs Indian Farmers Fertilizer, [1984] Lab.
I.C. 1342, distinguished.
1.3 In the instant case, the appellants had been employed as 'C ' Grade Fitters and in order to get the salary and allowances payable to 'B ' Grade Fitters they had to be promoted to the cadre of 'B ' Grade Fitters on their passing certain trade tests.
They had not been so promoted.
The claim of the appellants, therefore, is not tenable.
[473D E] 2.
It is open to the workmen, if they are so advised, to seek a reference of the question whether they are entitled to be treated as 'B ' (grade Fitter Under section 10 of the Act.
[476E]
