The respondent plaintiff filed a suit in the High Court against the appellants inter alia for dissolution of partnership and for accounts.
The plaintiff valued the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction at Rs.25 lakhs and for the purpose of court fee at Rs.500.
The appellants raised a preliminary objection as to the valuation of the suit contending that the relief sought for in the suit had been grossly undervalued and the Court should reject the plaint under order VII, Rule 11(b), Civil Procedure Code.
The learned Single Judge overruled the preliminary objection and held that the suit was not undervalued.
The Division Bench in dismissing the appeal; followed a Full Bench decision of the same High Court wherein it was observed that paragraph (iv) of section 7 of the Court Fees Act gave the right to the plaintiff in any of the suits mentioned in the clauses of that paragraph to place any value that he liked on the relief he sought, subject, however, to any rule made under section 9 of the Suits Valuation Act, and the Court had no power to interfere with the plaintiff 's valuation.
Before this Court, the appellant contended (1) that in a suit for accounts the plaintiff could not value the suit most arbitrarily according to her whims and (2) that an objective standard or positive material 432 appeared on the face of the plaint and the valuation of the relief ignoring such objective standard was demonstratively arbitrary.
Dismissing the appeal it was, ^ HELD: (1) The suits which are mentioned under section 7(iv) are of such nature that it is difficult to lay down any standard of valuation.
Indeed, the Legislature has not laid down any standard of valuation in the Court Fees Act.
[435B C] (2) It is apparent from Rule 4(i) of the Rules framed by the Punjab High Court under section 9 of the Suits Valuation Act, which are applicable to the Union Territory of Delhi, that valuation for the purposes of Court Fee and jurisdiction is not the same.
Under these Rules, the value of suit for accounts for purposes of court fee will have to be determined by the plaintiff.
[434G H] (3) It is manifestly clear from the provision of order VII, Rule 11 (b), that a Court has to come to a finding that the relief claimed has been undervalued which necessarily means that the Court is able to decide and specify proper and correct valuation of the relief.
But ordinarily it is not possible for the Court at a preliminary stage to determine the value of the relief in a suit for accounts simpliciter and the Court has no other alternative than to accept plaintiff`s valuation tentatively.
[435G H; 436B C] (4) Where there are objective standard of valuation or, in other words, the plaintiff or the Court can reasonably value the relief correctly on certain definite and positive materials, the plaintiff will not be permitted to put an arbitrary valuation dehors such objective standards or materials.
[439C D] (5) The plaintiff cannot whimsically choose a ridiculous figure for filling the suit where there are positive materials and/or objective standards of valuation of the relief appearing on the face of the plaint.
These materials or objective standards will also enable the Court to determine the valuation for the purpose of Order VlI, Rule 11(b), of the Code of Civil Procedure.[441C D] (6) The valuation of the relief in the instant case, for the rendition of accounts under Section 7(iv)(f) of the Court Fees Act.
is neither unreasonable nor it is demonstratively arbitrary.[442E] 433 Smt.
Sheila Devi & Ors.
vs Shri Kishan Lal Kalra & Ors., ILR 1974 Delhi 491; section Rm.
Sathappa Chettiar vs section Rm.
Ramanathan Chettiar, 119581 SCR 1024; Urmilabala Biswas vs Binapani Biswas, AIR 1938 Cal 161; Kishori Lal Marwari vs Kumar Chandra Narain Deo, AIR 1939 Patna 572; Nalini Nath Mallik Thakur vs Radhashyam Marwari, AIR 1940 Cal 482; Meenakshisundaram Chettiar vs Venkatachalam Chettiar; , ; Tara Devi vs Sri Thakur Radha Krishna Maharaj, [1987] 4 SCC; Abdul Hamid Shamsi vs Abdul Majid, JT and Atma Ram Charan Das vs Bisheshar Nath Dina Nath, AIR 1935 Lah 689 referred to.
