In the State of Haryana two identical schemes are simultaneously in operation with the object of imparting literacy (functional and awareness) to adult illiterates and to provide literacy to children keeping away from school.
The first scheme, known as the Adult and Nonformal Education Scheme, is financed by the Central Government under its Rural Functional Literacy Programme/Project, but is administered by the State Government.
Under this scheme, a number of Adult Education Centres have been opened to impart literacy to adult illiterates.
The petitioners were appointed as Instructors at these centres on different dates.
They are being paid a fixed salary of Rs.200 per month.
The petitioners are given a deliberate break of one day in their service after the lapse of every six months and have thus been treated temporary in service.
The second scheme, known as the State Social Education Scheme, has been framed by the State of Haryana.
Under this scheme Social Education Centres have been opened in the State and teachers known as Squad Teachers appointed at these centres to impart literacy among the illiterates.
The State regularised the services of the Squad Teachers working on ad hoc basis with effect from 1.1.1980 and sanctioned them pay scale of Rs.420 700, the scale applicable to primary school teachers in the State.
The Petitioners ' grievance is that although they are performing the same nature of functions and duties as performed by the Squad Teachers, they are denied the same scale of pay.
The petitioners pray for the issuance of a writ, order or direction to the respondents (i) to treat them in continuous service irrespective of the deliberate breaks in their service, (ii) to grant them regular pay scales of the Primary School Teachers plus consequential benefits from the date of their initial appointment, and (iii) to treat the Department of Adult Education and Non formal Education as a permanent department and to regularise the 412 services of the petitioners in that Department.
The claim of the petitioners is based on the doctrine of 'equal work equal pay '.
The petitioners contend that (i) the two schemes are similar and the nature of duties and functions performed by instructors are similar to those performed by squad teachers, (ii) the instructors as well as the Squad Teachers are both appointed by the District Adult Education officer and function under the supervision of the Directorate of Education, (iii) the instructors are full time employees and take regular classes of students in the age group of 5 15 years for two and a half hours and of adult illiterates in the age group of 15 35 years for one and a half hours.
In addition, they have to motivate the children and the adults to join the Adult Education Centres.
They are further required to submit regular survey reports.
The respondents, on the other hand, urge that the functions and duties of the instructors and the squad teachers are quite different.
The main points of distinction relied upon are that (i) the instructors are appointed part time while squad teachers are in full time employment, (ii) the squad teachers are transferable while instructors are not, (iii) the squad teachers are required to teach 7 hours daily while instructors are required to teach for four hours, (iv) the social education scheme is permanent and squad teachers are working under a permanent scheme while the instructors are working under a temporary scheme, and (v) the qualifications and the mode of recruitment of instructors are different; while the instructors are appointed locally, the squad teachers are selected by the Subordinate Service Selection Board after competing with candidates from any part of the country.
It is emphasized that if a regular selection was held, many of the Instructors may not have been appointed.
Earlier, this court had in Bhagwan Das vs State of Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634 upheld the claim of the Supervisors appointed to supervise the centres at which instructors have been working under the Adult and Non formal Education Scheme for the grant of the same scale of pay as has been sanctioned to the Head Squad Teachers of the Social Education Scheme.
In partly allowing the writ petitions, this Court, ^ HELD: (1) There is no difference in the nature of duties of the instructors and squad teachers and both of them carry out similar work under the same employer.
The functions and duties of both classes of 413 persons are primarily directed to advance the cause of education to bring social awareness among the people in the rural areas and to create interest in various social, economic and educational activities.
Bringing adults to centres for educating them is a difficult task and to impart education to dropout children is not an easy job.
One of the main duties of the instructors is to motivate the adults and dropout children to participate in the activities and to motivate them for taking education.
The instructors teach four hours a day and thereafter they have to do survey work and motivation work.
In addition to that, the instructors are required to carry out additional duties which are assigned to them by the Department.
Further, the instructors are required to organise sports like kho kho, kabadi and athletics, and to participate in the local functions and to motivate affluent villagers to give donations for the adult education scheme.
[420C E; 421D E] (2) Having regard to their duties and functions, it is difficult to uphold the respondents ' plea that the instructors are part time employees as they work only for four hours.
[421E] (3) If the two class of persons do same work under the same employer, with similar responsibility, under similar working conditions, the doctrine of 'equal work equal pay ' would apply and it would not be open to the State to discriminate one class with the other in paying salary.
[421F G] (4) The State is under a constitutional obligation to ensure that equal pay is paid for equal work.
Article 39(d) contained in Part IV of the Constitution ordains the State to direct its policy towards securing 'equal pay for equal work ' for both men and women.
Though Article 39 is included in the Chapter of Directive Principles of State Policy, but it is fundamental in nature.
The purpose of the article is to fix certain social and economic goals for avoiding any discrimination amongst the people doing similar work in matters relating to pay.
[421G; 422B C] (5) The doctrine of 'equal work equal pay ' would apply on the premise of similar work, but it does not mean that there should be complete identity in all respects.
[421F] (6) A temporary or casual employee performing the same duties and functions is entitled to the same pay as paid to a permanent employee.
[422D] (7) The plea that instructors are not transferable does not affect 414 the doctrine of equal pay for equal work.
The instructors are appointed A locally because they are in a better position to motivate the adults and dropout children for participating in the scheme, while an outsider may be handicapped in motivating the local residents.
[423C D] (8) Minimum qualification for the Instructors as well as the Squad Teachers is Matric, though many among both are graduates and some of them are trained teachers.
Though the Instructors belong to the locality where they have been posted, but they are appointed only after selection.
The difference in mode of selection will not affect the application of the doctrine of `equal work equal pay ' if both the class of persons perform similar functions and duties under the same employer.
[423D E] (9) The instructors are entitled to the same pay scale as sanctioned to squad teachers.
The pay of each of the petitioners shall be fixed having regard to the length of service with effect from the date of his initial appointment by ignoring the break in service on account of six months fresh appointments.
The petitioners will be entitled to increments in the pay scale in accordance with law notwithstanding the break in service that might have taken place.
These directions shall be implemented with effect from September 1, 1985.
[424A C] 10.
The petitioners ' claim for regularising their services in the departments cannot be accepted as admittedly the project of Adult and Non formal Education is temporary.
[424C D] Bhagwan Dass vs State of Haryana, [1987] 4 SCC 634; Ranjit Singh vs Union of India, ; ; Dhiren Chamoli vs State of U.P., and Surinder Singh vs Engineer in Chief CPWD, & Ors., referred to.
