The first appellant in this appeal, a private limited company, occupying a portion of the premises belonging to the United Commercial Bank, claimed to be the tenant of the Bank, but this was not admitted by the respondent Bank.
The Bank alleged that the appellant company had been allowed to occupy a portion of the Bank 's premises as licensee in consideration of certain accountancy and secretarial services rendered to the Bank.
The Bank had issued a notice of eviction to the appellant company under the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 ( 'the 1956 Act ').
Subsequently, the Bank issued a notice to the appellants under the Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act, 1971 ( 'the 1971 Act ') which is an Act of the Parliament.
The appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court, agitating the question whether the impugned Act which provides for eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises belonging to or taken on lease by a corporation established by or under a Central Act and owned or controlled by the Central Government was ultra vires as it was beyond the legislative power of the Parliament to extend the applicability of the said Act to such premises.
The appellants were interested in denying the legislative power of Parliament in so far as it purported to extend the applicability of the 1971 Act to the premises belonging to or taken on lease by public sector corporations.
Their argument went to the extent of urging that only the State legislatures and not Parliament were competent to legislate on a topic of landlord tenant relationship in respect of land and buildings.
According to the appellants, the provisions of 1956 Act were squarely applicable and should have been resorted to by the Bank for evicting them.
494 The appellants contended that a legislation of the type of West A Bengal Land (Eviction of unauthorised occupants) Act, 1962 (1962Act), which was on the pattern of the 1971 Act, would fall within the legislative field exclusively open to the State Legislatures and that the 1971 Act was ultra vires the Parliament in so far as it purported to affect the appellants ' rights.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J.
His Lordship agreed with Ranganathan, J. that the appeal should be dismissed.
His Lordship preferred the view of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in L.S. Nair vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. Bhilai, A.I.R. 1980 M.P. 106 to the view of the Bombay High Court in Miscellaneous Petition No. 458/79 Elliot Waud Hill (P) Ltd. vs Life Insurance Corpn.
This Court had in this Case proceeded on the short question whether the impugned Act which provides for eviction of unauthorised occupants from public premises to the extent it had been extended to premises belonging or taken on lease by a corporation established by or under a Central Act and owned or controlled by the Central Government, was ultra vires or beyond the legislative power of the Parliament to extend the applicability of the Act to such premises.
[498D G] There was no dispute, as emphasised by Ranganathan, J., as to whether the premises in question or of this type was a public premises.
For the purpose of this appeal, once it was held that the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised occupants) Act was intra vires the Parliament, no further issue between the parties survived.
It was not necessary to consider whether the provisions of the 1971 Act even if intra vires would pervail upon the provisions of the State Legislation.
For the purpose of this appeal, it was unnecessary to express any view on the amplitude and scope of Article 254 of the Constitution.
[498H; 499A B] It had to be taken that the legislation in question must be under stood in its pith and substance, and so understood, the Act in question in this case is in respect of transfer of property other than agricultural land and as such falls in Entry 6 of List III of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution.
It is clear from the decision of this Court in Indu Bhusan Bose vs Rana Sundari Devi and Anr., ; and the subsequent decision in V. Dhanapal Chettiarv.
YesodaiAmmal; , that the subject matter of housing accommodation and control thereof falls within the purview of concurrent list.
In that view 495 of the matter, it could not be convassed that the 1971 legislation in question was beyond the competence of the legislature.
[499C E] Per section Ranganathan, J.
The present agrument of the appellants might not have been open to them if the premises of the Bank could be said to be premises belonging to the Union Government In that case, the legislation to the extent it governs such premises can be said to fall under Entry 32 of List I as one covering the "property of the Union".
Though, the premises being situated in Calcutta any legislation under that entry in regard thereto would be subject to State Legislation, the state Legislation can only govern "save in so far as Parliament by law otherwise provides." Parliament having provided otherwise by the 1971 Act, that Act will prevail over the 11/56 and 1962 Acts.
Though the Bank was a corporation wholly owned and controlled by the Government, it had a distinct personality of its own and its property could not be said to be the property of the Union.
The position was beyond the pale of controversy after the decision of this Court in Bacha F.Guzdar vs C.I.T., ; ; State trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs C.T.O., [1964] 4 S.C.R. 99, and many other cases.
lt was not possible for the respondents to support the legislation qua the premises under Entry 32 of List I. [505A D] Entry 32 of List I being out of the way, the appellants contended that the legislation squarely regularly fell under Entry 18 of List II.
A question as to the interpretation of Entry 18 (or its predecessor, Entry 21 of the Provincial List under the Government of India Act, 1935) had arisen before the Federal Court and Privy Council, and also was considered in some decisions of this Court, which, except in the case of Indu Bhusan Bose vs Rama Sundari Devi, ; , were not helpful in deciding the issue before the Court.
In respect of Indu Bhushan 's case, while the respondents contended that the ruling concluded the issue in their favour, the appellants urged that it could not be taken as a decision that the house tenancy legislation could not come under Entry 18 of List II.
[505E; 506B C; 513C] It was true that the decision in Indu Bhushan 's case ultimately turned on the wider interpretation of Entry 2 of List I favoured by this Court, nevertheless, the judgment contains a specific discussion of the terms of Entry 21.
Indu Bhushan must be taken to have expressed a view that premises tenancy legislation in so far as it pertains to houses and buildinYs is referable not to Entry 18 of List II but to entries 6,7 496 and 13 of List III.
The decision of the larger Bench of this Court in V. Dhonpal Chettier vs Yesodai Ammal, ; , also reinforced the same line of thinking.
The discussion and ratio of Dhanpal Chettier fall into place only on the view that by that time it was taken as settled law that State house control legislations were referable to the legislative powers conferred by the Concurrent List.
[513C; 520D E] Entry 18 should be given as wide a construction as possible consistent with all the other entries in all the three legislative Lists.
There is no reason why the first topic dealt with by the entry, viz. land, should be narrowly interpreted.
lt should be understood as including all types of land, rural or urban, agricultural or non agricultural, arid, cultivated, fallow or vacant, What is 'land ' can be gathered from the other words of the entry which attempt a paraphrase.
It is not possible to interpret this entry as encompassing within its terms legislation on the relationship of landlord and tenant in regard to houses and buildings.
All the legislation coming up for consideration in the present case are referable to entries in the concurrent List and the topic of legislation is not referable to Entry 18 of List II.
The provisions of the 1971 Act, in so far as they were made applicable to the premises of the respondent Bank, are intra vires and valid.
[520F H; 525E] Once it was held that the 1971 Act is infra vires the Parliament, no further issue between the parties survived.
There was some discussion r. before this Court as to whether the provisions of the 1971 Act, even if intra vires, would prevail against the provisions of the State legislations.
This case is clearly governed by the primary rule in Article 254(1) of the Constitution under which the law of Parliament on a subject in the concurrent List prevails over the State Law.
Article 254(2) of the Constitution is not attracted because no provision of the State Acts (enacted in 1956 and 1962) were repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law of Parliament of existing law.
Even if the provision of the main part of Article 254(2) can be said to be somehow applicable, the proviso, read with Article 254(1), reaffirms the supremacy of any subsequent legislation of Parliament on the same matter even though such subsequent legislation does not in terms amend, vary or repeal any provision of the State Legislation.
The provisions of the 1971 Act will, therefore, prevail against those of the State Acts and were rightly invoked in this case by she respondent Bank.
[525F; 529C E] There was no substance in the appellants ' contention that the provision in the 1971 Act appointing one of the officers of the respondent Bank as the Estate officers was violative of Article 14.
[529F] 497 The appeal failed.
L.S. Nair vs Hindustan Steel Ltd. Bhilai, A.I.R. 1980 M.P. 106; Elliot Waud Hill (P) Ltd. vs Life Insurance Corporation Miscellaneous Petiton No. 458/79 before Bombay High Court; Indu Bhusan Bose vs Rama Sundari Devi and Anr. ; ; A.C. Patel vs Vishwanath Chadda, ILR 1954 Bombay 434; V. Dhanapal Chettiar vs Yasodai Ammal, ; ; Bacha P. Guzdar vs C.I.T., ; ; State Trading Corporation of India Ltd. vs C.T.O [1964] 4 SCR 99; A.P. State Raod Transport Corporation vs I.T.O.; , ; Heavy Engineering Mazdoor Union vs State, ; Vidarbha Housing Board vs I.T.O., ; Western Coalfields Ltd. vs Special Area Development Authority; , ; Manohar vs C.G. Deasi, AIR 1951 Nag. 33; Raman Dass vs State, AIR 1954 All.
707; Darukhanawala vs Khemchand, ILR ; M. Karuna vs State, AIR 1955 Nag 153, Kewalchand vs Dashrathlal, ILR ; Sukumar Dutta vs Gaurishankar, ; Raval & Co. vs Ramachandran, AIR 1967 Mad. 57;Mangtulal vs Radhey Shyam, AIR 1953 Pat.
14; Milap Chand vs Dwarakadas, AIR 1964 Raj 252; Rama Sundari vs Indu Bhusan, AIR 1967 Cal. 355; Nawal Mal vs Nathu Mal, AIR 1962 Raj. 193; Bapalal & Co. vs Thakur Das, AIR 1982 Mad. 309; Vnited Province vs Atiga Begum, ; Megh Raj vs Allan Rakhia, AIR 1947 PC 72; Atma Ram vs State of Punjab, [1959] Supp.
1 S.C.R. 748; Manaklal Chhotalal vs M.G. Makwana & Ors., ; ; Babu Jagtanand Sri Satyanarayanji, ILR 40 Patna 625; Union of India vs Valluri section Chaudhary, ; , State vs Peter; , , 292; Jaisingh Jairam Tyagi vs Maman Chand, ; ; Hoechst Pharmaceuticals vs State; , ; Dhillon 's case, [1972] 2 S.C.R. 33; Jain Ink Manufacturing Co. vs LIC, ; and Zaverbhai Amaidas vs State, [1955] S.C.R. 799, referred to.
