The construction of the Irrigation Project was entrusted to the respondent.
As per the contract the work commenced on 4th May, 1973 and was actually completed on 30th December, 1975, the stipulated date being 4th November, 1974.
According to the appellant, the respondent accepted the final payment and was duly paid a sum of Rs.23,74,001 for the work done by him including the extra work.
The last payment was alleged to have been made to the respondent in September, 1976.
A 'nil ' bill was the last bill prepared.
Thereafter, the respondent raised a claim and gave notice for appointment of an arbitrator.
One Nanda was appointed as the arbitrator by the Chief Engineer.
But on an application made by the respondent, the Subordinate Judge removed Nanda and appointed one Patnaik as the arbitrator.
Again an application for removal of the arbitrator was made, but was dismissed.
The Respondent filed his claims before the arbitrator.
These claims were for the alleged extra work in respect of which the decision of the Superintending Engineer under clause 11 of the contract was final and the same was excluded from the purview of the arbitration 563 clause.
The appellant initially contended that the arbitrator had no jurisdiction to deal with such claims but later filed a counter claim, and denied all the claims of the respondent.
While the application for removal of the arbitrator was pending, an adjournment was sought for from the arbitrator and it was refused.
After hearing the parties and considering the evidence produced, the arbitrator made a non speaking and non reasoned award for Rs.15,23,657 plus interest @ 10% in favour of the respondent.
Objections to the award were filed in the Court.
The Subordinate Judge upheld the objection and set aside the award.
On appeal, the High Court set aside the judgment of the Subordinate Judge and made the award rule of the Court, and directed payment of future interest at 6%.
In this appeal, by special leave, against the High Court judgment, the appellant State submitted that the award is without any reason.
It also suggested that since the validity of the non reasoned award is being gone into by a larger Bench of this Court, that decision should be awaited.
Dismissing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.1 The law as it stands today is that award without reasons is not bad per se.
Indeed, an award can be set aside only on the ground of misconduct or an error of law apparent on the face of the award.
[567F] 1.2 In the instant case, the plea that the award was bad being an unreasoned one, was neither mooted before the learned Subordinate Judge nor before the High Court.
It was also not raised in the objection to the award, filed originally.
It is only in the special leave petition that such a plea has been raised for the first time.
Arbitration is restored to as a speedy method of adjudication of disputes.
Stale and old adjudication should not be set at naught, or examination of that question kept at bay on the plea that the point is pending determination by a larger Bench of this Court.
Even if it is held ultimately that the unreasoned award per Se is bad, it is not sure whether such a decision would upset all the awards in this country which have not been challenged so far.
Certainly, in the exercise of discretion under Article 136 of the Constitution, and in view of the facts and circumstances of the present case, it would not be justified in allowing the party to further prolong or upset adjudication of old and stale dispute.
[567C E] 2.
Clause 11 of the contract between the parties makes the deci 564 sion of the Engineer in Charge final in respect of some issues.
Proviso of Clause 11 stipulates that in case of dispute about the rates and time for completion of the work and any dispute as to proportion that the additional work bears to the original contract work, the decision of the Superintending Engineer of the Circle would be final.
The points upon which the arbitrator in the instant case has adjudicated are not those which are excepted or covered by Clause 11 of the agreement.
ID that view of the matter, this clause has no application in the instant controversy.
[570B D] Bombay Housing Board (now the Maharashtra Housing Board) vs Kharbase Naik & Co., Sholapur, ; ; Chief Administrator, Dandakaranya Project, koraput, Orissa & Anr.
vs M/s. Prabartak Comercial Corpn.
Ltd. Calcutta, and Food Corporation of India.
vs P.L. Juneja, AIR 1981 Delhi 43 distinguished.
State of orissa vs Gokulchandra Kanungo, referred to.
3.1 It is well settled that when the parties choose their own arbitrator to be the judge in the dispute between them, they cannot, when this award is good on the face of it, object to the decision either upon law or on facts.
Therefore, when arbitrator commits a mistake either in law or in fact in determining the matters referred to him, where such mistake does not appear on the face of the award and the documents appended to or incorporated so as to form part of it, the award will neither be remitted nor set aside.
[571F G] 3.2 The fact that merely the award amount is quite high or that a large amount has been awarded, does not vitiate the award as such.
If ' there is any evidence of malady of racket of arbitration, the Court may scrutinise the award carefully in each such case.
[572A B] 3.3 It is clear from the facts of this case that the arbitrator is a highly qualified person having several Indian and foreign Degrees and at the relevant time was acting as Chief Engineer in Charge of the State Government.
Having regard to the nature of claims involved, and the fact that the additional work has been done for which large amounts have been paid in this case, it is evident that all due opportunities were given to the parties to adduce all evidence.
It cannot be said that the award was so disproportionate as to shock the conscience of the Court leading it to hold that the award was bad per Se.
The High Court was 565 right in dismissing the challenge to the award on this ground.
[572C D] Union of India vs Bungo Steel Furniture Pvt. Ltd., ; and Allen Berry & Co. (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, ; relied on.
State of Orissa & Ors.
vs Gangaram Chhapolia & Anr., referred to.
4.1 It is now well settled that the interest pendente lite is not a matter within the jurisdiction of the arbitrator.
[572G H] 4.2 In the instant case, the order of the High Court is modified to the extent that the award is confirmed subject to the deletion of the interest pendente lite.
It is made clear that interest for the period from 26.9.1981 to 18.3.1983 (the date of the award) is deleted.
However, the interest granted by the High Court from the date of the decree is sustained.
[573A B] Executive Engineer (Irrigation), Balimella & Ors.
vs Abhaduta Jena, [1988] 1 SCC 418, followed.
