The respondent a dealer in pulses, claimed exemption under section 30(2) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 for the assessment year 1977 78 contending that the purchases affected by him prior to 1.5.1977 could not be subject to tax.
The assessing authority and the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) rejected the assessee 's claim for exemption from tax.
D on appeal, the Tribunal was of the view that since the assessee had not furnished Form IlI C(I), he was not entitled to any exemption under section 3 D of the Act.
The High Court allowed the revision petition on the ground that as the Tribunal had not gone into the proof furnished by the assessee before the assessing authority and the Assistant Commissioner (Judicial) in support of his claim for exemption, and remitted the matter back to the Tribunal, directing it to consider the question whether the dealer was entitled to get any exemption on the basis of the evidence that he had furnished.
In the appeal to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the Revenue appellant that the High Court was wrong because, in view of section 3D(7 B) of the Act the assessee was not entitled to lead any other evidence apart from submitting the registered dealer Form No. III C(2).
Allowing the Appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The High Court was in error in directing the Tribunal to consider the matter on further evidence.
The assessee is entitled to exemption only on furnishing the declaration forms.
Since he did not do so, he is not entitled to the exemption.
[586E] 584 2.
Under section 3 D(7) declaration forms have been prescribed by Rule 12 B.
The provision should be construed as mandatory.
If the dealer had not furnished the required declaration forms in order to be entitled for exemption, he cannot file any other evidence which he re quires to be considered by the axing authorities[1586D].
Kedar Nath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd. vs Commercial Tax Officer M/S Govind Ram Tansukh Ram Tansukh Rai & Co. Budaun vs Commissioner of Sales Tax, U. P., [1985] UPTC 1960, approved.
Abdul Ghani Banne Khan vs CST., 1982 UPTC 665, over ruled.
