The appellant was appointed an Assistant Engineer on June 10, 1963 in the Punjab State Electricity Board on probation for two years which ended on June 10, 1965.
On bifurcation of Punjab Electricity Board, the service of the appellant was allocated to Haryana State Electricity Board.
As a result of a disciplinary proceeding held against him in 1968, a minor penalty of stoppage of one increment without any future effect was imposed on the appellant.
After expiry of one year, the appellant was, however, given the increment.
By virtue of an order dated March 30, 1970, the appellant and respondents 2 to 19 were confirmed as Assistant Engineers, class II on satisfactorily completing the probation period of two years.
Though the others were confirmed with effect from April 1, 1969, the appellant was confirmed with effect from December 1, 1969.
Consequently, the appellant 's name was placed last of all the confirmed officers.
The appellant challenged the said order by way of a writ petition before the High Court which dismissed the petition.
This appeal by special leave is against the judgment of the High Court.
G Allowing the appeal, ^ HELD: 1.
The penalty by way of stoppage of one increment for one year was without any future effect.
In other words, the appellant 's increment for one year was stopped and such stoppage of increment will H 622 have no effect whatsoever on his seniority.
Accordingly, the Electricity Board acted illegally and most arbitrarily in placing the juniors of the appellant above him in the seniority list and/or confirming the appellant in the post with effect from December 1, 1969 instead of April 1, 1969.
The question of seniority has nothing to do with the penalty that was imposed upon the appellant.
It is apparent that for the same act of misconduct, the appellant has been punished twice, that is, first, by the stoppage of one increment for one year and, second, by placing him below his juniors in the seniority list.
[624G H; 625A] 2.
There is no explanation why the confirmation of the appellant was deferred till December 1, 1969.
The explanation that after some substantive posts had fallen vacant on April 1, 1969, the question of confirmation was taken into consideration is not supported by.
any material on record inasmuch as there is nothing to show when these posts had fallen vacant.
It is difficult to accept that all these posts had fallen vacant on the same day, that is, on April 1, 1969.
Though the vacancies had occurred before that day, the Board did not care to take up the question of confirmation for reasons best known to it.
While there is some necessity for appointing a person in government service on probation for a particular period, there may not be any need for confirmation of that officer after the completion of the probationary period.
The archaic rule of confirmation, still in force, gives a scope to the executive authorities to act arbitrarily or malafide giving rise to unnecessary litigations.
It is high time that the Government and other authorities should think over the matter and relieve the government servants of becoming victims of arbitrary actions.
[625H; 626B; 625C; D] S.B. Patwardhan & others vs State of Maharashtra & others; , , referred to.
[Setting aside the High Court judgment and the seniority list, this Court directed that a fresh seniority list be prepared within six months on the basis of this judgment and maintain the appellant 's seniority in the post to which he has been promoted in the meantime.] [626D]
