On receiving secret information that smuggled diamonds had been kept by petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 in the premises of M/s Gems Impex Corporation, Bombay, petitioner No. 3, which firm was being managed by Petitioners Nos. 1 and 2, the Customs officers searched the premises and found large quantities of unaccounted diamonds, precious stones, pearls, gold manufactures, Indian currency etc.
The petitioners showed their inability to produce evidence of legal acquisition of the goods except to state that they had purchased these locally on cash payment.
The cash books however revealed no such payment.
Various incriminating documents were also found.
On these facts, the Customs officers formed a prima facie belief under section 110 read with section 123 of the that the unaccounted diamonds were smuggled goods, and seized them.
In his statement recorded under section 108 of the Act, petitioner No. 2 produced certain notes issued by four dealers saying that some quantity of diamonds had been given to the petitioners on approval basis.
The said dealers when questioned under section 108 stated that they had issued anti dated and fake notes in order to help the petitioners.
The explanation given by the petitioners having been found unacceptable, a show cause notice was issued ' to the petitioners who were called upon to explain as to why the goods be not confiscated and penalty imposed.
In reply, the petitioners stated that the goods were Iying with them on approval basis and relied on affidavits of other diamond merchants and persons.
These transactions were however not entered in the books of accounts of the dealers and persons who filed the affidavits.
545 The Collector of Customs by his order directed release of jewellery but ordered absolute confiscation of various officer goods including the diamonds and also imposed heavy penalties under section 112 of the Act.
An appeal to the Collector of Customs under 128 of the Act failed.
The Customs, Excise & Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal confirmed the order of confiscation in respect of diamonds.
The Tribunal held that seizure of diamonds was in the reasonable belief that these are smuggled goods and consequently the onus of proof, according to section 123 of the Act, was on the petitioners which they had failed to discharge.
The Tribunal however reduced the penalties imposed under section 112.
The petitioners challenged the Tribunal 's order before the High Court of Delhi under Article 226.
Moreover, on an application filed by the petitioners under section 130 of the Act, the Tribunal referred two questions to the Bombay High Court.
The reference pending in the Bombay High Court was transferred by the supreme Court to the Delhi High Court, and both the Writ Petition and the reference were heard and disposed of together.
The contentions raised before the High Court and reiterated before this Court were (1) that there was no material before the Customs officer to form the reasonable belief that seized goods were smuggled goods, and the seizure was bad in law, and therefore the provisions of section 123 of the Act did not apply, (2) that assuming that the onus was upon the petitioners, they had amply discharged the said burden by tendering affidavits; (3) that there was no profit element in smuggling the diamonds and, hence, no presumption should be inferred against the petitioners; and (4) that the conclusions of the fact finding body or statutory authority must be arrived at after giving fair opportunity to the party.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, it was, ^ HELD: (l) Section 123 of the Act itself recognises that diamonds have great potential for smuggling into India and that is why it is mentioned in sub section (2) of section 123 of the Act, and onus placed on the person from whose possession these are recovered.
[552C] (2) The High Court rightly found that there was evidence lo presume that the goods in question were smuggled.
A large quantity of diamonds was found in the possession of the petitioners.
No trustworthy evidence, documentary or oral, was produced in favour of the petitioners as to its legal acquisition/importation or possession.
[551G] 546 (3) In this case there was certainly a nexus between the available material and the formation of the belief that the goods were liable to confiscation.
The existence of the material was justiciable but not the sufficiency.
[553A B] (4) The conclusions arrived at by the fact finding bodies, the Tribunals or the statutory authorities, on the facts, cannot be interfered with where the fact finding body or authority has acted reasonably upon the view which can be taken by any reasonable man.
Courts will be reluctant to interfere in such a situation.
Where however, the conclusions of the fact finding authority are based on no evidence, then the question of law arises and that may be looked into by the Courts.
[553E F] (5) The High Court rightly found the affidavits as merely bald statements to come to the conclusion that by filing the affidavits the burden had not been discharged.
[554B] (6) A fair opportunity has two justiciable elements.
The first is that an opportunity of hearing must be given and the second is that the opportunity must be reasonable.
Whether a person has a fair hearing can be gone into by the Court and the Court 's conscience must be satisfied that an Administrative Tribunal charged with the duty of deciding a dispute has conformed to the principles of natural justice.
Judged by the aforesaid two aspects, the High Court was right that a reasonable and fair hearing was afforded to the petitioners.
[555A C] Shanti Lal Mehta vs Union of India, ; State of Gujarat vs Mohan Lal Jitamalji Porwal, ; M.A. Rasheed vs State of Kerala, ; ; The Barium Chemicals Ltd. & Anr.
vs The Company Law Board and ors.
, ; M/s Mehta Parikh & Co. vs C.l.
T. Bombay; , ; Pukhraj vs D.R. Kohli, [1962] Suppl 3 SCR 866; Rabindra Kumar Dev vs State of Orissa, ; ; Bal Kissen Kejriwal vs Collector of Customs Calcutta & ors., AIR 1962 Cal 460, referred to.
