The appellant has been manufacturing compressed oxygen and dissolved acetylene, falling under tariff item No. 14H of the First Schedule to the Act.
These items were sold to Government undertakings at the rates determined by DGS&D.
In respect of other buyers the appellant charges prices on slab basis which is related to quantitative discount.
These prices were found to be much more than the prices indicated in the approved price list.
The appellant did not furnish quantities of the products sold from its depots/service centres.
Apart from the declared price, the appellant charged delivery and collection charges, cylinder deposit and rentals.
The appellant explained that the difference in prices was due to special delivery and collection charges incurred for transporting the goods from the place of manufacture to the depot from where it was sold.
The appellant 's claim for abatements of account of freight and handling charges was not accepted as no evidence was produced for the same.
In respect of the price lists submitted by the appellant for approval, show cause notices were issued.
The appellant replied that in the past, under similar circumstances the claim for abatement had been upheld by the Department and therefore, there was no reason to deviate from the previous practice.
The Assistant Collector rejected the plea and approved the price list after disallowing the abatement on account of freight and handling charges.
The appellant preferred an appeal before the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals) which was dismissed.
Thereafter both the appellant and the Assistant Collector filed separate appeals before the Customs Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
688 The Tribunal emphasised that the ex factory prices were ascertainable and there was no scope of deduction from that price.
However it directed that if ex factory prices were not ascertainable and the goods were to be assessed ex depot, then it would be for the appellant to claim on the basis of actual evidence, and remanded the case to the Assistant Collector to refix the assessable value accordingly.
These appeals under section 35L(b) of the Act are against the Tribunal 's decision.
Disposing of these appeals, ^ HELD: 1.
The cost of transportation from factory to the depot cannot normally be included in computation of the value under Section 4(1)(a) read with section 4(4)(d)(i) of the Act.
Where the wholesale price is ascertainable at the factory gate, the question of transportation charges becomes entirely irrelevant.
The cost of transportation from the factory gate to the place of delivery and transit expenses were not to be added to the wholesale price at factory gate for purpose of duty under the Act.
It is clear from section 4 that the delivery and collection charges have nothing to do with the manufacture as they are for delivery of the filled cylinders and collection of the empty cylinders.
These charges have to be excluded from the assessable value.
Insofar as the loading charges incurred for loading the goods within the factory are concerned, they are to be included in the assessable value, irrespective of who has paid for the same, but the loading expenses incurred outside the factory gate are excludible.
Duty of excise is a tax on the manufacture, not a tax on the profits made by a dealer on transportation.
[690F H; 691A] 2.
In the instant case, there is a clear finding that the ex factory price was ascertainable.
If once that is the position that should be the basis upon which the value is to be determined, the other expenses, costs or charges must be excluded.
[693B] Union of India & Ors. etc.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd. etc.
; , referred to.
[This Court observed that the Tribunal 's order stood modified accordingly and directed the Assistant Collector to re fix the assessable value as indicated in this judgment. ] [693C]
