The appellant was convicted under section 302 read with section 201 IPC for having committed the murder of his father and son.
It was alleged, as motive for offence, that the appellant used to quarrel with his father as the latter wanted to transfer his land in the name of his grandson, who used to live with him.
PW. 2 had deposed that a day prior to Amawasya of Chet 1985 at about 5 p.m. he had seen the two deceased persons at the Gurdwara when appellant went there and told them that he had arranged for their visit to Amritsar, through the car seva truck coming that evening, to take the holy bath.
He had met the appellant that very night at about 10 p.m.
On his way to the fields and enquired of him why he too did not go to Amritsar.
And, that when he did not see the deceased for sometime he felt suspicious and lodged a report with the police on 8th August, 1985, which became the FIR.
On 13th August, 1985 the appellant is alleged to have made an extrajudicial confession to PW. 3, his sister 's husband, who is said to have produced him before the police.
On 15th August, 1985 a memorandum under section 27 of the Evidence Act was recorded by the investigating officer at the instance of the appellant and later dead bodies were recovered from field and identified.
The belongings of the deceased were recovered from the Kotha in the fields, where the deceased used to reside, at the instance of the appellant.
Based on this evidence the appellant was convicted and sentenced to death by the Sessions Court.
That order was upheld by the High Court.
614 Allowing the appeal by special leave, ^ HELD: The charge against the appellant cannot be said to have been proved beyond doubt.
His conviction, therefore, cannot be sustained.
[620] Extra judicial confession is a very weak piece of evidence and is hardly of any consequence.
3 says that the appellant told him that as the police was after him he had come and confessed the fact so that he might not be unnecessarily harassed.
There is nothing to indicate that this witness was a person having influence with the police or a person or some status to protect the appellant from harassment.
There is no other corroborative evidence about the extra judicial confession.
[618D E] As regards the motive, the will was executed on 31st December, 1984 and it is a figment of imagination that the murder was committed apprehending that the will was likely to be changed.
There is also no evidence to indicate that appellant was not having good relations with his father or that there was ever any trouble between father and the son.
[618F G] The evidence as to last seen also cannot be considered as a piece of circumstantial evidence against the appellant.
The case of the appellant was that his brother in law, Manjit Singh, had taken the deceased to his place on the pretext that appellant 's sister was not well.
There is no evidence led by the prosecution to negative this stand.
May be, PW. 2 saw them with the appellant at the Gurdwara on the Amawasaya day in Chet but it is significant that no other person connected with the deceased has been produced to suggest that he was not seen there after.
[619B C] As regards the recovery of dead bodies, the investigation officer himself admitted that after recording the statement of PW. 3 he knew that the bodies were buried in the field but he felt that information was not sufficient.
The said field is an open place surrounded by other fields.
It cannot be said that any one else could not have known about the bodies being buried there.
Since exclusive knowledge to the appellant cannot be attributed, the evidence under section 27 of the Evidence Act also cannot be said to be a circumstance against the appellant.
[619E G] According to the medical opinion, bodies were recovered about three months after the death.
The bodies were found disintegrated.
It was difficult to identify.
The disintegration had gone to such an extent 615 that the bodies could not be removed and sent for postmortem and therefore medical expert was called to the spot to perform the postmortem.
The prosecution did not examine any one of the relatives or the daughter of deceased or his son in law to identify the dead bodies although it has appeared in evidence that during the trial the said son in law was present in the Court.
[617E F] As regards recovery made from the Kotha where the deceased used to reside, there is nothing significant.
Their belonging were found to be there and on that basis no inference could be drawn against the appellant.
[61G H]
