These appeals by Special Leave and a petition for Special leave arose out of different judgments of the High Court.
The main issue involved was whether the location of Revenue Mandal Headquarters in the State of Andhra Pradesh under section 3(5) of the Andhra Pradesh District (Formation) Act, 1974, was a purely governmental function, not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.
Writ Petitions were filed in the High Court by individuals and gram panchayats questioning the legality and propriety of the formation of certain Revenue Mandals and location of certain Mandal Headquarters notified in preliminary notification issued under sub section
(5) of Section 3 of the Act.
In some cases, the High Court declined to interfere with the location of Mandal Headquarters, holding that the government was the best judge of the situation, or on the ground that there was a breach of guidelines it directed the Government to reconsider the question of location of the Mandal Headquarters.
In some cases, the High Court quashed the final notification for location of the Mandal Headquarters at a particular place, holding that there was a breach of guidelines based on the system of marking and also on the ground that there were no reasons disclosed for deviating from the preliminary notification for location of the Mandal Headquarters at another place.
Allowing Civil Appeal Nos.
1980, 1982, 1985 and 1987 of 1986 and all other appeals and Special Leave Petitions directed against the judgments of the High Court, whereby the High Court had interfered with the location of the Mandal Headquarters, the Court, ^ HELD: It was difficult to sustain the interference by the High Court in some of cases with the location of the Mandal Headquarters and the quashing of the impugned notification on the ground that the Government had acted in breach of the guidelines in that one place or 695 the other was more centrally located or that location at the other place would promote general public convenience or that the Headquarters should be fixed at a particular place with a view to developing the areas surrounded by it or that merely because a particular person who was an influential Member of Legislative Assembly belonging to the party in opposition had the right of representation but failed to avail of it.
The location of Headquarters by the Government by the issue of the final notification under sub s (5) of section 3 of the Act was on a consideration by the Cabinet Sub Committee of the proposals submitted by the Collectors concerned and the objections and suggestions received from the local authorities like Gram Panchayats and the general public, keeping in view the relevant factors.
Even assuming that any breach of the guidelines for the location of the Mandal Headquarters was justiciable, the utmost that the High Court could have done was to quash the impugned notification in a particular case and direct the Government to reconsider the question.
There was no warrant for the High Court to have gone further and direct the shifting of the Mandal Headquarters at a particular place.
[711B E] The guidelines are merely in the nature of instructions issued by the State Government to the Collectors regulating the manner in which they should formulate their proposals for formation of a Revenue Mandal or for the location of its Headquarters keeping in view the broad guidelines laid down in Appendix I to the White Paper issued by the Government laying down the broad guidelines.
The guidelines had no statutory force and they had also not been published in the Official Gazette.
They were mere departmental instructions for the Collectors.
The ultimate decision as to the formation of a Revenue Mandal or location of its Headquarters was with the Government.
It was for that reason that the Government issued preliminary notification under sub s (5) of section 3 of the Act.
Deviation from the guidelines in some of the aspects was usually for reasons of administrative convenience keeping in view the purpose and object of the Act i.e. to bring the administration nearer to the people.
There was nothing on record to show that the decision of the Government in any of these cases was arbitrary or capricious or was one not reached in good faith or actuated with improper considerations or influenced by extraneous considerations.
In a matter like this, conferment of discretion upon the Government in the matter of formation of a Revenue Mandal or location of its Headquarters in the nature of things necessarily leaves the Government with a choice in the use of the directions conferred upon it.
[713A F] It was difficult to sustain the judgments of the High Court in the 696 cases where it had interfered with the location of Mandal Headquarters and quashed the impugned notifications on the ground that the Government had acted in breach of the guidelines in that one place or the other was more centrally located or that location at the other place would promote general public convenience or that the Headquarters should be fixed at a particular place with a view to developing the area surrounded by it.
The location of Headquarters by the Government by the issue of the final notification under sub section (5) of Section 3 of the Act was on a consideration by the Cabinet Sub Committee of the proposals submitted by the Collectors concerned and the objections and suggestions received from the local authorities like the gram panchayats and the general public.
Even assuming that the Government while accepting the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub Committee directed that the Mandal Headquarters should be at one place rather than at another place as recommended by the Collector concerned in a particular case, the High Court would not have issued a writ in the nature of mandamus to enforce the guidelines which were nothing more than administrative instructions not having any statutory force, which did not give rise to any legal right in favour of the writ petitioners.
The petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitutions before the High Court were dismissed.
[723G H; 724A D] Gram Panchayat, Chinna Madur & Orr.
vs The Government of Andhra Pradesh, [1986] 1 Andhra Weekly Reporter 362; C.J. Fernandez vs State of Mysore & Ors., ; ; Padfield vs Minister of Agriculture Fisheries & Food, ; ; Laker Airways Ltd. vs Department of Trade, at 705; Council of Civil Service Unions and Others vs Minister for the Civil Service, ; ; Secretary of State for Education and Science vs Tameside M.B.C.; , ; Breen vs Amalgamated Engineering Union, at 190; R.V. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, explain, and Ridge vs Baldwin, ; , referred to.
