After the election of Members, the first meeting of the Aurangabad Municipal Corporation was held on May 6, 1983 at 2 P.M. and the Municipal Commissioner announced that the polling for the offices of Mayor, Deputy Mayor and Members of the standing Committee would commence from 2.30 p.m. onwards.
But at 2.30 P.M. some of the Councillors belonging to the Opposition Party sat on the ballot boxes and some others surrounded the Municipal Commissioner and demanded that the meeting be adjourned to a subsequent date.
The Councillors belonging to the ruling party demanded that the meeting and election be held later on that day.
Total confusion and bedlam prevailed and the rival groups started throwing Chairs at each other, leading to a pandemonium.
It was a free for all, and even outsiders were present.
When the situation was brought under control, the Municipal Commissioner announced that the meeting would continue and the elections would be held at 4.30 p.m.
The petitioner filed a protest at 4.15 p.m. stating that the meeting had been adjourned by the Municipal Commissioner for the day and, therefore, the holding of the meeting later on the same day would be improper and illegal.
Thereafter, the opposition group abstained from participating in the meeting held at 4.30 p.m., in which Respondents 1 and 2 were declared elected as Mayor and Deputy Mayor respectively 726 and Respondents 3 8 as Members of the Standing Committee.
In a Writ Petition filed before the High Court, the appellant questioned the election, on the basis that the meeting in which the election was held, was invalid.
The High Court held that the meeting was not adjourned for the day or sine die, but was only postponed, to be held as soon as peace was restored on the very day and upheld the election of Respondents 1 to 8.
Against the judgment of the High Court, the petitioner has filed the present special leave petition.
On behalf of the petitioner, it was contended that the meeting was not adjourned to a definite point of time and must therefore be regarded as adjourned for the day or adjourned sine die.
The contention of the Respondents was that the meeting had not been adjourned sine die but the proceedings had merely been suspended at 2.45 p.m. and the adjourned meeting held at 4.30 p.m. was a continuation of the original meeting and no new notice of an adjourned meeting had to be given.
It was also contended that there was no warrant for interference under article 136 of the Constitution since a finding of fact had been reached by the High Court on consideration of the material on record.
Dismissing the petition, ^ HELD: 1.
A properly convened meeting cannot be postponed.
The proper course to adopt is to hold the meeting as originally intended, and then and there adjourn it to a more suitable date.
If this course be not adopted, members will be entitled to ignore the notice of postponement, and, if sufficient to form a quorum, hold the meeting as originally convened and validly transact the business thereat.
Even if the relevant rules do not give the chairman power to adjourn the meeting, he may do so in the event of disorder.
Such an adjournment must be for no longer than the chairman considers necessary and the chairman must, so far as possible, communicate his decision to those present.
[739F G] 2.1 In the instant case, the High Court was right in holding that the first meeting of the Municipal Corporation fixed by the Municipal Commissioner for May 6, 1988 was not 'adjourned for the day ' or 'adjourned sine die ' but had only been put off to a later hour i.e. the proceedings had only been suspended, to re commence when peace and order were restored.
[740D E] 727 2.2 There is nothing on record to sustantiate the petitioner 's submission that the first meeting scheduled to be held on May 6, 1988 at 2 P.M. was 'adjourned for the day ' or 'adjourned sine die ' without transacting any business i.e. without consideration of the agenda for the day.
On the contrary, it is not in dispute that the business for the day was partly transacted when the Councillors met at 2 p.m. as scheduled and the Municipal Commissioner declared that the polling would commence from 2.30 p.m. onwards.
The trouble started at 2.30 p.m. when the Councillors belonging to the petitioner 's party prevented the casting of votes by snatching away the ballot boxes from the polling booths and sat upon them.
There was a pre determined plan on their part not to allow the first meeting to be held on that day.
But the Municipal Commissioner did not give way to the commotion and pandemonium and he did not put off the meeting to another day.
In the prevailing situation, the Municipal Commissioner had no other alternative but to adjourn the meeting.
Under the scheme of the Act, when the term of the elected Councillors is a period of five years which in terms of sub section (2) of section 6 of the Act is deemed to commence on the date of the first meeting, the Municipal Commissioner obviously could not adjourn the meeting for another day or adjourn it sine die.
If the contention that the meeting having been adjourned without specifying a definite point of time were to prevail, it would give rise to a serious anomaly.
The effect of adjourning the first meeting to another day would imply the coming into existence of another deemed date under section 6(2) of the Act for commencement of the term of the Councillors.
The fact that the Municipal Commissioner did not leave the House or vacate the seat lends support to the version that he had merely suspended the proceedings till order was restored.
[737A E] Smt.
Menaka Bala Dasi vs Hiralal Gobindalal & Anr., and Sheokumar Shashtri vs Municipal Committee, Rajnandgaon, AIR 1964 MP 195 Distinguished.
Shackelton on the Law & Practice of Meeting, 7th Edn.
p. 44, Horsley 's Meetings Procedure, Law and Practice, 2nd Edition, p. 84, para 1002 referred to.
