The respondent dealer who runs Roller Flour Mills was supplied wheat by the Food Corporation of India and Regional Food Controller for the manufacture of Atta, Maida, Suji etc.
The sale price of the wheat products was fixed by the State Government under the U.P. Roller Flour Mills (Ex Mill Price) Control Order, 1975.
The notification issued under the Control Order also authorised the mills to realise in addition to the fixed ex mill price, the proportionate amount of octrol, terminal tax, purchase tax or sales tax, etc.
payable by the mills on the wheat crushed.
Accordingly, the respondent realised this amount.
The respondent further realised the proportionate amount of the wheat purchase tax and wheat sales tax and octroi, as consideration of the sale price in addition to the sale price fixed by the State Government.
For this excess realisation, the Assistant Commissioner (Assessment) imposed a penalty under section 15 A(1)(qq) of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 treating it as realisation of tax in excess of tax payable.
The respondent 's appeals before the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) and the Tribunal failed.
The High Court, however, allowed the revision.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, ^ HELD: (1) Penalty under the Sales Tax Act is leviable for excess realisation of tax.
Therefore, realisation of the amount should be as tax and not in any other manner.
[753G] (2) The excess amount charged was in contravention of the provisions of the Control Order.
But that alone was not sufficient for initiation or levy of penalty under sub clause (qq) of section 15 A (1) of the 751 Act.
The excess amount has to be realised as sales or purchase tax and the tax so charged must have been in excess of tax payable.
[754A B] (3) Realisation of excess amount is not impermissible but what is not permissible is realisation of excess amount as tax.
[754E] (4) The imposition of a penalty under the Act is quasi criminal and unless strictly proved the assessee is not liable for the same.
If the purchaser realises more money, that by itself will not attract the penal provisions.
[754F G]
