The second respondent sold the properties to the appellant in ,952 and the deed of sale recited that the properties were sold free of all encumbrances.
The first respondent who had obtained a mortgage decree in respect of the properties in 1935 did not take any steps to have the decree drawn up as required under the Original Side Rules of the Calcutta High Court until 1954, when she commenced proceedings for sale of the mortgaged properties.
The second respondent raised the objection that the execution of the decree was barred by limitation but that was overruled by a single judge of the High Court and an appeal against that order was preferred by the second respondent.
Apprehending that the second respondent might enter into a collusive arrangement with the first respondent with a view to defeat her rights, the appellant made an application in the High Court under 0. 22, r. 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure praying that she might be substituted in the place of the second respondent, or in the alternative, be brought on record as additional appellant.
The High Court having dismissed the application, the appellant brought the present appeal: Held, that the application could not be sustained under 0. 22, r.10, of the Code of Civil Procedure because (i) assuming that 1288 the suit was considered as having been pending until the decree was drawn up in 954 no application was made to the Court where the suit was pending as provided in 0. 22, r. 10, and (ii) the application made to the appellate Court was also not within 0. 22, r. 10, as the transfer in question was made prior to the filing of the appeal and not during its pendency.
The application, however, falls within section I46 of the Code of Civil Procedure and the appellant is entitled to be brought on record since an appeal is a proceeding within the meaning of that section and the right to file an appeal carries with it the right to continue an appeal which had been filed by the person under whom the appellant claims.
Jugalkishore Sayaf vs Raw Cotton Ltd., [1955] I S.C.R. 1369, Sitharamaswami vs Lakshmi Narasimha, Mad.
51O and Muthia Chettiar vs Govinddoss Kyishnadoss, Mad.
gig, relied on.
