The appellant let out his godown to a Textile company, which was subsequently amalgamated with the respondent Company, under a scheme of amalgamation approved by the High Court.
On August 29, 1985 the appellant issued a notice to the erstwhile company under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act read with section 13(6) of West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act, 1956 to quit and hand over vacant possession of the godown.
Thereafter he filed a suit for eviction in the City Civil Court against the erstwhile Company and the respondent Company.
The respondent also filed a suit under Order 39(I) and (2) of the Civil Procedure Code for temporary injunction restraining the appellant from disconnecting electricity in the said premises.
The appellant filed an application in the High Court under clause 13 of the Letters Patent for transfer of the two suits on the ground that the respondent had adopted dilatory tactics and had taken several adjournments to file written statement, and that the original records relating to amalgamation were available in the High Court.
By consent of the parties, the High Court transferred these suits to itself for trying in its extraordinary original civil jurisdiction.
PG NO 205 When the suits appeared before the Single Judge, it was represented that the suits were transferred to the High Court only on the understanding that the suits would be settled and that the efforts to settle the suit had failed.
Hence,the Judge fixed a date for hearing of the two suits.
On February 17, l9S8 the respondent filed an application for recalling the order of transfer.
Accordingly, the High Court recalled its earlier order and retransferred them to the City Civil Court.
Aggrieved, the appellant filed an appeal by special leave, contending that there was simply an agreement to have the suits transferred to the High Court for quick and expeditious disposal, in view of the long delay in filing written statements.
The Respondent, however, contended that the agreement was that the suits would be settled in the High Court.
Disposing of the appeal, HELD: 1.1 Clause 13 of the Letters Patent enables the High Court to exercise the extraordinary original civil jurisdiction.
The Letters Patent contemplates two contingencies for the High Court to exercise extraordinary jurisdiction, namely, on agreement of the parties to that effect, the suits be transferred and, secondly, for the purpose of justice.
It further stipulates that the reasons for so doing to be recorded on the proceedings in the High Court.
[209C D) 1.2 The disposal of the suits by the High Court would serve the purpose of justice.
It would shorten litigation in the sense that there would be lesser number of appeals to the higher Court and the possibility of settlement is there in the High Court more than anywhere else.
Suits are likely to be more expeditiously disposed of under the supervision of the High Court Judge than before the City Civil Court or the Court subordinate to High Court.
[2l0B] 1.3 The purpose of justice must be determined by reference to the circumstances of each case and the balance of convenience having regard to those circumstances, is one of the matters for consideration.
[2l0D] In the instant case, even though initially the agreement to transfer might have been on the basis that the suits would be settled but the agreement to transfer was not PG NO 206 unequivocal.
The possibility of settlement might have been the motivation.
But the High Court has, undoubtedly, for the purpose of justice, rightly power to dispose of the suits.
Having once transferred the suits, it would be just and fair and would also serve the purpose of justice that the suits should continue to be disposed of by the High Court.
[210C D] Though the suits are at a preliminary stage, but for the purpose of justice, the Court must oversee the administration of justice by different Courts and orders passed High Court as well as City Civil Courts.
[210E] Therefore, the purpose of justice would be served by directing expeditious disposal of the suits by the High Court.
[210F]
