The prosecution case was: the appellants, who were of bad character, had an evil eye on the lands belonging to the younger brother of PW 1, in furtherance of which they got a fraudulent sale deed executed and murdered him in order to eliminate the possibility of the fraud being detected.
Suspecting foul play of the appellants, PW 1 lodged an FIR.
At the instance of appellant No. 2, who was first arrested, a dead body was recovered from a water logged pond and was identified to be that of PW 1 's younger brother, on the basis of a shirt and a tahmad.
The doctor; who conducted the post mortem.
could not give the cause of death or its duration.
The appellants were convicted and sentenced under sections 302, 364 and 210 IPC by the trial Judge.
On appeal, the High Court maintained the conviction and sentence of appellant No. I but reduced the same of appellant No. 2 to one under section 201.
Allowing the appeals, HELD: The evidence against the appellants is purely circumstantial.
But the circumstantial evidence falls short of the required standard on all material particulars.
The conviction of the appellants cannot.
therefore, be sustained.
[247H, 2490A] There is no satisfactory evidence that the sale deed in question was executed by somebody impersonating the deceased.
Though PW 12, who was identified by PW 11, scribe of the sale deed, as the person who impersonated the deceased, deposed that he had put his thumb impression an the sale deed, the thumb impression of the executant and the admitted thumb impression of pW 12 were not sent for expert opinion.
Nothing could be elicited from, nor any question was put to PW 20 to corroborate the version of PW II, as to PG NO 245 PG NO 246 the contents of the sale deed or the identity of the persons who accompanied him to PW 11 or those who put the thumb impression on the sale deed.
[248B D] The evidence on record is equally unsatisfactory as to identification of the dead body.
Post mortem was done more than three months from the date of alleged disappearance of the deceased.
The doctor who conducted the post mortem stated that it was skeleton of a young adult male and was unable to give the cause of death or when the death took place owing to the condition of the body.
The two panch witnesses for the recovery of the dead body could not identity the clothes recovered from the dead body as belonging to the deceased.
Though clothes were said to have been identified by PW 1 and his wife, a perusal of PW 1 's evidence would indicate that the identification was nothing but farce.
The body was not recovered at his instance.
He could not have seen the dead body with the clothes, as these were removed, washed, dried and packed separately with the seal of the panchas.
He was called to the Court only for the identification of the clothes and body.
lie stated that the dead body by appearance looked like that of his brother.
He could identify the clothes by a chit and a knot on them.
The witnesses, who were stated to have seen the deceased going with the appellant No. 1 and his father in law did not speak anything about the dress which the deceased was wearing at that time.
PVI: Is evidence could not be believed since he and the deceased were living separately and he could not have seen all that he had stated in evidence.
[24E, G H,249A B, D H] Conviction and sentence of appellants set aside.
They are acquitted of all charges.
[250A]
