% This appeal was directed against the judgment of the High Court whereby the High Court had dismissed the writ petition of the appellant, challenging the validity of his detention under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange & Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974 ( 'The Act ').
The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) had information that the appellant was engaged in receipt, storage and disposal of smuggled goods on a large scale.
On a specific information received on March 11, 1987, that large quantity of gold had been received by the appellant and stored at his instance in various premises, the DRI mounted a discreet surveillance in the vicinity of the appellant 's residence, and seized 100 foreign marked gold biscuits from Uttam Chand, a milk vendor.
Uttam Chand disclosed that the said gold had been given to him by the appellant.
He also disclosed that the appellant had given him 300 gold biscuits, and the remaining 200 gold biscuits had been taken away from him by Raj Kumar alias Chhotu, the servant of the appellant.
Raj Kumar alias Chootu disclosed that he had delivered the said 200 gold biscuits to one Bhuramal Jain.
A search of Bhuramal Jain 's residence resulted in the recovery of the said 200 gold biscuits.
Thus, 300 smuggled gold biscuits were seized by the DRI officers on March 11. 1987.
A provisional order of detention of the appellant dated April 1.
1987 was passed by the respondent No.2, the detaining authority, under section 3(1) of the Act, and duly communicated to the appellant along with the grounds of detention dated April 1, 1987 by the detaining authority.
The case of the appellant was referred to the Advisory Board constituted under sub clause (a) of clause (4) of Article 22 of the Con 43 stitution of India for its opinion, whereupon the Board submitted its report dated May 13, 1987, and the Central Govt.
by its order dated June 24, 1987, in exercise of its powers under section 8(f) of the Act, confirmed the detention of the appellant, etc.
At this stage, it might be mentioned that before the order of detention was passed by the detaining authority, the appellant had been arrested on a charge under section 135 of the .
The appellant challenged the order of detention as confirmed by the Central Government by a writ petition before the High Court which dismissed the same.
Similar detention orders having been passed in respect of the said Uttam Chand, Bhuramal Jain and Raj Kumar alias Chhotu, they had also challenged their detentions by writ petitions before the High Court and the High Court had by the same judgment under appeal allowed their writ petitions and quashed the orders of detention.
The appellant then appealed to this court for relief by special leave .
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, ^ HELD: Per Murari Mohon Dutt, J. It was not correct to say (as contended by counsel for the appellant) that the detaining authority was not aware of the fact that the appellant was already in detention on a charge under section 135 of the .
The detaining authority was fully aware of the fact of the arrest of the appellant as was evident from paragraph 13 of the grounds of detention.
It is not necessary that in the order of detention such awareness of the detaining authority has to be indicated.
It is enough if it appears from the grounds of detention that the detaining authority is aware of the fact that the detenu is already in detention.
[5lC E] It was true that in Uttam Chand 's case, the detaining authority had proceeded on the basis that the offence for which he had been arrested and detained, was a bailable offence.
But the question whether or not a particular offence for which a detenu has been detained, is a bailable or non bailable offence, does not have any bearing on the question of passing an order of detention.
Even though an offence is a non bailable one, an accused may be enlarged on bail.
Again, an offence for which a detenu has been put under detention, may be a bailable offence.
[5lE F] 44 On a conspectus of a number of decisions of this Court.
the Court was of the view that when a detenu is already under detention for an offence, whether bailable or non bailable, the detaining authority will take into consideration the fact of detention of the detenu, and, as laid down by this Court in Smt.
Sashi Aggarwal.
vs State of U.P. (Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 735 of 1987 disposed of on 11.1.1988), there must be compelling reasons to justify his preventive detention in spite of the fact that he is already under detention on the charge of a criminal offence.
There must be material for such compelling reasons and the material or compelling reasons must appear from the grounds of detention that will be communicated to the detenu.
In other words, two facts must appear from the grounds of detention, namely (i) awareness of the detaining authority of the fact that the detenu is already in detention, and (2) there must be compelling reasons justifying such detention, despite the fact that the detenu is already under detention.
[52F H: 53A] In this case, the Court was unable to accept the contention of the appellant that there had been non application of mind by the detaining authority to the relevant facts.
The detaining authority besides being aware of the fact that the appellant was already in detention, had taken into consideration the relevant facts before passing the impugned order of detention under the Act, which was apparent from the grounds of detention.
In the circumstances, the contention that the impugned order of detention should be struck down on the ground of non application of mind by the detaining authority, was rejected.
[53C D] It appeared from the observation made by the High Court that the appellant, without making any prayer before the Advisory Body for the examination of his witnesses or for giving him assistance of his friend, started arguing his own case, which in all probability, had given an impression to the members of the Advisory Board that the appellant would not examine any witness.
The appellant should have made a specific prayer before the Advisory Board that he would examine witnesses, who were standing outside.
The appellant had not made any such request to the Advisory Board.
There was no reason for not accepting the statement of the detaining authority that the appellant had been permitted by the Advisory Board to have the assistance of an advocate or a friend at the time of hearing, but the appellant had not availed himself of the same.
In the circumstances, the court did not think that there was any substance in the contention of the appellant that the Advisory Board had acted illegally and in violation of the principles of natural justice in not examining the witnesses produced by the appellant at the meeting of the Advisory Board and in not 45 giving permission to the appellant to have the assistance of his friend.
[54H; 55A C] The appellant contended that both the Government and the detaining authority made unreasonable delay in disposing of the representations made by his wife and by himself, and that the representations were not considered independently inasmuch as the same were disposed of after the Advisory Board submitted its report, and in view of the above facts, the order of detention was illegal and invalid.
[55D E] In regard to the representation of the appellant 's wife dated 11.4.1987, it appeared from paragraph 2 of the additional affidavit of Mr. S.K. Choudhary, Under Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, New Delhi, that comments from the DRI were received by the senior Technical officer on 28.4.1987.
He could not take action on 28.4.1987 as hearing of the appellant 's case before the Advisory Board was fixed on that date.
He placed the matter with his note before the detaining authority on 30.4.87.
It was apparent that the Senior Technical officer dealt with the matter immediately on getting the comments from the DRI and there was delay in putting up the matter before the detaining authority or the Government, as the case might be.
[55F, H; 56D, E] It was submitted on behalf of the appellant that the detaining authority had no jurisdiction to reject the representation when it was meant for the Government.
Mr. Kuldip Singh, Additional Solicitor General pointed out on a reference to record that the detaining authority had not rejected the representation but only commented "merits rejection".
The Court could not accept the contention of the appellant that the said comment of the detaining authority had influenced the mind of the Minister, who had considered the representation on behalf of the Government, and that there was no necessity for getting a comment from the detaining authority.
Unless the comments of the relevant authorities are placed before the Minister, it will be difficult for him to properly consider the representation.
There was no substance in the contention that any comment from the detaining authority would influence the mind of the Government.
Such assumption was without foundation.
The contention was rejected.
[56H; 57A D] As regards the representation dated 23.4.
1987 of the appellant to the detaining authority, it was rejected as stated in the said additional affidavit, by the detaining authority on 4.5.87, and the Additional 46 solicitor General pointed out with reference to the records that file had not been forwarded to the Minister after the rejection of the representation by the detaining authority.
In the Court 's opinion, nothing turned on the fact that after the representation had been rejected, the relevant file had been sent to the Minister for his consideration.
The Court was also told by the Additional Solicitor General that the report of the Advisory Board was dated May 13, 1987 and both the representations had been disposed of by the detaining authority and the Government on May 6, 1987, that is, much before the report of the Advisory Board.
It was apparent that as the report of the Advisory Board was dated May 13, 1987, there was no foundation for the contention of the appellant that the consideration of the representations had been influenced by the report of the Advisory Board.
[57D H; 58A B] As regards the appellant 's grievance that he was not supplied with the copies of the documents relied upon by the detaining authority along with the grounds of detention, there was no factual foundation in the complaint made by the appellant that he had not been supplied with the relevant documents along with the grounds of detention.
[58D] The contention of the appellant that the Government had not applied its mind while confirming his detention for the maximum period of one year as prescribed in section 10 of the Act, was, in the Court 's opinion, devoid of any merit.
Section 10 does not provide that in imposing the maximum period of detention, any reason has to be given.
In confirming the order of detention, it may be reasonably presumed that the Government has applied its mind to all the relevant facts, and if it imposes the maximum period of detention, it cannot be said that the Government has not applied its mind to the period of detention.
Under section lt of the Act, a detention order may, at any time be revoked or modified by the Government.
The court did not think, in the circumstances, that the detenu was in the least prejudiced or that there had been non application of mind by the Government to the question of period of detention of the detenu.
[58E H: 59A] The judgment of the High Court was affirmed.
[59B] Per K. Jagannatha Shetty, J. (concurring) The first question was as to the legality of an order of detention of a person who was already in custody.
The Law Report contains several decisions on this point and they furnish an instructive lesson for both l l sides.
In all the cases, there is, however, one uniform principle stated 47 and reiterated.
It is this: the detaining authority must have awareness of the fact that the detenu is already in custody and yet for compelling reason his preventive detention is found necessary.
[59C D] The question now raised was what should be the compelling reason justifying the preventive detention if the person was already in jail and where one should find it? Is it from the grounds of detention or apart from the grounds of detention? [59D E] It was urged that apart from the grounds of detention, there must be some other material disclosed to the detaining authority that if the detenu was released on bail, he would again carry on the prejudicial activity.
His Lordship did not think that the contention was sound.
There cannot be any other material which can enter into the satisfaction of the detaining authority, apart from the grounds of detention and connected facts therein.
The satisfaction of the detaining authority can not be reached on extraneous matters.
The need to put a person under preventive detention depends only upon the grounds of detention.
The activities of the detenu may not be isolated or casual.
They may be continuous or part of a transaction or racket prejudicial to the conservation or augmentation of foreign exchange.
Then, there may be need to put the person under preventive detention, notwithstanding the fact that he is under custody in connection with a case.
There could not, however, be any uniform principle to be applied in this regard.
Each case had to be judged on its own facts and grounds of detention.
If the grounds are germane, it would be perfectly legitimate exercise of power to make an order of detention.
[59E G: 60B C] In this case, having regard to the nature of the grounds furnished to the detenu, there was hardly any justification to find fault with the order of detention [60C] The next aspect which needed to be clarified was whether it was necessary for the concerned authority to give special reasons for directing the detention for the maximum period prescribed under the Act.
It was urged that it was a must for the concerned authority to give special reasons, and if no such reasons were given, then, it amounted to non application of the mind.
The Court was unable to subscribe to this view.
It was against the purpose and scheme of the COFEPOSA Act.
The order made under section 3(1) is in the nature of an interim order.
It is subject to the opinion of the Advisory Board under section 8(f) of the COFEPOSA Act.
If the Advisory Board reports that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for the detention of the person, the concerned 48 authority may confirm and continue the detention of the person for such period as it thinks fit.
The expression "as it thinks fit" in section 8(f) of the Act indicates that the concerned authority after considering the report of the Advisory Board may fix any period for detention.
The authority is not required to give any special reason either for fixing a shorter period or for fixing the maximum period prescribed under section 10.
The opinion of the Advisory Board and the grounds of detention are the only basis for confirming and continuing the detention.
Section 11 provides for revocation or modification of the detention order at any time.
When the power to revoke the order of detention could be exercised at any time, it is not necessary for the authority to articulate special reasons for continuing the detention for any period much less for the maximum period prescribed under the Act.
[60D E, G H; 61E G] Rameshwar Shaw vs District Magistrate Burdwan, ; ; Ramesh Yadav vs District magistrate, Etah, ; Suraj Pal Sahu vs State of Maharashtra, ; ; 391, Smt.
Sashi Aggarwal vs State of U.P., (writ petition (Crl.) No. 735 of 1987 disposed of by this court on 11.1.1988) and Bharat vs District magistrate, , referred to.
