Section 4 of the abolishes the bonded labour system and states that on commencement of the Act every bonded labourer shall stand freed and discharged from any obligation to render any bonded labour.
The Secretary of a social organization in Tamil Nadu wrote a letter to the Court alleging prevalence of bonded labour in stone quarries in several districts of Andhra Pradesh.
This letter was registered as a writ petition.
Three other similar applications were also received and registered as writ petitions.
During the pendency of the petitions, the court passed certain interlocutory orders.
In the first order the Court directed the District Magistrate, Hyderabad and a representative of a social organisation (AWARE) to visit the site and make a report to the court within two weeks.
In the next order the court asked the respondent State of Andhra Pradesh to file an affidavit showing how many bonded labourers had been identified and released since 1.1.1983 and whether they had been rehabilitated and if so, in what manner and if there is a follow up action.
If not rehabilitated then what steps were being taken by the State to do so.
It was also directed that Vigilance Committees be set up and a member of social organizations may also be included as a member in each committee.
After the District Judge submitted his report the Court asked the State Government to take further steps and see that several relevant labour laws applicable to labour PG NO 346 PG NO 347 working in stone quarries are fully implemented.
The Court also directed that a Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Labour, Government of India should visit the relevant stone quarries to hold an enquiry for the purpose of ascertaining whether there was existence of bonded labour and whether the several relevant mines laws and labour laws were being observed.
After the receipt of the report of the Joint Secretary, the Court directed the State of Andhra Pradesh to carry out the suggestions and recommendations made in the said report and to file an affidavit setting out what steps and measures have been taken by the State Government on the recommendations made by the Joint Secretary.
The Court also issued notice to the Central Government to take steps to ensure that the provisions of the Mines Act and the connected laws are observed in the stone quarries.
As a result of the action taken by the Court about 2200 bonded labourers were freed.
The State of Andhra Pradesh arranged for their transport to their homes situated in the States of Orissa, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.
The State Governments of these three States were directed to take further steps for the rehabilitation of the bonded labourers and submit a report to the Court.
Pursuant to this direction the State of Orissa submitted a report showing how these persons were rehabilitated by providing assistance to them.
The State of Tamil Nadu also filed a report after repeated directions and stated the measures being taken by them for rehabilitation of these labourers.
However, in spite of repeated directions the State of Karnataka did not cooperate in filing an affidavit showing how they have rehabilitated the freed bonded labourers.
The Court while disposing of the writ petitions and giving some more time to the State of Karnataka to do the needful.
HELD/OBSERVED:Detailed provisions have been made for extinguishment of liability to repay bonded debt, implementing authorities have been set up, vigilance committees have been provided, resort to bonded labour has been made an offence and steps for rehabilitation have also been indicated.
Laws, however beneficial they may be, are difficult to be implemented unless the requisite social consciousness has grown.
The system of Bonded Labour has prevailed in this Country for centuries.
The gap in economic conditions has been the main cause for this.
[358F G] The society envisaged under the constitutional set up can no more take bonded labour as a part of it.
Every citizen must be prepared to accept every other citizen as a person equal to him for enjoying the social benefits and the guarantees provided under the Constitution.
It must, PG NO 348 herefore, become a conscious obligation of every must, therefore, become a conscious obligation of every employer not to take advantage of the economic disability of a brother citizen and force him into the system of Bonded Labour.
It must equally be the obligation of every citizen to cooperate in bringing about abolition or what is condemned by the laws as Bonded Labour; otherwise, the beneficial legislation would remain on paper with mere a statutory declaration of abolishing bonded labour as provided in section 4 and yet continue to prevail unabated in the community.
[359D F] Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs Union of lndia; , , referred to.
Twelve years have passed since the law came into the Statute Book and surprisingly it came 26 years after the Constitution came into force.
In 38 years under the Constitution, we have not been able to generate appropriate attitudes and dispositions to live amicably in the polity.
Instead of appropriate consciousness manifesting itself contra indica tions have widely appeared.
Even those on whom the Statute casts the responsibility of implementing the provisions of the Act do not appear to be in a situation to respond.
It is difficult for the Court to entertain repeated complaints of this type and devote attention by way of monitoring the administration of the Act, as has been in this case.
We are surprised that about three years were necessary to persuade the State of Andhra Pradesh (Where bonded labour was identified and from where repatriation was necessary) and the states of Karnataka, Orissa and Tamil Nadu where rehabilitation was to be provided to perform their statutory obligations.
[360A C]
