The respondent who was entitled to minimum annual payments of specified amounts under the three trust deeds in question was assessed to tax under sub section
(2) of section 21 of the Wealth Tax Act, on the entire value of the assets held by the trusts.
On appeal, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner confined the liability of the assessee to wealth tax on the capitalised value of the minimum amounts payable under the trust deeds, and his decision was affirmed, on second appeal, by the Appellate Tribunal.
At the instance of the Revenue, the opinion of the High Court was sought on the question whether the finding that it was only the capitalised value of the interest of the assessee that had to be included in the net wealth of the assessee was 5justified.
The High Court answered the question in the affirmative, in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: A mere right to be considered for distribution of the income or of the corpus of the Trust Fund cannot be regarded as an 'interest ' since it is not capable of valuation.
There must be a right, present or contingent, before it can be said that an assessee has an interest.
The instant case is one where beyond the specified minimum the assessee was not entitled to anything more.
[273F GI Gartside & Anr.
vs Inland Revenue Commissioners, LR,[1968] Appeal Cases 553, relied on.
Padmavati Jaykrishna Trust & Another vs Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Gujarat, [1966] 61 I.T. R. 66; Commissioner of Wealth Tax Bombay vs Trustees of Mrs. Hansbai Tribhuwandas Trust, [l968] ; Commissioner of Wealth Tax, A. P. vs Trustees of H. E.H. PG NO 266 PG NO 267 Nizam 's Family (Remainder Wealth) Trust, ; Commissioner of Wealth tax A.P. vs Trustees of H.E.H.
The Nizam 's Sahabzadi Anwar Begum Trust, ; Leedale (Inspector of ' Taxes] vs Lewis, and McDowell and Co. Ltd. vs Commercial Tax Officer, , distinguished.
There is no doubt that the expression 'property ' must bear a comprehensive import.
The question remains whether what is conveyed under the three deeds of settlement to the assessee is a right to anything more than the prescribed minimum under each deed.
It is apparent that the assessee was entitled only to the minimum prescribed in each of the deeds of settlement.
Whether or not he received any further amount out of the net income of the Trust Fund was left entirely in the discretion of the Trustees.
There was no right in the assessee to any portion of the net income in excess of the minimum guaranteed to him.
It is the minimum alone which he could claim as his property.
So also, on the distribution of the accumulated balance as capital at the end of the stipulated period there was no right in him to receive any part thereof.
It was open to the Trustees to ignore him altogether and they could pay it to such other members of the family as they chose.
[272H; 273.A B] Ahmed G.H. Arriff and Others vs Commissioner of Wealth tax Calcutta referred to.
Per Suhyusuchi Mnkhurji.
On behalf of the Revenue an appeal was made before us that we should really construe the three Trust Deeds together and see 'the game of the hidden purpose ' behind these Trust Deeds which were.
in fact.
for the sole and exclusive benefit of the assessee.
It is true that tax avoidance an under developed developing economy should not be encouraged on practical as well as ideological grounds.
One would wish, that one could get the enthusiasm of Justice Holmes that taxes are the price of civilization and one would like to pay that price to buy civillzation.
But the question which many ordinary tax payers very often in a country of shortages with ostentious consumption and deprivation for the large masses ask, is does he with taxes buy civilization or does he facilitate the wastes and ostentiousness of the few.
Unless waste and ostentiousness in Government 's spendings are avoided or eschewed, no amount of moral sermons would change people 's attitude to tax avoidance.
In any event, however, where the true effect on the construction of the Deeds is clear, as in this case, the appeal to discourage tax avoidance is not a relevant consideration.
[274E H; 275A C] PG NO 268 McDowell & Company Limited vs Commercial Tax Office, [l985] referred to.
