On November 29, 1973 the Government of Maharashtra Notified a scheme approved under section 68 D of the authorising the Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation to operate contract carriage services in the entire area of the State of Maharashtra to the complete exclusion of all other persons except those falling under the seven categories mentioned therein.
The appellant who did not belong to any one of the seven categories applied to the Regional Transport Authority for a special permit under section 63(6) of the Act on the route Bombay to Shirdi for five days.
This application was rejected because the appellant had not produced a `No objection Certificate ' from the State Road Transport Corporation.
It was held by the Regional Transport Authority that in the absence of a `No Objection Certificate ' no special permit could be issued under section 63(6) of the Act.
The Maharashtra State Transport Appellate Tribunal allowed the appellant 's appeal holding that a special permit issued under section 63(6) of the Act was not a contract carriage permit issued under the Act and that the scheme did not have the effect of preventing any person from applying for a special permit under section 63(6) to operate a public service vehicle on any of the routes in the State.
The Corporation filed a writ petition in the High Court against the Tribunal 's order.
The High Court allowed the Writ Petition.
Disposing of the appeal and setting aside the judgment of the High Court, it was, HELD: (1) A contract carriage permit and a special permit are not one and the same, though the special permit has some of the features of a contract carriage permit.
[454E Fl (2) A Special permit is ordinarily taken to meet a need PG NO 448 PG NO 449 that exists for a few days like carrying a marriage party or persons going to a pilgrimage, etc.
[454F] (3) The distinguishing features of the two types of permits are: (1) A permit for which an application is made under section 49 of the Act and which is granted under section 51 of the Act is called a contract carriage permit.
A permit issued under section 63(6) of the Act is called a special permit; (2) while a contract carriage permit issued by a Regional Transport Authority of any one region is not valid in any other region unless the permit has been countersigned by the Regional Transport Authority of the other region as provided under section 63(1) of the Act, a special permit issued by one Regional Transport Authority under section 63(6) of the Act is valid in any other region or State without the countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or the other State as the case may be; (3) While the duration of a contract carriage permit is as prescribed under section 58(1) of the Act, a Special permit can be issued only for a specific period which may be for a few days only in accordance with the rules prescribed for that purpose; and (4) A contract carriage permit is renewable under section 58(2) of the Act, but there is no corresponding provision providing for renewal of a special permit.
[454B E] (4) The provision in the scheme which excludes operation of contract carriage services by persons other than those who are permitted to do so under the scheme refers to only those persons who wish to operate contract carriage services under permits issued under section 51 of the Act.
The scheme does not in any way prevent the issuing of special permits under section 63(6) of the Act by the Regional Transport Authorities in accordance with law as it does any that holders of special permits under section 63(6) would also be excluded from running the public service vehicles.
[457B C] (5) The scheme does not provide that the clause regarding exclusion of other persons from operating contract carriages would cease to operate if the Corporation issued a `No Objection Certificate '.
The insistence on the production of a `No objection Certificate ' from the Corporation by a person applying for a special permit under section 63(6) of the Act was wholly unwarranted.
[456H; 457A B] Mohd. Basha and others vs The Secretary, Regional Transport Authority and Anr., ; G. Shaikh Shavalli, Uravakonda & Ors.
vs The Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, Anantapur and Anr., A.I.R. ; S.R.M.S. Tourist Service Co. Bangalore & Ors.
PG NO 450 vs The Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, A.I.R. 1975 Karnataka 166; K.N. Sreekantaiah vs Deputy Transport Commissioner, Bangalore & Anr., ; Adarsh Travels Bus Service & Anr.
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
, [1985] Supp. 3 S.C.R. 661, referred to.
