The petitioner Construction firm entered into agreements with respondent No. 3, Superintending Engineer of a Circle for execution of certain civil works.
Respondent No. 1 Superintending Engineer of another Circle entered into a reference for arbitration and parties filed statements and adduced evidence.
Before the adjudication was completed, respondent No. 1 was transferred and his successor in office entered into the task of adjudication with the knowledge, consent and active participation of the petitioner in the proceeding.
Since the arbitrator could not complete the award within time, be sought extension of time by a letter to the petitioner and the petitioner agreed to such extension by a letter.
The petitioner did not ask for any further or fresh opportunity for adducing any evidence.
Thereafter, the arbitrator made his award.
The petitioner challenged the award under sections 30 and 33 of the before the District Judge on the ground that the previous arbitrator having entered into reference, his successor in office had no jurisdiction to conclude it and the award was violative of principles of natural justice.
The District Judge held that the successor in office to the original arbitrator was competent to pass the award.
Upholding this, the High Court rejected the challenge to the award.
Hence the petitioner filed the Special Leave Petition in this Court contending that once an arbitrator had entered into a reference, the next incumbent could not conclude the said arbitration proceedings without a fresh agreement, that there was violation of principles of natural justice and PG NO 462 PG NO 463 that the award was bad.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
If the parties to the reference either agree before,hand to the method of appointment, or afterwards acquiesce in the appointment made, with full knowledge of all the circumstances, they will be precluded from objecting to such. appointment as invalidating subsequent proceedings.
Attending and taking part in the proceedings with full knowledge of the relevant fact will amount to such acquiescence [465G ] N. Challappan vs Secretary, Kerala State Electricity Board and another; , relied on.
Chowdhury Murtaza Hossein vs Mussumat Bibi Bechunnissa, 3 I.A. 209 and Prasun Roy vs The Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority and another; , , referred to.
Russell on Arbitration, 18th Edition/20th Edition, pages 105/432 435, referred to.
In the instant case, the petitioner had full knowledge of the change of the incumbent and did not protest and proceedings went on before the new incumbent.
Thus, the petitioner had knowledge of the alleged defect and had acquiesced in the proceedings before the successor.
There was, therefore, no violation of principles of natural justice.
[465C, F] 2.
Unless there was a patent mistake of law and gross misstatement of facts resulting in miscarriage of justice or of equity, the award remains unassailable.
[466C] Champsey Bhara & Company vs Jivraj Ballo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd., 50 I.A. 324 and Firm Madanlal Roshanlal Mahajan vs Hukumchand Mills Ltd., lndore; , , referred to.
In the instant case, the arbitrator gave no reason for the award.
There is no legal proposition which is the basis of the award, far less any legal proposition which is erroneous.
There is no appeal from the verdict of the arbitrator.
The Court cannot review, in such circumstances,the award and correct any mistake in the adjudication by the arbitrator.
[466D] PG NO 464 3.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the award is unassailable.
The High Court was right in upholding the District Judge 's dismissal of the challenge to the award.
[466F]
