The respondent had been appointed Principal of St. Anthony 's College by Salesian Provincial and his appointment had been approved by the Director of Public Instruction (D.P.I.) on the recommendation of the governing body of the College.
Due to differences between the Principal and the Church authorities, and particularly, the appellants Nos 2, 3 and 4, i.e. the President and the members of the governing body of the College, the appellant No. 2, the President of the governing body and the Salesian Provincial intimated to the respondent of his transfer from the post of Principal of the College.
The respondent contended that the appellant No. 2 had no authority to appoint or dismiss or transfer the Principal, as the Principal of the College belonging to minorities was to be selected by the governing body and to be approved by the D.P.I. in accordance with the government instructions contained in its Memo dated December 7, 1979.
But the Salesian Provincial proposed another person as Principal, to which the governing body agreed and his appointment was approved by the D.P.I.
The respondent filed a writ petition in the High Court, contending that the Salesian Provincial had no power to transfer him, as he had been appointed Principal by the governing body of the College with the approval of the D.P.I., and so the Governing Body with the approval1 of the D.P.I. could transfer him under the statutory rules.
and that the order of transfer, having been passed without giving him any opportunity to show cause, was arbitrary, illegal and mala fide and violative of the principle of natural justice.
The High Court held that there was no reason why the respondent 's removal from the post of Principal should not PG NO 507 PG NO 508 have been by the governing Body and subject to the approval of the D.P.I., and directed inter alia that the impugned order of transfer be kept in abeyance and that the governing body would give the respondent an opportunity to show cause why he should not be transferred as stated in the impugned transfer order, and decide the matter of transfer after hearing him.
Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the governing body and others moved this Court by special leave.
It was contended by the appellants inter alia that the respondent could not have any grievance against the order of transfer as he had no statutory right to remain as Principal and that he, being ordained as priest according to the Articles of the constitution of the Society of St. Francis de Sales, the Salesian Provincial could transfer him to serve in any of the institutions of the Society as his service was transferable, and he could not question the transfer.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HElD: The St. Anthony 's College was a minority institution within the meaning of Article 30 of the Constitution, and the instructions contained in the Government Memo dated 7th December, 1979, laying down the procedure of appointment of Principal, vice Principal, etc, in religious minority Colleges in the State would apply to this Institution.
[514E F] The impugned order of transfer was passed without asking the respondent to show cause against the transfer and giving him an opportunity of hearing.
The impugned order purported to transfer the respondent from the post of Principal of the College to the post of Teacher in a school.
This order of transfer prejudicially affected the status of the respondent.
[5I5E F] The main question for consideration was whether the Salesian Provincial, appellant No. 2 was competent to transfer the respondent who had been appointed by the governing body of the college and approved by the D.P.I. as per the Government instructions applicable to a minority college.
[515G] According to the Government instructions aforesaid, the Principal whose appointment had been approved by the D.P.I., could work as Principal in the minority college till the age of superannuation as determined by the Government.
The impugned order of transfer amounted to removal of the respondent from the post of Principal.
The principles of natural justice and fair play mandate that in administrative actions the audi alteram partem rule is applicable; the person affected by the order had to be given an opportunity PG NO 509 of hearing against the purported order apart from the question whether the Assam Aided College Management Rules and Assam Aided College Employees, Rules are applicable to minority institutions.
[516B D] The appellants contended that Salesian Provincial, appellant No. 2, was the appointing authority of the respondent and as such he had the right to make the impugned order of transfer though there was no express provision conferring such a power.
[5l6F] The question was whether the Salesian Provincial was the appointing authority of the respondent, or the governing body of the College appointed the respondent and recommended his appointment for approval to the D.P.I.
The D.P.I. had approved the appointment of the respondent pursuant to the recommendation of the governing body.
So this question had to be gone into and determined by the governing body, as had been directed by the order of the High Court.
In so far as the respondent was transferred in his capacity as a priest from one division of the religious order to another, the matter pertained to the internal management of the religious order and it was not justiciable, but in so far as the order of transfer had been made, transferring the respondent from the post of Principal of the College to the post of Teacher of a school in another State, the respondent could complain against it.
Since the respondent had not been given an opportunity of hearing against the purported transfer which seriously affected his status, judgment of the High Court which directed the governing body to give the respondent an opportunity to show cause against the impugned order of transfer and to give him a hearing and decide the transfer matter in accordance with law, could not be faulted.
[516G H; 517A D]
