The mortgagee in possession leased out the shop to the appellant and delivered possession.
His entering of possession became a subject matter of dispute with respondent No. 2 in which the appellant was dispossessed.
In the proceedings initiated under section 145 Cr.
P.C. the,Magistrate found that the appellant was entitled to restoration of possession since he was dispossessed forcibly and wrongfully within the terms of proviso to section 145 (4) Cr.
The respondent filed a suit and obtained temporary injunction against the appellant.
That injunction was vacated by the Additional District Judge who found that the appellant was in possession of the shop on the date of occurrence of incident.
The respondents revision application challenging the final order under s,145(6) Cr.
P.C. was dismissed by the Sessions Judge.
Accepting respondents petition under section 482 Cr.
P.C., for quashing the proceedings under section 145 the High Court, following the judgment in Rum Sumer Puri Mahant vs Srate of U. P., , took the view that since the civil proceedings in respect of the disputed premises were pending before the competent civil court where interim reliefs have been prayed for and obtained, there was no justification for continuing the proceedings under section 145 Cr.
P.C. pending before the SDM.
Allowing the appeal by special leave, HELD: The High Court was in error in quashing the proceedings under section 145 Cr.
P.C. pending before the Sub Divisional Magistrate.
[589F, 587EF] An order made under section 145 Cr.
P.C. deals only with the factum of possession of the party as on a particular day.
It PG NO 584 PG NO 585 confers no title to remain in possession of the disputed property.
The order is subject to decision of the civil court.
The unsuccessful party therefore must get relief only in the civil court.
He may move the civil court with properly constituted suit.
He may file a suit for declaration and prove a better right to possession.
The civil court has jurisdiction to give a finding different from that which the Magistrate has reached.
[589D E] The ratio of the decision in Ram Sumer Puri Mahant vs State of U.P. is that a party should not be permitted to Litigate before the criminal court when the civil suit is pending in respect of the same subject matter.
That does not mean that a concluded order under section 145 Cr.
P.C. made by the Magistrate of competent jurisdiction, as in the instant case, should be set at naught merely because the unsuccessful party has approached the civil court.
[589C D]
