Seven persons were convicted under sections 307/149, 325/l49, 3231/149 and 148 IPC and sentenced to undergo R.Z. from one year to three years.
The High Court acquitted two of all charges, and five of the offence under section 307/149 while maintaining their conviction and sentence under section 325/149, section 323/149 and section 148.
They were however released on probation of good conduct.
Each one of them was ordered to pay compensation of Rs. 2,500 to Joginder who was seriously injured and whose power of speech was permanently impaired.
Before this Court the appellant contended that the intention of the five accused was obviously to commit murder of Joginder and their acquittal under section 3O7 IPC was perverse.
Disposing of the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) Under section 307 IPC what the Court has to see is whether the act irrespective of its result, was done with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in that section.
The intention or knowledge must be such as is necessary to constitute murder.
Without this ingredient being established there can be no offence of"attempt to murder".
Under section 307 the intention precedes the act attributed to accused.
Therefore, the intention is to be gathered from all circumstances, and not merely from the consequences that ensue.
In this case, the respondents had no intention to commit murder.
They had no motive either.
[575F G] PG NO 571 PG NO 572 (2) Many offenders are not dangerous criminals but are weak characters or who have surrendered to temptation or provocation.
In placing such type of offenders on probation the Court encourages their own sense of responsibility for their future and protects them from the stigma and possible contamination of prison.
[576C D] (3) In this case, the High Court has observed that there was no previous history of enmity between the parties and the occurrence was an outcome of a sudden flare up.
The accused had no intention to commit murder of any person.
Therefore, the extension of benefit of the beneficial legislation applicable to first offenders cannot be said to be inappropriate.
l576D E] (4) Section 357 empowers the Court to award compensation to victims while passing judgment of conviction.
This power of Courts to award compensation to victims is not ancillary to other sentences but it is in addition thereto.
This power is intended to do something to reassure the victim that he or she is not forgotten in the criminal justice system.
It is recommended to all Courts to exercise this power liberally so as to meet the ends of justice in a better way.
[577F H] (5) The payment by way of compensation must be reasonable.
What is reasonable may depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case, e.g. the nature of crime, the justness of claim by the victim and the ability of the accused to pay etc.
On these considerations the Court enhanced the compensation to Rs. 50,000.
[578A B]
