The Government by an order dated March 9,1979 revised the fee scales of certain categories of Staff Artists in Doordarshan with retrospective effect from January 1, 1973 on the analogy of the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission made in respect of regular Government servants but the categories of the petitioners were denied the benefit by giving them junior scales.
In these writ petitions they assailed the said order as discriminatory and violative of articles 14 and 16(1) of the constitution.
Their case is that the nature of work performed by them is similar to that performed by their counterparts in the Film Division and the qualifications required For appointment to these categories of Staff Artists are also the same as required in the cases of their counterparts in the Film Division.
They, therefore, claimed that they should be declared Government servants and given the same pay scales as given to their respective counterparts in the Film Division of the same .Ministry of lnformation and Broadcasting with effect from the respective dates of their appointments.
The petitioners ' claim was contested by the respondents by contending that the Staff Artists of Doordarshan were not Government servants but were engaged on contract basis, that they were not of the same class as the employees of the Film Division and that they were therefore not entitled to the same scales of pay.
PG NO 604 PG NO 605 Allowing the writ petitions, HELD: 1.
The Staff Artists of Doordarshan including the petitioners are Government servants.
They possess all the criteria of a Government servant.
They are holding civil posts under the Government.
They are being appointed up to the age of 55 6O years on a time scale like a regular Government servant.
Their contract runs till the age of retirement as in regular government service.
608E, B, 606F] Union oflndia vs M.A. Chowdhary, AIR 1987 SC l526, applied.
2.1 The petitioners perform the same duties as those performed by their counterparts in the Film Division, under the same Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.
When two posts under two different wings of the same Ministry are not only identical, but also involve the performance of the same nature of duties, it would be unreasonable and unjust to discriminate between them in the matter of pay.
[609D] 2.2 One of the Directive Principles of State Policy as embodied in clause (d) of article 39 of the Constitution is equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
The Directive Principles contained in Part IV of the Constitution though not enforceable by any court, are intended to be implemented by the State of its own accord so as to promote the welfare of the people.
Article 37 provides, inter alia, that it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in making law.
[609E F] 2.3 The principle of "equal pay for equal work", if not given effect to in the case of one set of Government servants holding same or similar posts, possessing same qualifications and doing the same kind of work as another set of Government servants it would be discriminatory and violative of articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.[609G] Such discrimination has been made in respect of the petitioners.
They are, therefore, entitled to same scales of pay as their counterparts in the Film Division.[609H 6l0A] [The petitioners to be given the new scales of pay with effect from the first day of the month of the year in which each writ petition was filed, except the petitioners in writ Petition Civil No. 1756 of 1986 who are to be given such scales of pay With effect from December 1,1983.
They would also be entitled to the substituted scales of pay and consequential benefits.
The respondents to disburse to the petitioners the arrear amounts being the difference in the pay scales within four months.][610B C,E F] PG NO 606
