The President of India, by order dated July 25, 1981 accorded sanction to treat all employees of canteens established ia Defence Industrial Installations under section 46 of the , as Government employees.
The order was given effect from 22.12.1980.
The petitioners were working in the canteens of the three Defence establishments at Kanpur, forming part of the Defence Department of the Union of India.
On their retirement after 22.10.1980 the petitioners claimed that the period of service rendered by them prior to 22.10.1980 canteens be counted towards their qualifying service for the purposes of pension.
Their claim was not accepted.
The respondents ' contention was that prior to 22.10.1980 the canteens in Ordnance factories were supervised and controlled by the Canteen Managing Committee consisting of equal number of elected representatives of the factory workers and nominees of management, and these Committees were the appointing authority of the Canteen workers and paid their salaries.
Allowing the petitions, it was, HELD: (1) It was admitted by the respondents that by the letter dated 24.5.1965 of the Ministry of Defence, provision had been made for subsidising the canteens maintained in Defence Industrial Installations under section 4th of the Act.
The letter also contained directions regarding pay scales, conditions of service, etc.
of the employees.
The cost of supervisory and clerical staff and cooks etc.
was to be reimbursed by the Government and the canteen buildings formed part of the industrial establishment concerned.
[595A B] (2) The expression 'occupier ' of a factory is defined in section 2 (n) of the as the person who has ultimate control over the affairs of the factory.
Under PG NO 590 PG NO 591 cause (iii) of section 2(n), in the case of a factory owned or controlled by the Central Government, the person or persons appointed to manage the affairs of the factory by the Central Government shall be deemed to be the occupier.
[596C,F] (3) A canteen is an integral part of the Defence establishment belonging to the Union of India.
There cannot be a canteen without sufficient number of workers working in the canteen.
They have to be appointed by the occupier.
Otherwise he would not be fully complying with section 46 of the .
The Managing Committee cannot be the employer of those workmen in the true sense of the terms.
The Managing Committee constituted under section 46 of the Act which is not an incorporated body and whose financial position is un certain cannot be considered to be the employer who has to bear the legal responsibilities under the several labour laws in force in India.
[597C D] (4) The basic requirements of the canteen, such as Buildings, utensils, crockery, cutlery, furniture, etc.
are to be supplied by the occupier.
[597B C] (5) In this situation it is difficult to hold that the employees in canteens established under section 46 of the Act would not be employees of the occupier, even though for purposes of management a Canteen ,Managing Committee, whose functions are advisory, has to be constituted under the Rules.
l597F] (6) It is also not shown that the workers in the canteens becoming the Government employees on 22.10.1980.
They were paid by the previous management, namely, the Managing Committee constituted under rule 68 of the U.P. Factories Rules, 1950 any compensation in lieu of services rendered by them prior to 22.10.1980.
[597F G] (7) It is, therefore, difficult to hold that the employees working in such canteens were not employees of the factories in which the canteen had been established.
If they are employees of the factories in which the canteen is established, the service rendered by them in these factories should be counted as part of the qualifying service for pension.
[597G H]
