The complainant filed in this Court a petition for contempt against the accused for their failure to comply with the orders of this Court.
In paragraph 2 of the affidavit in support of the petition, the complainant stated that the statements contained in the petition were true to the best of her knowledge, belief and information.
In paragraph 3 she further stated that the affidavit had been read over, translated and explained to her and she understood the contents thereof; and that the same were true to her knowledge and belief.
Similarly, in the affidavit on behalf of the accused, which has been filed by a clerk of the Advocate,the deponent verified the affidavit by stating that the statements of the accused were true and correct which were based on the records maintained in the Advocate 's office and on instructions received from the clients.
Rejecting the affidavits? as not being in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules or Order 19? Rule of the Code of Civil Procedure. this Court, HELD: 1.1 Affidavit is a mode of placing evidence before the Court.
A party may prove a fact or facts by means of affidavit before this Court but such affidavit should be ia accordance with Order XI Rules 5 and 13 of the Supreme Court Rules.
[564A] 1.2 The party stating facts must disclose as to what facts are true to his personal knowledge, information or belief.
If the statement of fact is based on information the source of information must be disclosed in the affidavit.
An affidavit which does not comply with the provisions of Order PG NO 561 PG NO 562 XI of the Supreme Court Rules, has no probative value and it is liable to be rejected.
[564D] 1.3 In a matter where allegations of mala fides or disobedience of the Court 's order are made against a person or party, it is an the more necessary that the person Filing affidavit in this regard must take care to verify the facts stated in the affidavit strictly in accordance with the Rules 5 and 13.
[564E] 1.4 Of late affidavits are being Filed in this Court in a slipshod manner without having any regard to the Rules.
Affidavits are being filed by persons who could have no personal knowledge about the facts stated in the affidavit.
Deponents of Affidavits pay no attention to verification.
[564F] State of Bombay vs Purushottam Jog Naik, ; , referred to 1.5 The practice of clerks of advocates filing affidavits without a proper verification is deprecated.
As matters before the apex court are determined on the basis of the statements contained in affidavits it is the duty of the litigants and the lawyers to file affidavits in accordance with the rules to assist the Court in administering justice.
[565E F] In the instant case, the affidavit filed by the complainant is clearly vague, general and defective, and does not indicate as to what facts were true to her knowledge, information and belief.
It does not comply with the requirement of a valid affidavit as laid down in the Rules 5 and 13 of the Supreme Court Rules.
Similarly, the affidavit in reply filed on behalf of the accused by office clerk of the Advocate is wholly improper and inadmissible in evidence and liable to be rejected.
[563E F, 565D] Since both the affidavits do not comply with the Rules, no reliance can be placed on them.
They are accordingly rejected.
Consequently, the contempt petition is also liable to be rejected, but parties are given a chance to file proper affidavits.
[565G]
