The Commissioner of Police, Hyderabad and Secunderabad, in exercise of his powers under Section 21(1) of the Hyderabad City Police Act, issued a Notification dated July 8,1986 directing that in order to ensure adequate safety of two wheeler riders, wearing of protective helmets is made compulsory for riders of motor cycles and scooters, as envisaged by rule 498 A of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Rules, 1964 with effect from August 1,1986.
The petitioner, a student having a permanent driving licence for a two wheeler vehicle, filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the aforesaid Notification as also rule 499 A of the Andhra Pradesh Motor Vehicles Rules, l964 on the ground that the same was violative of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Article 13(1)(d) and Article 21 of the Constitution.
It was contended by the petitioner that as Section 85A of the was yet to be enforced, rule 498 A was illegaI and ultra vires the Motor PG NO 632 PG NO 633 Vehicles Act, 1939.
It was further contended that the wearing of helmets preventing the free flow of breeze to the head result in giddiness and affect sight and hearing.
The petitioner also filed an affidavit of one Dr. Prabhakar Korada to support the contention that continuous wearing of helmets can raise the pressure leading to irritation, confusion, headaches, giddiness and falling of hair etc.
The High Court overruled the contentions of the petitioner and upheld the validity of the notification and the provisions of rule 498 A of the A.P. Motor Vehicles Rules.
The High Court also relied upon the medical opinions of some Neuro Surgeons of repute, and came to the finding that wearing of helmets would not cause any ailment whatsoever as contended by the petitioner.
The writ petition was accordingly dismissed.
The petitioner appealed to this Court by Special Leave.
It was contended on his behalf that in view of the cancellation of the notification dated May 14, 1988, Section 85 A had not come into force and as such, there was no provision in the providing for wearing of protective headgear or helmet by the driver of a motor cycle of any class while driving the same.
It was also submitted that in the absence of any specific provision in the Act, rule 498 A was ultra vires the Act itself and consequently, the notification issued under Section 21(1) of the Hyderabad City Police Act was illegal and should he struck down.
As there was some doubt whether Section 85 A had come into force by virtue of the notification dated May l4, I988 and whether the Central Government had the power to cancel the said notification by their subsequent notification dated October 31, l980.
the Court issued notice to the Attorney General of India, who appeared and relying on the decision in Om Prakash and Others vs Union of India and Others, AIR l97l SC 771 submitted that even assuming that rule 498 A does not come within the purview of clause (i) of sub section (2) of section 91, still the State Government could frame such a rule under sub section (1) of section 91 and that the clauses under sub section (2) of section 91 are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
Dismissing the special leave petition, HELD: 1.
Rule 498 A has been framed by the State Government by virtue of its rule making power under clause (i) of sub section (2) of section 19 of the purpose of protecting the head from being injured in case of an accident.[l638E] PG NO 634 2.
It is common knowledge that head of the driver of a two wheeler vehicle is the main target of an accident and often it is fatal to the driver.
By insisting on the wearing of a helmet by the driver driving a two wheeler vehicle, rule 498 A intends to protect the head from being totally injured in the case of an accident.
Clause (i) is wide enough to include the driver of a motor cycle or a scooter.
The expression "any person"in clause (i) also includes within it a driver of a two wheeler vehicle.
[638E F] 3.
Clause (i) is also intended for the prevention of danger, injury or annoyance to the public or any person including the driver of a two wheeler vehicle.
[638G] 4.
Rule 498 A is, therefore, quite legal and valid, in spite of the absence of any provision like section 85 A. [638H] 5.
There can be no doubt that rule 498 A is framed for the benefit, welfare and the safe journey by a person in a two wheeler vehicle.
It aims at prevention of any accident being fatal to the driver of a two wheeler vehicle causing annoyance to the public and obstruction to the free flow of traffic for the time being.[639G] 6.
Even assuming that rule 498 A is not clause (i) of sub section (2), it is quite immaterial inasmuch as such a rule can be framed in exercise of the general power under sub section (1) for the purpose of carrying into effect Chapter V1 relating to control of traffic.
[639D] 7.
There is hardly any fundamental right against any act aimed at doing some public good.
[640A] 8.
Even assuming that rule 498 A has put a restriction on the exercise of a fundamental right under Article 19 (1)(b), such restriction being in the interest of the general public, is a reasonable restriction protected by Article 19(5) of the Constitution.
[64OB] 9.
As rule 498 A has been framed in accordance with procedure established by law, that is, in exercise of the ulre making power conferred on the State Government under Section 19 of the , the question of infringement of Article 21 of the Constitution does not arise [640B] PG NO 635 10.
Rule 498 A helps the driver or a two wheeler to drive the vehicle in exercise of his freedom of movement without being subjected to a constant apprehension of a fatal head injury, if any accident takes place.[639H]
