The petitioner had filed a Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 1951 of 1985 in the Supreme Court praying that the respondents States be directed: (a) to release all children detained in the jails in the respondent States ; (b) to furnish 'complete information respecting all children detained in the States and the circumstances and the legal facts of such detention and the number of available juvenile courts and children homes; (c) to appoint district judges of the districts to visit jails, sub jails and lock ups to identify and release children in such illegal detention; (d) to requisition immediately necessary buildings and provide infrastructure and make immediate interim arrangements for `places of housing ' of children sought directions to the respective States, Legal.
Aid Boards, District Legal Aid Committees through the appointment of ` duty_counsel ' to ensure protection of the right of the children etc.
The said petition was treated as a public interest litigation and in regard to most of the areas covered by the aforesaid prayers, orders were made from time to time by this Court.
However, being dissatisfied with the progress of the case, the petitioner preferred a Misc.
Petition for leave to withdraw the main public interest litigation on the PG NO 643 PG NO 644 grounds: (1) that the Supreme Court has become "dysfunctional" in relation to, and in the context of the gravity of the violations of the rights of children and the urgency of the requisite remedial steps and that though the proceedings were listed for final disposal in the month of November, 1986 however, owing to unjustified adjournments obtained by the respondents and owing further, to the functional deficiencies of the procedure of this court the proceedings have not yet been finally disposed of; (2) that the Court has not been able to exact prompt compliance with its own orders and directions, issued from time to time, from the respondents; (3) that the applicant is disabled from conducting proceedings with "dignity" as certain happenings in Court had the effect of casting and tended to cast a slur on her integrity and dignity: and (4) that the proceedings were brought as a "voluntary action" and that applicant is entitled to sustain her right to be the "petitioner in person" in a public interest litigation and that the proceedings cannot be proceeded with after delinking her from the proceedings.
Dismissing the criminal miscellaneous petition, HELD: (1) The permission to withdraw the main petition is refused and it is directed that the applicant be deleted from the array of parties in this proceeding.
The proceedings shall now be proceeded with a direction to the Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee to prosecute the petition together with the aid and assistance of such persons or agencies as the Court may permit or direct from time to time.
[667B C] 1(ii) The order dated 5.8.1986 and I3.8.1986 forbidding the applicant from using the information collected by her during her visits to jails and other custodial institutions cannot he modified during the pendency of the proceedings as the information was gathered for purposes of the case and pursuant to the directions of this Court.
[667D] 2(i) The "rights" of those who bring the action on behalf of the others must necessarily be subordinate to the "interests" of those for whose benefit the action is brought.
[652C] 2(ii) In a public interest litigation, unlike traditional disputeresolution mechanism, there is no determination or adjudication of individual rights.
While in the ordinary conventional adjudications the party structure is merely bi polar and the controversy pertains to the determination of the legal consequences of past events and the remedy is essentially linked to and limited by the logic of the array of the parties, in a public interest action the PG NO 645 proceedings cut across and transcend these traditional forms and inhibitions.
The compulsions for the judicial innovation of the technique of a public interest action is the constitutional promise of a social and economic transformation to usher in an egalitarian social order and a welfare State; Effective solutions to the problems peculiar to this transformation are not available in the traditional judicial system.
The proceedings in a public interest litigation are, therefore, intended to vindicate and effectuate the public interest by prevention ot violation of the rights, constitutional or statutory, of sizeable segments of the society, which owing to poverty, ignorance, social and economic disadvantages cannot themselves assert and quite often not even aware of those rights.
The technique of public interest litigation serves to provide an effective remedy to enforce these group rights and interests.
In order that these public causes are brought before the courts, the procedural techniques judicially innovated specially for the public interest action recognises the concomitant need to lower the locus standi threshoIds so as to enable public minded citizens or social action groups to act as conduits between these classes of persons of inherence and the forum for the assertion and enforcement of their rights.
The dispute is not comparable to one between private parties with the result there is no recognition of the status of a Dominus Litis for any individual or group of individuals to determine the course of destination of the proceedings, except to the extent recognised and permitted by the court.
[651E H; 652A C] 2(iii) What corresponds to the stage of final disposal in an ordinary litigation is only a stage in the proceedings.
There is no formal, declared termination of the proceedings.
The lowering of locus standi threshold does not involve the recognition or creation of any vested rights on the part of those who initiate the proceeding, analogus to Dominus Litis.[652H;653A] 3.
Unduly harsh and coercive measures against the states and the authorities might themselves become counter productive.
In the matter of affirmative action the willing cooperation of the authorities must, as far as possible, be explored.
If the proceedings are allowed to be diverted at every stage into punitive proceedings for non compliance,the main concern and purposes of the proceedings might tend to be over shadowed by its incidental ramifications.
The coercive action would, of course, have to be initiated if persuasion fails.
[660C D] In the instant case, the Court 's orders dated 15.4.86, 12.7.86.
5.9.96, 13.8.86 and 21.11.86, show that certain PG NO 646 important and far reaching actions were initiated and appropriate directions were issued to the States and authorities concerned.
The first ground, therefore, does not justify the withdrawal of this public interest Litigation.
If the Court acknowledges any such status of a Dominus Litis to a person who brings a public interest litigation, it will render the proceedings in public interest litigations vulnerable to and susceptible of a new dimension which might, in conceivable cases, be used by persons for personal ends resulting in prejudice to the public weal.
[653F G;662H; 663A B] 4(i) The concept of public accountability of the judicial system is, indeed, a matter of vital public concern for debate and evaluation at a different plane.
But, for that reason courts of law, in their actual day to day judicial work, cannot allow the incantations and professions of these principles to enable parties to judicial adjudications to constitute themselves the overseers of the judicial performance and accountability in the individual case in which they are immediately concerned and permit themselves comments and criticism of the judicial work in the particular case.
[661F,G H;662A] 4(ii) While comments and criticisms of judicial functioning, on matters of principle, are healthy aids for interspersion and improvement, the criticism of the functioning of the Court in the course of and in relation to a particular proceeding by the parties to it borders on a conduct intended or tending to impair the dignity, authority and the functional disposition of the court.
It is, therefore thought important to maintain respect and dignity ot the courts and its officers whose task is to uphold and enforce the law because without such respect, public faith in the administration of justice would be undermined and the law itself would fall into disrespect.
[662B C] 4(iii) This is not to deny the broader right to criticise the systemic inadequacies in the larger public interest.
It is the privileged right of the Indian citizen to believe what he considers to be true and to speak out his mind, though not, perhaps, always with the best of testes; and speak perhaps, 'with greater courage then care for exactitude.
Judiciary is not exempt from such criticism.
Judicial institutions are.
and should be made, of stronger stuff ' intended to endure and thrive even in such hardy climate.
[662F G] In the instant case, there is no justification to the resort to this freedom and privilege to criticise the proceedings during their pendency by persons who are parties and participants therein.
[662G H] PG NO 647 5(i) Even the humblest citizen of the land, irrespective of his station in life, is entitled to present his case with dignity and is entitled to be heard with courtesy and sympathy, Courts are meant for, and are sustained by, the people and no litigant can be allowed to be looked upon as a supplicant or an importuner.
[663C D] 5(ii) The parties who seek justice at the hands of the court are neither its subordinates or subsidiaries.
But the notion of an equal participation, in its practical applications, presents difficulties and cannot be stretched to the point where the court could share the responsibility, and the powers that go with it, of regulating the proceedings of the court with any of the parties before it.
In the existing system.
the parties who seek recourse to courts have to submit themselves to the jurisdiction and discipline of the court.
Their conduct, in relation to the proceedings.
is liable to be regulated by the court.
This is not a matter of expression or assertion of any superiority but is merely a necessity and a functional imperative [666B C] In the instant case, keeping in view the facts and circumstances or the case, the second ground of withdrawal is wholly insubstantial and proceeds on what appear to be certain subjective susceptibilities of the applicant which, to the extent they are irreconcilable with the discipline of the court, cannot be countenanced.
[666D] 6(i) The contention, that applicant is entitled to sustain her right to be the "petitioner in person" in a public interest litigation and that the proceedings cannot be proceeded with after de linking her from the proceedings cannot be accepted.
Any recognition of any such vested right in the persons who initiate such proceedings is to introduce a new and potentially harmful element in the judicial administration of this form of public law remedy.
That apart, what is implicit in the assertion of the applicant is the appropriation to herself of the right and wisdom to determine the course the proceedings are to or should take and its pattern.
This cannot be recognised.
[666E G] 6(ii) No litigant can be permitted to stipulate conditions with the court for the continuance of his or her participation.
[667A] 7.
The initiation of a public interest litigation or proceedings for issue of a writ of Habeas Corpus on the basis of letters reflects and symbolises the Court 's anxiety to relax the rigour of formal pleadings.
However, in proceedings which are already initiated and are pending it world be inappropriate for a party to the proceedings to address letters directly to the Judges.
What is sought to be PG NO 648 brought to the notice of the Court should,as far as possible, be filed in the Registry for being placed before the appropriate bench or submitted in the open court.
There might be extra ordinary circumstances when a party is compelled to resort to the expedience of a letter or a telegram.
Even in such a case, it would be appropriate to address them to the Registry to be placed before the appropriate bench.
The difficulties arising out of such direct communications are too obvious to require any elaborate discussion, [664E G]
