The appellant was charged under section 95(l)(ii) of the Gold (Control) Act, 1968 pursuant to seizure of 7,000 tolas of foreign mark gold from his possession.
He pleaded guilty to the charge and was convicted and sentenced to the maximum punishment of imprisonment for 7 years and fine of Rs.10 lakhs prescribed under the Act.
On appeal, the High Court confirmed that sentence but reduced the fine to Rs.5 lakhs.
The Supreme Court confirmed the sentence in a special Leave petition filed by the appellant.
While the appellant was under judicial custody, he was again prosecuted along with 19 others under section 135 of the Customs Act for smuggling of gold and export of silver out of India.
The appellant pleaded guilty to the charge and was convicted and sentenced for 4 years R.I. with fine of Rs.2 lakhs by trial court.
Both sentences were ordered to run consecutively.
On appeal, the High Court enhanced the sentence from 4 years to the maximum prescribed punishment of 7 years on the ground that the enormity of the crime committed by the appellant warranted nothing else than the maximum sentence.
Allowing the appeal by the appellant on the question of sentence, HELD: 1.
Section 427, Cr.
P.C. relates to administration of criminal justice and provides procedure for sentencing.
The basic rule of thumb over the years has been the so called single transaction rule for concurrent sentences.
If a given transaction constitutes two offences under two enactments generally, it is wrong to have consecutive sentences.
It is proper and legitimate to have concurrent sentences.
But this rule has no application if the transaction relating to offences is not the same or the facts constituting the two offences are quite different.[751C,D E] PG NO 746 PG NO 747 2(i) The enormity of the crime committed by the accused is relevant for measuring the sentence.
But the maximum sentence awarded in one case against the same accused is not irrelevant for consideration while giving the consecutive sentence in the second case although it is grave.
The court has to consider the totality of the sentences which the accused has to under go if the sentences are to be consecutive.
The totality principle has been accepted as correct principle for guidance.
[753E.F] R. vs Edward Charles French, [1982] Cr.
R. (S) p. 1 at 6, referred to.
In the instant case, the trial court has properly considered all aspects including the plea of guilty and given good reasons for awarding 4 years R.I.
That means in all, the appellant has to undergo 11 years of imprisonment.
That by itself is quite Long enough in a man 's life.
But the High Court took a narrow view of the whole matter with the enormity of the crime on the forefront.
[753G H] 2(ii) The broad expanse of discretion left by legislation to sentencing courts should not be narrowed only to the seriousness of the offence.
No single consideration can definitively determine the proper sentence.
In arriving at an appropriate sentence, the court must consider, and some times reject, many factors.
The court must `recognise, learn to control and exclude ' many diverse data.
It is a balancing act and tortuous process to ensure reasoned sentence.
In consecutive sentences, in particular, the court cannot afford to be blind to imprisonment which the accused is already undergoing.
[753H ; 754A B] 3.
Generally, it is both proper and customery for courts to give credit to an accused for pleading guilty to the charge.
But no credit need be given if the plea of guilty in the circumstance is inevitable or the accused has no alternative but to plead guilty.
The accused being caught red handed is one such instance.
[753B]
