In this appeal by special leave, the dispute arose out of a lease by a charitable trust in favour of a company.
The respondent Trust Bled a for possession of a property taken on lease from it by the appellant company.
The appellant responded by filing an application claiming protection under section 9 of the Tamil Nadu City Tenant 's Protection Act (the `Act ').
The application was accepted by the trial court which held that the company was entitled to the benefit of the Act and appointed a Commissioner to inspect the property and fix the minimum extent of the property required by the defendant for convenient enjoyment of the super structure which it would be entitled to purchase in terms of section 9.
The trustees filed an appeal, contending that the company was not entitled to the protection of section 9.
The appeal was allowed.
The company preferred a revision petition before the High Court, which dismissed it, holding that the application of the company under section 9 was not maintainable.
The company appealed to this Court, Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: The short question to be decided was whether the company was entitled to the protection under section 9 of the Act.
This piece of legislation was enacted primarily for the protection of small tenants, who in certain municipal towns and adjoining areas had constructed buildings on others ' lands, by ensuring that they were not evicted so long as they paid a fair rent for the lease.
The Act also contained a provision whereunder a tenant could put up a claim to purchase the land in question from the owner.
[758C] PG NO 755 PG NO 756 The Act applies only to tenants in respect of land situated in certain areas where the tenancy has been created before a prescribed date.
The only controversy here was whether the lease in question could be said to be a lease of `land '.
Before a right of purchase can be exercised under section 9, the tenant must be a tenant of land, not comprising buildings or lands appurtenant thereto.
The High Court had held that there had been a lease not of the vacant land but of a building with the land appurtenant thereto and the provisions of the Act would not apply.
[764E, F G; 765F G] The case involved construction of the lease deed.
The language employed in the lease deed only showed that both land and building were leased.
Whether the land was to he treated as an appurtenant or not would depend upon the extent and nature of the land and its situation vis a vis the building thereon and not on whether the lease deed described the subject matter as `call that land and building" or Vice Versa.
If the deed had described the demised premises as `building and appurtenant land '.
that would have helped in ascertaining the intention of the parties but even that would not have been conclusive.
[766E G] The question whether a certain land is appurtenant or not is one of fact.
There was no reason to disturb the finding of the first appellate Court and the High Court that the land was appurtenant to the building.
The use of the land, in the circumstances of the case, was incidental to the enjoyment and beneficial use of the building.
[768B d] The clauses of the lease deed could not be construed as consisting of two separate leases, one, of the building and the other, of the land, as suggested by the lessees.
There were clear indications in the lease deed that it was a single, indivisible lease of both the building and the vacant land.
It was impossible to consider the document as comprising two leases.
It was a composite lease of a building with appurtenant land, sad having regard to the definitions contained in the Act, the Lessee was not entitled to the rights conferred by section 3 or section 9 of the Act.
[769D; 770F] Whether the Act applied to the lease or not was something which had to be considered on the terms of the lease deed, having regard to the nature of the property.
The clause regarding removal of the structures is the normal clause that occurs in the leases under the Transfer of Property Act.
The clause in this case made no mention of compensation and only talked of the lessees ' right to remove structures.
Even if no such clause had been inserted, that would have been the position in law.
It was not PG NO 757 possible to infer from such a natural clause that it had been put in with a view to denying compensation to the lessee and getting over the hurdle of the lessee putting in a claim for acquiring the property by purchase.
The lease deed was a simple lease deed containing the usual clauses and covenants expected in it and nothing more.
If the parties had been conscious of the possibility of the lessee claiming any rights under the Act, the lessors would have tried to safeguard themselves by making clear that what was let out was only a building and the appurtenant land.
[771C F] The appeal was dismissed.
Maharaja Singh vs State of U. P., [1977] 7 S.C.C. l55r referred to.
