Some persons were plying their business by squatting on pavement in front of a hospital in Delhi and had put up stalls or kiosk allegedly on Tehbazari under a licence under section 321 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.
The Delhi Municipal Corporation tried to remove them by demolishing their stalls etc.
These persons filed suits in the Court of Subordinate Judge praying for perpetual injunction restraining the Corporation from interfering with their business and/or removing or demolishing any temporary structures put up by them for plying their trade.
The Subordinate Judge disallowed the plaintiffs ' main claim seeking a declaration that the Municipal Corporation had no right or authority to remove the stalls built up by them.
He however held that by virtue of the Tehbazari licence granted in their favour the plaintiffs had acquired the right to occupy and carry on business at the suit sites till their licence was not terminated by the Corporation according to the procedure laid down in proviso (a)(ii) of Sub Section of Section 430 of the Act.
Two of the squatters namely Jamuna Das and his brother filed writ petitions in this Court seeking a writ of mandamus ordaining the Municipal Corporation to allot each of them a suitable site on pavement in front of the main gate of the hospital.
(Jamna Das & Anr.
vs PG NO 929 PG NO 930 Delhi Administration & Ors., Writ Petition Nos.
981 982 of 1984.) This Court directed that the petitioners be rehabilitated by the Municipal Corporation by construction of stalls according to the sketch plan filed by the Corporation with a further direction that each of them would be put in possession of one of the stalls.
The Court made it clear that this was a consent order and that the direction should not be treated as a precedent.
The respondent, who was one of the plaintiffs who had filed suits in the court of Subordinate Judge, moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for a writ and direction restraining the Corporation from evicting her without the due process of law.
The High Court partly allowed the writ petition holding that the judgment of the Learned Subordinate Judge which was a judgment inter partes had become final not having been appealed from and therefore the respondent could not be removed from pitching her stall on the pavement outside the hospital where she was squatting.
Relying on the decision of this Court in Jamuna Das ' case the High Court gave an option to the Corporation either to construct the stall similar to the one they have constructed in compliance with the direction made by this Court in Jamuna Das ' case or in the alternative furnish to the respondent a plan of the stall with requisite permission so that she could build her own stall accordingly.
Feeling aggrieved by this Judgment of the High Court, the Municipal Corporation filed this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal this Court, HELD: The Learned Judges of the High Court failed to appreciate that this Court in Jamna Das ' case made a direction with the consent of parties and with the reservation that it should not be treated as a precedent.
It expressed no opinion on the question whether there was any statutory obligation cast on the Municipal Corporation to provide alternative site to a person making illegal encroachment on a public place like any public street etc.
contrary to Section 320 of the Act as a condition precedent to the exercise of its powers under section 322 of the Act for the removal of such encroachment on any public street, footpath or pavement.
That apart, the High Court could not have made the impugned direction contrary to the provisions contained in sections 320 and 322 of the Act.
[937A C It is axiomatic that when a direction or order is made by consent of the parties, the Court does not adjudicate upon the rights of the parties nor lay down any principle.
Quotability as 'law ' applies to the principle of a case, its ratio decidendi.
The only thing in a Judge 's decision PG NO 931 binding as an authority upon a subsequent Judge is the principle upon which the case was decided.
Statements which are not part of the ratio decidendi are distinguished as obiter dicta and are not authoritative.
The task of finding the principle is fraught with difficulty because without an investigation into the facts, as in the present case, it could not be assumed whether a similar direction must or ought to be made as a measure of social justice.
That being so, the direction made by this Court in Jamna Das ' case could not be treated to be a precedent.
The High Court failed to realise that the direction in Jamna Das ' case was made not only with the consent of the parties but there was an interplay of various factors and the Court was moved by compassion to evolve a situation to mitigate hardship which was acceptable by all the parties concerned.
[937F H; 938A] Pronouncements of law, which are not part of the ratio decidendi are classed as obiter dicta and are not authoritative.
With all respect to the learned Judge who passed the order in Jamna Das ' case and to the learned Judge who agreed with him, we cannot concede that this Court is bound to follow it.
It was delivered without argument, without reference to the relevant provisions of the Act conferring express power on the Municipal Corporation to direct removal of encroachments from any public place like pavements or public streets, and without any citation of authority.
Accordingly, we do not propose to uphold the decision of the High Court because, it seems to us that it is wrong in principle and cannot be justified by the terms of the relevant provisions.
[938F G ] A decision should be treated as given per incuriam when it is given in ignorance of the terms of a statute or of a rule having the force of a statute.
[938G H] Salmond on Jurisprudence by P.J. Fitzgerald, 12th Ed.; Gerard vs Worth of Paris Ltd. (K), and Lancaster Motor Co. (London) Ltd. vs Bremith Ltd., , referred to.
Precedents sub silentio and without argument are of no moment.
This rule 'has ever since been followed.
One of the chief reasons for the doctrine of precedents is that a matter that has once been fully argued and decided should not be allowed to be reopened.
The weight accorded to dicta varies with the type of dictum.
Mere casual expressions carry no weight at all.
Not every passing expression of a Judge, however eminent, can be treated as an ex cathedra statement.
having the weight of authority.
[939G H] PG NO 932 Olga Tellis & Ors.
vs Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors., ; and Bombay Hawkers ' Union & Ors.
vs Bombay Municipal Corporation & Ors., ; , referred to.
