The applicants filed a contempt petition under Contempt of Courts Act against the respondents (some high officers of the Calcutta Municipal Corporation) and the lessees, respondent Nos. 13 and 14, who were given contract for construction alleging that they were guilty of contempt in that they had constructed the underground market in breach of the terms and conditions laid down by this Court in its order dated 18th August, 19X7.
The applicants submitted that the officers had permitted the lessees, to construct an underground air conditioned market at Satyanarayan Park and that they had connived and acquiesced in permitting the lessees to construct four pucca structures of 15 feet in height above the road level partly convering the surface of the park and covering a major portion of the surface of the Park.
They also alleged that the construction of the four storeyed quarters (service block) were also in violation of the conditions.
The respondents controverted these facts.
The matter was referred to the Single Judge of the High Court who had earlier heard the matter and whose decision had been confirmed by a Division Bench of the High Court and by this Court, to hold an enquiry as to whether there was a violation of the judgment and order passed by him The Learned Single Judge personally visited the site and heard the parties.
He submitted his report containing his visual impressions and holding that there was no violation of any directions given by him in his judgment and the question of committing any contempt of the judgment does not and cannot arise, He left the question open for this Court to determine whether there was any derivation from the conditions set forth by the Division Bench order and by this Court, PG NO 1017 PG NO 1018 Rejecting the contentions of the applicants, aggreeing with the findings and reasoning of the Single Judge and dismissing the contempt application, this Court, HELD: There can be no doubt whatever that there is no breach either of the conditions laid down by this Court or the Division Bench of the High Court.
The construction of the so called lofty structures over the staircase leading to the underground market, which we may call bunkers, as well as of the four storeyed building were in the architect 's plan and were expressly permitted in the licence and formed part of the sanctioned plan.
It was therefore present In the mind of all concerned including the Chief Municipal Architect and Town Planner as also of the Administrator of the Municipal Corporation while planning the costruction of the underground air conditioned market that these structures would be built up.
As already stated, the construction of the bunkers over the three staircases was a matter of absolute necessity to make the central air conditioning plant fully functional.
As regards the four storeyed structure, the construction thereof does not constitute a breach of the conditions laid down.
It has already been stated that the four storeyed structure is built to provide residential quarters to the staff and actually now it occupies much lesser space than before.
In the premises, the allegation made by the applicants that the aforesaid structures cover a substantial portion of the surface of the park which cannot now be turned into a terrace garden with a lush green lawn, is fully unfounded.
[1024G H; 1025A C] The Court cannot but deprecate the attempts made by the applicants to move the High Court as well as this Court time and again on one pretext or another in a frantic effort to prevent the construction of the underground air conditioned market at Satyanarayan Park which is a part of the beautification scheme of the great Metropolitan City of Calcutta by the State Government of West Bengal where a party in opposition is in power, to provide civic amenities to the citizens It is fortunate that these attempts have been frustrated and what was conceived of a development scheme has come to a reality.
[1025E G]
