A number of textile mills which were engaged in the business of manufacture and sale of rayon yarn and staple fibre, i.e. man made fibre, moved the High Courts under article 226 of the Constitution challenging the constitutional validity of the fee imposed upon them by the Textile Committee under rule 21 of the Textile Committee Rules.
1965 made by the Central Government under section 22 of the .
The levy of fee was challenged on the ground that the Textile Committee was not rendering any service to them by way of inspection or examination of rayon yarn and that the element of quid pro quo was totally absent.
The High Courts of Allahabad.
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Madras upheld the validity of the levy, while the Kerala High Court took the contrary view.
The parties came up in appeal to this Court.
Four similar petitions pending in the High Court of Bombay were also transferred to this Court.
Before the Court, it was contended on behalf of the textile mills (1) the rayon yarn and nylon yarn manufactured by them was made wholly Of filaments and not of fibres and therefore the same are not textiles within the meaning of the definition of textiles ' as contained of S.2(g) of the Textile Committee Act.
and hence not liable to payment of any fee in accordance with rule 21 of the Textile Committee Rules; and (2) the Textiles Committee rendered no service to the writ petitioners because neither they needed the services of the Committee nor the Committee was in a position to render any service to them.
PG NO 880 PG NO 881 On behalf of the Revenue, the Additional Solicitor General contended (I) the levy under r. 21 of the Rules was not correlated to the power of inspection which the Textiles Committee had under section 11 of the Act, but was relatable to its power to levy fees under section 12 for the performance of its functions, powers and duties under section 4 (2) the avowed object and purpose of the Act, as was clear from section 3, was `quality control ' of all textile and it would be idle to contend that rayon yarn and nylon yarn which were but species of what was known as man made fibres, otherwise called artificial silk, and had a world market, should be outside the purview of the Act, (3) the Act and the words used therein had to be interpreted not on a technological or specialised scientific plane, but in a popular sense as understood by experts in the sphere of the textile industry and the commercial world dealing with it; and (4) the definition of 'textiles ' must be given a broad and liberal construction in furtherance of the object and purpose of the Act.
Dismissing the appeals filed by the textile mills and allowing the appeal filed by the Textile Committee, it was HELD: (1) In view of the fact that in the writ petitions filled in the High Courts the textile mills had stated that they were actually engaged in the manufacture of rayon yarn and nylon yarn both of which.
they averred, were `species of what was known as man made fibres '.
their contention that rayon yarn and nylon yarn manufactured by them were not `yarn ' and therefore did not fall within the definition of textiles under section 2(g) of the Act could be countenanced.
[899E, F] (2) There was no explicable reason for the Legislature to have excluded rayon yarn and nylon yarn from the purview of the definition of textiles in s.(2)(g) of the Act.
In the premise, the expression `textiles ' as defined in s.2(g) of the Act has to be given a broad and liberal construction, in furtherance of the purpose and object of the Act.
[901A B] (3) The Act and the words used therein have to be interpreted not on a technological or specialised scientific plane but in the popular sense as understood by experts in the sphere of the textile industry and the commercial world dealing with it.
[901D E] (4) The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 treats rayon as well as nylon as textiles made of artificial (man made) fibres.
The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and the may properly be considered to be statutes in pari materia.
[905b] PG NO 882 (5) The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act is an Act earlier in point of time, and there is no reason why if a subsequent statute by the same Legislature can be pressed In aid for the purpose of interpreting, in the event of any doubt, the provisions of an earlier statute, the earlier statute cannot be made use of for the purpose of construing, in the event of ambiguity, the provisions of a later statute.
[905E] (6) Rayon and nylon yarn are not only made of 'other fibre ' but are also yarn of 'artificial silk ' within the meaning of section t(g) of the Act.
[904D] (7) The contention that rayon yarn and nylon yarn manufactured by the mills are made wholly of filaments and not of fibres and therefore did not come within the purview of textiles as defined in section 2(g) of the Act prior to its amendment and therefore were not liable for payment of the fee levied under r. 21 of the Rules, cannot prevail.[905F] (8) The grievance of the textile mills that there is no inspection of the rayon yarn and nylon yarn manufactured by them at the stage of production is belied by the fact that there is pre shipment inspection of the fabrics manufactured from such fibres for export.
[91OB C] (9) When the entire proceeds of the fee are utilised in financing the various projects undertaken by the Textiles Committee, as also the inspection of all textiles including man made fibres and textile machinery, the appellants cannot be heard to say that there is no reasonable and sufficient correlation between the levy of the fee and the services rendered.
[907C] (10) When the levy of the fee is for the benefit of the entire textile industry, there is sufficient quid pro quo between the levy recovered and the services rendered to the industry as a whole.
[91OD] (11) The conclusion is inevitable that the levy of the fee under r. 21 of the Textiles Committee Rules, 1965 by the Textiles Committee under sub section
(1) of section 12 of the is valid and constitutionally permissible.
[912B C] M/s Juggilal Kamalapat Cotton Spinning & Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. vs The Textiles Committee, Bombay, [1972] Tax L.R. 2104; The Travancore Rayons Ltd. r The Textiles Committee, ILR Sreeniwasa General Traders & Ors.
vs State of Andhra Pradesh, [1983] 3 SC R 843 referred to.
The PG NO 883 Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing (Wvg.) Co. Ltd ., Birlagram Ujjain vs The Textiles Committee, Bombay, ,overruled.
