The State of Haryana through Haryana Urban Development Authority (HUDA) acquired some land under the land Acquisition Act for the purpose of development and utilisation of that land for industrial purposes of Gurgaon under the Haryana Urban Development Authority Act, 1977.
The appellants herein filed writ petitions in the High Court challenging the validity of the acquisition of land.
The High Court dismissed the writ petitions.
Hence the writ petitioners filed these appeals by special leave.
.Some other affected persons also filed writ petitions in this Court Dismissing all the appeals and the writ petitions.
this Court, HELD: The first ground of attack to the acquisition that the sub stance of the notification under section 4(1) of the Act has not been published in the locality of the land said to be acquired is without any foundation.
Whether the substance of the notification was published or not is pre eminently a question of fact.
It is apparent from the statement made in paragraph 8 of the affidavit in reply of the land Acquisition Collector that the substance of the notification was published in the concerned localities.
It is further stated in the affidavit that pursuant such PG NO 1050 PG NO 1051 publication, 157 of the land owners filed objections to the proposed acquisition.
This fact has not been disputed by the appellants.
In view of these facts the first ground of attack is without any foundation whatsoever.
[1054D E] The second ground of attack was that the sole purpose of the acquisition was for a profiteering venture of the Government to acquire land at nominal price and then to re sale the same at a high profit Reliance was placed on an application for intervention filed in this matter by Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation (HSIDC) which showed that HUDA sold the land to HSIDC at a very high price paid by HSIDC out of the amounts received from intended allottees/entrepreneurs.
In the opinion of this Court the facts stated in the application of the HSIDC do not, support the contention of the appellants.
It is true that, as stated in the said application, HSIDC paid a sum of Rs. 1.74 crores to HUDA, but nothing turns out on that.
The land was acquired by the Government for the purpose of development and industrialisation.
The Government can do it itself or through other agencies.
In the instant case, the land was acquired at the instance of HUDA and, thereafter, HUDA had transferred the same to HSIDC.
It is not that the land was transferred in the same condition as it was acquired.
But, we are told by the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of HUDA and HSIDC that before transferring, HUDA had made external developments incurring considerable cost and HSIDC in its turn has made various internal developments and in this way the land has been fully developed and made fit for industrialisation.
Thus, there was no motive for HUDA to make any profit.
[1058E H; 1059A] The "Public purpose" in question is development and industrialisation of the acquired land.
The appellants have not challenged the said public purpose.
In the absence of any such challenge it does not lie in the mouth of the appellants to contend that the acquisition was merely a profiteering venture by the State Government through Haryana Urban Development Authority.
Even assuming that HUDA has made some profit, that will not in any way affect the public purpose for which the land was acquired and the acquisition will not be liable for any challenge on that ground.
[1059B D] Arnold Rodricks vs State of Maharashtra, AIR 1966 SC 1788, referred to.
When a point which is ostensibly a point of law i6 required to be substantiated by facts, the party raising the point, if he is the writ petitioner, must plead and prove such facts by evidence which must appear from the writ petition and if he is the respondent from the counter PG NO 1052 affidavit.
If the facts are not pleaded or the evidence in support of such facts is not annexed to the writ petition or to the counter affidavit, as the case may be, the Court will not entertain the point.
[1059F G] There is a distinction between a pleading under the Code of Civil Procedure and a writ petition or a counter affidavit.
While in a pleading, that is, a plaint or a written statement, the facts and not evidence are required to be pleaded, in a writ petition or in the counter affidavit not only the facts but also the evidence in proof of such facts have to be pleaded and annexed to it.
[1059G H] The contention of the appellants that the acquisition is for HSIDC which is a `company ' within the meaning of section 3(e) of the Act and, accordingly, the acquisition is invalid for the non compliance with the provisions of Part III of the Act is untenable.
In the notification under section 4(1), it has been clearly stated that the development and industrialisation of the acquired land would be made under the Haryana Development Authority Act, 1977 by HUDA.
It is, therefore, manifestly clear that HUDA was the acquiring authority and not HSIDC.
It is for HUDA to develop the land fully either by itself or by any other agency or agencies.
HUDA has transferred the land to HSIDC for the purpose of development and allotment to various persons.
It is too much to say that as HUDA has transferred the acquired land to HSIDC, the latter is the acquiring authority.
[1060B D] The contention that the petitioners have been discriminated inasmuch as the land of other persons in the village has not been acquired is without any substance whatsoever.
The Government will acquire only that amount of land which is necessary and suitable for the public purpose in question.
The land belonging to the petitioners have been acquired obviously considering the same as suitable for the public purpose.
[1061D]
