On February 21, 1986 the State Government of Maharashtra appointed Shri Justice B. Lentin as a one man Commission of Inquiry to probe into the death of 14 patients in the government run J.J.B. Hospital between 22.1.1986 and 7.2.1986 after they were administered contaminated glycerol, and to fix responsibility.
The inquiry revealed the existence of a corrupt and venal nexus between the drug firms, the delinquent Food & Drugs Administration and hospital staff on the one hand, and the appellant, some other persons and certain Government officials on the other.
The Commission 's report was an indictment of the State 's public health system.
The Commission having found the evidence given by the appellant self contradictory, issued a show cause notice to him as to why he should not be prosecuted for the offence of giving false evidence on oath under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 read with section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
After considering the appellant 's objections, the Commission directed filing of a complaint under sections 193 and 228 of I.P.C.
The appellant filed a petition in the High Court assailing the legality and propriety of the order of the Commission directing filing of the complaint, and the same was dismissed by the High Court.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that (1) the Commission could not be deemed to be a Court for the purposes of section 195(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure unless declared by the Commission of Inquiries Act itself, as stipulated in sub section
(3) of section 195, PG NO 942 PG NO 943 which provides that in cl.
(b) of sub section
(1), the term 'Court ' means a Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this Section; (2) the Commission of Inquiry appointed by the State Government was merely a fact finding body appointed by the Government for the 'information of its mind ', and the mere fact that the procedure adopted was of a legal character and it had the power to administer an oath would not impart to it the status of the Court and therefore was not a 'Court ' for the purposes of section 195(1)(b) of the Code; (3) the question was not whether the appellant could be prosecuted for perjury for giving false evidence which was an offence punishable under section 195(1)(b), but whether the Commission was a 'Court ' for the purposes of section 195(1)(b); (4) that sub section to put an end to the controversy, and this was nothing but 'legislative declaration of the law ' contrary to the law declared by this Court in Lalj Haridas case, and a number of statutes contain such a provision in accordance with the existing legislative practice.
The Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State contended that (1) the inclusive part of the definition of 'Court ' in section 195(3) of the Code was ex abundanti cautela and was merely declaratory of the law, and (2) the first part of sub section
(4) of section 5 of the Act satisfied the requirements of the inclusive part of the definition of 'Court ' as contained in sub section
(3) of section 195 of the Code.
Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) It could not be doubted that sub section
(3) of section 195 of the Code had been enacted by Parliament to implement the recommendations of the 41st Report of the Law Commission to remedy the uncertain state of law due to conflict of opinion between different High Courts as to the meaning of the word 'Court ' in section 195(1)(b) and to that extent the introduction of the inclusive clause in the definition of 'Court ' in sub section
(3) of section 195 had brought about a change in the law.
[966D] (2) Law must be definite, and certain.
If any of the features of the law could usefully be regarded as normative, it was such basic postulates as to the requirement of consistency in judicial decision making.
It was this requirement of consistency that gave to the law much of its rigour.
At the same time, there was need for flexibility.[968F G] (3) A Commission of Inquiry was fictionally a Civil PG NO 944 Court for the limited purpose of proceeding under section 482 of the old Code or section 345 of the present Code.
A fortiori the legal fiction contained in sub section
(5) of section of the Act which related to the proceedings before the Commission was necessarily confined to offences that were punishable under sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code and did not extend beyond that.
[970F G] (4) A Commission of Inquiry was not a Court properly so called.
A Commission is obviously appointed by the appropriate Government 'for the information of its mind ' in order for it to decide as to the course of action to be followed.
It was therefore a fact finding body and was not required to adjudicate upon the rights of the parties and has no adjudicatory function.
The Government was not bound to accept its recommendation or act upon its findings.
The mere fact that the procedure adopted by it was of a legal character and it had the power to administer an oath would not impart to it the status of a Court.
[972D E] (5) Parliament in its wisdom whenever thought it fit had inserted a special provision for deeming a tribunal to be a Court for the purposes of section 195(1)(b) but had left the other enactments like the Commission of Inquiry Act untouched although sub section
(3) of section 195 had been on the Statute Book for the last over 14 years.
[965D E] (6) The judgment will not however prevent the State Government from launching a prosecution against the appellant for commission of the alleged offences under sections 193 and 228 I.P.C. if otherwise permissible in law.
[977E F] Lalji Haridas vs The State of Maharashtra ; ; M.V. Rajwade vs Dr. S.M. Hasan, ILR (1954) Nagpur 1; Brajnanandan Sinha vs Jyoti Narain, ; ; Puhupram & Ors.
vs State of Madhya Pradesh, ; Balakrishnan vs Income Tax Officer, Ernakulam, ; Jagannath Prasad vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; Virinder Kumar Satyawadi vs The State of Punjab, ; Balwant Singh & Anr.
vs L.C. Bharupal, I.T.O., New Delhi, ; Chandrapal Singh vs Maharaj Singh, ; Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. vs Union State of Bihar, ; R. M.D. Chamarbaugwalla vs Union of India, ; ; Commissioner of Income tax Madhya Pradesh & Bhopal vs Sodra Devi, [1958] SCR l; St. Aubyn vs Attorney General, ; ; Shell Co. of Australia vs Federal Commissioner of Taxation, ; Smt.
Ujjam Bai vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; M.M. khan vs Emperor, ILR and In re.
Maharaja Madhava Singh LR (1905) 31 IA 239.
PG NO 945
