The appellant and respondent married in 1977.
In 1983, the appellant filed a suit for dissolution of the marriage, alleging that his wife was suffering from severe mental disorder, psychiatrically recognised as `Schizophrenia ' which rendered her unsociable and despite competent professional treatment, her condition deteriorated to the point of making manifest in her suicidal tendencies and aggressive violent behaviour towards others.
The appellant could not therefore reasonably be expected to live with the respondent as man and wife.
The Respondent denied the imputation of insanity and contended that the appellant was determined to get rid of her, as a result of the domestic discord between her and the appellant 's mother and sister.
Both the husband and the wife gave evidence, to prove their respective cases.
Other witnesses were also examined.
The respondent wife produced a copy of the order passed by the Magistrate in proceedings initiated by the appellant under the Lunacy Act.
for the committal of his wife to a mental asylum.
The order stated that there was no abnormality in her, requiring institutional treatment.
On appreciation of the evidence, the trial court accepted the case of the appellant and granted a decree for dissolution of the marriage.
The Respondent wife appealed to the High Court.
Allowing the appeal, the High Court reversed the decree of dissolution of marriage, granted by the trial court.
It held that the appellant had not shown that his wife 's mental illness was so intense as to justify a reasonable apprehension that it would be impossible or unsafe for the appellant to live with her.
PG NO 913 PG NO 914 In the present appeal before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that in assessing the reasonableness of the husband 's apprehension that he could not be expected to spend the rest of his life with a `Schizophrenic ', due acknowledgement required to be made to his subjective susceptibilities also.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 Section 13(1)(iii) does not make the mere existence of a mental disorder of any degree sufficient to justify the dissolution of a marriage.
The burden of proof of the existence of the requisite degree of mental disorder is on the spouse basing the claim on that state of facts.
The context in which the ideas of unsoundness of `mind ' and `mental disorder ' occur in the section as grounds for dissolution of a marriage, require the assessment of the degree of the `mental disorder '.
Its degree must be such as that the spouse seeking relief cannot reasonably be expected to live with the other.
All mental abnormalities are not recognised as grounds for grant of decree.
[921 C H; 922A] 1.2 scnizophrenia is said to be a difficult mental affliction.
It is insidious in its onset and has hereditary pre disposing factor.
Each case of Schizophrenia has to be considered on its own merits.
Mere branding of a person as Schizophrenic will not suffice.
For purpose of Sec.
13(1)(iii) Schizophrenia is what Schizophrenia does.
Not all Schzophrenics are characterised by the same intensity of the disease.[924D;928D] 2.
In the instant case, taking into account the facts and circumstances the High Court, on a reasonable assessment of the situation, rightly came to the conclusion that the requisite degree of the mental disorder which alone would justify dissolution of marriage has not been established and that the decree for the dissolution of the marriage.
granted by the trial court was not justified.
[917C D] Rita Roy vs Sitesh Chandra, AIR 1982 Cal 138, approved.
McLoughin vs O 'Brian, ; ; Bennett vs Bennett. , relied on.
John Searle `Minds, Brains and Science ' [l984] Reith Lectures, PP.
10 & 11, Concise Medical Dictionary, p. 566, Oxford Medical Publications, 1980, Philosophy and Medicine, Vol.
5, p.x.
F.C. Redlich and Daniel X. Freedman.
`The Theory and Practice of Psychiatry ' [1966] Edn.
William Alanson White, New York, The Autobiography of a Purpose ' PG NO 915 Doubleday & Co. 1938 p. 53, Karl Menninger `Communication and Mental Health ', The Menninger Quarterly, [1962], p. 1., Richard C. Allen, Elyce Zennott Ferster, Jassee C. Rubin `Readings in Law and Psychiatry ', Revised & Expanded edn.
(1975), p. 38 relied on.
