The Government of India set up a Wage Board for the port and dock workers at major ports on November 13, 1964(1) to determine the categories of employees who should be brought within the scope of proposed wage fixation, and (2) to work out a wage structure for those employees on the basis of the guidelines laid down by the Government.
The Wage Board submitted its final report on November 29, 1969.
The Wage Board did not choose to make any recommendation in respect of bargemen, i.e., Dandees and Majhis at the Port of Calcutta.
According to the Wage Board, the bargemen were engaged more in the transport of cargo rather than its handling and they therefore did not fit in with the definition of 'dock worker '.
Thereupon, the bargemen raised an industrial dispute claiming the benefit of the Wage Board recommendations.
Accordingly, the Central Government on August 22, 197o constituted a National Tribunal at Calcutta for adjudication whether the recommendations of the Wage Board were applicable.
to the bargemen, and if not, to what relief with regard to wages and allowances were they entitled.
The National Tribunal held that the bargemen were entitled to be paid wages and allowance at the rates of wages recommended by the Wage Board on the ground that the bargemen came within the meaning of the definition of 'dock worker ' and thus the recommendations of the Wage Board were applicable to them, and alternatively, on the ground that PG NO 1034 PG NO 1035 they were entitled to the same rates of wages and allowances even independently~ having regard to the financial capacity of the management and all other relevant considerations governing the determination of the wages.
Aggrieved by the award of the National Tribunal, the managements filed two writ petitions before the High Court at Calcutta questioning its validity on the ground that it was beyond the scope of the reference.
The learned Single Judge observed: (1) that the scope of the reference was to find out from the report of the Central Wage Board itself whether the recommendations were applicable to the bargemen or not, and it was not for the National Tribunal to criticise the report of the Central Wage Board and to establish that the bargemen were dock workers within the meaning of the Act; (2) the National Tribunal, in a round about way, made the recommendations of the Central Wage Board applicable to the bargemen although apparently the recommendations were not applicable to them, and (3) the National Tribunal having held that the recommendations of the Central Wage Board were applicable to the bargemen, there was no scope for it to decide independently the pay structure of the bargemen.
The learned Single Judge accordingly quashed the award as beyond the jurisdiction of the National Tribunal.
The Division Bench, on appeal, agreed with the Single Judge and further held that the National Tribunal had failed to fix the wages in accordance with the settled principles.
Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (l) The object of enacting the and of making provision therein to refer disputes to tribunals for settlement is to bring about industrial peace.
Whenever a reference is made by a Government to an industrial tribunal it has to be presumed ordinarily that there is a genuine industrial dispute between the parties which requires to be resolved by adjudication In all such cases an attempt should be made by Courts exercising power of judicial review to sustain as far as possible the awards made by industrial tribunals instead of picking holes here and there in the awards on trivial points and ultimately frustrating the entire adjudication process before the tribunals by striking down awards on hyper technical grounds.[1042B C] PG NO 1036 (2) In order to decide the question whether the bargemen were dock workers or not the National Tribunal had to examine incidentally the correctness of the decision of the Wage Board on the question, and after taking into consideration all the material before it the National Tribunal had come to the conclusion that the bargemen were also dock workers and there was no justification for denying them the benefit of the recommendations of the Wage Board.
This part of the Award could, therefore, be considered to be outside the scope of the reference made to the National Tribunal.
The finding recorded by the National Tribunal may be right or wrong but it could not be considered as one recorded without jurisdiction.
[1048B D] (3) The National Tribunal while holding that even independently of the recommendations of the Wage Board, the bargemen were entitled to the same wages and allowances which had been recommended by the Wage Board had observed that it would not be beyond the capacity of the employers to pay.
The criticism of the award in this regard by the High Court was wholly unjustified.
[1048E F; 1049A] (4) The wages and allowances fixed by the National Tribunal were just and not at all excessive.
[1049E] Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. and Anr.
vs The Union of India and Others, referred to.
