The appellant assessee had claimed before the Andhra Pradesh High Court that tobacco seed oil and tobacco seed cake, being forms of tobacco, were entitled to exemption under section 8, read with entry 7 of the Fourth Schedule, of the Andhra Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1957, which confers exemption from sales tax in respect of certain goods including `tobacco '.
The petitioners in the writ petitions have claimed the same relief directly in this Court.
The High Court held that "tobacco seed" was not tobacco and that only leaf, stalks and stems of the tobacco plant could he said to be "tobacco" within the meaning of its definition.
Before this Court it is urged on behalf of the Assessees that: (i) the word `tobacco ', in its ordinary connotation.
takes in the tobacco plant and every part of it, including the seed (ii) the definition of `tobacco ' makes it clear that it takes in every form of tobacco, manufactured or unmanufactured; and (iii) tobacco seeds, not only when they are in their raw unmanufactured state but also when.
on manufacture, they manifest themselves in the form of tobacco seed oil or tobacco seed cake will fall within the definition.
On the other hand, on behalf of the state it is submitted that the definition, which covers both what the expression means as well as what it includes, is exhaustive, and tobacco seed does not come within either the first part or the second part of the definition.
Dismissing the appeals and the petitions, it was, HELD: (1) The definition consists of two separate parts which specify what the expression means and also what it includes.
The joint use of the words "mean and include" makes the definition exhaustive.
[lO94C] PG NO 1089 Dilworth vs Commissioner of Stamps, [1899] AC 99 referred to.
(2) Tobacco seed does not come within the first part of the definition, for the expression "tobacco cured or uncured, manufactured or unmanfactured" has to be read as a whole and will not take in tobacco seed.
It will not come under the second part because it specifically mentions leaves, stalks and stems but leaves out seeds.
[1094A B] (3) The definition, when it says that tobacco means any form of tobacco, lays emphasis that the item under consideration should be tobacco in form.
[1096A] (4) Tobacco seed, once it is separated from the plant, is an item entirely different from tobacco and does not fall within the expression `tobacco or any form of tobacco '.
[1096C] (5) Since tobacco seed does not fall within the definition, the oil and cake produced by the crushing of the seeds will not also be covered by the definition or eligible for the consequent exemption.
[1094B] (6) The effect of accepting the assessee 's claim for exemption would be to automatically catapult them into the levy of excise and additional excise duties, but the fact that tobacco oil and cake have not been considered to be excisable commodities for the past several years is as indication as to how the legislature and administration understood and applied these provisions all along.
[1096H; 1097B] C.I.T. vs Taj Mahal Hotel, S.C. Amara Purushotham Mamidi Obaiah vs State of A.P., [1962] 29 S.T.C. 654; and 1977 40 S.T.C. referred to.
