Regulation 19(1) of the State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur (Officers ') Service Regulations 1979 requires the officers to retire from the service of the Bank on attaining the age of fifty eight years or on completion of thirty years of service whichever occurs first.
A note added below that regulation states that the existing practice of utilising the service of officers beyond 58 years will continue in respect of those who joined service before l9th July, 1969.
The proviso thereto, however, confers discretion on the competent authority to extend the period of service of such retiring officers in the interest of the bank.
The respondent, an officer of the said Bank, who retired from service on September 30, 1982 on attaining the age of superannuation of 58 years was not granted extension of service.
The sought relief from the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The Bank resisted the Petition on the ground that his continued utility in the service of the Bank was found restricted By the time the petition came up for consideration the respondent had attained 60 years of age.
The single Judge.
therefore, dismissed the petition without going into the merits.
The Division Bench, however, accepted the appeal and gave relief to the respondent on the view that the extension of the petitioner could have been refused only if he was found unsuitable on the ground of continued utility or good health or integrity and not whether it was desirable in the interest of the Bank.
Since the Bank applied a different criteria altogether it held the order arbitrary and based on collateral grounds.
Allowing the appeal of the Bank by Special leave, HELD: 1.1 The High Court has misconstrued the legal right claimed by the respondent.
[1031B] 1.2 In the scheme provided in Regulation 19(1) an officer of the Bank has a legitimate right to remain in PG NO 1026 PG NO 1027 service till he attains the age of superannuation.
But beyond that age, he has no such right unless his service is extended by the Bank.
The further rights of parties are regulated by the proviso thereto.
[1031F G] 1.3 The proviso preserves discretion to the Bank.
It is a discretion available with every employer, every management, State or otherwise.
If the Bank considers that the service of an officer is desirable in the interest of the Bank, it may allow him to continue in service beyond the age of superannuation.
If the Bank considers that the service of an officer is not required beyond superannuation, it is an end of the matter.
It is no reflection on the officer.
It carries no stigma.
[1032C D] State of Assam v Basanta Kumar Das, [1973] 3 SCR l58; Kailash Chandra vs Union of India, [1962] I SCR 374; B.N. Mishra vs State [1965] l SCR 693 and State of Assam v Pramadhar, [1971] l SCR 503,referred to. 2.
The Bank, however, is required to consider the case of individual officers with due regard to (i) continued utility, (ii) good health, and (iii) integrity beyond reproach of the officer.
If the officer lacks one or the other, the bank is not bound to give him extension of service.
11032D E] In the instant case the Bank had shown to the High Court that the case of the respondent was considered and he did not fit in the said guidelines.
The High Court does not sit in an appeal against that decision.
The High Court under Article 226 cannot review that decision.11032E]
