The appellant who was a scientist in the Defence Electronics Research Laboratory was compulsorily retired from services by an order dated November 28, 1988 under Article 459(h) of the Civil Services Regulations.
He challenged the retirement order before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
It was contended on his behalf that he had a brilliant academic career and a clean record of service and that he had actually been interviewed for the post of Director during May June, 1986, and that on account of the representation made by him in February, 1986 to the authorities for redressal of personal grievances wherein he had suggested improvements in the laboratory and pointed out the defective functioning of the Institution, the authorities developed bias against him.
On behalf of the Department, these allegations were countered and the service records of the appellant were produced before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal rejected the allegations of bias, mala fide and the appellants ' claim that the order of retirement was based upon extraneous consideration, and dismissed the appeal.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant, that the appellant had a clean service record and there was, therefore, no justification to prematurely retire him, and that it has to be assumed that the appellants 's record of service was clean as he was not communicated any adverse entry in his character roll.
The Department made available for inspection at the hearing of the appeal, the service records from 1973 till retirement, in support of its stand that the guidelines prescribed for review for deciding whether an officer should be prematurely retired had been strictly followed, and that the decision to retire the appellant was taken in a bona fide and legitimate manner and without any bias or prejudice and that there were several entries by the authorities in the character roll to indicate deficiencies and drawbacks in the appellant 's functioning.
PG NO 6 Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The post in which the appellant was working was a responsible one and poor performance could not be tolerated.
[IID] 2.
The appellant had served under four controlling authorities and three of them were Scientists of international repute.
These Scientists appear to have made a fair assessment of the appellant 's work and what is material is that there is unanimity in their conclusion.
Years back one of the entries had indicated that the appellant had become `dead wood ', and he was also communicated the general disapproval of his method of working.
[11A B, 11D] 3.
It cannot be contended in the instant case, that there was no communication of adverse entries because the entries were mostly based upon general assessment of the performance.
Ordinarily when the entries relate to specific instance leading to adverse entries, the communication thereof is sent to the officer concerned with a view to providing an opportunity for improvement of performance.
[11C D] 4.
The review proceedings were in consonance with the guidelines framed by the Government.
From the proceedings of the Review Committee it is found that the Committee took up the review of 19 officers and found the appellant alone liable for retirement.
Even at Government level after the recommendation of the review committee, the report was duly scrutinised.
[11D, 11F]
