By virtue of the notifications issued by the Government of Maharashtra in exercise of its powers under section 41 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, the new industries set up in backward areas for the production of edible as well as non edible oils came to enjoy the benefit of exemption from paying purchase tax/sales tax.
Subsequently, the Government of Maharashtra amended the Act and introduced section 41A by virtue of which the tax exemption facility originally granted under the Package Scheme of Incentives, 1979 to edible oil units stood withdrawn earlier than stipulated in the exemption notifications.
The withdrawal of the tax exemption however did not apply to units engaged in producing non edible oils.
The petitioner in one petition has challenged the constitutional validity of section 41, while the petitioners in the other two writ petitions challenged the validity of section 41A.
The petitioner in the first petition, who was engaged in the production of washed cottonseed oil, in an old unit, contends that (i) the power of exemption can be granted on any specified class of sales or purchases from payment of tax, and the Government was not entitled to grant exemption only in favour of new units set up in backward areas, (ii) section 41 confers arbitrary powers of exemption on the State Government so as to exempt new units from the payment of purchase tax, sales tax and central sales tax, thus placing old units in a very disadvantageous position, and PG NO 72 PG NO 73 (iii) washed cottonseed oil is also edible oil although it requires some processing for making it fit for human consumption, and therefore the new washed cottonseed oil units should also be classified as units producing edible oils and subjected to purchase tax and sales tax.
The petitioners in the other two petitions contend that the Government was precluded by Promisory Estoppel from going back on the lncentive Scheme before the expiry of the full term of tax exemption benefit period.
Dismissing the writ petitions, it was, HELD: (l) Section 41 has been provided in order to enable the State (government to grant exemption from payment of purchase tax/ sales tax on any specified class of sales or purchases in public interest.
It is not as if the power has been given to the government to act in an arbitrary manner or for conferring largess on any section of manufacturers or traders.
Section 41 has withstood the test of time and has enabled the government to promote public interest, by granting tax exemption benefit, whenever needed.
[81A D] (2) The words "exempt any specified class of sales or purchases ' could well be construed as applying to the grant of exemption of the new units because the sales and purchases effected by new entrants would constitute a specified class by themselves in contra distinction with the class of sales and purchases effected by the older and seasoned units.
[82C D] (3) Even though edible and non edible oils may fall under the general heading of 'oils they undoubtedly constitute two separate groups which are capable of distinct classification on intelligible basis.
[83A B] (4) The Package Incentives Scheme was only evolved to provide incentive to entrepreneurs to start new units in backward areas.
It could never have been the intention or the object of the Government that the entrepreneurs should unjustly enrich themselves at the cost of the public exchequer or to be given competing ability with the older units to such an extent as to virtually drive the latter out of the business.
(5) Since the very foundation of the Scheme for giving tax exemption benefits is public interest, the government PG NO 74 was not only entitled but it was under an obligation to withdraw the tax exemption benefit when the continuance of the Scheme was going against public interest.
(6) As long as the washed cottonseed oil that is produced is sold without further processing, it will not constitute edible oil.
[82Fl (7) The government had neither acted arbitrarily nor practised any discrimination against edible oil units started newly or had interfered with the rights of the owners of the new units in running their business and trade in any manner when it enacted Section 41A. (8) Section 41A is fully in accordance with law and not violative of Articles 14, 19(i)(g) and 300A of the Constitution.
[83E] Tapti Oil Industries vs The State of Maharashtra.
AIR 1984 Bom.
161 Olympic Oil Industries Ltd. W.P. No. 3275 of 1985 in Bombay High Court and S.L.P. (Civil) No. 10144 and 10550 of 1986 in the Supreme Court, referred to.
