The U.P. Public Service Commission made an advertisement in various newspapers inviting applications for the post of Food & Drug Controller, U.P. The requisite qualification for the said post were specified in the advertisement as: (l) a degree from any recognised University in Medicine/Science/Pharmaceutical Chemistry, and (2) experience of five years in Drug Standardization and problems relating to control of Drug standards or Drug manufacture or Drug testing in a renowned institution.
Pursuant to the said advertisement Dr. M.C. Bindal, Dr. S.K. Majumdar, the appellants in the two appeals C.A. No. 379/84 and C.A. No. 3926/84 respectively, and Ram Chander Singh.
the respondent in the first appeal along with others filed applications.
The Commission after holding interview recommended the appointment of (a) in the main list R.C. Singh and (b) in the reserved list Dr.
M.C. Bindal (Provisional) and made it clear that the word `Provisional ' denoted that the recommendation was subject to the candidate meeting the necessary qualification experience of five years.
The State of Uttar Pradesh intimated the Commission that the candidature of R.C. Singh did not appear to be suitable in view of the vigilance enquiry against him, and that Dr. Bindal had the requisite experience of five years.
In its reply the Commission intimated that the right to appoint or not to appoint a candidate vested with the State of U.P. and it was for the State Government to take a decision accordingly.
On receipt of this letter, the State Government appointed Dr. M.C. Bindal as Food & Drug Controller.
Two writ petitions were filed in the High Court, one by PG NO 36 PG NO 37 R.C. Singh and another by S.K. Majumdar challenging the appointment of Dr. M.C. Bindal on the ground that he had not the requisite experience.
The High Court by a common judgment allowed in part the writ petitions, and held that though Dr. Bindal is not per se unsuitable or disqualified for the post, his appointment was to be treated as only provisional and subject to the final decision of the State Government.
Dr. Bindal appealed to this Court.
In the meantime the Service Commission directed one of its officers to verify whether Dr. Bindal fulfilled the qualifications relating to practical experience of 5 years in Drug Standardization or Drug testing in a renowned institution.
The Deputy Secretary after enquiry sent a report that the total period of experience of Dr. Bindal on the date of submission of his application was only 3 years 4 months and 9 days whereas the essential qualification required was experience should be for 5 years.
The Commission thereafter took the decision: 'that the Commission withdraws and cancels the provisional recommendation and the candidature because Dr. Bindal did not possess the requisite qualification 'section In the appeal and the writ petition it was contended on behalf of Dr. Bindal that the Service Commission was wrong and patently in error in withdrawing the candidature of the appellant and in cancelling its recommendation.
Allowing C.A. No. 3926 of l986 filed by Dr. Majumdar, and dismissing C.A. No. 3797 of l984, W.P. No. 756 of 19X6 filed by Dr. Bindal and C.A. No. 3798 of l984 filed by the State of l .P., the Court, HELD: 1.
A candidate in order to be considered for appointment for the post must have to comply with the requisite qualification, namely the educational qualification as well as experience.
If any of these essential qualifications is lacking then the candidate cannot claim to be appointed in the said Post.
[42E] 2.
Under Article 320(3)(a) and (b), it is the duty of the Public Service Commission to consider and to get itself satisfied as to which of the candidates has fulfilled the requisite qualifications specified in the advertisement.
[42G] 3.
The Commission in the instant case has duly got verified the certificates of Dr. Bindal in regard to his experience of five years in drug testing by a Deputy Secretary of the Commission, and after considering his report as well as the certificates came to the conclusion that the appellant though fulfilled educational PG NO 38 qualification, lacked in the requisite experience of five years in drug testing.
The Commission therefore, revised its earlier decision and also cancelled the recommendation earlier given in favour of the appellant.
The decision of the Public Service Commission, cannot be faulted.
[42H; 43A B] 4.
It is the constitutional requirement envisaged in Article 320 that the Commission will have to perform the duty of recommending the candidate fulfilling all the requisite qualifications for the post to the Government for being considered for appointment to the post concerned.
[143B C]
