By an agreement dated 1st January, 1964, the disputant, a tenant Co partner member of a Cooperative Housing Society, permitted appellants ' father the user of her flat.
On a joint application by both the parties, the Society granted permission for his occupying the flat on terms of leave and licence.
The disputant later made a claim under section 91 of the Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 (`the Act ') before the District Deputy Registrar for his eviction.
The claim for eviction was resisted by him on the ground that the transaction between the parties was one of lease and the Registrar had no jurisdiction to enter upon the reference under section 91.
It was held that the parties stood in the jural relationship of landlord and tenant and the dispute did not touch upon business of the Society within the meaning of section 91.
Aggrieved, the disputant carried an appeal to the Maharashtra State Cooperative Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal remanded the case for a fresh decision on the question whether the disputant was a tenant co partner member or a tenant owner member, as the society was held to be a mixed type of society of both tenant co partner members and tenant owner members.
On remand, the Judge.
first Cooperative Court recorded a finding that the Society was a tenant Co partnership type of society and the disputant was only a tenant Co partner member.
Thereafter the dispute came up for adjudication before the said Judge.
The Judge rendered an award holding that after the termination of the licence the possession of appellants ' father was wrongful, and directing him to vacate and hand over possession of the flat.
He went in appeal before the Maharashtra State Co operative Appellate Tribunal but without avail.
Dismissing the appeal, the Court, HELD: The agreement between the parties was embodied in PG NO 60 PG NO 61 usual standard form of an agreement for leave and licence.
The parties to the agreement were bound by the terms thereof.
There was nothing to suggest that the agreement for leave and licence was merely a device to camouflage the real nature of the transaction, viz., creation of a tenancy, which would clearly be against the bye laws of the society.
The disputant, the licensor, was only a tenant co partner member and all hat she could do under the terms of the bye laws was to create a licence with the permission of the society by making the licensee to be a nominal member thereof.
The matter is directly covered by the decision of this Court in O.P. Bhatnagar vs Smt.
Rukibai Narsindas, ; [67C E] The Society was purely a tenant co partnership type of housing society consisting only of tenant co partner members and there were no tenant owner members in the society.
In view of the subsequent change brought about by the amendment of the bye laws, there was no question of the disputant being regarded as a tenant owner member.
The Appellate Court and the Judge of the First Cooperative Court rightly held her o be a tenant Co partner member.
The appellant 's father having been inducted into the premises under the terms of the agreement for leave and licence could not say that the disputant was a tenant owner member and not a tenant co partner member or that the transaction was one of ease and not licence.
[68G; 69D E] Sabharwal Brothers vs Smt.
Guna Amrit Thandani, [1973] I SCR 53 and Ramesh Himmatlal Shah vs Harsukh Jadavji Joshi, , distinguished.
O.P. Bhatnagar vs Smt.
Rukibai Narsindas, ; ; Dr. Manohar Ramchandra .Sarlare vs The Konkan Co operative Housing Society Ltd. & Ors., , I.R.; Hingorani vs Pravinchandra, ; Contessa Knit Wear vs Udyog Mandir Cooperative Housing Society, and Bandra Green Park Co operative Housing Society Ltd. & Anr.
vs Mrs. Dayadasi Kalia
