Respondents are running Private Schools.
In pursuance of the State of Kerala publishing in the Gazette a final list of areas where new unaided recognised high schools/upper primary schools/lower primary schools were to be opened or existing unaided lower primary schools/ upper primary schools were to be upgraded in the year 1986 87 the Respondents educational agencies submitted applications for grant of sanction to open the unaided recognised schools or for upgrading the schools already run by them.
These applications were duly inquired and considered by the District Educational Officer as also by the Director of Education as per the Rules & procedure laid down therefor, particularly Rules 24(3) and (4) and thereafter the Government considered the applications in accordance with Rule 2A(5) and took a final decision for grant of necessary sanction for opening/upgrading of 36 lower primary schools, 36 upper primary schools and 19 high schools, totalling in all 91 schools in the list of areas selected.
On 4.2.87, the State Government issued an Order under exhibit P 4, granting sanction to the Respondents to open new unaided schools or to upgrade their existing schools subject to the conditions set out therein.
However, by an Order exhibit P 5, dated 20.2.87, the Government directed that the earlier order under Ex P 4 be kept in abeyance.
The Respondents challenged the Order of the Government by means of a Writ Petition.
During the pendency of the Writ Petition general elections were held to the Kerala Legislative Assembly as a result whereof a new Ministry assumed office.
The Government under the new Ministry passed an order dated 19.5.87 under Ex P 7 cancelling in toto the order under Ex P 4 granting sanction to the Respondents to open the school or to upgrade the existing schools.
PG NO 94 PG NO 95 The Respondents thereupon amended their Petition suitably and challenged the validity of the order of cancellation passed under Ex.
The Singie Judge of the High Court before whom the Writ Petition first came up for hearing took the view that while it was obligatory for the Government to follow the procedure prescribed in Rules 2 & 2A, Chapter V, if it was to permit the opening of new unaided recognised schools or upgradation of existing schools, the converse result would not follow i.e. wherever the Government had gone through the procedure under the Rules the Government could not retrace its steps and was bound to proceed further in the matter and that the Government had no option to reverse its decision.
On the question of revocation of the order of sanction, however, the learned Judge held that the power to sanction new schools carried with it the inherent power of cancellation of an order passed under Rule 2A(5).
Accordingly the learned Singie Judge dismissed the petitions.
The respondents thereafter preferred appeals before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench allowed the appeals, reversed the order passed by the Single Judge but granted only limited reliefs to the Respondents in that it quashed the order under exhibit P 7 dated 19.5.87 and issued a mandamus to the State Government to consider the applications of the Respondents on their merits on the basis of the earlier order passed in their favour under exhibit P 4 dated 4.2.87.
The Division Bench further held that the Respondents have locus standi to challenge the order of cancellation and that the Government did not have the power or jurisdiction to revoke the cancellation order.
It also held that the cancellation order violated the principle of natural justice.
Being aggrieved by the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court, the State filed these appeals after obtaining special leave.
Dismissing the appeals this Court, HELD: The importance of securing recognition lies in the fact that without recognition the students studying in the unaided schools will neither be permitted to appear as candidates in the examinations conducted by the State nor be eligible to avail of the opportunities for higher education or to enter public service examination.
The obtainment of recognition from the Government is therefore a vital factor for the educational agencies starting new schools or newly upgrading their existing schools.
[ 107B C] Rule 2A(1) makes it imperative for the Director to call for applications from interested parties for opening new schools or upgrading existing schools in the selected areas.
The mandate contained therein goes to show that the PG NO 95 idenffication and selection of inadequately served areas under Rule 2(4) is not an idle or meaningless exercise.
[111A C] When even an unsuccessful applicant is conferred a right to represent to Government against the non approval of the application, can it be said that an approved applicant has no right whatever to complain when the sanction granted to him is revoked all of a sudden without he being given any opportunity to show cause against such cancellation.
[111D E] The further scrutiny of the application of the approved applicant under Rule 9 and the confirmation of approval under Rule 11 would not, however, mean that the earlier sanction granted under Rule 2A(S) does not create "legitimate expectation right" in the approved applicant.
[111G H: 12A] The Rules do not provide for the Government reviewing suo moto any order of sanction passed under Rule 2A(5) in favour of any applicant for opening of a new school or upgrading an existing school and its power of revision under Rule ] 2 is confined to the reconsideration of the case of any applicant whose name did not find a place in the final list of approved applications published by the Government.
[116D E ] Though the sanction granted to the respondents under exhibit P 4 would not by itself entitle them to open new schools or upgrade the existing schools, it did confer on them a right to seek the continuance of the statutory procedural stream in order to have their applications considered under Rule 9 and dealt with them under Rule 11 [122C] It was not open to the Government, either under the Act or Rules or under Section 20 of the Kerala General Clauses Act to cancel the approval granted to the respondents under Rule 2A(5), for opening new schools or upgrading existing schools in the selected areas on the basis of a revised policy.
[122D] The impugned order under exhibit P 7, irrespective of the question whether the government had the requisite power of cancellation or not, is vitiated by reason of non observance of the principles of natural justice and the vice of extraneous factors.
[ 122E]
