Execution applications were filed by the Appellant under section 21 of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for obtaining possession of the portions in the occupation of the respondents Tenants.
The appellant 's case was that she obtained s motion of the Additional Rent Controller on 26/27th February, 1976 and thereafter leased out specified portions in her property to the respondents under separate leases for a limited period of two years commencing from March 1, 1976.
The rear portion in the ground floor was leased out to one tenant and the first and second floor were leased out to another tenant.
Each tenant was to pay a sum of Rs.850 per month.
The execution applications were filed by the appellant against the two respondents as they failed to vacate the portion leased out to them at the end of the two year period.
The two respondents put up a common defence contending, that there was a single tenancy and not two tenancies, they were jointly inducted into possession of the entire leased portion in the month of December, 1975, under an oral lease and the tenancy was therefore not referable to the sanction given by the Additional Rent Controller on 26/27th February, 1976.
They placed reliance on the payment of Rs.1,700 on 10th December, 1975 as security deposit, and three months advance payment of rent of Rs.5,100 by means of cheque on 29th December, 1975.
The Rent Controller after inquiry and consideration of the accepted the case of the respondents, and held that an oral having been granted in favour of the respondents even in the month of December, 1975 their tenancy rights were not governed by the sanction given by the Additional Rent Controller under section 2l, and that sanction of the Rent Controller was vitiated by fraud in that it was by supressing the true facts from the notice of the Rent Controller.
The execution applications were accordingly dismissed.
PG NO 241 PG NO 242 In the appeals preferred to the Rent Control Tribunal, it was held that even if the respondents had been inducted into possession in December 1975 under an oral tenancy they must be deemed to have impliedly surrendered their earlier tenancy the sanction granted by the Rent Controller on 2h/27th February, 1976.
It was further held that the respondents ought to have brought to the notice of the Rent Controller without delay the fraud practised by the appellant and since they have failed to act promptly they were not entitled to seek nullification of the sanction of the Rent Controller.
The Tribunal allowed the appeals, held the execution applications were maintainable, and directed respondents to deliver possession to the appellant in a month 's time.
Second appeals were filed by respondents to the High Court, which were allowed.
It was held that as the respondents were already given tenancy rights they would not be governed by the sanction given by the Rent Controller on 26/27th February, 1976, that the sanction order itself was unenforceable as it was vitiated by fraud, and that no question of implied surrender of the earlier tenancy would arise, when the Rent Controller gave sanction for limited tenancy rights.
The High Court restored the order of the Rent Controller dismissing the execution appeals.
Dismissing the appeals by the landlord, the Court, HELD: 1.
What section 21 envisages is the creation of tenancy rights after getting the sanction of the Rent Controller.
Such being the case, the landlord should make known to the Rent Controller, if there is already a tenant in occupation of the premises, the factum of his possession and the terms of the tenancy and satisfy the Rent Controller that notwithstanding a tenant being in occupation of the premises under an earlier tenancy he should be granted sanction under section 21 to confer limited tenancy rights in favour of the existing tenant himself or in favour of new tenant.
[249D E] 2.
Section 21 was not intended to obtain 'post facto ' sanction of a tenancy that had already been created by supressing relevant information from the Rent Controller so as to enable the landlord to straight away recover possession of the leased property by filing an application under section 21 after the expiry of the period for which permission to lease had been granted by the Rent Controller.
[249E F] PG NO 243 3.
Besides what the parties say, the Rent Controller has to apply his mind before granting sanction under section 21 because the order passed by him has legal consequences and will govern the rights of the parties to the tenancy that is to follow in terms of the sanction.
[251C] S.B. Noronah vs Prem Kumari, [1980] I SCR 281; J.R. Vohra vs Indian Export House Pvt. Ltd., ; at 723; Inder Mohan Lal vs Ramesh Khanna, [1987] IV SCC 1 at page 9; and Joginder Kumar Butan vs R.P. Oberai, [1987] (IV) SCC page 20 at 29 referred to.
A statement made in contravention of facts, whether made by one or both the contracting parties, cannot alter the truth of the situation or cure the lacuna of withholding of relevant information.
[249H] In the instant case, it is inconceivable that irrespective of the differences in the size and nature of the two portions, the respondents would have consented to pay the same rate of rent to the appellant for the portions alleged to have been leased out to them.
The tenancies Granted to the two respondents are for the same period i.e. from March 1, 1976 to 28 February.
If all these factors are taken note of the only conclusion that can be reached is that only a single tenancy in favour of both the respondents should have been created for the entire leased portion and not two tenancies, one for the ground floor, and the other for the first and second floor.
The story of two tenancies put forward by the appellant is a make believe affair.
[248B D] In the instant case, when the appellant had already put the re spondent in possession of the property in December, 1975, she could not have bona fide made a statement before the Rent Controller that she would not be requiring the premises for her own occupation from 1st March 1976 onward for a period of two years.
The fact that respondent 910 appeared before the Rent Controller and gave statements in tune with the statement made by the appellant cannot improve the situation in any manner.
[249G H] 5.
The sanction obtained from the Rent Controller under Section 21 was vitiated by fraud and therefore a nullity.
It could therefore not be said that by reason of the respondents having agreed to take limited ten tenancy rights under the order of Rent Controller for a period of two years commencing from March 1, 1976 they must be deemed to have impliedly surrendered their earlier tenancy rights as envisaged under clause (f) of section 111 of the Transfer of Property Act.[252C E] PG NO 244 Doe d. Earl of Egrement vs Courtenay, , referred.
