The petitioner in the Special Leave Petition is the tenant, Respondent No. 3 was one of the five co owners of the petition premises.
On January 28, 1978, one of the co owners who had sole possession of the shop vacated the shop and sent intimation of the vacancy to the Rent Controller under the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting and Eviction) Act, 1972.
The petitioner filed allotment application for the said shop and he was the sole applicant.
The Rent Control Officer directed the petitioner to appear in the allotment proceedings, called for a report from the Inspector, found one of the co owners to he in possession of the shop and that he had discontinued the business and was going to let out the shop.
The 3 other co owners never objected to the petitioner 's tenancy on the allotment order.
The allotment letter was accordingly passed on 12th February.1978, and possession was taken up by the petitioner thereafter.
On or about 25th February, 1978 the 3rd respondent who was a non occupant owner filed an application under section 16(5) of the Act i.e. after 25 days of the allotment, for review of the order.
The Rent Controller allowed the review application and cancelled the allotment order.
The Additional District Judge having dismissed the revision petition, the petitioner filed a writ petition in the High Court.
The question about the maintainability of the review application under section 16(5) of the Act at the instance PG NO 276 PG NO 277 of a non occupant owner having arisen the matter was referred to a Full Bench and by a majority, the Bench came to the conclusion that such an application was maintainable.
Dismissing the Special Leave Petition, HELD: 1.
A landlord, even though not in actual possession at the time of the possession of the property, can ask for review of the order of release or allotment.
[280G] 2.
A landlord has a right to the property.
The section should not be so construed as to defeat the right to possession of property in appropriate cases unless the intention of the Legislature is manifest.
[280F] 3.
Section 16(5)(a) speaks of 'where the landlord or any other person '.
Hence, two categories of persons are contemplated i.e. a land lord, or any other person.
[280C] 4.
The requirement of the sub section, to be in lawful occupation of the building or any part thereof, applies only in case of any other person claiming to be in lawful occupation and not in case of landlord.
The Section has used the expression "or" and so the expression "or" is disjunctive of these two categories to be treated separately.
Hence, the requirement to be in lawful occupation, is not there is case of an application by the landlord.
[280C D] 5.
The proviso puts an embargo of 7 days in making the application for review.
It can only apply to those who were in lawful occupation at the time of the making of the original Order.
It cannot curtail the rights of the landlord.
as such, it only affects any other person who was in lawful occupation.
[280E G] Niren Kumar Das vs 7he District Judge, Pilibhit & Ors.
AIR 1977 Allahabad 47, approved.
