The appellant who was a Sub Inspector of Police was dismissed by the Superintendent of Police by an order dated 29th January, 1973, exercising powes under clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
The appellant preferred an appeal to the Inspector General of Police, and the said appeal Having been dismissed, he challenged the order of dismissal as well as the appellate order in an application under Article 226 of the Constitution in the High Court.
A Division Bench, however, dismissed the application.
In the appeal by special leave to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that: (1) the appellant having been appointed as Sub Inspector of Police by the Inspector General of Police, the order of his dismissal by the Superintendent of Police was illegal being in contravention of Article 311(1) of the Constitution, and (2) the provisions of clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution were not attracted to the facts of the case and consequently the order of dismissal was illegal having been passed without compliance with the requirements of Article 311(2).
Dismissing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The Superintendent of Police and Principal, Police Training College, Assam are authorities having coordinate jurisdiction to appoint Sub Inspectors under Rule PG NO 324 11(X) and Schedule Column II of the Assam Police Manual, Part III.
[329E; 328H] In the instant case, the appellant having been appointed by the Principal Police Training College Darrang, Assam, and having been dismissed by the Superintendent of Police, Darrang, District Tejpur who was a coordinate authority, the submission that the order of dismissal was illegal as having been passed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed has no substance.
[329E F] 2.
While construing the words "it is not reasonably practicable to hold such enquiry" used in clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) it was held in Union of India vs Tulsi Ram Patel and Others, [1985] Supplement 2 SCR 131, that whether it was practicable to hold the inquiry or not must be judged in the context of whether it was reasonably practicable to do so.
It is not a total or absolute impracticability which is required.
What is requisite is that the holding of the inquiry is not practicable in the opinion of a reasonable man taking a reasonable view of the prevailing situation.
One of the illustrations justifying clause (b) of the second proviso to Article 311(2) being invoked, is the non availability of the witnesses on account of fear of the officer concerned.
[330G H; 331A B, 332A] In the instant case, it is apparent from the order of dismissal that this was the main ground for invoking the said clause (b).
The Superintendent of Police who passed the order of dismissal was the best authority on the spot to assess the situation in the circumstances prevailing at the relevant time and this Court does not find any good ground to interfere with the view taken by the Superintendent of Police in this behalf.
In such matters the Court will not sit in judgment over the relevancy of the reasons given by the disciplinary authority for invoking clause (b) like a Court of appeal.
Even in those cases where two views are possible, the Court will decline to interfere.
[332A B. C]
