During the pendency of the suit for eviction of the defendant appellant from the shop room under section 11 of the Bihar Building (Lease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1982 the Trial Court passed an order directing the appellant to deposit rent month by month.
The appellant having defaulted in the payment of rent for two months, the respondent landlord filed a petition under section 13 of the Act for a direction to strike out the defence of the appellant.
The appellant 's defence was that it was a case of genuine mistake.
The Trial Court held that the excuse for non payment was not bona fide and that there was unexplained delay to deposit the rent.
The Trial Court therefore struck off the appellant s defence.
The High Court dismissed the revision application of the appellant it limine.
Disposing of the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) The Act, as the preamble states, is inter alia `to prevent unreasonable eviction of tenants '.
Therefore, though it is for protection of tenants, the Act is enjoined to regulate the rights and the duties of the landlords and the tenants.
[413C] (2) The Court must from a proper perspective judge the question whether the delay or failure to deposit the rent in terms of order under section 13 of the Act has been properly explained, and if that delay has been properly explained, then the court has a discretion to excuse the delay, but if the delay has not been properly explained then the court has no discretion.
Such a construction would be a harmonious rendering of the language of section l 3 to the claim for justice in each particular case.
[414B C] PG NO 409 (3) In construing the question whether the delay has been reasonably explained or not, the court in the scheme of the administration of justice must take a constructive and purpose oriented approach.
If it does, then the element of discretion comes into play though not in the form of directory or mandatory provision but in considering whether the delay was properly explained or not.
[414C D] (4) In the facts of this case, there is good deal of justification for the delay and the delay has been properly explained.
The Trial Court, therefore, committed an error resulting in miscarriage of justice.
The High Court in not interfering with this miscarriage too committed an error of jurisdiction.
[4l4D E] Ganesh Prasad Sah Kesari vs Lakshmi Narayan Gupta, [1985] 3S.C.R. 825; Mrs. Manju Choudhary vs Dulai Kumar Chandra, and M/s. B.P. Khemka Pvt. Ltd. vs Birendra Kumar Bhowmick; , , referred to.
