The appellant is an Advocate.
Gautam Chand was one of his old clients.
The complainant Respondent No. l engaged the appellant on being introduced by Gautam Chand to file a Suit against Shri section Anantaraju for recovery of a sum of Rs.30,098 with Court costs and interest in the Court of City Civil Judge at Bangalore.
The appellant passed on the papers to his junior advocate to file the Suit which he did.
The complainant 's allegation is that the matter in dispute in the suit had not been settled at all and the appellant without the knowledge and without his instructions filed a memo in the Court to the effect that the matter has been settled out of Court and accordingly got the suit dismis sed and also received half of the institution court fee; about which the complainant was not aware, nor was he informed by the appellant.
The complainant 's allegation is that he was not informed about the dates of hearing of the suit; when inquired he was simply told that the case is posted for filing written statement where his presence was not neces sary.
When nothing was heard by the complainant from the appellant about the progress of his suit, he personally made inquiries and came to learn to his great surprise that the suit in question had in fact been withdrawn as settled out of Court.
The version of the appellant Advocate is that Gautam Chand, his old client, had business dealings with the plaintiffs, Haradara (Complainant) and the defendant Anantaraju.
Anantaraju had also executed an agreement on 9.8.80 to sell his house property to Gautam Chand.
He received earnest money amounting to Rs.35,000 from Gautam Chand.
Anantaraju however did not execute the sale deed within the specified time.
Gautam Chand approached the appellant for legal advice.
The appellant caused the issue of notice to Anantaraju calling upon him to execute the sale deed.
A notice was also issued on behalf of the complainant calling upon the defendant Anantaraju demanding certain amounts due on 3 self bearer cheques amounting to PG NO 362 Rs. 30,098 issued by him in course of their mutual transactions.
Gautam Chand and the complainant were friends having no conflict of interests Gautam Chand instructed the appellant and his junior Ashok that he was in possession of the said cheques issued by Anantaraju and that no amount was actually due from Anantaraju to Haradara Complainant.
Gautam Chand desired Anantaraju to execute the sale deed.
Anantaraju executed the sale deed on 27.11.81 in favour of Gautam Chand, even though an order of attachment before judg ment in respect of the said property was in existence.
Consequent on the execution of the sale deed, the object of the suit was achieved.
The complainant did not at any time object.
In this back ground, the appellant had reasons to believe the information re: settlement of dispute conveyed by the three together on 9.12.81.
Acting on the said informa tion, the appellant asked Ashok his erstwhile junior to take steps to withdraw the suit, which he did on 10.12.8l as per instructions received from the appellant noted on the docket of the brief.
The state Bar Council, called for the comments of the appellant relating to the complaint.
No charge was framed specifying the nature and content of the professional misconduct attributed to the appellant.
Nor were any issues framed or prints for determination formulated.
Instead thereof the Bar Council proceeded to record evidence.
As the case could not be concluded within the time limit, the matter came to be transferred to the Bar Council of India.
The Bar Council off India addressed itself to the three questions, viz. (i) Whether the complainant was the person who entrusted the brief to the appellant and whether the brief was entrusted by the complainant to the appellant.
(ii) Whether report of settlement was made without instructions or knowledge of the complainant? (iii) Who was responsible for reporting settlement and instructions of the complainant ? The Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India after considering the matter found appellant guilty of professional misconduct and suspended him for practising his profession for 3 years on the charge of having withdrawn a suit (not settled) without the instruction of the clients.
PG NO 363 The appellant has filed the appeal u,s 38 of the Advocates Act.
The following questions arose for consideration by this Court.
(i) Whether a specific charge should have been framed apprising the appellant of the true nature and content of the professional misconduct ascribed to him: (ii) Whether the doctrine of benefit of doubt and the need of establishing the basic allegations were present in the mind of the Disciplinary Authority in recording the finding of guilt or in determining the nature and extent of the punishment inflicted on him; (iii) Whether in the absence of the charge and finding of dishonesty against him the appellant could be held guilty of professional misconduct even on the assumption that he had acted on the instructions of a person not authorised to act on behalf of his client if he was acting in good faith and in a bona fide manner.
Would it amount to lack of prudence or non culpable negligence or would it constitute professional misconduct.
Disposing of the appeal, the Court, HELD: That the appellant was not afforded reasonable and fair Opportunity of showing cause inasmuch as he was not apprised of the exact content of the professional misconduct attributed to him and was not made aware of the precise charge he was required to rebut.
[376E F] That in recording the finding of facts on the three questions.
referred to above.
the applicability of the doctrine of benefit of doubt and the need for established the facts beyond reasonable doubt were not realized.
Nor did the Disciplinary Committee consider the question as to whether the facts established that the appellant was acting with bona fides or mala fides whether the appellant was acting with any oblique and dishonest motive.
whether there was any mens rea; whether the facts constituted negligence and if so whether it constituted culpable negligence.
Nor has the Disciplinary Committee considered the question as regards the quantum of punishment in the light of the aforesaid considerations and the exact nature of the professional misconduct established against the appellant.
[376F H; 377A] The Court, in view of the fact that "the matter is one of the ethics of the profession which the law has entrusted to the Bar Council of India" and it is in their opinion, "a case which must receive due weight" did not consider it PG NO 364 appropriate to examine the matter on merits without first having the opinion of the Bar Council of India.
[377D] Remanding the matter to the Bar Council of India the Court directed it to consider whether it would constitute an imprudent act, an unwise act, a negligent act or whether it constituted negligence and if so a culpable negligence, or whether it constituted a professional misconduct deserving severe punishment, even when it was not established or at least not established beyond reasonable doubt that the concerned Advocate was acting with any oblique or dishonest motive or with mala fides.
[377H; 378A] L.D. Jaisinghani vs Naraindas N. Punjabi, and Re: M. vs Distt.
Judge Delhi, [1956] S.C.R. P. 811(814), referred to.
