The respondent had acquired the building being premises No. 1.1.249 Chikkadpalli, Hyderabad, constructed two storeys over this building and utilised the upper floors for his residence and the ground floor for his business.
Subsequently, he had purchased the adjacent building being premises No. 1 1 250.
The appellant was a tenant in the suit premises No. 1.1.250 even before the respondent purchased it, and was running his shop in the front room and residing in the rear portion.
The respondent sought eviction of the appellant inter alia on the ground of requirement of additional space under section 10(3)(r) of the Andhra Pradesh Buildings (I,ease, Rent and Eviction) Control Act, 1960, under which .
landlord occupying only a part of a building was entitled to seek the eviction of a tenant occupying another portion or the remaining portion of the building if the landlord required additional accommodation for residential purpose or for carrying on his business.
The Rent Controller held that the respondent was not entitled to an order of eviction under section 10(3)(c) because the leased premises was a separate building and did not form part of the building in which the respondent was carrying on his business.
The Appellate Authority however held that even though the leased premises had a separate municipal door number it could be treated as forming part of the building in the respondent 's occupation because both ' the buildings were owned by the respondent and were separated only by a single wall.
PG NO 433 PG NO 434 The High Court in revision held that if the respondent wanted the premises bona fide as an additional accommodation it did not matter whether it was a separate building or a portion of the same building.
Before this Court, the appellant contended that section 10(3)(c) would not apply to a case where the landlord and the tenant were occupying different buildings even though the two buildings were owned by the same landlord.
The respondent, on the other hand, contended that the two buildings could not be treated as independent and separate buildings because both the buildings were owned by the respondent and were separated only by a single wall.
Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (I) From a reading of clause (c) of section 10(3) it is obvious that provision has been made under that clause only to seek the eviction of a tenant occupying another portion or the remaining portion of the building in which the landlord is also residing or carrying on his business in one portion.
[437F] (2) What section 11)(3)(c envisages is the oneness of the building and not the oneness of ownership of two different buildings, one occupied by the landlord and the other by the tenant.
[438G H] (3) The significant words used in section 10(3)(c) are "the landlord who is occupying only a part of a building" and "any tenant occupying the whole or an portion of the remaining part of the building." [438H; 439A] (4) A practical test which can be applied o find out if two adjoining buildings form part of the same building or two different buildings would be to see whether one of the two buildings can be sold by the landlord and the purchaser inducted into possession of the premises sold without the landlord 's possession and enjoyment of the premises in his occupation being affected.
[439B C] (5) The identity of two separate building is not to be judged on the basis of the buildings being separated by a single wall or by two separate walls with intervening space in between them.
[439E] (6) There is no room or scope for the respondent to invoke section 2(iii), defining the word "building", to contend that two different premises should be treated as a single and integrated building for the purposes of the Act if the two buildings adjoin each other and are owned by the PG NO 435 same person but under different occupation i.e. one by the landlord and the other by the tenant.
[440C D] (7) If the hardship experienced by landlords similar to the respondent is to be alleviated, then it is for the legislature to remedy the situation by making suitable amendments to the Act and it is not for the Court to read section 10(3)(c) beyond its terms, oblivious to the limitations contained therein and hold that a separate tenanted building adjoining the building in the owner 's occupation would also form part of the latter building.
[44lA B] Balaiah vs Lachaiah, AIR 1965 A.P. 435; Balaganesan Metals vs M.N. Shanmugham Chetty, JT and N. Ramaswamy Naidu vs P. Venkateshwarlu, Vol.
Il 1961 1 A.W.R. page 400, referred to.
