Industrial Court Duty of Must give an opportunity to applicants to explain the delay if the complaints are barred by limitation.
The respondents were earlier the employees of an organisation called the Maharashtra State Cooperative Marketing Federation Limited (Marketing Federation).
Later a new organisation namely the Maharashtra State Cooperative Cotton Growers Marketing Federation Ltd., the appellant herein, was formed and some of the activities of the Marketing Federation were assigned to it.
By letter dated l0th August, 1984, the Government directed the Marketing Federation that the Services of the seasonal staff should be terminated and those of the regular staff be placed at the disposal of the new organisation.
As the Marketing Federation and the appellant failed and neglected to give them the permanent status, the respondents made a complaint before the Industrial Court complaining of unfair labour practices on the part of the Marketing Federation as also the appellant herein as contained in Items 6 and 9 of the Schedule IV of the Act.
The workers stated that even when there was an award in their favour by the Industrial Tribunal declaring them as permanent employees, yet the Marketing Federation and the appellant did not give them the status of permanent employees.
The Industrial Court took the view (i) that the complaints made by the respondents did not come under items nos.
6 and 9 but they came under item No. I and as such he could not decide the complaints in view of PG NO 472 PG NO 473 section 5(d) of the Act, (ii) that there was no unfair labour practice on the part of the Marketing Federation or the appellant, and (iii) that the complaints were barred by limitation.
The Industrial Court dismissed the complaints of the respondents.
Feeling aggrieved the respondents filed writ petitions before the High Court and the same were allowed.
Hence these appeals by special leave.
The appellant contended that the award of the Industrial Court was not binding on them.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: In view of the Award, it must be held that the respondents were the permanent employees of the Marketing Federation, and that after the constitution of the appellant and the transfer ot the employees of the Marketing Federation to the appellant, the appellant was bound to accept the respondents as permanent employees and not to treat them as seasonal employees or temporary employees.
This act on the part of the appellant amounts to unfair labour practice.
[476E F] There is no justification for the finding of the Industrial Court that the complaints made by the respondents do not come within the purview of Items Nos. 6 and 9 of the Schedule IV of the Maharashtra Recognition of Trade Unions and Prevention of Unfair Labour Practices Act, 1971.
No reason has been given by the Industrial Court why the complaints come within Item No. I of Schedule IV and, as such, can be decided only by the labour Court and not by the Industrial Tribunal.
The complaints made by the respondents are clear and specific and there was no scope for categorising them as complaints under Item No. I of Schedule IV.
[476G H;477] It has been assumed 1 the Industrial Tribunal that the respondents came to now That they were being appointed as seasonal employees on the respective dates of their appointment letters.
There is, however, no material on record to show on what dates the appointment letters were served on the respondents.
In the circumstances, the Industrial Court was not at all Justified in holding than the complaints filed by the respondents were barred by limitation.
Even assuming that the complaints were barred by limitation, as held by the Industrial Court, the Industrial Court should have given an opportunity to the respondents for explaining the delay.
No such opportunity has been given to the respondents.
Accordingly, this Court is unable to subscribe to the view of the Industrial Court that the complaints filed by the respondents were barred by limitation.
[477B D]
