The appellant, now represented by his legal representatives, had taken on rent certain premises and was in occupation thereof.
On the basis of a usufructuary mortgage executed by the landlord in their favour, the respondents who are the partners, sought the eviction of the appellant under section 21(1)(h) of the Karnataka Rent Control Act, 1961 on the ground that they were bona fide in need of the premises to run their business.
The appellant 's defence was that the usufructuary mortgage was a sham and nominal transaction created by the landlord with an oblique motive because he had refused to pay higher rent for the premises and secondly the mortgagees were not bona fide in need of the premises for their business.
The Trial Court rejected both the defences and ordered eviction and the said order was affirmed by the appellate court and the High Court.
Hence this appeal.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court, HELD: The definition of landlord ' in Section 3(h),is an inclusive definition and would take within its fold any per.
who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to receive the rent in respect of the leased premises.
The person receiving or entitled to receive the rent may do so either on his own account or On account of or on behalf of or for the benefit of any other person or as a trustee, guardian or receiver for any other person.
A mortgagee with possession undoubtedly falls under the first category as under Sec.
58(d) of the Transfer of property Act, he is PG NO 505 PG NO 506 entitled to receive the rent on his own account and this factor makes the usufructuary mortgagee stand on a higher and different footing than other persons accorded the status of a landlord under Scction 3(h) because their entitlement to receive rent is on behalf of or for the benefit of others and not on their own account.
[5l0F H] V.
Baluswamy Servai vs N. Raju Servai, ; T. Ezhumalai vs Padmavathi Ammal, [1971] J Aswatharamiah vs Special Deputy Commissioner, ; section Subramanayaswamy vs Deputy Commissioner, Bangalore, AIR 1981 Karnataka 190; R. Vijendra vs H.R. & A.C., ILR , referred to.
If the legislature so wanted, it would have undoubtedly categorised a mortgagee with possession also as one of the excluded class of landlords for the purpose of sec.
21(1)(h) of the Act.
Obviously the legislature has not done so as would appear from the explanation to clause 4 of sec.
[511D E] A mortgagee with possession, steps into the shoes of the mortgagor and becomes entitled to all the rights of the mortgagor and the only right left with the mortgagor is the redemption.
A mortgagee with possession is entitled to be in posession of the mortgage property as long as it is not redeemed.
If the mortgagee with possession leases back the property to the mortgagor, he acquires the rights of a lessor and is entitled to enforce the terms of he lease against the mortgagor.
[511F G] Mathur Lal vs Keshar Bai & Anr., ; , referred to.
There can be no doubt that a mortgagee with possession stands very differently from other kinds of landlords euvisagad under section 3(b) of the Act.
He is therefore entitled, as much as the owner himself, to seek recovery of posession of the leased premises from a tenant for him own bona fide requirement of use.
[511g H] V.Baluswamy Servai vs N. Raju Servai ; R Vijendra vs H. R. & A .
C., ILR , approved.
The appellant 's argument that a scheming landlord can adopt the devious method of creating a sham deed of usufructuary mortgage in order to have u tenant evicted has no force because il fails to note that an order of eviction under sec.
21(1)(h) would not be Passed by the court for the PG NO 507 mere asking because, the mortgagee with possession has first get to prove that the premises are reasonably and bona fide required by him for occupation by himself.
[512B C]
