The petitioner signed two contracts, one on the 12th January.
1980 and the other on 18th August, 1980 for the supply of Indian H.P.S. Groundnut Kernels Javas to a Swiss Company.
On 20th December, 1980 the petitioner informed the respondent not to nominate any vessels to load goods as it were unable to get necessary clearance from the Government, and by a telex message on 27th January.
1981 informed the respondent that the goods could not be exported on account of executive/legislative ban.
The respondent invoked the arbitration proceedings with the Federation of Oil Seeds and Fats Association who informed the petitioner on 6th March, 1981 by a letter of the appointment of an arbitrator.
The petitioner challenged the arbitration proceedings in the Delhi High Court.
On March 23rd.
1981 a stay order was passed restraining the arbitration proceedings, and on 11th December.
1981 the High Court held that no arbitration agreement existed with regard to the second contract and as such nobody was entitled to seek reference to arbitration.
The petitioner filed a special leave petition to this Court.
This Court passed an interim order granting special permission to the respondent to file a money suit in any court since the claims were getting barred by time.
Pursuant to this order the r respondent filed a regular money suit in a foreign court, and two identical suits in the Bombay High Court for recovering damages, for which the written statements were filed.
PG NO 548 PG NO 549 The petitioner moved an application in one of the suits in the High Court stating that in the interests of justice pending disposal of the three suits an injunction should be granted restraining the parties from proceeding with the arbitration, and that the arbitration be stayed under the principles of section 35 of the .
The High Court granted interim injunction restraining the parties from proceeding with arbitration.
On 8th March, 1985, the High Court dismissed the notice of motion and held that this Court 's order dated 2nd December, 1983 was clear, there was no abandonment of the pending arbitration proceedings by the respondent and therefore stay could not be granted.
This order was confirmed by the Division Bench in appeal.
In the S.L.P. to this Court the question was: whether the High Court was right in declining to grant stay of the arbitration proceedings.
Dismissing the application, HELD: 1.
The High Court rightly held that Section 35 does not apply.
[556A] Sujant Singh vs Seth Mohinder Paul, AIR1964 Punj 395 ref.
to. 2.
In particular facts and circumstances if a party filed a suit to save limitation the same would not vitiate the award or make the award bad under section 35 of the Arbitration Act.[555F] 3.
Foreign awards automatically are not `lifeless award ' They can be enforced in this Court in accordance with law.[556G] Oil & Natural Gas Common.
Western Co. of N. America, AIR 1987 SC 574 ref to. 4.
Whether in a particular case it would be just and equitable to the parties to direct them to proceed with the arbitration, must depend upon the facts and circumstances of a particular case having regard to the legal provisions applicable to a particular Situation.[556A D] In the instant case, there is a valid arbitration agreement between the parties.
In view of the direction of this Court.
the continuation of the arbitration proceedings in respect of the filing of the suit would not be bad.
In these circumstances if the court declined to exercise its jurisdiction under section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure to grant stay of the proceedings of arbitration in PG NO 550 London, the court has not acted in excess of jurisdiction or has not exercised its jurisdiction improperly.
In such a situation the Appellate Court should not normally interfere.
In the premises, it would have been improper to exercise any jurisdiction to interfere.
[557B C] V/C Tractoroexport, Moscow vs M/s Tarapore & Co. & Anr., ; ; Serajuddin & Co. vs Michael Goldetz & Ors., AIR 1960 Cal.
47; In re All India Groundnut Syndicate Ltd., and Ramji Dayawala & Sons (P) Ltd. vs Invest Import; , referred to.
