The respondent had taken a loan of Rs.15,000 from the Ministry of Defence for construction of a house on a plot allotted to him.
As the amount of loan was insufficient to complete the construction, he took a loan of Rs.5,000 from Appellant No. 1 and on 6th September, 1973 he entered into an agreement to sell the house and the plot to Appellant No. 1.
The aforesaid amount of Rs.5,000 was shown as advance of sale price.
Clause 2(b) of the Agreement provided that the appellant purchaser shall pay to the seller!respondent a sum of Rs.105 every month against the sanctioned loan of Rs. 15,000 till the full amount is recovered from the respondent.
I he payment of Rs. 105 per month was made by the appellant only up to .January 1976 and this payment covered upto 23 instalments, and more than l00 instalments remained unpaid.
On January 29, 1974 another agreement, for construction. was entered into between Appellant No. 1 and the respondent.
Under this agreement, Appellant No. 1 was to complete construction of the house and alter the completion of the house the respondent was to return the cost of construction amounting to Ks.1,15,000 including appellant 's profit of Rs.20,000 and security amount of Rs. 15,000 deposited by the Appellant No. 1 with the respondent, within three years in a lump sum and on payment the Appellant No.
I was to hand over the possession of the building and the plot to the respondent.
Till that amount was paid.
Appellant No 1 was entitled to possess and occupy and enjoy the building PG NO 513 PG NO 514 The house was not completed but the appellants who are husband and wife were occupying the same.
According to the respondent this transaction was sham and bogus and he repudiated the same.
Disputes arose between the parties.
The respondent filed a suit claiming for the return of possession of the said plot of land and house.
The application ot ' the appellant under section 34 of the Arbitration Act was dismissed.
In the appeals preferred by the appellant the Additional District Judge, appointed a sole arbitrator with the consent of the parties.
The arbitrator made and published his award which went against the appellants.
The High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the appellants against the order of the District Judge dismissing their application challenging The Award.
This Court.
in appeal, set aside the award of the Arbitrator and also the judgment of the High Court and appointed Shri A.C. Gupta, a former Judge of this Court as the sole arbitrator.
It was contended before the said Arbitrator that the agreement for sale was not registered and might not convey any interest to appellant No. 1 in the property, but the appellants, who had been put in possession of the said land and construction.
were entitled to retain possession under th4 ' protection affOrded by section 53A of the .
The arbitrator made and published his award which went against the appellants.
The arbitrator held from the receipts filed, that the respondent paid only rent up to than 100 instalments remained to be paid, and that there was no valid reason why the respondent should have failed to carry out his obligation under The contract.
The arbitrator further held that the respondent could not, therefore, claim that his possession was protected, under section 53A of the and was, therefore.
not entitled to retain possession of the disputed property beyond January 1976.
In the objection filed by the appellants challenging the award before this Court it was contended that the award is bad in law and liable to be set aside as there is an error of law disclosed on the face of the award as the statements contained in the award ran counter to the settled position in law that wrongful repudiation by the respondent of the contract by his letter dated 16 January, 1976, before mutual obligation under the contract were carried out, amounted to PG NO 515 an anticipatory breach of contract by him and therefore the Appellant No. 1 is absolved from carrying out his remaining obligation under the contract, and could claim specific performance of the same even though he failed to carry out his remaining obligations under the contract.
Dismissing the objections and upholding the award, the Court, HELD: l.
It is settled in law that where a party to a contract commits an anticipatory breach of the contract, the other party to the contract may treat the breach as putting an end to the contract and sue for damages, but in that event he cannot ask for specific performance.
The other option open to the other party, namely, the aggrieved party, is that he may choose to keep the contract alive till the time for performance and claim specific performance but, in that event, he cannot claim specific performance of the contract unless he shows his readiness and willingness to perform the contract.
[521B C] International Contractors Ltd. vs Prasanta Kumar Sur, [1961]3 SCR 579, distinguished.
It is an error of law and not a mistake of fact committed by the Arbitrator which is justiciable in the application before the Court.
[521A] If there is no legal proposition either in the award or in any document annexed to the award which is erroneous and constitutes the basis of the award and the alleged mistakes or alleged errors are only mistakes of fact the award is not amenable to correction by the Court.
[522A B] Coimbatore District Podu Thozillar Sangam vs Balasubramania Faundary and Others, ; ; Champsey Bhara and Co. vs Jivraj Balloo Spinning Weaving Co. Ltd., [1922 23] LR 50 IA 324, ; Kanpur Nagar Mahapalika vs M/s Narain Das Haribansh, , and State of Orissa & Ors.v.
M/s Lall Brothers, [1988] Judgment Today S.C. 552, referred to.
In this case, what the arbitrator has done is to set out in his award the relevant portion of section 53A of the , in terms of the said section.
There can be no dispute that these provisions have been correctly set out.
There is thus no error in the proposition of law set out by the learned Arbitrator in the award.
It may be that there is an error, although that is by no means certain, in PG NO 516 the application of these principles in coming to the conclusion that, notwithstanding the repudiation of the said contract by the respondent, Appellant No. 1 was not absolved in the facts and circumstances of the case from his obligation to pay the remaining instalments of Rs.105 per month as provided under the contract.
[521F G]
