An order was passed by the District Magistrate, Nellore, directing the detention of the respondent under the Prevention of Black Marketing and Maintenance of supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980.
The State Government approved the detention and referred the matter to the Advisory Board under section 10 of the Act.
The detenus.
representation was also forwarded by the Government to the Advisory Board.
The Advisory Board heard the detenu and the top ranking police officers, who represented the State, and expressed the opinion that there was sufficient cause for the detention of the respondent.
The Government agreed with the opinion and confirmed the respondent 's detention for a period of six months.
The detenu challenged the validity of the order of detention.
The High Court allowed the writ petition.
The High Court found that there was unequal treatment by the Advisory Board in considering the representation of the detenu.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) The Act by section 11(4) expressly denies representation through a legal practitioner.
The Board may hear any person it necessary.
If the detenu desires to be PG NO 620 PG NO 621 heard, the Board may hear him also.
But no person has a right to be represented by a lawyer, much less the detenu.
This provision is in conformity with article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution.
[626B C] (2) The power to detain a person without trial is a serious In road into the liberty of individuals.
It is a drastic power capable of being misused or arbitrarily exercised.
The framers of our Constitution were not unaware of it.
They had, therefore, specially incorporated in the Constitution enough safeguards against the abuse of such power.
[630G H] (3) The Advisory Board is a constitutional imperative.
It has an important function to perform.
There is no particular procedure prescribed for the Advisory Board since there is no lis to be adjudicated.
Section 11 of the Act provides only the broad guidelines for observance.
The Advisory Board, however, may adopt any procedure depending upon varying circumstances.
But any procedure that it adopts must satisfy the procedural fairness.
[631F G] (4) It is important for laws and authorities not only to be just but also appear to be just.
Therefore, the action that gives the appearance of unequal treatment or unreasonableness whether or not any substance in it should be avoided by the Advisory Board.
It is the duty of the Advisory Board to see that the case of detenu is not adversely affected by the procedure it adopts.
It must be ensured that the detenu is not handicapped by the unequal representation or refusal of access to a friend to represent his case [632B C] (5) In the instant case, since the Advisory Board has heard the high ranking officers of the Police Department and others on behalf of the Government and detaining authority it ought to have permitted the detenu to have the assistance of a friend who could have made an equally effective representation on his behalf.
Since that has been denied to the detenu, the High Court was justified in quashing the detention order.
1632D E] A.K. Roy vs Union of India, ; ; Kavita w/o Sunder Shankardas Devidasani etc.
vs State of Maharashtra; , ; Nand Lal vs State of Punjab, [1982] I SCR 718; Johney DaCouto vs State of Tamil Nadu, , referred to.
