The respondent company filed revised classification lists classifying all rectangular products of thickness below 3.0 mm manufactured by them as bars covered by Tariff Item 26AA(ia) of the Central Excise Tariff.
The Asstt.
Collector, Central Excise took the view that rectangular products of thickness less than 3.0 mm and of width less than 75 mm fell under the definition of 'Hoops ' and merit classification under Tariff Item 26AA(ii) and exigible to the appropriate duty.
The respondent preferred an appeal before the Collector of Central Excise who held that the product fell within the definition of 'Hoops ' and upheld the order of the Asstt.
Collector.
The respondent appealed to the Tribunal which held that the flat product of thickness less than 3.0 mm and a width of less than 75 mm was classifiable as 'bars ' as claimed by the respondent company and not as 'Hoops ' and allowed the appeals.
The Department therefore filed the appeals under Section 35L(b) of the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944 before this Court.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court, HELD: If the revenue wants to tax a particular goods known as such then the onus is on the Revenue.
[600F] 'Hoop ' is made either by slitting coiled strip rolled in multiple width, into narrow coiled strip of the desired width, or from narrow coiled strip with a hot rolled or mill edge and the type and width of hoop being produced influences the choice of the method used.
[599B] Curled hoop is made by a pinch roll and curved guide shoe arrangement that permits the hoop to take a circular form.
A straight length hoop is produced merely by removing the curved guide shoe.1599D] PG NO 597 PG NO 598 Straight length is not a short length, it is long.
[599E] The fact is that they were produced in a mill that could produce hoops and strips.
Their lengths are not such as to place them in the same class as hoops.
Having, therefore, regard to this and the relevant tariff item, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that it will be more appropriate to assess them under Item 26AA(ia) than Item 26AA(ii).
[599(G H; 600A] South Bihar Sugar Mills Ltd. vs Union of India & Ors., ; , referred to.
In an appeal under Section 35L(b) this Court has to see the propriety and the correctness of adjudication.
There was no misdirection in law nor any non consideration of facts.
There is no exclusion from consideration of legitimate proper materials.
[600F G]
