The appellants were promoted in January 1981 as Awal Karkuns in the Department of Food and Civil Supplies, Sholapur.
At the same time, the private respondents holding those posts were directed to be repatriated to their parent department, that is, the Revenue Department.
The private respondents challanged these orders by way of a civil suit on the ground that these orders were unjust, illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The Civil Judge decreed the suit.
The Additional Sessions Judge and the High Court upheld the decree.
The High Court came to the finding that the Food & Civil Supplies Department, Sholapur, had no separate existence on the date the impugned order was passed and that it was part and parcel of the Revenue Department.
It is contended by the private respondents that on the abolition of the statutory rationing, the Food & Civil supplies Department was abolished, and the appellants were absorbed in the Revenue Department.
This contention is disputed by the appellants.
Allowing the appeals, it was, HELD: (1) It was not disputed that after the introduction of statutory rationing, the Food & Civil Supplies Department was an independent Government Department at Sholapur.
[71G] (2) It was wrong to assume that the Food & Civil Supplies Department dealing with food and supply thereof.
was abolished consequent on the abolition of the statutory rationing.
[718D] (3) The fact of introduction or abolition of statutory rationing had nothing to do with the question of food and supply thereof, which must be dealt with by some department of the Government and after the creation of the Food & Civil PG NO 712 PG NO 713 Supplies Department, it was dealt with by that Department.
[718C] (4) As the Department existed, it could be reasonably presumed that it had its own staff and the appellant 's contention that they were retained in the Food & Civil Supplies Department seemed to be correct.
[718E] (5) There was no material in proof of the alleged absorption of the appellants in the Revenue Department.
Moreover, as they did not fulfil the conditions for absorption in the Revenue Department, they could not be transferred to or absorbed in that Department.
[717C; 718H] (6) It is true that there was no order showing that the respondents were transferred on deputation from the Revenue Department to the Food & Civil Supply Department.
It could, however, be reasonably presumed that the respondents were sent on deputation to the Food & Civil Supplies Department, otherwise there was no question of their repatriation to their parent department.
[718H; 719A] (7) It was apparent from the fact that separate rules were framed for recruitment of officers in the Food and Civil Supplies Department and a final gradation list was also prepared and published, that the Food and Civil Supplies Department was not part and parcel of the Revenue Department, but it had a separate and independent existence.
[719G] (8) As the appellants belonged to a different department their promotions would be governed by the rules of that department.
Similarly, the promotion of the private respondents would be considered in accordance with the rules of the Revenue Department.
[721A] Shri Atmaram Chaturvedi Garbude & Ors.
vs State of Maharashtra & Ors., Special Civil Application Nos.
707 of 1974 and 4834 of 1976 Bombay High Court, Nagpur Bench, referred to.
