The Range Officer, Forest of the appellant State lodged complaints with the .judicial Magistrate Ist Class against the respondents accused alleging that they had committed offences under section 51 of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972.
The learned Magistrate took cognizance of the offence and ordered issue of process to the respondents accused.
However.
before lodging the aforesaid complaints, a case had also been registered against the respondents accused with the concerned police station under sections 447, 429 and 379, IPC read with sections 54 and 39 of the Wild life Protection Act.
1972 and the matter was under investigation by the police.
The respondents accused moved the High Court under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for quashing the aforesaid order of the Magistrate.
The High Court quashed the proceedings against the respondents accused on the ground: (a) that the Magistrate acted with out jurisdiction in taking cognizance of the offence and ordering issue of process against the accused, since it was a case to which section 210(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 attracted and that as an investigation by the police was in progress in relation to the same offence the Magistrate would be required to stay the proceedings on the complaint and call for a report in the matter from the Police; and (b) that on the face of the complaint, it PG NO 455 PG NO 456 could not be said that the complaint spelts out the ingredients of the offence alleged.
Hence these appeals by special leave by the appellant State.
Allowing the appeals to this Court HELD: (1) The orders of the High Court in Crl.
223 of 1987 dated 13.2.1987 and the two orders in Crl.
No. 25X of 1987(R) and Crl.
No. 259 1987(R) dated 18.2.1987 are set aside and the order dated 1.7.1986 of the learned Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and ordering issue of summons to the respondents is restored.
The criminal case initiated on the complaint will now be proceeded with , in accordance with law.
[470H; 471A B] 2(1) A perusal of sections 2(16), 2(36), 9(1), 51 and 55 of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 shows that cognizance of an offence against the "Act" can be taken by a Court only on the complaint of the officer mentioned in section 55.
Even if the jurisdictional police purported to register a case for an alleged offence against the Act, sec.
210(1) Cr.
P.C. would not be attracted having regard to the position that cognizance of such an offence can only be taken on the complaint of the Officer mentioned in that section.
[462H; 463A B] 2(ii) Where a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence instituted otherwise than on a police report and an investigation by the police is in progress in relation to same offence, the two cases do not lose their separate identity.
The section seeks to obviate the anomalies that might arise from taking cognizance of the same offence more than once.
But, where, as in the instant case.
cognizance can be taken only in one way and that on the complaint of a particular statutory functionary.
there is no scope or occasion for taking cognizance more than once and accordingly, section 210 Cr.
P.C. has no role to play.
[463R C] 3(i) Jurisdiction under section 482 Cr.
which saves the inherent power of the High Court, to make such orders as may he necessary to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, has to be exercised sparingly and with circumspection.
In exercising that jurisdiction, the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry whether the allegations in the complaint are like to be established by evidence or not.
that is the function of the Trial Magistrate when the evidence comes before him.
[463E F] 3(ii) When the High Court is called upon to exercise jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.
P.C. to quash a proceeding PG NO 457 at the stage of the Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence, the High Court is guided by the allegations, whether those allegations, out in the complaint or the charge sheet, do not in law constitute or spell out any offence and that resort to criminal proceedings would, in the circumstances, amount to an abuse of the Process of the court or not.
[463G H] In the instant case, it is difficult to agree with the High Court that the allegation in the complaint, taken on their face value, would not amount in law to any offence against the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972.
[465G] Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs R.K. Rohtagi, ; at 890 and Municipal Corporation of Delhi vs P.D. Jhunjunwala; , at 897 followed.
4(i) The ingredients of an offence under sec.
g(l) read with sec.
50(1) of the Act require for its establishment certain ingredients which are not part of the offence under sec.
429 I.P.C. and vice versa.
[470G] 4(ii) The expression "any act or omission which constitutes any offence under this Act" in section 56 of the Act, merely imports the idea that the same act or omission might constitute an offence under another law and could be tried under such other law or laws also.
[466H; 467A] 4(iii) The proviso to section 56 has also a familiar ring and is a facet of the fundamental and salutory principles that permeate penalogy and reflected in analogous provisions of sec.
26 of ; Section 71 IPC; Section 100 of the Cr.
P.C. 1973, and constitutionally guaranteed under article 20(2) of the Constitution.
[467A B] 5.
The expression "the same offence", "substantially the same offences", "in effect the same offence", or "practically the same", have not done much to lessen the difficulty in applying the tests to identify the legal common denominators of "same offence".
The same set of facts, in conceivable cases, can constitute offences under two different laws.
An act or an omission can amount to and constitute an offence under the IPC and at the same time constitute an offence under any other law.
[468B C; 470A B] Leo Roy Frey vs The Superintendent, District Jail, Amritsar, ; ; State of Madhya Pradesh vs Veereshwar Rao Agnihotry; , ; Omprakash Gupta vs PG NO 458 Slate of U. P.; , ; The State of Bombay vs section L. Apte & Anr., ; ; "Double Jeoparady" the Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice, vol. 2, (p. 630) 1983 Edn. by Sanford H. Kudish vs The Free Press, Collier Mac Millan Publishers.
London and Friedland in "Double Jeoparady" (Oxford 1969) referred to.
6(i) The policy and object of the Wild life laws have a long history and are the result of an increasing awareness of the compelling need to restore the serious ecological imbalance introduced by the depradations inflicted on nature by man.
[460E F] 6(ii) The State to which the ecological imbalances and the consequent environmental damage have reached is so alarming that unless immediate, determined and effective steps were taken, the damage might become irreversible.
[460F G] 6(iii) The largest single factor in the depletion of the wealth of animal life in nature has been the 'civilized man" operating directly through excessive commercial hunting or, more disastrously, indirectly through invading or destroying natural habitats.
[462B C]
