The Kerala State Government, after completion of preliminary steps, published a declaration on 18.1.1984 concerning the acquisition of petitioner 's land for a public purpose.
On 24.9.1984 the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 came into force whereby section 11 A was introduced into the Land Acquisition Act, 1894.
Section 11 A provided that the Collector shall make an award under section 11 of the Act within a period of two years from the date of publication of the declaration, and in the case where the said declaration had been published before the commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 within two years from such commencement.
The Collector made the award on 23.9.1986.
The notice of the award was served on the petitioner on 30.9.1986.
The petitioner challenged the award before the High Court of Kerala on the grounds (1) that the notice of the award having been served on 30.9.1986, the award was not made within the prescribed period of two years, and (ii) that there was inordinate delay in making the award.
Both the writ petition and the writ appeal were dismissed by the High Court.
Dismissing the special leave petition, it was, HELD: (1) In section 11 A the words "the Collector shall make an award within a period of two years from the date of the publication of the declaration" mean that the Collector is empowered to make an award till the expiry of the last date of the period of two years irrespective of he date on which the notice of the award is served upon the persons interested in the land.
`To make an award ' in this section PG NO 648 PG NO 649 means `sign the award '.
That is the ordinary meaning to be ascribed to the words `to make an award '.
[655C D] (2) It is well known that the meaning to be assigned to the words in a statute depends upon the context in which they are found and the purpose behind them.
(3) The object of and the reason for prescribing the period of limitation under section 11 A are different from the object of and the reason for prescribing the period of limitation under section 18 of the Act and the consequences that would flow from the violation of the rule of limitation in the two cases are also different.
There is no analogy between section 11 A and section 18 of the Act insofar as the above question is concerned.
[654C D; 655E] (4) It would be safer in such cases to rely upon the statute for guidance as regards the maximum time that can be taken to make an award, instead of proceeding to strike down acquisition proceedings on the ground of delay in making the award by applying varying standards to different cases even though the maximum time of two years has not been exceeded.
The time taken by the Land Acquisition Officer in this case to make the award cannot be considered to be fatal to the acquisition proceeding.
[656B C] Raja Harish Chandra Raj Singh vs The Deputy Land Acquisition Officer, [1962] 1 S.C.R. 676, distinguished.
