In 1967 the second respondent landlord applied to the Prescribed Authority, under section 3 of the U.P. (Temporary) Control of Rent and Eviction Act, 1947 for permission to file a suit for eviction against the appellant tenant on the ground of his own requirement because his brother with whom he was living had asked him to find accommodation elsewhere.
This application was rejected.
After the 1947 Rent Act was replaced by the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act 1972, the second respondent again sought the permission of the Prescribed Authority for recovery of possession of the leased premises either fully or partially, on the ground that he was living in great hardship in a single room in a house.
The Prescribed Authority refused to grant the permission on the ground that the application had been made within a period of six months from the commencement of the 1972 Rent Act and hence it was barred by Rule 18 (1) of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of letting, Rent and Eviction) Rules, 1972.
The Appellate Authority, however, granted permission to the second respondent to recover possession of the ground floor portion of the house.
The appellant moved a petition in the High Court against the order of the Appellate Authority but did not succeed.
Before this Court the appellant contends that(l) a second application on the same ground made within six months from the commencement of the 1972 Act was barred under Rule 18 (1) of the 1972 Rules; (2) the High Court 's view that it is not barred because it is the circumstances of requirement and not the nature of the requirement that would constitute PG NO 722 PG NO 723 the ground of eviction is erroneous and unsustainable (3) the Act and the Rules do not permit the creation of two dwelling units in a building covered by a single tenancy; (4) the Appellate Authority has erred in rendering a finding against the appellant in the matter of comparative hardship; and (5) the Appellate Authority and the High Court have failed to notice the without the ground floor, the first and second floors cannot be used as residence because the bath and toilet rooms are situated only in the ground floor.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (I) All that Rule 18(1) says is that if a second application is made for release of the house on which permission to sue was sought for in the previous application on the same ground within a period of six months from the date of the final order in that application or within six months from the commencement of the Act, whichever is later, 'the prescribed authority shall accept the findings in those proceedings as conclusive." [727E Fl (2) Even if the two applications are treated as having been made on the same ground, the second application would not attract the operation of Rule 18(1) since the Rule contains only a formula of presumption based on facts.
The prescription of the rule is only of a directory nature and not of a mandatory nature [728C] (3) In the interpretation of statutes, where the situation and the context warrants, the word "shall" used in a section or rule has to be construed as "may".
The present context is one such where the words "the prescribed Authority shall accept the findings in those proceedings as conclusive" have to be read as "the Prescribed Authority may accept the findings in those proceedings as conclusive" because the finding are based upon existence of facts.
[728(, H] (4) It will be inequitable and unrealistic to construe Rule 18(1) as containing an inexorable legal prescription for rejecting a second application filed within the prescribed time limit solely on the basis of the findings rendered in the earlier application.
[729F] (5) The long interval of time between the rejection of the first application and the date of making the second application viz., about five years, and the significant changes that had taken place during the interval in the living conditions of the second respondent undoubtedly rendered irrelevant the earlier findings.
[730A B] PG NO 724 (6) Section 21(1) provides for an order of eviction being passed against a tenant 'From the building under tenancy or any specified part thereof." [730C] (7) It is open to the appellant to move the Prescribed Authority for directions being given to the second respondent to make suitable provision in the ground floor for the appellant and his family members to have access to and make use of the bath and toilet rooms in the ground floor.
[730G]
