Section 2(f) of the Central Excise Act defines `manufacture ', to include any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of a manufactured product.
The President of India promulgated an Ordinance called the Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Ordinance 1979, which was later replaced by Central Act VI of 1980, called the Central Excises and Salt and Additional Duties of Excise (Amendment) Act, 1980.
The PG NO 770 PG NO 771 Amending Act became effective from 24th February, 1979.
By section 2 of the Amending Act, Section 2 (f) of the Excise Act was amended by adding three sub items in the definition of `manufacture ' so as to include activities like bleaching, dyeing, printing etc.
which were held not covered by two decisions of the Gujarat High Court.
Similar amendments were made in items 19 and 22 of the First Schedule with retrospective effect.
Section 5(2)(b) of the Amending Act provided that no suit or other proceedings shall be maintained or continued in any other Court for the refund of the duty collected and no enforcement shall be made by any Court of any decree or order directing the refund of such duties of excise which have been collected and which may have been collected, as if the provisions of Section 5 of the Act had been in force on and from the appointed day as defined in the Act.
Prior to the Amending Act, 1980, the levy an the processors, was challenged before the Gujarat High Court in the case of vijay Textiles Mills vs Union of India nd Real Honest Textile vs Union of India, [1979] 4 E.L.E.J. 181.
The Gujarat High Court held that cotton fabric subjected to bleaching, dyeing and printing could not be subjected to excise duty under items 19 and 22 of the First Schedule to the , and that processors were liable to pay duties under tariff entry 68 only on the value added by that processor.
Following this judgment a large number of similar claims of ,processing houses were allowed by the High Court by its judgment dated 13.3 1979.
However, the Bombay High Court, took a different view and held that even under the concept of manufacture ' envisaged in section 2(f) even prior to its amendment, the operations carried on by the professors amounted to `manufacture ' and that, at all events, the matter was placed beyond any controversy by the Amendment Act of 1980.
The judgment of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Vijay Textiles and Real Honest Textiles was considered by a Bench consisting of three judges of this Court in Empire Industries vs Union of India [1985] Supp. 1 SCR 292 and it was held not to have been decided correctly.
The view taken by the Bombay High Court in New Shakti Dye Works Pvt. Ltd. vs Union of India & Anr. was approved.
The present appeals, by special leave, preferred against the judgments of the High Court of Gujarat and the High Court of Bombay, and the batch of writ petitions under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, involve common PG NO 772 questions of law concerning the validity of the levy of duties of excise under tariff items 19 and 22 of the Schedule to the ("Central Excise Act") as amended by the Central Excises and Salt Additional Duties Excise (Amendment) 1980 Act ("Amending Act") treating as `manufacture ' the process of bleaching, dyeing, printing, sizing, mercerising, water proofing, rubberising, shrink proofing, organdie processing etc.
done by the processors who carry out these operations in their factories on job work basis in respect of `cotton fabric ' and `Man made fabric ' belonging to their customers.
The facts in all the cases are indenticl.
The petitioners/appellants carry out the operations of bleaching dyeing, printing sizing, finishing etc.
of grey fabric on job work against payment of processing charges to it by the customers who are the owners of the grey fabric.
The machinery and equipment installed in the petitioners ' factories are suited for and appropriate to the processing of grey fabric and are not capable to manufacturing grey fabric.
The man made grey fabric, such as, Art Silk Grey fabric is manufactured in mills and on power looms and that latter is exempt from excise duty on its manufacture.
The Art Silk Grey fabrics which are processed in the petitioners/appellants factories are those manufactured on power looms and not by the mills and that the Art Silk Grey fabric received do not come from the manufacturers of the grey fabric through the manufacturing stream but from the various trader through the sales stream.
The present writ petitions/appeals also include cases where the grey fabric is also purchased by some of the processing houses and are sold by them, after processing.
In some cases, the manufacturers of the grey fabric subject it to captive consumption and process them in their own composite establishments.
At the time of hearing, the correctness of the view taken in the Empire Industries case on certain aspects having been doubted by another Bench of this Court, these appeals/writ petitions were referred to a Bench of five judges on two questions namely (1) whether the processing of grey fabric amounted to `manufacture ' within the meaning of Section 2(f) as it stood prior to its amendment, and (2) whether, even if such processing did amount to `manufacture ' what should be the proper basis for determining the assessable value of the processed fabrics.
In the petitions and appeals, the following points arise for determination.
PG NO 773 A(i) Whether the process of bleaching, dyeing, printing, sizing, shrink proofing etc. carried on in respect of cotton or man made `grey fabric ' amount to `manufacture ' for purposes, and within the meaning of Sect;on 2(f) of the prior to the amendment of the said Section 2(f) by section 2 of the Amending Act VI of 1980.
A(ii) Whether the decision in Empire Industries Limited that these operations amount to `manufacture ' is wrongly decided and requires reconsideration.
(B) Whether the amendment brought about by the Act of 1980 of Section 2(f) and to tariff items 19 and 22 of the Central Excise Act is ultra vires Entry 84 List 1 and, therefore, beyond the competence of the Union Parliament.
Whether, at all events, even if the expended concept of manufacture introduced by the Amendment is beyond the scope of Entry 84 List 1, whether the impost is, at all events, referable to and supportable by the residual Entry 97 of List 1.
(C) Whether, at all events even if the amendments to Central Excise Act are valid, the levy under the Additional Duties Act is unsupportable and without the authority of law as there is no corresponding enlargement of the definition of `manufacture ' under the Additional Duties Act.
(D) Whether the retrospective operation of the Amending Act is an unreasonable restriction on the fundamental right of the `processors ' under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.
(E) Whether, even if the levy is justified, at all events, the computation of the assessable value of the processed grey fabric on the basis of the whole sale cash selling price declared under classification list under Rule 173(b) is unjustified and illegal in respect of the assessable value of the processed grey fabric done on job work basis.
Allowing the appeals preferred by the Union of India, HELD: (Per Majority) The appeals preferred by the Union of India are allowed and the Judgment of the Gujarat High Court under appeal is PG NO 774 set aside.
The appeals preferred by the processors against the judgment of the Bombay High Court and the Writ Petition filed by the processors directly in this Court are dismissed.
The Union of India and its authorities shall be entitled to take necessary steps to seek the enforcement of the bank guarantees, if any for the recovery of the arrears.
[810C D] Per Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (Concurring with Venkatachaliah.
J.) (1) A statutory charge should be measured by the method of its computation as laid down in the statute and not by any other method of computation.
The circumstances that thereby the benefit of any computation granted by the legislation may be lost and that in some cases hardship might result are not matters which would influence courts on the Instruction of the statute.
A tax payer is entitled only to such benefit as is granted by the legislature [811C D] (2) (i) Where a manufacturer sells the goods manufactured by him in wholesale to a wholesale dealer at the arms length and in the usual course of business, the wholesale cash price charged by him to the wholesale dealer less trade discount would represent the value of the goods for the purpose of assessment of excise.
But the price received by he wholesale dealer who purchases the goods from the manufacturer and in his turn sells the same in wholesale to other dealers would be irrelevant for determination of the value of the goods and the goods would be charged on that basis.
[812E F] (2) (ii) The valuation must be on the basis of wholesale cash price at the time when the manufactured goods enter into the open market.
The value of the trade marks is not to be taken into account in computing the assessable value as the affixation of the trade marks of a particular brand was extraneous to manufacture.
The values of such extraneous on additional factors do not enter into the computation of assessable value and as such the wholesale cash price at which the goods enter into the wholesale market would be independent of the value of the trade marks.
[812G H:8134A B] (2)(iii) The assessable value would, therefore, include the value of the grey cloth in the hands of the processors plus the value of the job work done plus manufacturing profits and manufacturing expenses whatever would be included in the price at the factory gate.
The correct assessable value must be the value of the fabric at the factory gate, that is to say, the value at which the manufactured goods leave the factory and enter the main stream.
[813E] PG NO 775 3.
Computation of the assessable value is one question and as to who should be liable for the same is another.
Duties of excise are imposed on production or on manufacture of goods and are levied upon the manufacturer or the producer in accordance with the relevant rules.
This is quite independent of the ownership of goods.
It is, there fore, necessary to reiterate that the value for, the assessment under Section 4 of the Act will not be the processing charge along but the intrinsic value of the processed fabric which is the price at which the fabrics are sold for the first time in the wholesale market.
The rules are clear on the computation of that value.[813F H] Atic Industries Ltd. vs H.H. Dave, Asstt.
Collector of Central Excise and Ors.
, ; ; Union of India & Ors. etc.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd. etc.
; , at 375; Union of India & Ors.
vs Cibatul Ltd., [1985] Suppl.
3 S.C.R. 95 and Joint Secy.
to the Govt.
of India & Ors.
vs Food Specialities Ltd., 11985] Suppl.
3 S.C.R. 165, followed.
Per Venkatachaliah, J. (for himself and on behalf of R. section Pathak, and section Natarajan, J.) 1(i) The prevalent and generally accepted test to ascertain that there is `manufacture ' is whether the change or the series of changes brought about by the application of processes take the commodity to the point where, commercially, it can no longer be regarded as the original commodity but is, instead, recognised as a distinct and new article that has emerged as a result of the processes.
[797E F] 1(ii) The view taken in the Empire Industries case that `grey fabrics ' after they undergo the various processes of bleaching, dyeing sizing, printing, finishing etc.
emerges as a commercially different commodity with its own price structure, custom and other commercial incidents and that there was in that sense a `manufacture ' within the meaning of Section 2(f), even as unamended, is an eminently plausible view and is not shown to suffer from any fallacy.
[798A B] Union of India vs Delhi Cloth & General Mills, [1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 536 at 597; Tungabhadra Industries Ltd. vs Commercial Officer Kurnool; , ; Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax vs Pio Food Packers, ; at 1275; Sterling Foods vs State of Karnataka, PG NO 776 ; at 475 & 476; Kailash Nath vs State of U.P., 8 S.T.C. 358; Deputy Commissioner sales Tax vs Sadasivan, 42 S.T.C. 2 (Kerala); Swastic Products Baroda vs Superintendent of Central Excise, ; Swan Bangle Stores vs Assistant Sales Tax Officer, 25 S.T.C. 122 (Allahabad); State of Andhra Pradesh vs Sri Durga Hardware Stores, 32 S.T.C. 322 (Andhra Pradesh); Extrusion Process Pvt. Ltd. vs N.R. Jadnav, Superintendent of Central Excise, ; In Health & Milligan Manufacturing Company, The Sherwin Williams Company, etc.
vs J.H. Worst Director of the North Dakota Government Agricultural Experiment Station; Kailash Nath vs State of U.P., 8 S.T.C. 358; Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. (Lucknow) vs Harbilas Rai, 21 S.T.C. 17; Hiralal Jitmal vs Commissioner of Income Tax, 8 S.T.C. 325 at 326 and Kores (India) Ltd. vs Union of India and Ors., , referred to.
2(i) Entries in the legislative lists.
are not sources of the legislative power but are merely topics or fields of legislation and must receive a liberal construction inspired by a broad and generous spirit and not in a narrow pedantic sense.
The expression "with respect to" in Article 246 brings in the doctrine of "Pith and Substance" in the understanding of the exertion of the legislative power and wherever the question of legislative competence is raised, the test is whether the legislation, looked at as a whole, is substantially `with respect to ' the particular topic of legislation.
If the legislation has a substantial and not merely a remote connection with the entry, the matter may well be taken to be legislation on the topic.
[799B D] 2(ii) Competence to legislate flows from Articles 245.
246 and the other Articles following in Part XI of the Constitution.
In defending the validity of a law questioned on ground of legislative incompetence, the State can always show that the law was supportable under any other entry within the competence of the legislature.
Indeed in supporting a legislation sustenance could be drawn and had from a number of entries.
The legislation could be a composite legislation drawing upon several entries.
Such a "rag bag" legislation is particularly familiar in taxation.
[800F G] Diamond Sugar Mills vs State of IJ.P., [1961] 3 S.C.R. 242 at 248; Statutory Interpretation, at page 644 and Hari Krishna Bhargav vs Union of India & Anr., [1966] 2 S.C.R. 22, referred to.
PG NO 777 2(iii) So far as, the exclusive competence of the Union Parliament to legislate is concerned, all that is necessary is to find out whether the particular topic of legislation is in List 11 or List 111.
If it is not, it is not necessary to go any further or search for the field in List 1.
Union Parliament has exclusive power to legislate upon that topic or field.
Of course, it has concurrent power also in respect of the subjects in List 111.
[801E F] 2(iv) Even if the impost on process is not one under Entry 84, List 1, but Is an impost of `processing ' distinct from `manufacture ' the levy could yet be supported by Entry 97, List 1, even without the aid of the wider principle recognised and adopted in Dhillon 's case ; [799F] 3.
Section 4 of the Amending Act VI of 1980 has amended the relevant items in the schedule to the Additional Duties Act, the expressions ' `produce ' or `manufacture ' in Section 3(1) of the Additional Duties Act must be read along with the entries in the Schedules.
What appears, therefore, clear is that what applies to the main levy, applies to the additional duties as well.
[803F] Pandit Ram Narain vs The State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.
; , at 673; Macbath & Com.
vs Chisletr, at 224; Commissioner of Sales Tax, Madhya Pradesh vs Jaswant Singh Charan Singh, [19671 2 S.C.R. 720 at 725 26; Assistant Collector of Central Excise, Calcutta Division vs National Tobacco Co. of India Ltd., ; at 835; Att.
vs Lamplough [1878] 3 exhibit D. 214, 299; Interpretation of States, 11th ed.
p. 156 and Bennion 's Statutory Interpreation, p. 568 569, referred to.
4(i) A Competent legislature can always validate a law which has been declared by court to be invalid provided the infirmities and vitiating factors noticed in the declaratory judgment are removed for cured.
Such a validating law can also be made retrospective.
If in the light of such validating and curative exercise made by the legislature granting legislative competence the earlier judgment becomes irrelevant and unenforceable, that cannot be called an impermissible legislative overruling of the judicial decision.
All that the legislature does is to usher in a valid law with retrospective effect in the light of which earlier judgment becomes irrelevant.
Such legislative expedience of validation of laws is of particular significance and utility and is quit often applied, in taxing statutes.
It is necessary that the legislature should be able to cure defects in statutes.
No individual can PG NO 778 acquire a vested right from a defect in a statute and seek a wind fall from the legislature 's mistakes.
[804G H; 805A C] Sri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd. & Anr.
vs Broach Borough Municipality & Ors., , referred to.
4(ii) Validity of legislations retroactively curing defects in taxing statutes is well recognised and courts, except under extraordinary circumstances, would be reluctant to override the legislative judgment as to the need for and wisdom of the retrospective legislation.
[805C] 4(iii) In testing whether a retrospective imposition of a tax operates so harshly as to violate fundamental rights under article 19(1)(g), the factors considered relevant include the context in which retroactivity was contemplated such as whether the law is one of validation of taxing statute struck down by courts for certain defects; the period of such retroactivity, and the decree and extent of any unforeseen or unforeseenable financial burden imposed for the past period etc.
Having regard to all the circumstances of the present case, this court in Empire Industries ' case rightly held that the retroactivity of the Amending provisions was not such as to incure any infirmity under Article 9(1)(g).
[805E G] 5(i) Section 4 of the `Central Excise Act ' envisages that the value of an article for the purposes of duty shall be deemed to be; (a) the wholesale cash price for which an article of the like kind and quality was sold or was capable of being sold at the time of removal of the article from the factory or premises of manufacture for delivery at the place of manufactures or (b) where such price was not ,ascertainable the price at which an article of the like kind and quality as sold or capable of being sold al the time of removal of the article chargeable with duty [808F G] 5(ii) Consistent with the provisions of Section 4 and the Central Excise (Valuation) Rules, 1975, framed under sec.
37 of the Act, it cannot be said that the assessable value of the processed fabric should comprise only of the processing charges.
this extreme contention, if accepted, would lead to and create more problems than it is supposed to solve, and produce situations which could only be characterised as anomalous.
The incidence of the levy should be uniform, uninfluenced by fortuitous considerations.
The view taken in the matter in Empire Industries case does not call for reconsideration.
[809C D] PG NO 779 5(iii) The question whether the producer or the manufacturer is or is not the owner of the goods is not determinative of the liability.
The essential and conceptional nature of the tax is to be kept clearly distinguished from both the extent of the power to impose and the stage at which the tax is imposed.
Though the levy is on the production or manufacture of the goods, the imposition of the duty could be at the stage which the law considers most convenient to impose as long as a rational relationship with the nature of the tax is maintained.
[806B D] 5(iv) The nature of the excise duty is not to be confused with, or tested with reference to, the measure by which the tax is assessed.
The standard adopted as the measure of assessment may throw light on the nature of the levy but is not determinative of it.
When a statutory measure for assessment of the tax is contemplated, it "need not contour along the lines which spell out the levy itself ', and "a broader based standard of reference may be adopted for the purposes of determining the measure of the levy".
Any statutory standard which maintains a nexus with the essential character of the levy can be regarded as a valid basis for assessing the measure of the tax.
[808G H; 809A B] Atic Industries Ltd. vs H.H. Dave, Assn.
Collector of Central Excise and Ors., [1975] 3 S.C.R. p. 563 and Union of India Ors.
vs Bombay Tyre International Ltd. etc. [1984] 1 S.C.R. p. 347 at 375, referred to.
Per Ranganathan, J. (Concurring with Venkatatchlliah, J. 1(i) Hindustan Milkfood Manufacturers Ltd. vs Union, The HMM case) , was based not on the scope of legislative entry 97 in List I but on the language and scope ot the amendment actually effected.
It was considered not necessary or possible to stretch the language of the definition in section 4 beyond the ambit of the provision as delineated in the earlier decisions.
The question decided was not that the legislature could not, but that it did not make any redical change in the nature of the levy.
[815F G] 1(ii) There is nothing in the decision HMM case that supports the contention of the petitioners here that the amendment of the definition of `manufacture ' cannot be sustained by reference to entry 97 of List 1 in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India, if it cannot be upheld as falling under the purview of Entry 84.
[816H; 817A] PG NO 780 2(i) The words `levied ' is a wide and generic expression.
One can say with as much appropriateness that the Income Tax Act levies a tax on income as that the Income Tax Officer levies the tax in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
It is an expression of wide import and takes in all the stages of charge, quantification and recovery of duty, though in certain contexts it may have a restricted meaning.
In the context of sub section (I) the word 'levied ' admittedly means `charged as well as assessed '.
The words `levy and collection ' in sub section (3) cannot be construed differently from the words `levied and collected ' used in sub section (1).
Section 3(3), therefore.
also covers the entire gomut of section 3(1) and cannot be construed as becoming operative at some what later stage.
Its operation cannot be excluded in determining the scope of the charge.
[818F H] 2 (ii) Having regard to the nature and content of the levy indicated in section 3(1), it is obvious that section 3(3) has to have the effect of attracting not only the purely procedural and machinery provisions of the 1944 Act but also some of its charging provisions.
It is, therefore, difficult to consider section 3(1) of the 1957 Act in contrast to the Finance Act of 1965 as covering the entire ambit of the charge imposed.
In short, the language of section 3(3) has to be given a wider meaning than under the Finance Act, 1965.
A provision similar to that in section 80 of the Finance Act, 1965 is also found in other Finance Acts.
On perusal of these provisions, it will be found that a like position exists there also.
These provisions are all self contained and completely specify the scope of the charge either as a percentage of the excise duty normally chargeable under the Central Excises & Salt Act, 1944 or as a percentage of the `assessable value determined under section 4 of the 1944 Act.
This is very important reason why the observations in the Associated Cement Co. s, case [1985]2 S.C.C. 719 cannot be of application in the context of the 1957 Act.
[821E H] M/s Mahendra Pratap Rama Chandra vs Commercial Tax officer & Others. , referred to.
3(i) Legislatures sometimes take a short cut and try to reduce the length of statutes by omitting elaborate provisions where such provisions have already been enacted earlier and can be adopted for the purpose on hand.
While, on the one hand, the prolixity of modern statutes and the necessity to have more legislations than one on the same or allied topics render such a course useful and desirable, the attempt to legislate by reference is sometimes overdone and brevity is achieved at the expense of lucidity.
However this legislative device is quite well known and the principles applicable to it fairly well settled.
[823C D] PG NO 781 3(ii) Referential legislation is of two types.
One is where an earlier Act or some of its provisions are incorporated by reference into a later Act.
In this event, the provisions of the earlier Act or those so incorporated, as they stand in the earlier Act at the time of incorporation, will be read into the later Act.
Subsequent changes in the earlier Act or the incorporated provisions will have to be ignored because, for all practical purposes the existing provisions of the earlier Act have been re enacted by such reference into the later one, rendering irrelevant what happens to the earlier statute thereafter.
On the other hand, the later statute may not incorporate the earlier provisions.
It may only make a reference of a broad nature as to the law on the subject generally or contain a general reference to the terms of an earlier statute which are to be made applicable.
In this case any modification, repeal or re enactment of the earlier statute will also be carried into in the later, for here, the idea is that certain provisions of an earlier statute which become applicable in certain circumstances are to be made use of for the purpose of the later Act also.
[823E H] 3(iii) Whether a particular statute falls into the first or second category is always a question of construction.
[824B] In the present case, the legislation falls into the second category.
section 3(3) of the 1957 Act does not incorporate into the 1957 Act any specific provisions of the 1944 Act.
It only declares generally that the provisions of the 1944 Act shall apply 'so far as may be" '.
that is, to the extent necessary and practical, for the purposes of the 1957 Act as well.
[824B C] Secretary of State vs Hindustan Cooperative Insurance Society ; Solani Ores Ltd. vs State, ; ; Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd. vs Union, ; ; Bhajiva vs Gopikabai, [1978] 3 S.C.R. 561; Collector of Customs vs Nathella Sampathu Chetty, ; ; New Central Jute Mills Ltd. vs Assistant Collector; , ; Special Land Acquisition Officer vs City Improvement Trust, [1977] 1 section( referred to. 3(iv) The legislation presently in question is clearly in pari materia with the 1944 Act.
It is also merely supplemental.
While the 1944 Act imposes a general levy of excise duty on all goods manufactured and produced, and aim of the present Act is to supplement the levy by an additional duty of the same nature on certain goods.
