The respondent company was engaged in the manufacture of nonalcoholic beverage bases falling under Tariff Item 68 of Central Excise Tariff.
According to the Revenue, the company manufactured the nonalcoholic beverage bases without holding proper Central Excise Licence, and had cleared the said goods without payment of the duty due thereon.
The stand of the company was that the goods were exempt from duty under Notification No. 55/75 C.E. dated 1st March, 1975 which inter alia exempted "all kinds of food products and food preparations".
The Customs and Excise Collector confirmed the demand of central excise duty against the company.
In appeal, the Confirmed the demand of and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal accepted the contention of the company.
The Additional Solicitor General on behalf of the appellants contended that (i) non alcoholic beverage base though having some food value, was not food product or food preparation.
at any rate, in the context of the Act and notification as such; (ii) the expression "food products and food preparations" was used in contrast to "beverages" so far as the present Act and notifications thereunder were concerned; (iii) in ordinary common and commercial parlance also the goods in question were not known as food products and/or food preparations as such, and therefore these were PG NO 933 PG NO 934 not to be treated as exempt under the notification; and (iv) how Government understood a matter at the time of the notification, was a relevant factor and that was a factor which one should bear in mind.
K.P. Verghese vs Income Tax Officer Ernakulam, ; and Government of India 's decision in Re: Asian Chemical Works, , relied upon.
On behalf of the respondent it was contended that the Tribunal had acted on the varied materials, and therefore, such decision of the Tribunal should not be altered or deviated from.
Collector of Customs, Bombay vs Swastic Woollen (P) Ltd., , relied upon.
Allowing the appeals, it was, HELD: (1) The word `Food ' has no fixed definition of universal application and its meaning varies from statute to statute.
But food is one which nourishes and sustains human body for the purposes of growth, work or repair and for the maintenance of the vital process.[939D] Brooke Bond (India) Limited vs Union of India, ; Brooke Bond (India) Limited vs Union of India.
119%41 and The State of Bombay vs Virkumar Gulabchand Shah, ; , referred to.
(2) The expression `food products ' is not defined in the Act.
The exemption includes food products and food preparations ' and provides an inclusive definition of `food products ' and food preparations '.
[946E] (3) The words used in the provision, imposing taxes or granting exemptions, should be understood in the same way in which these are understood in ordinary parlance in the area in which the law is in force or by the people who ordinarily deal with them.
[947F] (4) It is a well settled principle of interpretation that courts in construing a statute or notification will give much weight to the interpretation put upon it at the time of enactment or issue, and since by those who have to construe, execute and apply the said enactments.
l947E] PG NO 935 (5) The notification should not only be confined to its grammatical or ordinary parlance but it should also be construed in the light of the context.
The expression should be construed in a manner in which similar expressions have been employed by those who framed the relevant notification, [948E] Hindustan Aluminium Corporation Ltd. vs State of Uttar Pradesh, ; , referred to.
(6) The question of interpretation involves determining the meaning of a text contained in one or more documents.
Judges are often criticised for being tied too closely to the statutory words and for failing to give effect to the intention of the Parliament or the law maker.
[949C] (7) According to the tradition of our law, primacy is to be given to the text in which the intention of the law giver has been expressed.
[949D] (8) The principle is well settled that when two views of a notification are possible, it should be construed in favour of the subject as notification is part of a fiscal enactment avoiding, however, as absurd meaning.
[948F] Coroline M. Armytage & Ors.
vs Frederick Wilkinson, , referred to.
(9) The notification must be read as a whole in the context of the other relevant provisions.
When a notification is issued in accordance with power conferred by the statute, it has statutory force and validity and, therefore, the exemption under the notification is, as if it were contained in the Act itself [947G H] Orient Weaving Mills (P) Ltd. vs Union of India, [1962] Supp.3 SCR 481 and Kailash Nath vs State of U.P., AIR 1975 SC 790, referred to.
(10) The purpose of exemption is to encourage food production and also give boost to the production of goods in common use and need.
After all, the purpose of exemption is to help production of food and food preparations at cheaper price and also help production of items which are in common use and need, like electric light and power.
[949A B] PG NO 936 (11) Having regard to the language used it would not be in consonance with the spirit and the reason of law to give exemption for non alcoholic beverage bases under the notification.
Bearing the aforesaid purpose, it cannot be contended that expensive items like Gold spot base, Limca base or Thumps up base were intended to be given exemption at the cost of the public exchequer.[949E F] (12) Non alcoholic beverage bases in India cannot be treated or understood as new 'nutritive material absorbed or taken into the body of an organism which serves for the purpose of growth, work or repair and for the maintenance of the vital process ' and an average Indian will not treat non alcoholic beverage bases as food products or food preparations in that light.[948G H]
