Rule X(2) of the Rules regulating the appointments of Housemen and House Surgeons at the hospitals attached to the Government Medical Colleges in the State of Maharashtra provides that the Government may sanction supernumerary posts to allow spouses of Government servants on transfer to undertake studies, if standing high in merit, from another college.
The appellant married to a Government Medical Officer working in the State of Maharashtra after having passed M.B.B.S. examination and completing one year internship from a college situated in the State of Andhra Pradesh.
On her application, the Government of Maharashtra in exercise of its power under rule X(2) created a Housepost in Obstetrics and Gynaecology w.e.f. July l5.
1986 specifically and categorically stating that the supernumerary Housepost was created to enable the appellant to complete her post graduate studies at Dr. V.M. Medical College, Solapur, respondent No. 2.
The appellant joined the Housepost and duly completed the same.
However, she was refused admission in the M.D. Course by respondent No.2 inasmuch as she was not even issued an application form.
Being aggrieved, she filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the legality of the action of the respondent refusing to admit her in the said post graduate M.D. Course.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition holding, inter alia, that no inference could be drawn that everybody who completed the house job was entitled to get admission to the post graduate cousre ipso facto and that granting of registration for house job would not amount to admission to the post graduate course in a Medical College.
Hence this appeal by special leave.
Allowing the appeal, PG NO 959 PG NO 960 HELD: (l) All the seats in the post graduate degree course for Obstetrics and Gynaecology are not reserved for the candidates passing the M.B.B.S. examination from the said Dr. V.M. Medical College.
It is not disputed that certain percentage of seats are reserved for the students of the College.
But, no application form was issued to the appellant and accordingly, the question of not admitting the appellant on the ground of institutional preference or institutional reservation of seats does not arise.
[964F G] (2) The State of Maharashtra is entitled to refuse to admit any student passing the M.B.B.S. examination from any Medical College in the State of Andhra Pradesh as that State has not reciprocated in the matter of admission to post graduate degree courses in Medical Colleges of that State.
[964G H] (3) The State of Maharashtra after considering all facts and circumstances including the high merit of the appellant specifically created a supernumerary Housepost for the appellant.
After creating the supernumerary Housepost specifically for the appellant so as to enable her to become eligible for the post graduate degree course, the respondents are not at all justified in refusing her even an application form and in not considering her case for admission in the post graduate degree course on the ground of failure of reciprocity by the Andhra Pradesh State.
It was, therefore, unreasonable and unjust for the respondents to refuse admission to the appellant on a ground which is not at all tenable in the facts and circumstances of the cases.
[965C F] (4) Normally the Supreme Court does ot interfere in the matter of admission of students in an educational institution.
Even if it interferes.
it generally directs the authorities concerned to consider the question of admission in accordance with the rules of the institution.
But, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, particularly the fact that the appellant had to lose two years of her academic career for no fault of hers, it is directed that the respondents shall issue to her an application form for admission in the post graduate M.D. Course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology and that alter the submission of the application form and compliance with other formalities by the appellant, she shall be admitted in the post graduate course in Obstetrics and Gynaecology in Dr. V.M. Medical College, Solapur, in the 1989 session, provided she is not otherwise unfit.
[966B D]
