In November 1976, the respondent issued a notice to the appellant under section 11 of the Jammu & Kashmir Houses & Shops Rent Control Act, 1966 calling upon it to pay the arrears of rent.
The notice also terminated the tenancy and called upon the appellant to vacate the demised premises.
The notice sent by registered post was received back by the respondent with the endorsement "left without address, returned to sender".
Thereupon the respondent caused a copy of the notice to be fixed to one of the doors of the premises in question.
No payment of rent was however made by the appellant subsequently.
The respondent, therefore, filed a suit in June 1977 seeking ejectment of the appellant on the ground of default in the payment of rent.
The Trial Court ordered eviction.
and the appellant 's appeals before the District .Judge and the High Court against the order of eviction failed.
Before this Court the appellant contends that (1) the safeguards in sections 11 and 12 of the Act are intended for the benefit and protection of the tenant and therefore, where the Act provides for the service of the notice, by post.
this requirement has to be strictly complied with; (2) such postal service can neither be presumed nor considered to be good service where The latter is returned to the sender due to non availability of the addressee; (3) in the absence of any enabling provision, service by some other mode, such as affixture, cannot be treated as sufficient compliance with the statute; and (4) where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done in that way or not at all and other methods of performance are necessarily forbidden.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: (1) The proviso to clause (i) of section 11(1) and the proviso to section 12(3) are intended for the protection PG NO 983 PG NO 984 of the tenant.
A Nevertheless, it will be easy to see that too strict and literal a compliance of their language would be impractical and unworkable.
[988H; 989Al (2) The proviso insists that before any amount of rent can be said to be in arrears, a notice has to be served through post.
All that a landlord can do to comply with this provision is to post a prepaid registered letter (acknowledgment due or otherwise) containing the tenant 's correct address.
Once he does this and the letter is delivered to the post office, he has no control over it.
It is then presumed to have been delivered to the addressee under section 27 of the General Clauses Act.
[989A B] (3) To interpret the provision as requiring that the letter must have been actually delivered to the addressee, would be virtually rendering it a dead letter.
[989F] (4) If a registered letter addressed to a person at his residential address does not get served in the normal course and is returned, it can only be attributed to the addressee 's own conduct.
If he is compelled to be away for some time, all that he has to do is to leave necessary instructions with the postal authorities.
[989H; 990A] (5) The more reasonable, effective, equitable and practical interpretation would be to read the words "served" as "sent by post".
correctly and properly addressed to the tenant, and the word "receipt" as the tender of the letter by the postal peon at the address mentioned in the letter.
No other interpretation will fit the situation as it is simply not possible for a landlord to ensure that a registered letter sent by him gets served on, or is received by the tenant.
[990B C] (6) The statute prescribes only one method of service for the notice and none other.
To require service by some other method to be effected over and above the postal service would be to travel outside the statute.
[99OF] (7) Where the statute does not specify any additional or alternative mode of service, there can be no warrant for importing into the statute a method of service on the lines of the provisions of C.P.C.
This Court would therefore not like to hold that a substituted ' ' service.
such as the one effected by the landlord in the present case, is a necessary or permissible requirement of the statute.
[990G] (8) The provision in regard to the notice contemplated by the statute is unsatisfactory and it is hoped that the PG NO 985 legislature would soon set it right.
On the provision as it stands, a landlord must be held to have complied with the statutory requirement by sending a notice correctly addressed to the tenant by registered post.
[991H; 992A] Hare Krishna Das vs Hahnemann Publishing Co. Ltd. 1965 66, ; Surajmull Ghanashamdas vs Samardarshan Sur, ILR ; Taylor vs Taylor, 11875] 1 Ch. D. 426.
