The house of the appellant detenu was searched and currency notes, bank drafts, bank pass books and loose sheets seized.
The detenu 's statement was recorded and he was arrested.
Iater, he made an application retracting his statement and the Magistrate made an order thereon: "Taken on record".
He was subsequently released on bail with a condition that he would attend Enforcement Department office every day.
On his moving another application, the condition was varied.
Thereafter, an order of detention was made by respondent No. 1 against the appellant under section 3 of the .
The detenu thereupon filed a writ in the High Court challenging the order, which was dismissed.
Before this Court, it was contended on behalf of the detenu that (i) his application for variation of the condition of bail and the order thereon as well as his application retracting his statement and the order thereon were not placed before the Detaining Authority, and non consideration of these vital documents vitiated the detention order; and (ii) copies of bank statements and loose sheets were not supplied to the detenu and this infringed his right to make an effective representation.
Dismissing the appeal, it was, HELD: 1.
The application for variation of condition of bail and the order passed thereon were not material or relevant documents and failure to produce the same before PG NO 1031 PG NO 1032 the Detaining Authority before arriving at his subjective satisfaction had not vitiated the detention order.
[1035A] Asha Devi wife of Gopal Sherwal Mehta (detenu) vs Shiveraj, Addl.
Chief Secretary to the Government of Gujarat Arvindbhai Purshottambhai Patel y. R.O. Iyer and Ors., Writ Petition No. 1304 of 1987 dated 25.2.1988, Bombay High Court, distinguished.
Though the detenu 's application retracting his statement and the Magistrate 's order thereon was not placed before the Detaining Authority, his retraction letter and the reply of the Directorate of Enforcement had been placed before the Detaining Authority, and as such the Authority knew about these facts.
[1035G; 1036A] 3.
There was no dispute that all the documents which were considered by the Detaining Authority in reaching his subjective satisfaction and referred to in the grounds of detention had been furnished to the detenu.
It was not necessary to furnish copies of all the documents including the bank pass books which were not material and relevant for reaching the subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority merely because they were mentioned in the panchnama.
11036F G] 4.
The bank pass books were not vital and material documents in reaching subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority and as such the failure to furnish the bank pass books to the detenu had not infringed any right of the appellant and the order of detention could not be questioned as illegal or vitiated on that account.
[1037B C] Ashok Kumar vs Union of India, [ 198X] ; , referred to.
