Under the , November 1, 1966 was fixed as the appointed day on and from which date certain territories of the State of Punjab were transferred to the Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh, alongwith some officers and staff.
Accordingly, respondents Nos. 4 and 5 who were holding the posts of Tourist Officers in the Pay scale of Rs.250 350 in the State of Punjab were allocated to Himachal Pradesh as Tourist Officers in the same scale.
The appellant who was a confirmed Reception Officer in the Department of Public Relations & Tourism, Himachal Pradesh, had been temporarily promoted on May 13, 1966 as District Public Relations Officer in the pay scale of Rs.250 500, against an ex cadre post.
In the provisional seniority list and the final seniority list published in 1971, the appellant was shown as Reception Officer while respondents Nos. 4 and 5 were shown senior to him as Tourist Officers.
The appellant made a representation to the Government regarding his promotion and seniority.
As a result, the appellant was given proforma promotion as Assistant Manager with retrospective effect from June 4, 1966.
In the seniority list prepared by the Himachal Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation on December 31, l977 the name of the appellant was placed at the top of the names of other the officers including those of respondents Nos.
l & 5.
However, on the representation of respondent Nos. 4 & 5, the Tourism Development Corporation issued an order dated PG NO 1009 PG NO 1010 April 28, 1982 that the inter se seniority of the appellant and respondents nos.
4 & 5 was to be determined on the basis of their substantive ranks on November l, 1966, and that the said respondents being in higher scale on that date would rank senior to the appellant, as the appellant was not entitled to any advantage in seniority on account of his proforma promotion.
The appellant moved a writ petition before the High Court against the order dated April 28, 1982.
The High Court dismissed the writ petition principally on the ground that the seniority list once finalised after integration could not be reopened.
Allowing the appeal, it was, HELD: (l) Both the provisional and the final seniority lists were prepared without complying with the directions of the Central Government, as contained in the letter of the Joint Secretary to the Government of lndia, Ministry of Home Affairs, dated February 14, 1967.
[1017E F] (2) According to the instructions issued by the Central Government for the integration of services, and determination of relative seniority, one of the two steps which had to be taken was determination of equivalent posts, the most important factor for such determination being the salary of the post.
[1014F G] (3) There was no attempt to determine the equivalent posts, that is to say, no endeavour was made by the Government to equate one post with another for the purpose of integration and determination of relative seniority.
Instead, the posts as they were, were placed in the seniority list.
[l017F] (4) l,under the directions of the Central Government, the post of Tourists Officer could not be equated with that of the District Public Relations Officer because the scale of pay of the former is less than that of the latter.
[1O15E] (5) One of the factors that should have been taken into consideration for the purpose of determination of relative seniority as mentioned in the letter of the Government of lndia, is length of continuous service whether temporary or permanent in the equivalent post, excluding periods for which an appointment is held in a purely stopgap or fortuitous arrangement.
[1017G H] PG NO 1011 (6) The Government utterly ignored the direction of the Central Government and the appellant 's substantive rank as the Reception Officer as on November 1, 1966 was erroneously taken into consideration for the purpose of preparing the inter se seniority.
This omission vitiates the final seniority list, apart from the omission to equate one post with another for the purpose of integration.
[1018B C] (7) Normally, when a seniority list has been made final, it should not be allowed to be challenged.
But when a seniority list is prepared ignoring all just principles and also the rules framed or directions given by appropriate authority, seriously affecting any officer.
it is liable to be examined and set aside by the Court.
[1018G H] (8) It is only on April 28, 1982 when the Government accepted the representation of respondents nos.
4 & 5 and directed that the inter se seniority of the appellant and the said respondents was to be determined on the basis of their substantive ranks as on November l. 1966 that the cause of action really arose to the appellant for moving the writ petition.
There has thus been no unreasonable delay on the part of the appellant to challenge the final seniority list.
It is also not correct to say that no representation was made by the appellant earlier.
[1019E F] (9) What has been done in the instant case is that a glarming injustice was done to the appellant by taking into account his substantive rank as the Reception Officer on November 1. 1966, while as a matter of fact.
on that date he was holding the position of District Public Relations Officers.
That was done in violation of the directions of the Central Government, and subsequently the Government rectified the mistake by granting proforma promotion to the appellant with effect from .June 4, 1966 to the post of Assistant Manager equivalent to the post of District Public Relations Officer.
There is therefore no question of taking the previous approval of the central Government as contamplated by Section 82(6) of the Act.
[1020F G; 1022l] State of Himachal pradesh vs Union of lndia [l974] 3 SCR 907; N. Subba Rao vs Union of India., [1973] l SCR 94.
