The respondents in the appeals were recognised Export Houses which had been granted Imprest licences for the import of 'uncut ' and 'unset ' diamonds with certain export obligations attached to them.
After the due discharge of the export obligations, the respondents became entitled to revalidation and endorsement of the said Imprestlicence for import of OGL items.
The said Export Houses applied under paragraph 185(4) of AM83 policy for revalidation and endorsement of the Imprest Licences.
The appellant No. 3, the Chief Controller of Imports and Exports, rejected this claim of the respondents.
Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of rejection, respondents filed writ petitions in the High Court assailing the legality of the orders 2 rejecting their claims, and seeking a mandamus to the appel lants to endorse the Imprest Licences.
Single Judge of the High Court allowed the writ peti tions, and the order was affirmed in appeal by the Division Bench.
In the appeals by the Union of India to this Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellants that: (a) in the Import Export Policy 1982 83, the entitlement of Registered Export Houses to the facility of revalidation and endorse ment of OGL items under paragraph 184 is subject to and conditioned upon the express limitations contained in clause (7) of paragraph 185 of the Policy, and that the High Court was in error in directing revalidation and endorsement without reference to the mandatory prescription provided in the said clause, and (b) that the High Court was in error in ignoring the contentions of the appellants that the respond ents had rendered themselves disentitled to relief on the ground of the inordinate and unexplained delay of one and a half years in the filing of the writ petitions.
Disposing of the Appeals, the Court, HELD: l(a) Para 185(4) was intended to provide certain incentives to the Export Houses which, upon grant of Im prest Licences, fulfil their countervailing obligations in the matter of export commitments.
The provision is a benefi cial one.
[8H; 9A] 1(b) Clauses (4) and (7), no doubt, on their plain wording present certain constructional difficulties, and it is possible to take the view that the said clauses are part of an integrated policy scheme, providing for certain incen tives to export houses and have to be read together.
This view, however, will unduly restrict the scope of the benefi cial provision.
[9A, C] 1(c) That the conditions in para 185(4) of the Policy would not be attracted to the case of Export Houses which are granted Imprest Licences, would be a harmonious con struction of clauses (4) and (7) which appears to advance and promote the objects of the policy in Paragraph 185(4) and is, at all events, not an unreasonable view to take of the matter.
[9B] 1(d) An interpretation which would unduly restrict the beneficial scope of the policy in para 185(4), would take away with one hand what the policy of the law gives with the other.
[9C] 3 2(a) If appellants had raised a specific plea of delay as a bar to the grant of relief and the delays in the present cases, having regard to the nature of the subject matter, were not inconsiderable it was perhaps necessary for the High Court to have specifically dealt with the plea.
The aspect of delay adverted to by the Single Judge was a different one viz. the delay in seeking revalidation and endorsement after the issue of the redemption certifi cate and not the delay in the filing of the writ petitions.
[11D] 2(b) It would therefore he appropriate that the appel lants ' appeals before the High Court are remitted to the Appellate Bench of the High Court.
If the Appellate Bench is persuaded to view that the delay is satisfactorily explained it may proceed to confirm the orders of the Single Judge subject to the question that the permissibility of the importable items be determined in the light of the pro nouncements of this Court in Rajprakash Chemicals Ltd. vs Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 1621 and D. Navinchandra & Co. vs Union of India; , If the delay is held by the Appellate Bench to be such as to disentitle the respond ents to relief, it will proceed to allow the appeals and dismiss the writ petitions.
[11F H]
