The Supreme Court dismissed an appeal by special leave filed by Kehar Singh, against his conviction and sentence of death awarded under section 120 B read with section 302 of the Indian Penal Code in connection with the assassination of the then Minister of India.
Indira Gandhi.
A Review Petition filed thereafter by Kehar Singh was dismissed on 7th September, 1988 and later a writ petition was also dismissed by this Court.
On 14th October, 1988 Kehar Singh 's son presented a petition to the President of lndia for the grant of pardon to Kehar Singh under Article 72 of the Constitution on the ground that the evidence on record of the criminal case established that Kehar Singh was innocent and the verdict of the courts that Kehar Singh was guilty, was erroneous.
In the petition, he also urged that it was a fit case of clemency and prayed that Kehar Singh 's representative may be allowed to see the President in person in order to explain the case concerning him.
His request for hearing was not accepted on the ground that it was not in accordance with "the well established practice in respect of consideration of mercy petitions".
Thereafter, in response to a further letter written by counsel for Kehar Singh to the President of India refuting the existence of any practice not to accord a hearing on a petition under Article 72, the Secretary to the President wrote to counsel that the President is of the opinion that he cannot go into the merits of a case finally decided by the highest Court of the land and that the petition for grant of pardon on behalf of Kehar Singh will be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of lndia.
The President of India thereafter rejected the said petition.
Hence these writ petitions and the special leave petition to this Court.
PG NO 1102 PG NO 1103 The main issues involved in the writ petitions and the S.L.P. were: (a) whether there is justification for the view that when exercising his powers under article 72, the President is precluded from entering into the merits of a case decided finally by the Supreme Court; (b) to what areas does the power of the President to scrutinise extend; and (c) whether the petitioner is entitled to an oral hearing from the President in his petition invoking the powers under article 72.
Disposing of the petitions, HELD: 1(i) The power to pardon is a part of the constitutional scheme and it should be so treated also in the Indian Republic.
It has been reposed by the people through the Constitution in the Head of the State, and enjoys high status.
It is a constitutional responsibility of great significance, to be exercised when occasion arises in accordance with the discretion contemplated by the context.
[1109H; 1110A B] W. I. Biddle vs Vuco Perovich, ; referred to. 1 (ii) The power to pardon rests on the advice tendered by the Executive to the President, who subject to the provisions of article 74(1) of the Constitution.
must act in accordance with such advice.
[1110B] Maru Ram vs Union of lndia; , followed.
2[i] It is open to the President in the exercise of the power vested in him by article 72 of the Constitution of scrutinise the evidence on the record of the criminal case and come to a different conclusion from that recorded by the court in regard to the guilt of, and sentence imposed on, the accused.
In doing so, the President does not amend or modify or supersede the judicial record.
The judicial record remains intact.
and undisturbed.
The President acts in a wholly different plane from that in which the court acted.
He acts under a constitutional power, the nature of which is entirely different from the judicial power and cannot be regarded as an extension of it.
And this is so, notwithstanding that the practical effect of the Presidential act is to remove the stigma of guilt from the accused or to remit the sentence imposed on him.
[111lC D] 2(ii) The legal of a effect of a pardon is wholly different from a judicial supersession of the original sentence.
It is the nature of the power which is determinative.
[1111G] Kuljit Singh vs Lt. Governor of Delhi, [1982] 3 S.C.R. 58; Nar A Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh, [19S5] I S.C.R. PG NO 1104 238 and Sarat Chandra Rabha and Others vs Khagendranath Nath and Others, ; , followed.
Ex Parte William Wells, ; , Ex Parte Garland, ; at 370; Ex Parte Philip Grossman, ; ; B and U.S. vs Benz, ; at 358 referred to.
3(i) There is no right in the condemned person to insist on an oral hearing before the President.
The proceeding before the President is of an executive character, and when the petitioner files his petition, it is for him to submit with it all the requisite information necessary for the disposal of the petition.
He has no right to insist on presenting on oral argument.
[1116A B] 3(ii) The manner of consideration of the petition lies within the discretion of the President, and it is for him to decide how best he can acquaint himself with all the information that is necessary for its proper and effective disposal.
The President may consider sufficient the information furnished before him in the first instance or he may send for further material relevant to the issues which he considers pertinent, and he may, if he considers it will assist him in treating with the petition, give an 'oral hearing to the parties.
The matter lies entirely within his discretion.
[1116B C] 3(iii) As regards the considerations to he applied by the President to the petition, the law in this behalf has already been laid down by this Court in Maru Ram etc.
vs Union of India [1981] I S.C.R. 1196.
[1116D] 4.
There is sufficient indication in the terms of article 72 and in the history of the power enshrined in that provision as well as existing case law, and specific guidelines need not be spelled out for regulating the exercise of the power by the President.
Indeed, it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised guidelines, since the power under Article 72 is of the widest amplitude, can contemplate a myriad kinds and categories of cases with facts and situations varying from case to case, in which the merits and reasons of State may be profoundly assisted by prevailing occasion and passing time.
[1116F F] 5.
The question as to the area of the President 's power under Article 72 falls squarely within the judicial domain and can be examined by the court by way of judicial review.
However, the order of the President cannot be subjected to PG NO 1105 judicial review on its merits except within the strict limitations defined in Maru Ram etc.
vs Union of India ; at 1249.
The function of determining whether the act of a constitutional or statutory functionary falls within the constitutional or legislative conferment of power, or is vitiated by self denial on an erroneous appreciation of the full amplitude of the scope of the power is a matter for the court.
[1115G; 1113B C] Special Reference No. I of 1964, [1965j I S.C.R. 413 at 446; State Rajasthan and Ors.
vs Union of India, ; at 80 82; Minerva Mills Ltd. vs Union of India, ; at 286 287; S.P. Sampath Kumar vs Union of India, [1987] I S.C.C. 124; A.k.
Roy, etc.
vs Union of India and Anr., ; and K.M. Nanavati vs The State of Bombay, [1961] I S.C.R. 497, referred to.
Gopal Vinayak Godse vs The State of Maharashtra and Ors., ; ; Mohinder Singh vs State of Punjab, A.I.R. , Joseph Peter vs State of Goa, Daman and Diu, ; ; Riley and Others vs Attorney General of Jamaica and Another, ; Council of Civil Service Unions and Others vs Minister for the Civil Service, ; ; Attorney General vs Times Newspapers Ltd. ; Horwitz vs Connor Inspector General of Penal Establishments of Victoria, [1908] 6 C.I.R. 38; Michael De Feritas also called Michael Abdul Malik y. Ceorge Ramoutar and Ors., , 394, Bandhua Mukti Morcha vs Union of India, ; , 161 and Rai Sahib Ram Jawaya Kapur and Ors.
vs The State of Punjab, , 235 6, distinguished.
In the instant case, having regard to the view taken on the question concerning the area and scope of the President 's power under article 72 of the Constitution, the Court directed that the petition invoking that power shall be deemed to be pending before the President to be dealt with and disposed of afresh.
The sentence of death imposed on Kehar Singh shall remain in abeyance meanwhile.
[1117C D] The Constitution of India, in keeping with modern constitutional practice, is a constitutive document, fundamental to the governance of the country, whereby, according to accepted political theory, the people of India have provided a constitutional polity consisting of certain primary organs, institutions and functionaries to exercise the powers provided in the Constitution.
[1108H; 1109A] PG NO 1106 All power belongs to the people, and it is entrusted by them to specified institutions and functionaries with the intention of working out, maintaining and operating a constitutional order.
[1109B ] To any civilised society, there can be no attributes more important than the life and personal liberty of its members.
That is evident from the paramount position given by the Courts to article 21 of the Constitution.
[1109C] The Courts are the constitutional instrumentalities to go into the scope of Article 72.
[1115B]
