In 1947 three rooms and a courtyard in an evacuee 's property were given on tenancy to the appellant by the Custodian of Evacuee Property.
In 1956 the entire property was jointly purchased by the father of the respondent and a lady.
The lady died in 1975 and her legal heirs became the co landlords of the disputed premises.
In June 1975, the father of the respondents filed an eviction petition against the appellant on the ground that the premises was required bona fide by the landlord under section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
The legal heirs of the joint purchaser viz the lady, were, however, not impleaded as parties.
The appellant contested this petition alleging that the respondent had no locus standi to file the petition, that the respondent was not the sole owner of the premises in occupation of the appellant, that there was no relation ship of landlord and tenant existing between the parties, that as other owners were not joined as parties the eviction petition was not maintainable, and further that the permis sion granted by the Slum Authority was invalid.
The Addi tional Rent Controller held that one of the co landlords could receive payment on behalf of the other and that re ceipt of rent by one landlord would not by itself make him exclusive owner when the premises were in fact owned by more than one owner and consequently the respondent alone could not terminate the tenancy of the appellant.
He further held that one coowner could not terminate the tenancy when the property was owned by joint owners and that the respondent landlord was not able to prove that there was no reasonable suitable accommodation with him and that his claim for bona fide reasonably requirement was not proved.
He accordingly dismissed the suit for eviction.
68 Aggrieved by the order of the Additional Rent Control ler, the respondent filed an appeal before the Rent Control Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that the respondent was entitled to claim the premises on the ground of bona fide requirement for the use of his family, and that the property had all along been used for residential purposes and that it would not be proper to accept the view that the purpose of letting out was residential cure commercial On the question whether one coowner could maintain the suit for eviction the Tribu nal held that in the circumstances of the case the respond ent landlord as a co owner alone could have maintained the eviction petition.
The appellant filed a second appeal and the High Court rejected the same on the ground that the action for eviction was justified in view of section 14(1)(e) of the Act, and that the need of the landlord was bona fide, and further the High Court affirmed the view that a co owner in the facts and circumstances of the case was entitled to maintain an action for eviction.
In the appeal by special leave to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellant tenant that in the absence of the other co owner the suit for eviction was incompetent, and that the bona fide need was not properly proved and the High Court was in error in upholding the order of eviction on this ground.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
When the other co owner did not object to the eviction one co owner could maintain an action for eviction even in the absence of the other co owner.
[75D] In the instant case, the direction given by the Court in the suit for specific performance of an agreement to sell filed by Smt.
Sham Kaur against the respondent landlord, was not with respect to the portion of the property which was in the occupation of the tenant appellant and which was the subject matter of the eviction petition.
The three rooms and the courtyard in question, the subject matter of dispute, fails in the share of Sunder Singh respondent who had filed the eviction petition.
Furthermore there is no evidence that Smt.
Sham Kaur or her representatives wanted the appellants to continue.
[75E G] Kanta Goel vs B.P. Pathak and others; , ; Sri Ram Pasricha vs Jagan Nath ; referred to.
The law is that the estoppel of a tenant under sec tion 116 of the Evidence Act was a recognition and statutory assimilation of the equitable principles underlying the estoppel in relation to tenants.
[76D] In the instant case, the rent had all along been col lected by the respondent from the appellant.
[76D] Tej Bhan Madan vs II Additional District Judge and others; , , referred to.
The High Court noted that the plea of the appellant that immediately prior to the filing of the petition, the landlord had rented out a few rooms on the ground floor, was not specifically raised in the pleadings nor in the first appeal, and rightly held that it was not proper to raise this question in the second appeal.
[76E F] 4.
The High Court appointed an Advocate as Local Commis sioner to visit the premises and give his report.
The report corroborated the stand of the landlord respondent.
In that view of the matter it was not possible for the High Court to have further interfered with the findings of the Appellate Court.
[77B] Vinod Kumar Arora vs Surjit Kurnar ; referred to.
The respondent was, therefore, entitled to maintain the eviction petition alone and he had proved the grounds for eviction and that his need was bona fide and that he had no other suitable accommodation in his possession.
[77E] V. Dhanpal Chettiar vs Yesodai Ammal, ; , referred to.
