A Committee consisting of two Judges of the High Court was constituted by Delhi Administration to enquire into certain incidents in January 1988, involving the lawyers and the police sequel to an alleged incident of a lawyer, being apprehended by the students of a College, and banded over to the police on the accusation of committing an offence within the campus of the said College and his subsequently being brought in handcuffs by the police for production before a Magistrate, 21 who ultimately discharged him with direction to the Commis sioner of Police to take action against the guilty police officials.
In its interim report, the Committee observed that it had 10 examine the conduct of various police officers, and, in particular, among others, the petitioners and recommended the transfer of the petitioners from their posts.
In pursuance of a notice issued by the Committee under Rule 5(2)(a) of the Rules, statements of cases on behalf of the High Court Bar Association and the Commissioner of Police together with the supporting affidavits were filed before the Committee.
The Police were required to be ready for examination from May 16, 1988 onwards but the counter affidavit and the list of witnesses had not been filed till 17th May, 1988, on which date the Commissioner of Police submitted two applications praying for postponement of hearing and for calling upon the Bar Association to start their evidence first and to call upon the Commissioner of Police to adduce the evidence thereafter.
Rejecting these applications, the Committee passed an order saying that since the Police had failed to file their counter affidavit or list of witnesses, the petitioners should be present in Court on May 19, 1988 for crossexamination.
On the petitioners ' refusing to enter the witness box for taking oath for cross examination, the Committee decided to file complaints against the petitioners for an offence under section 178 of the Indian Penal Code and in pursuance of which complaints were filed against the petitioners in the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 's Court under sub section
(4) of section 5 of the Commissions of Enquiry Act, 1952 read with section 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The petitioners challenged these orders in this Court by way of writ petitions and Special Leave Petitions.
This Court passed an order on June 2, 1988 directing the Commit tee to reconsider the whole question relating to the order in which the witnesses had to be examined in the case.
In pursuance of the aforesaid order, the Committee passed an order on 29th June, 1988 holding that the concept of burden of proof was not quite relevant in the proceedings before a Commission, under the Act, which had been given free hand to lay down its own procedure subject, of course, to the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder and that it would be difficult for the committee to lay down 22 the manner in which the witnesses were to be examined, foregoing its right to examine any witness at any stage, if his statement appeared to be relevant, that merely because there were allegations against a particular person he would not be said to be covered under section 8 B, which required a positive order from the Committee, and that when the Commit tee mentioned that it was to examine the conduct of various Police Officers and others, it did not have in view section 8 B of the Act.
The Committee specifically held that the three other persons to whom notices had been issued under section 8 B would be examined at the end of the inquiry.
On August 18, 1988 this Court quashed the orders of the Committee directing the filing of the complaints and the criminal proceedings against the petitioners before the Metropolitan Magistrate and held (a) that the Delhi Adminis tration had to examine first all its witnesses as required by Rule 5(5)(a) of the Rules framed under the Act; even those witnesses who may have filed affidavits already may first be examined in chief before they were cross examined, since it was stated that when the affidavits were filed the deponents did not know what the other parties who had also filed affidavits had stated in their affidavits; the ques tion whether a party had the right of cross examination or not shall be decided by the Committee in accordance with section 8 C of the Act; the direction to the Delhi Administration to examine its witnesses first did not apply to those witnesses who fell under section 8 B of the Act, who had to be examined at the end of the inquiry, as opined by the Committee itself; (b) that the petitioners were persons, who fell under section 8 B of the Act and had to be dealt with accordingly, and (c) that if the three persons to whom notices under section 8 B had been issued were to be examined, even according to the Committee, at the end of the inquiry there was no justifia ble reason to deny the same treatment to the petitioners who were in the same position as those three persons; the action of the Committee in asking them to be cross examined at the beginning of the inquiry was, therefore, discriminatory; mere non issue of notices to them under section 8 B ought not to make any difference if they otherwise satisfied the condi tions mentioned in section 8 B; the issue of such a notice was not contemplated under section 8 B of the Act; it was enough if at any stage the Commission considered it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person and such person would thereafter be governed by section 8 B of the Act.
Reasons for this order were to be given later.
Giving reasons for the above order the Court, HELD: 1.
Recourse to procedure under section 8 B of the Commis 23 sions of Enquiry Act, 1972 is not confined to any particular stage and if not earlier, at any rate, as soon as the Com mittee made the unequivocal declaration of its intention, in its interim report to examine the conduct of the two peti tioners it should have issued notice under section 8 B to the two petitioners, if it was of the view, for which view there is no justification, that issue of a formal notice under section 8 B was the sine qua non for attracting that Section.
At all events, the Committee could not deny the petitioners the statutory protection of section 8 B by merely refraining from issuing a formal notice even though on its own declared intention, the section was clearly attracted.
[42C E] State of Jammu and Kashmir vs Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad, [1966] Suppl.
S.C.R. page 401 and State of Karnataka vs Union of India & Another, [1978] 2 S.C.R. page 1, relied on.
2.1 The use of the word 'or ' between clauses (a) and (b) of section 8 B of the Act makes it clear that section 8 B would be attracted if requirement of either clause (a) or clause (b) is fulfilled.
Clause (a) of section 8 B applies when the conduct of any person is to be enquired into whereas clause (b) applies to a case where reputation of a person is likely to be prejudicially affected.
[42B] 2.2 The fact that no formal notice had been issued under section 8 B would constitute no justification for not treating a person to be covered by that section if otherwise the ingre dients of the said section were made out.
Having once stated in its interim report in unequivocal terms, that the conduct of these two petitioners among others was to be examined, it was not open to the Committee to still take the stand that section 8 B was not attracted in so far as they were concerned.
[42B C] 2.3 Keeping in view the nature of the allegations made in the statements of case and the supporting affidavits filed on behalf of the various Bar Associations including the Delhi High Court Bar Association, requirement of even clause (b) of section 8 B was fulfilled inasmuch as if those allegations were proved they were likely to prejudicially affect the reputation of the two petitioners.
In view of the specific term of reference which contemplated taking of "stringent action" against all those responsible, even the career of the petitioners as police officers was likely to be affected in case an adverse finding was recorded against them and the principle that the report of a Commission of Enquiry has no force proprio vigore does not, on a pragmatic approach to the consequences, seem to constitute sufficient safeguard so far as the petitioners are concerned.
[43C E] 24 The reason for the importance attached with regard to the matter of safeguarding the reputation of a person being prejudicially affected in cl.
(b) ors.
8 B of the Act is not far to seek.
[43E F] Blackstone 's Commentary of the laws of England Vol I, IVth Edition, Corpus Juris Secundum Vol. 77 at page 268 and D.F. Marion vs Davis, 55 American Law Reports page 171 referred to.
3.1 Section 8 B inter alia contemplates an opportunity being given to the person governed by the said section to produce evidence in his defence whereas section 8 C inter alia gives him the right to cross examine the witnesses who depose against him.
[45D] Not only that calling upon a person governed by section 8 B to produce evidence in his defence at the very inception of the inquiry is a contradiction in terms inasmuch as in this situation such a person would really be required to disprove statements prejudicial to him of such witnesses who are yet to be examined, it would also reduce the right of crossexam ination by such person to a mere formality for the obvious reason that by the time the witnesses who are to be crass examined are produced, the defence of such person which would normally constitute the basis for the line and object of cross examination would already be known to such witness es and they are likely to refashion their statements accord ingly.
[45E F] 3.2 Perhaps in a case where there is no other witness to give information about the alleged incident about which the inquiry is being held and the only person or persons who could give such information is or are the person or persons who are likely to be adversely affected by the inquiry, it may be necessary to depart from the above view as a matter of necessity.
But this is not one such case.
There are admittedly any number of other persons who can give evidence about what happened on the relevant dates.
[45G] Since the two petitioners clearly fell within the cate gory of persons contemplated by section 8 B of the Act and were consequently entitled to the same treatment as has been accorded by the Committee to the persons to whom notice has been issued by it under the said section, the Committee was not justified in calling upon the two petitioners to stand in the witness box for cross examination at the very initial stage of the enquiry.
[54B D] 3.3 The apprehension that in case a person governed by section 8 B 25 was to be examined at the end and at that stage such person even at the risk of not producing his defence, for some reason, chooses not to appear as a witness, the Committee would be deprived of knowing the facts in the knowledge of such person and such a course would obviously hamper the enquiry is more imaginary than real inasmuch as the power of the Commission to call upon any person to appear as a wit ness under section 4 of the Act, which in terms is very wide and is not circumscribed by fetters of stage, would be available to the Commission and it would be entitled to call such person as a witness even at that stage.
[46A C] 4.1 In view of the provisions contained in sections 4 to 6 of the Act, and the rules framed thereunder a person could not, on the belief that he was covered by section 8 B, avoid the consequence of sections 178 and 179, by claiming absolute immuni ty from binding himself by an oath or affirmation for an swering questions put to them.
[51H; 52A] Mc Grain vs Daugherty, 71 L. ed.
580; Uphaus vs Wyman, ; ; Sinclair vs United States, ; ; Kastigar vs United States, ; and Brown vs Walker40 L.ed. 819, referred to.
However, a valid justification put forth by the witness was sufficient ground to make him immune from prosecution.
[52F] Watkins vs United States, ; ; Flaxer vs United States; , and Murphy vs Waterfront Commission of New York, ; referred to.
In the instant case, the petitioners are not asserting that they could not be required at all to appear as a wit ness before the Committee and make statement on oath.
It was submitted on their behalf that they did not either wish to delay the proceedings or to show disrespect to the Commit tee, but only wanted to protect their own interest by making the submission which they made before the Committee, as per legal advice given to them, namely that they being covered by section 8 B of the Act their defence would be put to serious jeopardy and will be prejudicially affected if they were required to appear in the witness box for crossexamination at the very inception of the inquiry even before statements of witnesses proving the accusations against the petitioners had been recorded which they were entitled to defend.
[52B E] 4.2 On the view of the Committee that persons covered by 8 B were to be examined at the end of the enquiry, the fact that an affidavit of the petitioner was on record could hardly justify the petitioner being 26 called upon to enter the witness box at the very inception.
[55C] Smt.
Indira Gandhi and another vs Mr. J.C. Shah Commis sion of Inquiry, ILR 1980(1) Delhi 552 referred to.
4.3 Had the Committee not been labouring under the misapprehension that the petitioners were not covered by section 8 B, because no notices under that section had been issued to them, notwithstanding the fact that their conduct was to be examined on its own declared, intention, it would obvi ously not have required the petitioners to take oath for being cross examined at the stage at which it did so.
The subsequent orders of the Committee directing complaints to be filed against the petitioners for an offence punishable under section 178 IPC and the act of filing such complaints were the consequences of the said misapprehension.
[55F G] Since the petitioners were covered by section 8 B, the action of the Committee in compelling the petitioners to enter the witness box for being cross examined, when even according to it persons similarly situated were to do so at the end of the inquiry, was in itself discriminatory.
There was, there fore, valid justification for the refusal by the petitioners to take oath for cross examination at the stage when they were required to do so.
[55H; 56A B] Therefore, the Committee should not have, in the instant case, directed the filing of a complaint against either of the petitioners for an offence punishable under section 178 IPC.
[56C] 5.
Since the action of the Committee in holding that the petitioners were not covered by section 8 B of the Act and com pelling them to enter the witness box on the dates in ques tion was discriminatory and the orders directing complaint being filed against the petitioners were illegal, it is a case involving infringement of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution.
In such a situation, the power of this Court to pass an appropriate order in exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 142 of the Constitution cannot be seriously doubted, particularly having regard to the special facts and circumstances of this case.
[56D El The orders directing filing of complaints being invalid, the consequential complaints and the proceedings thereon including the orders of the Magistrate issuing summons cannot survive.
[56E F] 6.
If the petitioners are compelled to face prosecution.
in spite of 27 the finding that the orders directing complaint to be filed against them were illegal, it would cause prejudice to them.
Therefore, this Court can interfere in the matter.
[56G] 7.
Apart from the directions contained in this Court 's order dated 18th August, 1988, it is not expedient to lay down any particular rigid procedure to be followed by the Committee with regard to sequence in which witnesses were to be examined by it.
[41G H]
