The U.P. Legislature enacted in 1973 the Uttar Pradesh Urban Planning and Development Act.
On or about 11th Septem ber, 1974 Lucknow had been declared to be a development area by a notification.
The Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act 1984 was made effective from 24th September, 1984.
Notifications under section 4(1) and a declaration under section 6 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 were issued on 8th December, 1984 in respect of the Housing Scheme (Gomti Nagar) Phase II on the 28th December, 1984 in respect of Dalibagh Housing Scheme, and on the 21st February, 1980 in respect of the Housing Scheme (Gomti Nagar) Phase III.
The owners of the land which were sought to be acquired by the aforesaid notifications filed writ petitions in the High Court and obtained stay orders in respect of taking over of possession of the diverse lands on the ground that the notifications under section 4(1) and section 6 of the Act have been passed simultaneously.
A Notification under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 was issued on the 6th May, 1985 declaring that the lands of the respondents were needed for a public purpose viz., construc tion of market yard for the Krishi Utpadan Samiti.
The Notification further contained a declaration that since there was urgency for the acquisition the provisions of action 17(IA) and section 17(4) of the Act shall apply and the provisions of section 5A shall not apply.
On the same day i.e. on 6th May, 1985 another Notification was issued under section 6 making a declaration 93 that the laud was required for the public purpose viz., construction of a market yard.
That Notification also con tained direction as contemplated in section 17(1) and (IA) authorising the Collector to take possession of the land even before the declaration of the award under section 11.
Aggrieved by the acquisition the respondents filed two writ petitions and contended before the Division Bench of the High Court that in view of the amendments introduced by the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984, the declaration as contemplated under section 6 could not have been made on the same day on which the Notification under section 4 was published, and that after the amendment, the Notification under section 6 of the Act can only be issued after the Notification under section 4 was published.
The High Court was of the view that prior to the amend ment, a declaration under section 6 could be made simultane ously with the publication of the Notification under section 4(1), but after the amendment, a declaration can only be made "after the date of publication of the Notification under section 4(1)" and came to the conclusion that there must be difference of dates between the date of the publica tion of the Notification under section 4 and section 6.
The High Court held that the notification under section 6 was therefore rendered illegal and as such the appellants were not entitled to take possession of the respondents ' land.
It accordingly quashed the Notification dated 6th May, 1985 issued under section 6 of the Act.
In the appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf of the State appellants that the amendment of section 17(4) by the words "after the date of the publication of the notification" was necessitated because of the change of the expressions in sub section (1) of section 4 which for the first time gave a definition of the date of the publication of the notification.
Similarly, in section 6(2) the last date of the publication as enjoined in section 6 had been defined as the date of publication.
For this purpose, it was necessary to introduce the expression "after the date of the publication of the notification" under sub section (4) of section 17.
On the question whether the declaration under section 6 of the Act would be issued simultaneously along with a notification under section 4 of the Act in view of the amendment made by section 17(4) of the Act; Dismissing the Appeals, 94 HELD: l(a) The words "after the date of the publication of the notification" in sub section (4) of section 17 read simpliciter clearly indicate that declaration under section 6 had to be made after the publication of the notification meaning thereby subsequent to the date of the publication of the notification.
There is nothing in the the scheme of the Act which militates against such a construction.
[106F G] l.(b) No alteration in meaning by alteration of language can result unless the requirement of the English language demand it or those requirements permit it and the sense of the section demands it.
[107A B] 2.
At times where emergency provisions are invoked emergent action may be taken but in such a situation in view of the state of law that was before it, the legislature has made a conscious change which cannot be explained away merely because this is as a consequence of the changes in sections 4 and 6 of the Act.
[106G H] Smt.
Somawanti & Ors.
vs State of Punjab, Babu Singh & Ors.
vs Union of India & Ors., AIR (1979) SC 1713; Collector (District Magistrate) Allahabad & Anr.
vs Raja Ram Jaiswal; , referred to.
The basic principle of construction of every statute is to find out what is clearly stated and not to speculate upon latent imponderables.
The scheme of the Act also must be looked into.
In interpreting the statutes it is safer to rely on the obvious meaning rather than to investigate the imponderables.
[106D] Shri Balaganesan Metals vs M.R. Shanmugham Chetty & Ors., ; ; Raja Satyendra Narayan Singh & Anr.
vs State of Bihar & Ors., referred to.
It is the job of the Court to interpret the intention of the legislature by the words used.
The fairest and the most rational method to interpret the will of the legisla ture is by exploring intentions at the time when the law was made by signs, the most natural and probable.
These signs are either the words, the context, the subject matter, the effects and the consequence or the spirit and reason of the law.
The words have to be understood in their usual and most known signification.
[107C D] Lord Howard de Walden vs IRC, ; ; Hopes vs Hopes.
[1948] 2 AIR 920; referred to.
95 Blackstone Commentaries in the Laws of England, Vol.
1 p. 59 referred to.
It will be open to the appellants to issue a fresh declaration under section 6, if so advised, within the period contemplated in the proviso to section 6(1) of the Act read with its first Explanation.
[107F]
