The appellant manufactures cotton fabric on power looms.
By virtue of two notifications issued under Rule 8(1) of the Central Excise Rules 1944 unprocessed cotton fabric was exempt from excise duty as also additional duties.
Since the appellant was using the process of 'calendering ', the Cen tral Excise authorities held that the cotton fabric manufac tured by it ceases to be "unprocessed".
The collector of Central Excise, directed the appellant to pay levy on the manufacture of the calendered cotton fabric, and also levied a penalty of Rs. 1,00,000 under Rule 173.
On appeal, the Central Board of Excise and Customs affirmed the levy of duty, but set aside the imposition of penalty.
The appellant preferred an appeal before the Cus toms, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal.
The Tribunal held that calendering is a finishing process and it was not necessary for the process of calendering to be a process which belonged to the same genus as those enumerated in Sec.
2(f)(v) to take the cotton fabric out of the exemp tion.
It would be sufficient that of calendering is a "process" of cotton fabric even if it does not partake of the other processes specifically enumerated in the preceding expression in section 2(j)(v)2.
In that view of the matter the Tribunal 215 dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant.
This appeal under Sec.
35L of the Act is against the Tribunal 's Order.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that "plaincalendering" process neither adds anything to the cotton fabric nor the effect brought about by it is lasting; it was purely a temporary finish and that having regard to the nature of the process it is plainly manifest that it does not impart to the fabric either of the two ingredients necessary to bring the process into the family of processes envisaged by the preceding expressions in Sec. 2(f)(v).
On behalf of the Revenue it was submitted that since the Tribunal had not specifically examined this aspect and recorded its finding thereon, it would be appropriate to remit the matter to the Tribunal.
Allowing the appeal, and remitting the matter to the Appellate Tribunal for a fresh disposal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The expression ejus dem generis 'of the same kind or nature ' signifies a principle of construction whereby words in a statute which are otherwise wide but are associated in the text with more limited words are, by implication, given a restricted operation and are limited to matters of the same class are genus as preceding them.
If a list or string or family of genus describing terms are followed by wider or residuary or sweeping up words, then the verbal context and the linguistic implications of the preceding words limit the scope of such words.
But the preceding words or expressions of restricted meaning must be susceptible of the import that they represent a class.
If no class can be found, ejus dem generis rule is not attracted and such broad construction as the subsequent words may admit will be favoured.
[220F; 221A B] S.S. Magnhild (owners) vs Mc Intvre Bros. & Co., ; Tribhuban Parkash Nayyar vs Union of India, [1970] 216 2 SCR 732 and U.P.S.E. Board vs Hari Shankar, ; relied on.
Statutory Interpretation by Rupert Cross; Statutory Construction by Francis Bennian, relied on.
The definition of "manufacture" obtaining in Sec. 2(f) of the Central Excise Act was amended by Act 5 of 1986 giving it an extended meaning.
[220A] Empire Industries vs Union of India, [1985] Suppl.
1 SCR 292 relied on.
In the present case the expressions 'bleaching, mercerising, dyeing, printing, water proofing, rubberising, shrink proofing, organdie processing ' which precedes the expression 'or any other process ' contemplate processes which impart a change of a lasting character to the fabric by either the addition of some chemical into the fabric or otherwise. 'Any other process ' in the section must, share one or the other of these incidents.
The expression "any other process" is used in the context of what constitutes manufacture in its extended meaning and the expression "unprocessed" in the exempting notification draws its mean ing from that context.
[222G H; 223A]
