Rule 23 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 prohibits the addition of any colouring matter to an article of food, except as specifically permitted by the rules.
Rule 28 interdicts use of coal tar food colours or a mixture thereof, except those specifically enumerated there in, in food.
Item 2 of the said list includes 'sun set yellow FCF '.
Rule 29 prohibits the use of even the coal tar food colours permitted under Rule 28, in or upon any food, other than those enumerated in Rule 29. 'Fruit products ' was one such item of food so enumerated under cl.(f) of Rule 29 as it stood at the relevant time.
Section 16 of the Preven tion of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 provides for punishment of the offenders.
The appellant, a tradesman, was found guilty by the Trial Court of the offence of selling 'Kesari coloured sweet supari sali ' adulterated with yellow basic coal tar dye and sentenced to one year 's simple imprisonment and a fine of Rs.2,000, both being statutorily compulsory 139 minimum sentences under section 16(1)(a)(i) of the Act.
He was, however, acquitted of the charge by the first appellate court but on appeal by the State the High Court reversed the judgment of acquittal and restored the conviction and sen tence.
In this appeal by special leave, it was contended for the appellant that the legislation being penal, the expres sion 'Fruit products ' in Rule 29(1 ') should receive a rea sonably liberal construction, and if so construed, 'supari ' being basically and essentially an yield of the arecapalm would reasonably admit of being considered such a fruit product in which the use of coal tar colours was not prohib ited.
In the alternative, it was contended that 'supari ' in the form in which it was offered for sale in this case was a 'flavouring agent ' within the meaning of Rule 29(m), in which case also the use of permitted coal tar food colours was not prohibited.
It was further contended that the appel lant having acted bona fide on a particular understanding of Rule 29(1) which could not be said to be wholly implausible, he should be entitled to the benefit of doubt.
Lastly, a grievance was made that the appellant, who was a small time tradesman and had purchased the supari from a big manufac turer to sell in retail, had alone been exposed to prosecu tion while the distributor had gone scot free.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The scheme of Rule 23, 28 and 29 of the Pre vention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 makes it apparent that coal tar food colours permitted by Rule 28 can be used if the food articles in question are 'Fruit products ' as understood in Rule 29(1).
[144C, F] 1.2 'Supari ' in the form in which it was offered for sale in the instant case though vegetative in origin and derived from and prepared out of the usufruct of areca palm, does not admit of being classified as a 'Fruit product ' under Rule 29(1).
Merely because a particular article of food was of plant origin did not render that article neces sarily a 'Fruitproduct '.
Even products derived from, or associated in their origin with fruits need not ipso facto be 'Fruit products ' for purposes and within the meaning of Rule 29(1).
Item 16 of Appendix B to the Rules, which dealt with 'Fruit products ', referred to juice, syrup, squash, beverage, drinks, sauce, ketchup, relish, marmalade, chatni etc.
That indicated what were envisaged as 'Fruit products ' in Rule 29(1). 'Supari ' also does not admit of being classi fied as a 'flavouring agent ' under Rule 29(m).
[145F H; 146A] 140 2.
The distinction between literal and legal meaning of statutory language lies at the heart of the problem of interpretation of statutes.
The Court is not entitled to decline to determine the legal meaning of a statute on the principle of non liquet.
In the instant case, a wider con struction of 'Fruit Products ' in cl.(f) which is in the nature of exception to Rule 29, results automatically in a corresponding narrower construction of the substantive provision in Rule 29.
This is not a case of relieving provi sion excepting from the definition of an offence where the rule of construction against doubtful penalisation operates.
The offence is really a violation of a prohibition imposed on a penalty as a social defence mechanism in a socio eco nomic legislation.
The construction appropriate to such a legislation would be one which would suppress the mischief aimed at and advance the remedy.
It would, therefore, be a strain on the statutory language and the statutory scheme to include 'supari ' in the form in which it was sold, within 'Fruit products ' as understood in cl.(f) of Rule 29.
[150A D] Planters Nut and Chocolate Co. Ltd. vs The King, ; Ramavatar Budhai Prasad vs The Assistant Sales Tax Officer, XII STC 286; Municipal Corpn.
vs Kacheroo Mal, ; ; Goodfellow vs Johnson, [1965] 1 All E.R. 941 and Criminal Law: Smith & Hogan, 5th Edn.
p. 92, re ferred to.
3.1 The question of what a word means in its context within the Act is a question of legal interpretation and, therefore, one of law.
The choice of the proper rule of construction to be applied to ascertain the meaning is again a matter of law.
To countenance the contention of the appel lant that he had acted bona fide on a particular understand ing of Rule 29(f) would be to contradict one of the funda mental postulates of a legal order that rules of law enforce objective meaning to be ascertained by the courts, and to substitute the opinion of the person charged with the breach of the law for the law itself.
Otherwise, the consequence would be that whenever a defendant in a criminal case thought that the law was thus and so, he is to be treated as though the law was thus and so, that is, the law actually is thus and so.
[150D G] United States vs Wurzbach, ; (@) 399; Criminal Law: Smith & Hogan, 5th Edn.
p. 70, referred to. 3.2 The statute prescribes a strict liability without need to establish mens rea.
The actus reus is itself an offence.
There might be cases where some mental element might be a part of the actus reus itself.
This is not one of those cases where anything more than the mere doing 141 of the prescribed act requires to be proved.
The appellant is, therefore, not entitled to the benefit of doubt.
[151F] Pyarali K. Tejani vs M.R. Dange, [1974] 2 SCR 154; Goodfellow vs Johnson, ; Smedleys Limited vs Breed, and Criminal Law: Smith & Hogan, 5th Edu.
p. 92, referred to.
The big offenders who manufactured the 'supari ' and who distributed them to the retailer in the instant case have gone scot free.
The offence was committed ten years ago and the appellate court had acquitted the appellant.
Fur thermore, the expression 'Fruit products ' in Rule 29(f) in the context of what the delegated legislative authority really meant and wanted to convey was not a model of preci sion and has since been deleted enumerating in its place precisely the specific products in which the food colours permitted by Rule 28 could be used, leaving no room for the possibility of any argument of the kind advanced in this case.
[153D E, F] This is, therefore, a fit case in which the appropriate Government should exercise its executive powers of remission of the substantive sentence of imprisonment, though not of fine, under section 432 Cr.
P.C. or under other law appropriate to the case.
The imposition of the substantive sentence of imprisonment on the appellant to be postponed till his prayer for remission, which he shall make, is considered and disposed of.
[153G H; 154A B] Ganeshmal Jashraj vs Govt.
of Gujarat and Anr.
, ; and Inderjeet vs U.P. State, ; , referred to.
