On April 5, 1988 an order of detention was passed against the petitioner in the writ petition under section 3(2) of the .
He could not be served with this order and taken into preventive custody as he was abscond ing.
He was treated as an absconder and resort was had to section 7(2) of the Act.
A proclamation was obtained against him under Sections 82 and 83 of the Criminal Procedure Code 1973 and was executed on May 5, 1988.
He surrendered thereafter in Court on July 4, 1988 and was sent to the District Jail where he was served the detention order and the grounds of detention on July 5, 1988.
In the grounds of detention three incidents were enumer ated indicating that the petitioner had acted in a manner which was against the maintenance of public law and order situation.
The incidents were: (1) On July 8, 1987 the petitioner had gone along with his associates and threatened the contractor of a mango garden that fees for goondagardi (Chauth) should be paid to him and assaulted the contractor.
The matter was reported to the police who registered a case under Sections 301 and 323 I.P.C. (2) On February 11, 1988 the petitioner threatened a shopkeeper that he should pay Rs. 10,000 immediately falling which he would killed.
The shopkeeper reported the matter to the police who had 258 registered a case under section 506 I.P.C. (3) On March 3, 1988 the petitioner taking a Revolver in his hand moved in the market area and, threatened the shop keepers if they do not pay 'Chauth ' they could not open their shops.
On account of this threat the entire market was closed.
The grounds of detention also informed the petitioner that he could make a representation under section 3 of the Act and that the matter would be submitted under section 10 to the Advisory Board, and that he could make any representation for the consideration of the Board.
The meeting of the Advisory Board was fixed on August 2, 1988.
The Board considered the written and oral representa tions of the petitioner and gave a report that there was sufficient cause for the detention of the petitioner.
The State Government accepted the report of the Advisory Board and passed a further order on August 17/18, 1988 confirming the detention of the petitioner.
In the writ petition to this Court the detention order was assailed on the following grounds: (1) The three grounds set out in the grounds of deten tion are not incidents which would affect the maintenance of public order or the even tempo of the life of the community.
(2) the third incident has been concocted in order to give credibility to the detention order.
(3) The petitioner was denied the opportunity to have the assistance of a friend when he appeared before the Advisory Board, and (4) That the Central Government had not considered the petitioner 's case when the State Government sent a report under section 3(5) of the Act and the nonapplication of mind by the Central Government vitiates the detention of the petitioner.
Dismissing the writ petition, HELD: 1 .(a) The demand for chauth from the contractor and the attack launched on him would show that it was not a case of singling out a particular contractor for payment of chauth but a demand expected to be complied with by all owners or contractors of mango groves in the locality.
In such circumstances the demand made and the attack launched would undoubtedly cause fear and panic in the minds of all the owners and contractors of mango groves in that area, and this would have affected the even tempo of life of the community.
[265E F] 259 l.(b) The incident in the second ground must also be viewed in the same manner in which the first incident has been construed as indicated above.
It is not as if the demand and the threat following it were made against Ashok Kumar in an isolated manner.
On the other hand, the demand had been made as part of a scheme to extort money from all the shopkeepers under a threat that their continuance of business and even their lives would be in danger if chauth was not paid.
This demand would have certainly made all the shopkeepers in that locality feel apprehensive that they too would be forced to make payments to the petitioner.
and that otherwise they would not be allowed to run their shops.
[265G H; 266A B] l.(c) In so far as the incident in the third ground is concerned, the petitioner is stated to have taken a revolver with him and threatened all the shopkeepers in the market, that if anyone failed to pay 'chauth ' he would not be al lowed to open his shop and he would have to face the conse quences.
This incident cannot be considered as merely caus ing disturbance to the law and order situation but must be viewed as affecting the even tempo of life in the market.
[266B D] l.(d) Whether an act relates to law and order or to public order depends upon the impact of the act on the life of the community.
In other words if the reach and effect and potentiality of the act disturb or dislocate the even tempo of the life of the community, it will be an act which will affect public order.
[266E, G] In the instant case, it cannot be said that the demands made and threats given by the petitioner to the contractors and shopkeepers as mentioned in the three grounds would have its reach only to the limited extent of affecting the law and order situation, and not go so far as to affect the maintenance of public order.
[267E] Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs State of Bihar, ; ; Arun Ghosh vs State of West Bengal, ; Nagendra Nath Mondal vs State of West Bengal, ; ; Nandial Roy vs State of West Bengal, referred to and Gulab Mehra vs State of U.P., [1987] IV SCC 302, distinguished.
It is not possible to accept the contention that third incident referred to in the grounds of detention is a concocted altair.
The records go to show that H.C. Khajan Singh had promptly reported the incident at the police station and the truth of his report had been verified by Inspector R.C. Verma.
[267H; 268A] 260 State of U.P. vs Kamal Kishore Saini, ; at 213 referred to.
Though the Advisory Board had permitted the detenu to appear along with a friend the detenu had failed to take a friend with him.
He did not also represent to the Advisory Board that he did not have adequate time to get the services of a friend and that he required time to have the services of a friend.
Such being the case, he cannot take advantage of his own lapses and raise a contention that the detention order is illegal because he was not represented by a friend at the meeting of the Advisory Board.
He did not also choose to represent to the Advisory Board that he was not given sufficient time to secure the service of a friend.
[271C D; 272B] 4.(a) The Central Government had in fact considered the report sent by the State Government under section 3(5) of the Act, and saw no reason to revoke the detention order in exercise of its powers under section 14.
[272D] 4.(b) The petitioner was absconding and proclamations were made under sections 82 and 83 Cr.
P.C. and it was only thereafter the petitioner had surrendered himself in Court.
The challenge to the detention order on ground of delay in arrest is not sustainable.
This is not a case where the petitioner was freely moving about but no arrest was effect ed because his being at large was not considered a hazard to the maintenance of public order.
[272F]
