The appellant was a diploma holder and was serving as an Administrator/Instructor since 1976 in an Engineering Col lege.
In May 1987 he submitted an application to the Univer sity for study leave for three years to enable him to prose cute his studies in the B.E. Engineering Degree Course.
The Study Leave Committee recommended the case on August 3, 1987 and the Syndicate of the University accepted the recommenda tion on August 14, 1987 and the appellant was granted study leave for a period of 3 years with full pay.
This order was communicated to the appellant on October 29, 1987.
The appellant submitted an application on November 14, 1987 for admission on the B.E. Degree Course.
This application was made after the last date for admission in the general seats had expired.
The Officer in Charge, Admissions raised cer tain objections to the effect that the appellant submitted the application after expiry of the last date and that he had obtained less than 60% marks in the Diploma Examination passed by him.
The Dean considered the objections and recom mended the case of the appellant for admission to the Vice Chancellor.
Thereafter the order for admission of the appel lant was issued by the Dean, the appellant deposited the fees and joined classes from January 16, 1988.
On February 18, 1988 the appellant was communicated an order dated January 20, 1988 of the Dean directing that his admission was put in abeyance until further orders.
The appellant challenged the aforesaid order of with drawal of his admission, before the High Court unsuccessful ly. 231 In the appeal to this Court, the objections that were raised to the admission of the appellant were that: (1) he had not secured 60% of marks which was the minimum require ment for admission, and (2) that he should not have been admitted after the last date.
The admission it was submitted was illegal.
Allowing the Appeal, the Court, HELD: 1.
The appellant had secured more than 60% of marks in the aggregate in the Diploma Examination and was not disqualified for admission in that regard.
[235B] 2.
When the appellant made the application beyond the last date, his application should not have been entertained.
But the application was entertained presumably on the basis of the resolution of the Syndicate dated December 13, 1970.
The appellant also brought to the notice of the Dean the said resolution and also the implementation of the same by admitting seven teacher candidates.
[236E F] 3.
Although the admission to the B.E. degree course is governed by statutes of the University and admission rules, the Syndicate 's resolution dated December 13, 1970 had also been kept alive.
Neither the Dean, nor the Vice Chancellor was aware of the true position, viz whether the resolution had become infructuous in view of the statutes and admission rules.
The University should have revoked the said resolu tion to obviate any ambiguity in the matter of admission or included the same in the statutes as part of the admission rules.
[236C E] 4.
It is the duty of the University to see that its statutes, rules and resolutions are clear and unambiguous and do not mislead bona fide candidates.
[236D] 5.
When after considering all facts and circumstances and also the objections by the office to the admission of a candidate, the ViceChancellor directs the admission of such a candidate such admission could not be said to have been made through mistake.
[236G] 6.
Assuming that the appellant was admitted through mistake, the appellant not being at fault, it is difficult to sustain the order withholding the admission of the appel lant.
[236H]
