Sub section (2) of section 21 of the empowers the Tribunal not to entertain an applica tion the grievance in respect of which had arisen beyond three years immediately preceding the date on which the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal became exercisable under the Act.
The appellant, an Upper Division Clerk, was suspended from service, in July 1975 pending on account of the insti tution of criminal proceedings against him.
By an order dated August 4, 1975 he was sanctioned subsistence allowance at the rate of 50 per cent of his salary last drawn.
By a further order dated May 6, 1982 the subsistence allowance was reduced to 25 per cent of the salary he was drawing on the date of suspension.
He moved a petition before the Tribunal in the year 1988 for a direction to the Government to restore the original order of August 4, 1975.
That peti tion was dismissed by the Tribunal solely on the ground that the order reducing the allowance having been passed on May 6, 1982, it could not entertain the application made more than five years thereafter, apparently on the ground of limitation set out in section 21(2) of the Act.
In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that the Government had failed to review the order of May 6, 1982 even though a long period of five years had elapsed after the reduction of the subsistence allowance, that the delay in conclusion of the criminal proceedings, as a consequence of which he had been kept under suspension, 225 was not due to him and in the circumstances it was not just and appropriate that he should be paid a subsistence allow ance at a reduced rate for an unreasonably long period.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The Tribunal was not right in rejecting the application.
[229F] 2.
The cause of action in respect of a prayer seeking enhancement of subsistence allowance arises every month in which the said allowance at the reduced rate is paid.
There fore, in the instant case, though no relief could be given to the appellant in respect of the period which was beyond three years from the date on which the Tribunal commenced to exercise its powers under the Act, it was quite open to the Tribunal to consider whether it was proper for the Govern ment to continue to give effect to the order dated May 6, 1982 from any subsequent date, and if the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the said order was required to be re vised it could pass an appropriate order notwithstanding the fact that a period of five years had elapsed from the date on which the order reducing the subsistence allowance was passed.
While doing so it was open to the Tribunal to fix a date within the period of the said three years from which the appellant should be paid subsistence allowance at the revised rate having due regard to the date of the applica tion.
[229C E] 3.1.
The very nomenclature of the allowance makes it clear that the amount paid to a Government servant under suspension should be sufficient for bare subsistence in this world in which the prices of the necessaries of life are increasing every day on account of the conditions of infla tion obtaining in the country.
More so, when a Government servant cannot engage himself in any other activity during the period of suspension.
The amount of subsistence allow ance payable to the Government servant concerned should, therefore, be reviewed from time to time where the proceed ings drag on for a long time, even though there may be no express rule insisting on such review.
[228F G] 3.2.
In doing so, the authority concerned no doubt has to take into account whether the Government servant is in any way responsible for the undue delay in the disposal of the proceedings initiated against him.
If the Government servant is not responsible for such delay or even if he is responsible for such delay to some extent but is not pri marily responsible for it, it is for the Government to consider whether the 226 order of suspension should be continued or whether the subsistence allowance should be varied to his advantage or not.
[228G H; 229A] 4.
The case is remanded to the Tribunal to dispose of the application made by the appellant on merits.
[229G]
