The appellant undertook the construction of a Farmers ' Community Centre Building by an agreement entered into with the Union of India and the State of Himachal Pradesh, the respondents in the appeal.
The agreement dated June 20, 1968 provided, by Clause 2, for the payment of compensation for delay, if the contractor should have been guilty of delay in commencing the work or in completing it, the quantum of compensation to be deter mined by the Superintending Engineer and that his decision was final.
Clause 25 provided for settlement of disputes by arbitration.
It excluded from arbitration matters or dis putes in respect of which provision had been made elsewhere or otherwise in the contract.
Certain disputes arose between the parties, and in terms of clause 25 of the agreement they were referred to a sole arbitrator.
The Contractor submitted a claim in respect of 9 items, and the department filed a counter claim to the effect that they were entitled to receive from the Contractor a sum of Rs.24,000 on account of payment of 10 per cent compensation for not executing the work in accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement.
The arbitrator gave his award, and the same was filed in the Court.
The Contractor filed objections for modification in respect of items 1, 8 and 9 of his claim and item No. 1 of the respondents ' counter claim.
The department also filed its objections.
The Single Judge dismissed the objections of the respondents and 289 allowed the appellants ' claim only in respect of item No. 1 of the respondents ' counter claim.
The single Judge took the view that a reading of clause 2 with clause 25 made it clear that any compensation under clause 2 could be adjudicated upon only by the Superintending Engineer or the Development Commissioner and that it was not open to the arbitrator to have entered upon a reference in regard to this claim at all.
Both parties filed appeals to the Division Bench.
The Bench reversed the order of the Single Judge and restored the award to its original terms.
It held that inasmuch as a bonafide dispute can be raised by the contractor in regard to his liability to compensation under clause 2 and as no machinery was provided in clause 2 for the resolution of such dispute, there is ample justification for holding that resort can be had to arbitration under clause 25.
On this view of the matter, the Bench did not agree with the Single Judge that the arbitrator had traveled outside his jurisdic tion in awarding compensation to the Government against the contractor for the delay in executing the work.
In the appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf of the appellants that the terms of Clause 2 clearly envis age the determination of the amount of compensation for the delay in the execution of the work only by the Superintend ing Engineer and specifically mentions that the decision of the Superintending Engineer in writing shall be final.
The opening words of Clause 25, "Except otherwise provided in the contract" clearly take out of the purview of Clause 25 any dispute in respect of a claim under Clause 2.
Even if Clause 25 be held applicable, the question of submitting a dispute in this regard to the arbitrator could only arise if there had been a determination and a dispute under Clause 2.
It was further submitted that there was no dispute at all between the parties on the question of compensation and that a dispute cannot be said to arise merely because a counter claim was for the first time put forward by the Department before the arbitrator.
On behalf of the respondent Department the appeal was contested by contending that Clause 2 was in the natore of a penal clause which automatically takes effect irrespective of any default.
The clause made the contractor liable for the penalty prescribed therein whenever there was a delay in the completion of the contract, whatsoever might have been the reason therefore, the question as to whether the con tractor was at default or not being totally immaterial.
The Department was, therefore, entitled to automatically deduct from the bills payable to the contractor, the compensation or penalty at the rate mentioned in Clause 2 290 or such reduced amount as may be determined in a particular case by the Superintending Engineer and that if the contrac tor objected to the deduction that would give risc to a dispute which can be the subject matter of arbitration under Clause 25.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Clause 2 of the contract makes the time speci fied for the performance of the contract a matter of essence and emphasises the need on the part of the contractor to scrupulously adhere to the time schedule approved by the Engineer in charge.
With a view to compel the contractor to adhere to this time schedule, this clause provides a kind of penalty in the form of a compensation to the Department for default in adhering to the time schedule.
[297E F] 2.
Clause 2 contains a complete machinery for determina tion of the compensation which can be claimed by the Govern ment on the ground of delay on the part of contractor in completing the contract as per the time schedule agreed to between the parties.
The decision of the Superintending Engineer is in the nature of a considered decision which has to arrive at after considering the various mitigat ing circumstances that may be pleaded by the contractor or his plea that he is not liable to pay compensation at all under this clause.
[298E F] 3.
The question regarding the amount of compensation leviable under Clause 2 has to be decided only by the Super intending Engineer and no one else.
[298G] 4.
The opening part of Clause 25 clearly excludes mat ters like those mentioned in Clause 2 in respect of which any dispute is left to be decided by a higher official of the Department.
[299C] 5.
The question of awarding compensation under Clause 2 is outside the purview of the arbitrator and the compensa tion, determined under Clause 2 either by the Engineer in Charge or on further reference by the Superintending Engi neer will not be capable of being called in question before the arbitrator.
[299D] 6.
Clause 25 which is the arbitration clause starts with an opening phrase excluding certain matters and disputes from arbitration and these are matters or disputes in re spect of which provision has been made elsewhere or other wise in the contract.
These words can have reference only to provisions such as the one in paranthesis in Clause 2 291 by which certain types of determination are left to the administrative authorities concerned.
[299B C] 7.
The question of any negligence or default on the part of the contractor has many facets and to say that such an important aspect of the contract cannot be settled by arbi tration but should be left to one of the contracting parties might appear to have far reaching effects.
In the instant case, it is made clear that the decision regarding non arbitrability is only on the question of any compensation which the government might claim in terms of Clause 2 of the contract.
This is not an undefined power.
The amount of compensation is strictly limited to a maximum of 10 percent and with a wide margin of discretion to the Superintending Engineer.
It is this power that is kept outside the scope of arbitration.
[299E, F, H; 300A]
