The appellant was inducted into the structure in ques tion by the owner in 1953.
In 1969, the owner died and some dispute arose between his legal representatives and the respondent.
The dispute was finally decided in favour of the respondent.
The appellant duly recognised him as landlord and started paying rent.
In 1973, in response to a notice received from the Municipal Authorities asking him to remove the disputed structure on the ground that it was erected on Government land, the appellant was forced to file a suit in the Civil Court, challenging the validity of the notice and praying for injunction against the Municipal authorities from inter fering with his possession.
The respondent thereafter filed a suit against the appellant on the grounds of default in payment of rent and denial of his title by him.
It was alleged that the appel lant had challenged the respondent 's title in the plaint filed in the earlier suit.
The case of default in payment of rent was rejected, but the suit was decreed on the ground of denial of title.
On appeal, the Additional District Judge confirmed the decree and held that the statements in the plaint amounted to disclaimer and, in any event, the appellant had failed to acknowledge the landlord 's title therein and consequently he was liable to eviction under cl.(f) of section 13(1) of the Act.
The appellant 's second appeal was also rejected by the High Court at the admission stage.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: In providing disclaimer as a ground for eviction of a tenant in cl.(f) of section 13(1) of the Rajasthan Premises (Control of Rent and Eviction) Act, 1950, the Legislature decided to give effect to the 331 provisions of cl.(g) of section 111 of the .
The principle of forfeiture on disclaimer is rounded on the rule that a man cannot approbate and repro bate at the same time.
Since the consequence of applying the rule is very serious, it must be held that the denial has to be clear and in unequivocal terms.
[334C D] In the instant case, the 1973 suit was not directed against any of the defendants excepting the Municipality and the statements in the plaint were made by way of giving the background in which the impugned notice by the Municipal officers had been issued.
No relief against the other de fendants including the present respondent was prayed for.
Even interpreting the plaint in a manner as favourable to the landlord as may be possible it has to be accepted that the document cannot be construed to clearly deny the re spondent 's title in unambiguous terms.
One thing that is conspicuous is that the appellant did not claim any title in himself.
He expressly described the character of his posses sion as that of a tenant.
Examining the entire plaint in this background the ground contemplated under section 13(1)(f) of the Act is not made out.
[334B, E F] Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan vs Municipal Board of Sitapur and another, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 1923, referred to.
