This was an appeal by the defendants in a suit for possession on redemption of certain mortgages instituted in the Court of the Special judge exercising jurisdiction under the Sangli State Agriculturists Protection Act (1 of 1936).
Their case was that the mortgaged properties had been sold at auction and purchased by their father who had sold most of them to other persons more than 12 years before the institution of the suit and as such the suit was barred by limitation.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
On appeal the High Court of Sangli permitted the plaintiff to amend the plaint originally filed so as to include the relief for redemption and remanded the suit.
The trial court, thereafter, decreed the suit in part, holding that the claim in respect of portions only of the mortgaged properties was barred by limitation.
Both the parties appealed to the High Court of Bombay and the appeals were heard together.
The High Court dismissed the defendant 's appeal and allowed the plaintiff 's appeal holding that article 148 and not article I34 Of the Limitation Act applied.
In the result, the plaintiff 's suit was decreed in its entirety.
Held, that the preliminary objection that the Special judge had no jurisdiction under the Sangli State Agriculturists Protection Act to entertain the suit must be overruled.
The fixing of ,915 as the date line by the Act had reference to such reliefs as could be had only by way of reopening of closed transactions and could not, therefore, preclude the Special Judge from granting other reliefs in respect of transactions entered into prior to 1915.
Nor could it be contended in bar that the plaintiff was bound in the first instance to set aside an auction sale of the mortgaged properties in execution of a money decree in which she was not substituted in place of her deceased father as his true heir and legal representative nor made a party and no controversy was raised by the parties nor decided by the Court as to who was the true legal representative.
The plaintiff was entitled to ignore the sale and the suit was not barred under article 12 of the Limi tation Act.
480 Malkarjun Bin Shidramappa Pasare vs Narhari Bin Shivappa, (1900) L.R. 27 I.A. 216, doubted and distinguished.
In order that article I34 of the Limitation Act might be attracted to a suit for possession on redemption, it was necessary for the defendant to prove affirmatively that the mortgagee or his succesor in interest had transferred a larger interest than was justified by the mortgage.
Where, as in the present case, this was not done, article 134 could not apply and the only other article which could apply was article 148 Of the Limitation Act.
Under the Mitakshara School of Hindu Law partition may be either (1) a severance of the joint status of the coparcenary by mere defining of shares but without specific allotments or (2) partition by allotment of specific properties by metes and bounds according to shares.
The latter, if reduced to writing becomes compulsorily registrable under section I7(1)(b) of the Indian Registration Act but the former does not.
Consequently, in the present case such unregistered docu ments as were adduced by the plaintiff for the limited purpose of proving partition in the former sense did not fall within the mischief Of section 49 of the Indian Registration Act and were admissible in evidence.
