The respondent in each of the appeals is the assessee.
It was a firm of 10 individuals.
They acquired a reserve forest, by a lease which entitled them to enjoy the usufruct of the forest by its exploitation.
The partnership deed provided that the firm will carry on the development and exploitation of lands.
The acquisition was effected with a view to raise a coffee and cardamom plantation thereon.
For doing this, the assessee had to clear a portion of the forest and in the process fell the unwanted trees standing thereon as natural growth.
The cut trees were sold by the assessee in the form of firewood as well as in the form of cut sizes of timber as well as sleepers.
Some of the growth was also converted into charcoal and the resultant charcoal sold.
The firm had been functioning for the past 7 years and had been paying sales tax on its sale of firewood, timber and sleepers.
But for the first time in the assessment year 1968 69, it put forward a claim that the above turnover was not assessable in its hands.
The assessing officer and the first appellate authori ties held that the turnover in question to be taxable.
But the Tribunal reversed this decision, and held that the turnover was not liable for assessment to sales tax.
The High Court dismissed the revision petition filed by the State.
It held that it was a case of a lease.
It did not involve any sale of trees.
Merely because the trees were sawn to sizes, would not by itself make out a sale.
The suggestion that the sizing of trees into timber of their conversion into sleepers could make a difference was not accepted by the High Court, which following the decision of the Kerala High Court in Kuttiravin & Co. vs State of Kera la, [1976] 38 STC 282 affirmed the Tribunal 's order.
409 The State appealed to this Court.
Allowing the appeals and setting aside the order of the High Court and Tribunal, the Court, HELD: l(a) The fact that the assessees are business entities, the size of the tract developed, the extent and value of the trees standing on the land, the inevitability of the jungles having to be cleared and the standing trees disposed of before commercial crops would be grown, the manner in which the forest trees were disposed of, are all insignia that mark out the entire set of activities as a concern in the nature of trade.
[414D E] l(b) In the area of income tax law, it has been held that no adventure in the nature of trade can be spelt out where all that a person does a mounts to a mere realisation of his capital assets.
[414E F] l(c) The assessees in the instant case, did not merely realise the value of a capital asset belonging to them.
They went in for the acquisition of an asset fully realising its potentialities for exploitation not merely as a plantation but also, incidentally, by disposing of the existing growth on the land.
[414G H] l(d) If one purchases an asset with a view to turn it to account in such manner, one is certainly carrying out an adventure in the nature of trade.
[414H; 415A] 2(a) The definition of 'business ' in the T.N. General Sales Tax Act, 1959, includes 'any transaction in connection with or incidental to or ancillary ' to a trade.
The activi ties carried on by the assessee were incidental and ancil lary to the business which the assessee was carrying on or definitely intended to carry on.
It is also immaterial, on this definition, that the assessee may not have had a 'm otive of making a profit or gain ' on these sales, though on the facts, it is clear that such motive must have existed and, in any event, could not be ruled out.
[415B C] 2(b) Even the sales effected before the plantation started yielding results would be covered by the definition, as the venture undertaken by the assessee has to be consid ered as an integral whole and there can be no doubt that the sale of the forest produce was part of activities in the contemplation of the assessees right from the beginning.
[416B] 410 Kuttiravin & Co. vs State, [1976] 38 STC 282, over ruled.
L.N. Plantation Co. vs State, [1981] 47 STC 210; Tamil Nadu Trading Co. vs State, [1981] 52 STC 7, approved.
Deputy Commissioner vs Shree Shamungam Estates, [1979] 43 STC 226 Mad.
reversed State vs Surmah Shell, [1973] 31 STC 426; District Controller of Stores vs Assistant Commercial Tax Officer, [1976] 37 STC 423 referred to, Deputy Commis sioner vs Palampadam Plantation, [1969] 24 STC 231, distin guished.
