The landlord filed a petition for eviction of his tenant on the ground of wilful default in payment of rent and bona fide requirement under sub clauses (ii) & (vi) respectively of Clause 13(3) of the C.P. and Berar letting of Houses and Rent Control Order, 1949.
The landlord alleged that the rent was payable on the expiry of each month, and pleaded that as the tenant paid the rent in lump sums representing the rent of several months together, he had committed wilful default and was liable for eviction.
The tenant contested the peti tion and pleaded that the accumulated rents were accepted by the landlord without any objection, and consequently he had no occasion to assume that the landlord was aggrieved by the manner in which the rents were paid.
The tenant further asserted that the rent was payable at his convenience.
The Rent Controller dismissed the application of the landlord both on the ground of bona fide requirement and wilful default.
The Appellate Authority the Resident Deputy Collector confirmed the order of the Rent Controller in appeal.
The landlord thereafter approached the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution.
The High Court while con firming the order of the Rent Controller in so far as the ground of bona fide necessity was concerned, held that the tenant was a habitual defaulter in payment of rent, and was therefore, liable for eviction.
The tenants appellants in CA No. 1953 of 1980 challenged the order of their eviction, while the landlord appellant in CA No. 1954 of 440 1980 challenged the order rejecting his eviction application on the ground that he failed to prove his case of bona fide requirement.
Allowing Civil Appeal No. 1953 of 1980, and dismissing Civil Appeal No. 1954 of 1980 the Court, HELD: 1.
The relevant provisions of the Rent Control Order require a tenant to be "habitually in arrears with the rent" as a condition for the grant of the permission by the authority to the landlord to determine the lease.
This condition in the Rent Control Order is different from the condition in several other statutes where mere nonpayment of rent for a particular period, has been provided as adequate ground for eviction of the tenant.
[443C] 2.
The crucial test to determine whether the tenant was a 'habitual defaulter ' is the conduct of the landlord in receiving the rent offered belatedly.
If he receives the same under a protest and warns the tenant to be regular in payment in the future, he cannot be assumed to have agreed to a modified agreement in this regard.
But if he, without any objection and without letting the tenant know his thought process, continues to receive rent at intervals of several months, he cannot be allowed to spring a surprise on the tenant by suddenly starting a proceeding for eviction.
[443G H] In the instant case, there was no objection whatsoever, raised on behalf of the landlord against the delayed pay ments.
The High Court, therefore was not right in reversing the concurrent finding of the two courts below.
The judgment is set aside, and that of the Resident Deputy Collector is restored.
[444B] S.P. Deshmukh vs Shah Nihal Chand Waghajibai Gujarati, , followed.
Pandurang Tukaram Rajkondawar vs Salaram Madhaorao Chavan, [1985] Mh.
L.J. 169; Shishir Hari Mahajan vs Sanara siobai Rodmal Sharma and Anr., [1982] MH.
L.J. 908 and Nathuji Narayanrao Udapure vs Narendra Vasanjibhai Thakkar and Anr., [1981] MH.
L.J. 446, referred to.
Both the Rent Controller and the Resident Deputy Collector have on a careful consideration of all the rele vant circumstances held that the landlord has failed to prove his case of bona fide requirement.
The High Court while confirming the finding has again considered the 441 materials on the record.
No acceptable ground for interfer ing with the concurrent findings of the three Courts has been shown.
Civil Appeal No. 1954 of 1980 has therefore to be dismissed.
[441H; 442A B]
