The appellants are tenants of the premises belonging to the Respondent, and have been carrying on business as a partnership firm in the said premises.
The respondent filed an eviction petition against the appellant firm and another firm, on the ground that the appellant had unlawfully and without the consent of the Respondent sub let the premises to the other firm.
The Trial Court passed a decree for eviction, against which the appellants preferred an appeal to the Appellate Authority.
The Appellate Authority dis missed the appeal and upheld the finding of unlawful sub letting by the appellants.
The appellants preferred a Civil Revision petition before the High Court, which was also dismissed.
The present appeal by special leave is against the High Court 's decision.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that since the eviction petition had been filed without joining the partners of the other firm (the sub tenant) the eviction petition was not maintainable at all.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The objection that the eviction petition was filed against the appellants firm and the other firm, was not maintainable as it had been filed without joining any of the partners of the said other firm as respondents or serv ing them as partners, had not been raised at all till the stage of special leave and it is not open to the appellants to raise such an objection at a very late stage and thereby delay matters for a number of years.
[419F; 420C] 418 Chhotelal Pyarelal, the partnership firm and others vs Shikharchand, , distinguished.
There is evidence to show that the other firm was carrying on business at the said premises and that the said firm carried on business in the said premises even for some time during which the appellants firm had ceased to carry on the business there.
Moreover, although a notice was given by the respondent to the appellants and the other firm to produce their income tax returns, assessment orders as well as account books and ledgers for the relevant period, these were not produced.
It was open to the Trial Court, from these circumstances, to come to the conclusion that had the account books and ledgers been produced, they would have shown that rent was received by the appellants from the other firm which would justify the finding of subletting.
[420D F]
