An application for pre emption was filed under the provisions of section 8 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 by the respondent to pre empt a plot of land sold to the appellant by a Kobala dated May 16, 1974 by a co sharer having 1/4 interest in the plot.
The land in question was owned by an agriculturist and he used to keep his agricultural implements in the said property.
He also possessed other agricultural lands as agriculturists and in occupancy raiyati interest.
The suit property was recorded in his name as 'Raiyat Sthitiban ' and the classification of land was recorded as 'Bari ' i.e. homestead of the said agriculturist.
On September 20, 1967 the land was sold by a registered Kobala to 4 persons, and on October 28, 1968 one of the persons sold his share to the predecessor of the respondent.
On the basis of this Kobala it was alleged that he was a co sharer.
The respondent filed an application for pre emption under section 8 of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.
The appellant contested the same contending in the written statement that the respondent was neither co sharer of the holding nor an adjoining owner and that the disputed proper ty is non agriculture tenancy, that the petition was barred by limitation as the respondent was all along aware of the sale of the property and that the story of his coming to know only after taking copy of the sale deed was absolutely false.
397 The Trial Court held that the respondent was a co sharer and was entitled to pre empt, the application of pre emption was not barred by limitation as it was filed within a period of 3 years of the knowledge of the same as no notice of the sale was served on the respondent.
The Trial Court further held that the land was non agricultural land and as such the application for pre emption under section 8 was not main tainable.
The miscellaneous case was accordingly dismissed.
The respondent filed an appeal, and the Additional District Judge reversed the findings of the Trial Court, and held that the suit property was recorded as raiyati interest in the R.S. Record of Rights and being the homestead land of an agriculturist, the application for pre emption under section 8 was maintainable.
The appeal was allowed and the judgment of the trial court was set aside.
The appellant filed a revision petition in the High Court.
During its pendency he made an application for amend ment claiming alternative relief for pre emption under section 24 of the West Bengal NonAgricultural Tenancy Act, 1949.
The High Court held that even if the land was non agricultural land, pre emption could be granted under sec tion 24 of the W.B. Non Agricultural Tenancy Act, but dis missed the petition on the ground that there was no juris dictional defect or error entitling the Court to interfere in revision.
In the appeal to this Court by special leave, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that the land has been recorded as in the R.S. Record of rights as non agricultural land, and that the Trial Court had rightly held that Section 8 of the Land Reforms Act was not applicable to such a holding.
The decision of the High Court to the effect that the finding recorded by the Appellate Court to the contrary suffered from no jurisdictional error was therefore wholly unwarranted.
Relying on Eyachhin Ali Naskar vs Golap Gazi, it was contended that nature of holding had to determined with reference to the user of land comprised in the holding.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
The application for pre emption under section 8 of West Bengal Land Reforms Act was properly allowed by the lower appellate court and the said order was maintained by High Court.
There is no infirmity in this finding, and the same is upheld.
[400G H] 398 2.
The definition of land as given in section 2(7) of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 means agricultural land, and includes homesteads.
But, homestead land does not fail within the province of non agricultural land both under the Non Agricultural Tenancy Act as well as under the West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955.
Eyachhin Ali Naskar and Anr.
vs Golap Gazi, per incuriam & over ruled.
[404E F] 3.
On a conspectus of the provisions contained in sec tion 2(8) W.B. Estates Acquisition Act 1953 & section 2(4)(a) W.B. NonAgricultural Tenancy Act, 1974 it follows that 'Homestead ' of an agriculturist even though the same is included in the holding of the raiyat but not on the agri cultural land, still it is to be treated as agricultural land being the homestead of the agriculturist under the provisions of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act read with West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act and West Bengal Non Agricultural Tenancy Act.
[404G H; 405A] 4.
There is nothing to show that the non agricultural land in the instant case has vested and the same has not been retained by the owner, nor is there anything to show that the original owner had in his possession non agricul tural land exceeding the ceiling limits, even assuming that the land is non agricultural land.
But the land being home stead of an agriculturist is agricultural land.
Therefore, the amended provision of section 3A of the West Bengal Land Reforms Act does not require consideration in this matter.
[406C E] Dwarka Nath Prasad Atal vs Ram Rati Devi, and Luigi Ambrosini, Ltd. vs Bakara Tinko and Another, A.I.R. 1929(PC) 306, distinguished.
