The respondents are dealers in hides and skins.
They deal among other things in splits and coloured leather.
The splits are the cut pieces, small and irregular, obtained in the process of cutting raw or tanned hides and skins either with a view to reduce their thickness or to give them a regular shape.
Coloured leather is obtained when the tanned hides and skins are dyed with various colours.
The claim of the respondents is that these two items fail in the list of "goods of special importance in inter State trade and com merce" set out in section 14 of the and, therefore, entitled to the concessions available under section 15 of the Act, namely the benefits of single point taxation and of a smaller rate of tax.
Such claims were allowed by the assessing authority in respect of coloured leather and in respect of splits he disallowed the claims.
The Appellate Assistant Commissioner upheld the order of the assessing authority.
The Board of Revenue negativated the contention that leather splits continued to be dressed skins under declared goods of inter State importance and held that these splits are to be treated as 'scraps ' or to be taxed at the multiple rates.
As regards coloured leather the Board held that these are commercially different products and that the exemption granted was not correct.
The tribunal, in certain cases, had held that the assessee was entitled to the con cessions claimed in respect of both items.
The respondents moved the High Court by way of Writ Peti tions 446 and tax revision cases and the High Court upheld the claim of the respondents, holding that 'splits ' and 'coloured leather ' continue to be hides and skins eligible for special treatment under the .
The present appeals by special leave are against those judgments of the High Court.
The contentions of the appellant State were that the leather splits or cuttings are "scrap" and do not qualify any longer to be described merely as hides and skins and that coloured leather is a totally new and sophisticated product known as leather and can no longer be described merely as hides and skins and as such cannot qualify for exemption.
On behalf of the respondents, a reference was made to certain circulars of the authorities which contain a contem poraneous exposition of the meaning of the entry in question and contended that, to say that one item being called scraps and the other as leather would not be sufficient to take them out of the description "hides and skins, in a raw or dressed state" and cuttings of hides and skins would not cease to be hides and skins merely because they are small pieces and can be loosely described as "scraps".
As for coloured leather, it was contended that the exact scope of the expression used in entry (iii) of section 14(1) which re ferred to 'hides and skins whether in a raw or dressed state ' would have to be looked into.
Dismissing the appeals, HELD: 1.1.
The High Court was right in holding that 'splits ' and 'coloured leather ' continue to be hides and skins eligible for special treatment under the .
[456E] 1.2 A contemporaneous exposition by the administrative authorities is a very useful and relevant guide to the interpretation of the expressions used in a statute.
Consid ering that the clarification was sought for from the Minis try of Commerce at the earliest point of time when a doubt arose as to the scope of the expression used by the statute and given after considering the technicalities of the proc esses employed in the manufacture of finished leather by the department fully conversant with this branch of trade and in the context of the provisions of this very statute, the terms of the statute can well be construed by reference to such exposition, in the absence of anything in the statute to indicate the contrary.
Indeed, such interpretation should be shown to 447 be clearly wrong before it is overturned.
The view of the Ministry was that the expression 'hides and skins in the raw or dressed State ' refers at one end to the raw material obtained from the slaughtered or dead animals and at the other end to the tanned and finished material; the expres sion, therefore, seems to include the other intermediate stages as well. 'Dressing ' according to the authoritative interpretations, would mean the conversion of tanned hides and skins by further suitable processing into leathers of different types which are ready for use.
[452F H; 452B D] Desh Bandhu Gupta and Ors.
vs Delhi Stock Exchange, ; ; Verghese vs I.T.O., , relied on.
Mahi Traders vs State of Tamil Nadu, [1980] 45 STC 327, approved.
Definitions in this regard show that hides and skins acquire the name of 'leather ' even if the hair or wool has not been removed therefrom, as soon as they receive some treatment which prevents them from putrefaction after treat ment with water. 'Dressing ' is a stage much later than tanning.
Indeed, from the definitions it is clear that it is practically the same as giving finishing touches to the leather and making it suitable for the manufacture of par ticular types of goods.
The findings of the Tribunal in this regard in an earlier case, which had not been appealed against by the Department, that under the , the appellant is in a much better position, because all the hides and skins are brought together in one entry, and whether raw or dressed, the product falls under the same entry, seems to be the correct view of the scope of the entry in question.
[454B D; 455E] Glossary of terms relating to hides, skins and leather published by ISI in 1960: Dictionary of Leather Terminology published by the Tanners ' Council of America.
Encyclopedia Britannica Vol. 7 and, 'Wealth of India '.
, a publica tion of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1966, relied on.
Hides and skins are termed 'leather ' even as soon as the process of tanning is over and the danger of their putrefaction is put an end to.
The entry in the , however, includes within its scope hides and skins until they are 'dressed '.
This represents the stage when they undergo the process of finishing and assume a form in which they can be readily utilised for manufacture of various commercial articles.
In this view, it is hardly material that coloured leather may be a form of leather or may even be said to represent a different commer 448 cial commodity.
The statutory entry is comprehensive enough to include the products emerging from hides and skins until the process of dressing or finishing is done.
[456C E]
