In 1969, the Govt.
of India announced, through public notice a scheme for registration of contracts involving deliveries extending over a period of not less than 12 months for cash assistance m respect of certain exports.
The scope of the scheme was extended in 1970, allowing cash assistance at the same percentage as was prevailing on the date of the firm contract so registered provided the invoice was attested by the Banks concerned.
It was also provided that even if the rate of cash assistance is reduced by Govt.
the higher rate that existed on the date of the Firm con tract would be admissible.
And in case of increase in the rate, exports made during the contract would normally be eligible for the benefit of the increased rate.
It was also made clear that if the rate is likely to affect an exporter adversely, Govt. would consider its matter on merits.
In 1972 the cash assistance scheme on export of engi neering goods was modified allowing additional cash assist ance of 5% of the f.o.b. value on all exports effected during 1.4.72 to 30.9.72 to certain countries.
It was fur ther announced that in respect of transmission towers ex ported from Ist Oct. 1972 till 31st March, 1973 cash assist ance would be at the rate of 25% of the f.o.b. value.
The appellant company entered into contracts with the National Electricity Board of Malaysia and in respect of some of the exports of transmission towers, the appellant received cash assistance and in respect of others, it was denied on the ground that the exports made during the ex tended delivery period of the contract were not covered under the Import Trade Control Policy and as such no cash assistance could be granted on exports made after March, 1974.
The appeal preferred by the appellant was rejected by the Deputy 502 503 Chief Controller of Imports and Exports on the ground that the benefit of registration on export in execution of the supplementary contract was additional quantity at increased rates and could not be allowed under Govt.
policy.
The second appeal was rejected by the Chief Controller of Im ports & Exports, stating that after execution of the supple mentary order there was increase in quantity of goods to be supplied as also price on the date of execution of the supplementary order and the import policy did not provide for protection of benefits where there was increase in the value of contract.
The review petition filed by the appel lant was also rejected.
Thereafter the appellant moved the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The High Court partly allowed the petition restraining the respondents from en forcing the demand for the refund of the cash assistance already paid and rejected the appellant 's claim in respect of contracts, entered into in the context of the offers made subsequent to April 1972, since the cash assistance declared as on April 1, 1972 and thereafter was in terms made avail able upto a specific date.
This appeal by special leave is against the High Court 's judgment.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that at different stages, the respondents gave different reasons for refusing to pay cash assistance.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 There could arise no question of granting cash assistance to different exports under the original scheme and the prevalent amended scheme at the same time.
[508E] 1.2 Paragraph 10 in the 1970 scheme made it quite clear that exports effected after the specified date would not be eligible for cash assistance.
Consistently with this para graph, in the subsequent schemes the periods were pre scribed.
The amended scheme dated 20th April, 1972 pre scribed the period from 1.4.72 to 30.9.72 and the amended scheme dated 16th June 1973 applicable to this case, pre scribed the period from 1st October 1972 upto and including 31st March 1973.
In other words, exports of Transmission Towers made after the prescribed period would not be eligi ble to assistance under the prevalent scheme.
The word 'amendment ' would imply that the scheme of 1969 stood amend ed.
[508C E] 504 1.3 In view of the unequivocal language of paragraph 10 of.
the 1970 scheme and clear prescription of the different periods during the subsequent amended schemes and the admit ted facts that the export in respect of these two contracts were made only after July 1974, there is no reason to allow the appellant 's claim.
Whether the Government 's policy was conducive to maximisation of exports and foreign exchange earning is entirely a different matter.
[508F G]
