The appellant was one of the eight tenants in the build ing belonging to Respondent No. 1, who filed eviction peti tions against all the 8 tenants on the ground that the building was bona fide required by him for immediate demoli tion and construction as contemplated under Section 21(1)(j) of the Karnataka Rent Control Act.
In the petition against the appellant, it was specifically stated that he might occupy the premises corresponding to the original tenement in the new building after it was built.
The application of Respondent No. 1 for deletion of the words "corresponding portion" and for leave to withdraw the offer made earlier, were rejected.
Upon a memorandum filed by the appellant consenting to a decree being passed in pursuance of Section 21(1)(j) of the Act, the Court passed an order allowing the eviction petition against the appellant.
After the reconstruction work commenced, appellant gave a notice to Respondent No. 1 of his intention to occupy the corresponding shop in the new building, agreeing to pay the fair rent as contemplated under Section 27 of the Act.
Meanwhile Respondent No. 1 who got the eviction decree, filed an appeal before the District Judge, challenging the eviction decree on the ground that the Court had no juris diction to pass any decree by consent under Section 21(1)(j) of the Act.
The District Judge allowed the appeal.
Immedi ately thereafter Respondent No. 1 inducted Respondent No. 2 as a tenant in a shop in the reconstructed building reasona bly corresponding to the shop occupied by the appellant in the old building, and Respondent No. 2 started his business in the shop.
The appellant preferred a Revision Petition to the High Court against the order of the District Judge, and in the Revision Petition the appellant impleaded the second Respondent also.
The High Court allowed the Revision Petition and held that the decree passed by the Munsiff under Section 21(1)(j) of the Act was not a 577 578 decree passed by consent but was a valid decree passed by a competent Court after application of mind.
It was also held that the landlord was liable to place the tenants in vacant possession of the reconstructed building as provided in the Act, and that the rights of the second Respondent were subject to the rights of the original tenant conferred on them under Sections 27 and 28 of the Act.
After the High Court 's order, the appellant filed an application under Sections 27 and 28 of the Act before the trial court seeking permission to occupy the shop premises which was in possession of Respondent No. 2.
The trial court allowed the application.
On revision, the High Court set aside the order of the trial court, taking the view that the appellant was not entitled to claim the shop occupied by Respondent No. 2 and Respondent No. 1 was required to give the appellant any tenement in the newly constructed build ing.
Against this order of the High Court the appellant has filed this appeal by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant, it is claimed that he is entitled to be put in possession of the shop facing the Main Road and occupied by Respondent No. 2, whereas he was of fered a shop not facing the Main Road.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.1 The appellant is entitled to be handed over the possesssion of the shop occupied by respondent No. 2.
[585B] 1.2 Under the provisions of Section 28 of the said Act, the appellant became entitled to occupy a tenement in the new building.
Although there is nothing specific in the language of sub section (1) of Section 28 to that effect, a fair, commonsense reading of the provisions of subsection (1) of Section 28 would show that a tenant against whom eviction decree has been passed under Section 21(1)(j) and who has given notice as contemplated under Section 27 of that Act would be entitled to a tenement in the new building which could be said to be reasonably comparable to or to reasonably correspond to the tenement in respect of which the decree was passed.
The High Court based its judgment on the consideration of a question which really was not materi al, namely, whether the appellant was entitled to get an identical shop in the new building, whereas the real ques tion was as to whether he was entitled to a comparable shop.
[583G H; 584A B] 1.3 The original shop occupied by the appellant admeasured 579 17 ' x 9 ' and was facing the Main Road.
The shop which re spondent No. 1 offered to the appellant was admeasuring only 11 ' 6" X 8 ' 6" and was not facing the Main Raod but was on the rear of the new building.
This shop cannot be considered as comparable to the shop originally occupied by the appel lant.
Moreover, it is not as if comparable shops were not available.
In fact, respondent No. 1 constructed several shops of 9 ' X 16 ' facing the Main Road, one of which he has given away in a hurried manner, to respondent No. 2, proba bly with a view to forestall the claim of the appellant.
In these circumstances, the appellant could not be compelled to accept the shop offered by respondent No. 1, which is in no way comparable.
The appellant was entitled to a shop reason ably corresponding to the original shop occupied by him as the circumstances would permit.
It was not the appellant 's case that he is entitled to an identical shoo but that he was entitled to a comparable shop.
It is not open now to respondent No. 2 to resist the claim of the appellant.
Respondent No. 2 was joined as a party in the revision petition wherein the High Court held that the rights of respondent No. 2 are subject to the rights of the original tenant conferred upon him under Sections 27 and 28.
This decision has not been challenged by respondent No. 2 in any proceedings and has now become final as against him.
[584C E, G; 585A] Sreenivasa Rao vs Narasimhaiah, , referred to.
