In respect of assessment year 1965 66, the Income tax Officer issued notices to the assessee under section 148 read with sections 142(1) and 143(2) of the Act on the ground that income has escaped assessment in respect of three cash credit entries totaling Rs. 1 lakh.
The assessee challenged the notices by way of writ petitions before the High Court.
The High Court gave a finding that the notice was within jurisdiction only in respect of an entry of Rs.30,000 and in respect of the other two entries viz. Rs.40,000 and Rs.30,000 it directed the Income tax Officer not to reopen the assessment.
These two appeals are against the High Court 's judgment.
The appeal by ReVenue, by certificate, is in respect of the two entries of Rs.40,000 and Rs.30,000 and the other appeal of the assessee, by special leave, is in respect of the entry of Rs.30,000.
On behalf of the Revenue, it was contended that once the High Court sustained the notice in respect of a sum of Rs.30,000, that gave full jurisdiction to the Income tax Officer to reopen the assessment and that the High Court should not have examined time tenability of the assessee 's contention in regard to the two transactions of Rs.30,000 and Rs.40,000 and that aspect should have been left to be considered by the Income tax Officer while making the reas sessment.
The contention of the assessee was that the notice was issued more than 7 years after the assessment was completed and was also beyond the period of limitation, viz., four years, that the escapement of the income from assessment had not resulted from failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for the assessment.
605 Allowing the appeal of the assessee, and dismissing the appeal by the Revenue.
HELD: 1.
The notice issued under section 148 of the Act is quashed.
It was not for the High Court to examine the valid ity of the notice under section 148 in regard to the two items if the High Court came to the conclusion that the notice was valid at least in respect of the remaining item.
Whether the Income tax Officer while making the reassessment would take into account the other two items, should have been left to be considered by the Income tax Officer in the fresh assess ment proceeding.
[610C D] CIT.
Punjab, H.P. & Bilaspur, Simla vs Jagan Nath Ma heshwary, 32 AIR 418 and Pulavarthi Viswanadham vs CIT.
A.P., approved.
V. Jagan Mohan Rao & Ors.
vs CIT & Excess Profits Tax, A.P., and Parimisetti Seetharamamma vs CIT, referred to.
2.1 The three amounts mentioned in the notice under section 148 of the Act were found in the assessee 's account by the Income tax Officer when he examined the same in course of the assessment proceedings.
He had called upon the assessee to substantiate the genuineness of the transactions and the assessee had produced material to support the same.
The Income tax Officer accepted the documents produced and treated all the three transactions to be genuine and on that footing completed the assessment.
The primary facts were before the Incometax Officer at the time of the regular assessment and he called upon the assessee to explain to his satisfaction that the entries were genuine and on the basis of materials provided by the assessee, satisfaction was reached.
It was then open to the Income Tax Officer to make further probe before completing the assessment if he was of the view that the material provided by the assessee was not sufficient for him to be satisfied that the assessee 's contention was correct.
[610E H] 2.2 The expression 'material facts ' used in section 147(a) referred only to primary facts and the duty of the assessee was confined to disclosure of primary facts and he had not to indicate what factual or legal inferences should properly be drawn from primary facts and this clause did apply to the facts of the present case as the alleged escapement of income for assessment had not resulted from failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all materi al facts necessary for its assessment for that year.
The notice in the instant case, did not indicate 606 Whether it was a case covered by cl.
(a) or cl.
On the finding of this Court that cl.
(a) was not invokable, the power under cl.
(b) could be called in aid under section 149(1)(b) of the Act within four years from the end of the relevant assessment year.
Admittedly, the notice has been issued beyond a period of four years and, therefore, the notice itself was beyond the time provided under the law.
The High Court overlooked to consider this aspect of the matter.
[610H; 611A C] Calcutta Discount Company Ltd. vs ITO, , followed.
