Clause (2) of Regulation 20 of the Service Regulations of the Punjab National Bank lays down that no officer shall resign from the service of the bank otherwise than on the expiry of three months from the service on the bank of a notice in writing of such resignation.
The proviso thereto empowers the competent authority to reduce the period of three months or remit the requirement of notice.
The respondent, a permanent officer of the bank, made an application on 21st January 1986, purporting to resign from the service with effect from 30th June, 1986.
He, however, received a letter from the bank on 7th February, 1986 in forming him that his resignation letter had been accepted by the competent authority with immediate effect by waiving the condition of notice.
He thereupon filed a writ petition in the High Court challenging the validity of the purported acceptance of his resignation with effect from 7th February, 1986 and for a direction to consider him as in service up to 30th June, 1986.
Thereafter, on 15th April, 1986 he wrote another letter to the Bank purporting to withdraw the resignation letter dated 21st January, 1986.
The High Court held that the petitioner 's resignation letter would have become effective only on the 30th June, 1986, that under the Regulations there was no jurisdiction whatever in the competent authority to determine his service earlier than that and that until the resignation became effective on 30th June, 1986 he had a right to withdraw the same.
Consequently, it quashed the order dated 7th February, 1986 and declared that the petitioner continued to be in service with the bank.
613 In this appeal by special leave it was contended for the appellant that Regulation 20(2) provided for a notice to the employer only in order to protect the employer 's interests, that its requirements could, therefore, be waived by the employer if it so desired unilaterally, that under the proviso to clause (2) it was competent for the bank to waive any notice at all and to accept the resignation with immedi ate effect or with effect from such other date as the bank may consider appropriate.
Dismissing the appeal, HELD: 1.
Until the resignation becomes effective on the terms of the letter read with Service Regulation 20 of the Punjab National Bank, it is open to the employee, on general principles, to withdraw his letter of resignation.
[619C] Raj Kumar vs Union of India, ; Union of India vs Gopal Chandra Misra, ; and Balram Gupta vs Union of India, ; 2.
Clause (2) of Regulation 20 makes it incumbent on an officer of the bank, before resigning, to serve a notice in writing of such proposed resignation.
The clause also makes it clear that the resignation will not be effective other wise than on the expiry of three months from the service of such notice.
[616H; 617A] 3.
What the proviso to clause (2) contemplates is that in a case where the employee desires that his resignation should be effective even before the expiry of the period of three months or without notice being given by him, the bank may consider such a request and waive the period or require ment of notice if it considers it fit to do so.
It does not empower the bank to thrust a resignation on an employee with effect from a date different from the one on which he can make his resignation effective under the terms of the resig nation.
In the instant case, the employee had not requested the bank to reduce the period of notice or to waive the requirement of notice.
[617F; 618G] 4.
There are two ways of interpreting clause (2).
One is that the resignation of an employee from service being a voluntary act on his part he is entitled to choose the date with effect from which his resignation would be effective and give a notice to the bank accordingly.
The only restric tion is that the proposed date should not be less than three months from the date on which the notice is given.
In the instant case, the letter dated 21st January 1986, sent by the employee purporting to 614 resign with effect from 30th June, 1986 fully complied with the terms of this clause and so the resignation would have become effective only on that date.
The other interpretation is that when an employee gives a notice or resignation, it becomes effective on the expiry of three months from the date thereof.
On this interpretation the respondent 's resig nation would have taken effect on or about 21st April, 1986 even though he had mentioned a later date.
In either view of the matter, the respondent 's resignation did not become effective till 21st April, 1986 or 30th June, 1986.
The bank could not have accepted that resignation on any earlier date.
The letter dated 7th February, 1986 was, therefore, without jurisdiction.
[617A B; 618A B, G H] The respondent had thus continued to be in service till the 21st April, 1986 or 30th June, 1986.
But, by that time, he had exercised his right to withdraw the resignation.
Since the withdrawal letter was written before the resigna tion became effective, the resignation stood withdrawn with the result that the respondent continued to be in the serv ice of the bank.
[619A B] Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking vs Tara Chand, , distinguished.
