The appellant gave a report to the Commissioner of Police against the second respondent, alleging that he had committed the offences of cheating and criminal breach of trust.
It was alleged that the second respondent, who was employed by the appellant as its Divisional Manager (Export Import) had negotiated on behalf of the appellant with an Italian firm for supply of quality granite stones and had obtained a letter of credit and availing the credit facility, had drawn a sum of Rs. 13,69,750 and misappropri ated the amount.
A case was registered and investigated, but subsequently the police sent a 'B ' Report to the Court, stating that further investigation was not required as the case was of a civil nature.
Aggrieved by the report, the appellant ap proached the Second Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for quashing the report and for permission to prove the commission of offences by the second respondent.
The Magis trate passed an order for a calendar case being registered against the second respondent for offences punishable under Sections 408 and 420 I.P.C. and for issuing summons to him.
Thereupon the second respondent filed a petition under Section 482 of the Code before the High Court and sought the quashing of the order of the Magistrate.
The High Court allowed the petition and set aside the order of the Magis trate on the ground that the Magistrate had not followed the procedure for taking cognizance of the case and issuing process to the accused after the police had sent a 'B ' report in the case.
According to the High Court, the Magis trate should have issued notice to the appellant to find out whether he was disputing the correctness of the 'B ' report and if so, to comply with the requirements of Section 200 719 of the Code.
The High Court further stated that only after examining the appellant on oath and his witnesses, the Magistrate should have decided whether a case should be registered and process issued to the accused.
Aggrieved by the High Court 's order, the appellant has preferred this appeal by special leave.
On behalf of the appellant, it was contended that the second respondent had no locus to question the order of the Magistrate and that the Magistrate was justified in taking cognizance of the offence and directing the issue of process to the second respondent.
On behalf of the respondent, it was argued that since the Magistrate had not followed the procedure laid down in Section 200 or Section 202, the second respondent was enti tled to seek quashing the order of the Magistrate, and the High Court was right in setting aside the order of the Magistrate.
Allowing the appeal, HELD: 1.
On receipt of a complaint a Magistrate has several courses open to him.
The Magistrate may take cogni zance of the offence at once and proceed to record state ments of the complainant and the witnesses present under Section 200.
After recording those statements, if in the opinion of the Magistrate there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he may dismiss the complaint under Section 203.
On the other hand if in his opinion there is sufficient ground for proceeding he may issue process under Section 264.
If, however, the Magistrate thinks fit, he may postpone the issue of process and either inquire into the case him self or direct an investigation to be made by the police officer or such other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding.
He may then issue process if in his opinion there is sufficient ground for proceeding or dismiss the complaint if there is no sufficient ground for proceed ing.
Yet another course open to the Magistrate is that instead of taking cognizance of the offence and following the procedure laid down under Section 200 or Section 202, he may order an investigation to be made by the police under Section 156(3).
When such an order is made, the police will have to investigate the matter and submit a report under Section 173(2).
On receiving the police report the Magis trate may take cognizance of the offence under Section 190(1)(0) and issue process straightaway to the accused.
The Magistrate may exercise his powers in this 720 behalf irrespective of the view expressed by the police in their report whether an offence has been made out or not.
This is because the police report under Section 173(2) will contain the facts discovered or unearthed by the police as well as the conclusion drawn by the police therefrom.
If the Magistrate is satisfied that upon the facts discovered or unearthed by the police there is sufficient material for him to take cognizance of the offence and issue process, the Magistrate may do so without reference to the conclusion drawn by the Investigating Officer because the Magistrate is not bound by the opinion of the police officer as to whether an offence has been made out or not.
Alternately the Magis trate, on receiving the police report, may without issuing process or dropping the proceeding proceed to act under Section 200 by taking cognizance of the offence on the basis of the complaint originally submitted to him and proceed to record the statement upon oath of the complainant and the witnesses present and thereafter decide whether the com plaint should be dismissed or process should be issued.
[725D H;726A C] 2.1 The position is, therefore, now well settled that upon receipt of a police report under section 173(2) a Magistrate is entitled to take cognizance of an offence under Section 190(1)(b) of the Code even if the police report is to the effect that no case is made out against the accused.
The Magistrate can take into account the statements of the witnesses examined by the police during the investi gation and take cognizance of the offence complained of and order the issue of process to the accused.
Section 190(1)(b) does not lay down that a Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence only if the investigating officer gives an opin ion that the investigation has made out a case against the accused.
The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by the investigating officer and independently apply his mind to the facts emerging from the investigation and take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit, in exercise of his powers under Section 190(1)(b) and direct the issue of process to the accused.
The Magistrate is not bound in such a situation to follow the procedure laid down in Section 200 and 202 of the Code for taking cognizance of a case under Section 190(1)(b) though it is open to him to act under Section 200 or Section 202 also.
The High Court was, there fore, wrong in taking the view that the Second Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate was not entitled to direct the registration of a case against the second respondent and order the issue of summons to him.
[728C F] 2.2 The fact that in this case the investigation had not originated from a complaint preferred to the Magistrate but had been made 721 pursuant to a report given to the police would not alter the situation in any manner.
Even if the appellant had preferred a complaint before the Magistrate and the Magistrate had ordered investigation under Section 156(3), the police would have had to submit a report under Section 173(2).
[728G H] K. Sham Rao vs A.R. Diwakar, ; Nagawwa vs section Konjalgi, ; ; Abhinandan Jha and Ors.
vs Dinesh Mishra, ; ; H.S. Bains vs State, ; and Tufa Ram & Ors.
vs Kishore Singh, ; relied on.
Setting aside the order of the High Court and restoring the order of the Magistrate, this Court directed that the case against the Second Respondent shall proceed in accord ance with law.
[729B C]
