The services of the respondent, an employee of the appellant company, were terminated in accordance with the Standing Orders of the company, approved by the appropriate authorities under the provisions of the , and the Central Provinces and Berar Industrial Disputes Settlement Act, 1947.
Standing Order NO. 2(a) defined " employees " as " all persons . employed in the Office or Mains Department or Stores or Power House or Receiving Station of the Company . whose names and ticket numbers are included in the departmental musters ".
The Standing Orders also defined the term " workman " and provided that every workman should have a ticket.
No ticket had been issued to the respondent by the company, and consequently his ticket number was not included in the departmental muster.
The respondent challenged the validity of the order terminating his services by an application made before the High Court under article 226 of the Constitution on the grounds, inter alia, that the Standing Orders in question were confined to those employees only to whom tickets were issued, and that as no ticket was issued to him he was not an employee within the meaning of the Standing Orders which did not therefore apply to him and, consequently, the termination of his services under Standing Order No. 16(1) was illegal: Held, (1) that the words " whose names and ticket numbers are included in the departmental musters " occurring in Standing Order NO. 2 (a) should be read as " whose names and ticket numbers, if any, are included in the departmental musters "; Cortis vs The Kent Water Works Company ; ; ; and Perumal Goundan vs The Thirumalarayapuram jananukoola Dhanasekhara Sangha Nidhi, Mad. 624, applied.
(2)that under the Standing Orders, in which a distinction is made between 'employees ' and 'workmen ', while every workman must have a ticket, there may be employees who may have no tickets the possession of which is not an essential characteristic of an employee; and, (3)that the Standing Orders apply to all employees for whose benefit they have been made.
464 Accordingly, the Standing Orders were applicable to the respondent and the termination of his service in accordance with Standing Order No. 16(1) was valid and, therefore, the application made by him to the High Court must fail.
